

Engineers at War 1939–1945
Richard Croucher
Merlin Press £4.80
Richard Croucher has written the first serious Marxist analysis of the subject, a book that will remain essential reading for those interested in the question of industrial relations in the Second World War. He shows the class war was not put on ice for the duration. In 1944, a total of 3,714,000 days were lost through industrial disputes, more than at any time for the previous 12 years. This happened despite jingoistic appeals to patriotism.
Strikers were depicted by politicians and the Press as either being pro-Nazi or, at best, the unfortunate dupes of sinister subversive agents. These concocted stories stretched credibility to the limit. Perhaps the most fantastic came from Scottish miners’ leader, Abe Moffat. In September 1943, when 20 collieries in Lanarkshire were idle, he blamed anarchists, Trotskyists and the Duke of Bedford for causing the stoppage.
Both Labour and Communist Parties tried to restore industrial peace, creating conditions of class harmony where productivity would rise. This book examines their role fairly, and in detail. Where, in my opinion, Richard Croucher’s work becomes less satisfactory is when he comes to consider the impact of repressive legislation.
The State possessed an armoury of 868 regulations, many deliberately couched in vague, ambiguous terms, with which it tried to impose its will. Workers were fined for staying at home to care for sick children, arriving at the factory late because of a transport hold-up, and for not working with sufficient enthusiasm.
In May 1945, Ernest Bevin, the Minister of Labour, told the House that 18,436 persons had been convicted for absenting themselves from work or being late without reasonable cause; of whom 1,323 were imprisoned. Asked how many employers had been convicted, Bevin replied: ‘I would want notice of that question’.
Trade unionists became increasingly resentful of the manner wartime regulations operated, making them weapons employers could use against workers. Far from cowering them into submission, fines and imprisonment often resulted in the downing of tools; production only resumed once the punishments had been waived.
Richard Croucher could, I think, have dwelt a little more on these victories. In a sense, the 1944 Tyneside Apprentices strike fell into this category. Nationwide agitation helped to secure the release of the four imprisoned Trotskyists. The dispute, as well as the ensuing publicity, gave greater credibility to the industrial activities of the ILP, RCP, etc. Moreover, the strikers won what they came out for – no apprentice was ever conscripted into the armed forces.
Attempts to contain the mounting opposition sometimes ran into trouble. For example, when the Amalgamated Engineering Union leaders decided to suspend the Barrow District Committee for backing a strike at Vickers’ shipyards, the Huddersfield District Committee en bloc resigned in protest. Wal Hannington, then AEU national organiser, journeyed to Yorkshire to try and smooth it over.
To his dismay, he discovered the District Committee solidly ILP. Its main spokesmen were the Warwick brothers. They had been expelled from the Communist Party in 1928, charged with Trotskyism, largely through the efforts of hatchet man Hannington, and they were anxious to even old scores.
The industrial unrest needs to be seen in a wider context. In the ten by-elections between 1939 and 1945, the ILP secured an average of 25 per cent of the total vote, fighting on a definite anti-war ticket. Many socialist ideas were beginning to gain a resonance within the class: controls were imposed more rigorously on labour than on capital; profits of the arms manufacturers – the ‘merchants of death’, as Brockway called them – rose as the soldiers fell; and firms continued to honour trading agreements reached with their German counterparts.
British fighters in the Battle of Britain had inferior bullet-proof glass to the Messerschmitts because the Germans had the patent rights. Similarly, German tanks had greater speed and mobility because the lightest metal – beryllium – was used in their manufacture but could not be used in British tanks for the same reason.
As facts like these became more widely known, disenchantment increased until a large proportion of the population, although not having clear and definite ideas, nevertheless wanted to see a fundamental change in British society. It is one of the ironies of history that it was because this feeling was so intense and widespread that a Labour Government was elected – and because a Labour Government was elected that the fundamental change did not take place.
 



You, You & You
Pete Grafton
Pluto Press £2.95
Pete Grafton claims to have ‘prodded an enormous iceberg’ – a cold and, I would have thought, not a particularly useful exercise. Having interviewed a mere 49 people, he rightly concludes that not all Britain enthusiastically supported the Second World War. The only surprising thing is that Grafton himself should find it surprising. For even the flimsiest research would have disclosed that, beneath all the war propaganda, profound tensions existed.
Let me prick the official myth of the British people, harmoniously and unitedly backing Churchill throughout, with three facts selected almost at random:


A Gallup Poll, published on 28 March 1942, revealed only 35 per cent were satisfied with Churchill’s government while 50 per cent of the people were critical of it.
 
The centrist ILP, fighting on an anti-war socialist platform, contested ten parliamentary by-elections during the war, averaging 25 per cent of the total votes cast. Remarkably, on one occasion it came within 349 votes of winning a Tory seat.
 
Despite howls from politicians and the press about ‘stabbing oar troops in the back’, workers still continued to go on strike – more days were lost in 1944 through industrial disputes than in any year since the General Strike.


Unfortunately, Pete Grafton’s book hardly helps at all to explain these facts. His interviewees give personal rather than significant accounts; they tend to deal with their own particular grumbles, not with the powerful protest movements that were emerging. As a result, many of the most interesting experiences are missing.
We never hear what it was like to put forward the case for international socialism from a public platform. Nor do we know what special problems confronted strike leaders because of the state’s vast array of repressive legislation. Likewise, that soldiers in the Eighth Army, far from condemning strikers, actually came out in support is never mentioned. Yet the inclusion of these would have made it a much more valuable and interesting book.
Had he quoted the soldiers in the Western desert declaring that ‘the right to withdraw one’s labour is one of the essential freedoms we are fighting for’, then we might even have sent a copy to Mr Norman Tebbit!
 



The Labour Party constitutes part of The Establishment. Indeed, it resembles the Church of England. The Reverend Harold Wilson’s sermons, delivered to aged and half-empty congregations, are not treated seriously any longer. Nevertheless, despite the lack of enthusiasm or active commitment, millions of people at least give it formal allegiance. Just as when asked their religion, they apathetically reply ‘C of E’, so they traipse to the polling stations to vote Labour. Behind this single act lies a deeply ingrained outlook, an important part of the working class tradition, that creates an obstacle to progress towards socialism in Britain.
Social democracy’s strength lies not in organisation but attitude. The Labour leaders are incapable of mobilising millions of people behind Transport House banners, barring the road to revolutionary advance. But they can rely, however, on a widely held attitude that retards the rate of revolutionary advance. The widespread belief in preserving constitutional niceties, of going through the proper channels, and of leaving things to Parliament, dissipates a lot of energy. It cushions the blows directed at the ruling class.
The laws of capitalism are designed to facilitate the smooth-running of capitalism. To keep within the limits they impose precludes effective struggle. It means, for instance, accepting the Industrial Relations Bill and making the best of it. Similarly with the Tory ‘Fair’ Rents Bill – tenants should stoically pay the increases because it is the holy writ of Parliament. But such docility gains its own reward: besides leading to a deterioration in working class wages and conditions, the very ease with which the new laws gain acceptance tempts the Tories to introduce an even more vicious legislation. Indeed, the only way to fight these measures is to practise widespread illegality, to make the laws inoperable. If trade unionists went on a one-day general strike every time the Industrial Relations court imposed a fine, then the Tory government would have to think again. To collect, say, a £50,000 fine from the Transport & General would mean employers being ‘fined’ £150 million, the cost of a day’s lost production.
But Labour leaders deplore such tactics. James Callaghan said there must be no defiance of the law; everything should be left to Parliament to decide. In making these remarks, he reveals another flaw of social democracy: it is not merely that the veneration of the law prevents effective struggle but also the belief in the crucial importance of Parliament prevents effective organisation. It is an essentially elitist approach. Instead of doing things for yourself, you look to others to do them for you. Rather than rely on the strength of your own organisation, you look to some self-proclaimed saviour in the House of Commons to improve your lot. Influencing parliamentary decision-making, not perfecting grass-root organisation, becomes number one priority.
This, however, flies in the face of historical experience. Capitalism is not a charitable institution. It does not give things away. Every gain workers have secured has been won through strength of organisation and ability to struggle. To suggest anything other is to spread illusions – and this is precisely what social democrats try to do.
We can say, therefore, that the first and most serious charge against Harold Wilson & Co. is that, by their constitutional and elitist approach, they impede the workers’ struggle at the present time, making it more difficult to repulse the employers’ offensive. To this indictment can be added two further charges: first, the failure of successive Labour governments to overthrow capitalism and, second, the failure of the last Labour government even to make modest improvements to the workers’ lot.
 
The Nature of Reformism
Before examining these two points, it is worthwhile looking at the nature of reformism. As the term is usually used (or misused), reformism is synonymous with social democracy. But there is nothing intrinsically socialist or even working class about reformism. One has only to think for a moment about other countries: many measures similar to those introduced by the Attlee administration were brought in by Adenauer’s Christian Democrats in Germany while in France, under the Fourth Republic, when right-centre governments predominated, family allowances and other benefits much higher than those in Britain were granted. So it would be wrong to think that Labour politicians have a monopoly of reformist activity. Indeed, an examination of what has happened in Britain merely confirms this fact. The three great periods of reforms – post-1867, 1906-1914 and 1945-51 – have each been associated with different political parties. In the first of these the Tories, led by Disraeli, wished to tame the newly enfranchised working class, to secure its adherence to traditional capitalist politics. The second was the Liberals’ response to the mounting industrial tension and social unrest that characterised the period before the First World War. The third came when Labour had the task in 1945 of making the transition from war to peace while trying to avoid the harmful, and potentially revolutionary, social clashes that happened after 1918. People had to be granted crumbs to keep them quiet.
Reform can, therefore, be viewed as a response of behalf of the ruling class to pressure from below. It is essentially conservative, an attempt to buttress the existing class structure by making minor concessions. From their standpoint, reform is preferable to revolution. As Tsar Alexander II pointed out when he abolished serfdom in Russia in 1857, ‘Better that the reform should come from above than wait until serfdom is abolished from below.’ Similarly, Northern Ireland illustrates the same point today. The regime has existed there for 50 years. During which time, there has been a police state, discrimination against the Catholics, bad housing, unemployment, etc. But during those fifty years, successive Tory and Labour governments have done nothing to improve the situation. It is only after mass action imperilled the very existence’ of the state that talk of reforms came from politicians’ lips. Reform is the reply to the threat of revolution.
But it is not merely that. The granting of concessions acts as a lubricant, making the system run more smoothly. They help to foster illusions about the state. Instead of seeing its real role, that of preserving capitalist exploitation, it is seen in a more favourable light. People think of the benefits they derive from the state rather than the payments they make to it. Even if they still happen to be disconsolate, they are fed with expectations that things will improve – ‘a better tomorrow’ was the slogan of Edward Heath at the 1970 general election. Labour would also have the electorate believe that it would secure them ‘a better tomorrow’. But while illusory in both cases, they do help to stimulate expectations about the future.
In many respects, it makes the capitalist state analogous to a one-armed bandit. Obviously fruit machines operate to redistribute wealth, from the pockets of the suckers who use them to the businessmen who own them. But this object would not be accomplished if the player lost every time. That would make the function of fruit machines transparently clear. People would not use them, and their owners’ profits would go down. In other words, it pays the capitalist to occasionally lose. Similarly, it pays the capitalist state to appear to be generous since this conceals the true nature of its being.
Often reforms, besides creating goodwill, have a hidden bonus for the capitalist class. Improvements to the educational system can be construed as a victory for the workers. On the other hand, they provide employers with a labour force better able to cope with modern scientific and technical problems. Likewise the National Health Service, introduced by Aneurin Bevan in 1948, was popularly regarded as a great boon for the working man. But it also helped employers, who have known for a long time that personnel who are healthy are also more productive.
A further consequence of reform is that it creates a political climate that is conducive to stability. Politicians, all accepting the fundamental principles of capitalist society, compete among themselves on how to improve running it. This is useful from the standpoint of the system. [1] It is infinitely better than allowing the pressure of discontent to build up until it explodes with revolutionary force.
From the foregoing, the reader might wrongly conclude that the introduction of reforms, at all times and in all places, has a reactionary effect. It hinders the struggle for socialism. But this overlooks the fact that each piece of legislation has a cost. Consequently, it is likely to squeeze profit margins and damage the competitiveness of the economy. Faced with an angry proletariat, the ruling class may wish to assuage it by granting reforms but this is not always feasible. Indeed, there is an interaction of forces: the demands of the people conflict with the system’s ability to meet them. In deteriorating economic conditions, when capitalism no longer can concede reforms, the struggle for reforms is transformed into a revolutionary struggle – one that can only be won by smashing the system. In Russia the Bolsheviks came to power because the Provisional government could not meet three modest demands – the clamour for peace, land and bread.
To the extent that it becomes impossible for the state to meet people’s strivings for social improvements, the path is opened to revolutionary organisations. Politicians like Heath and Wilson, through their failure to fulfil their election pledges, sow the seeds of doubt in the parliamentary system. It is their own inadequacy that creates the conditions for International Socialism to grow. Workers do not turn to revolution light-heartedly, in the mood that one would go for a picnic; for revolution is an extremely arduous and exacting process, involving a lot of hardship and sacrifice. Therefore, it is only after other possibilities have been exhausted, once it has become clear that in terms of the old society problems are insoluble, that it is placed on the agenda of history.
 
Wilson and Attlee
An analysis of the Wilson administration reveals that, in its six years in office, it did not solve these basic problems. Indeed, during that time the situation was exacerbated. Far from bringing in reforms, as the Attlee administration (1945-51) did, the tendency under Wilson was in the opposite direction. Let me make a few comparisons:


Unemployment. An achievement of the Attlee government, an important reason for its initial popularity, was that it was the first government that secured full employment in peacetime. Harold Wilson, on the other hand, was in office while the unemployment figure crept up to 700,000. In the New Statesman, R.H.S. Crossman, defending the Labour government, stated that there was only a 9 per cent rise during the last year of the Wilson administration as against a 15 per cent one in Edward Heath’s first year. [2]
The National Health Service. In 1948, when the NHS started, the British economy was sufficiently strong to operate it without patients making payments. Subsequently, this great principle was eroded away. But in 1964, Labour returned to office pledged to restore the completely free service. However, this promise was never kept. Charges were even increased. In other words, the Labour government (1964-70) did not attain the standards reached by its predecessor.
Anti-union legislation. The Attlee administration repealed the 1927 Trades Disputes Act, which made it illegal for trade unions to call a general strike. It did, however, continue with some of the wartime emergency legislation and used it against militants. However, in 1951, thanks to a dock strike that spread from Merseyside to London, the Labour government took all the anti-union measures off the statute book. This is in marked contrast to the conduct of Wilson’s government, which strove to introduce an anti-union bill, 25 out of whose 29 provisions are included in the Tory government’s Industrial Relations Bill.
Interest rates. Under the Attlee government, interest rates were generally low. Indeed, for a time, during the ‘cheap money’ policy of Dr. Dalton, bank rate was as low as 2.5 per cent. This meant it was relatively easy for local authorities to borrow money for housing and other social needs. Moneylenders did not do so well. But, gradually, interest rates rose until, by the time the Wilson government went out of office, a £5,000 council house ultimately cost £29,270 once all the interest repayments had been made.


It would, of course, be possible to go on, detailing other aspects of the last Labour government’s record and showing that its performance was far worse than that of its predecessor. This was not because Wilson’s cabinet was less talented than that of Clem Attlee. Nor is there any reason to believe that their resolve was less. Rather the crucial difference was not in personal qualities or policies but in the state of the economy.
British capitalism’s decline had become more pronounced and consequently its ability to grant concessions had diminished. Indeed, under Wilson’s administration, far from seeing improvements placed on the statute book, the vehicle was put in reverse gear. We witnessed Labour reformism without reforms – indeed with attacks on the basic rights of British workers.
 
The Decay of the Labour Left
Some political tendencies, such as the Tribune MPs and the Communist Party, would accept some of these criticisms of the last Labour government. They would admit its performance was disappointing. Nevertheless, they argue that this does not necessarily mean that all attempts to use the parliamentary machine must necessarily fail. They visualise the transformation of society – in fact, the creation of socialism -coming through legislative enactments. For this to happen, three necessary conditions must exist. They are:


First, that the Labour left (the CP assisted by other left-wing forces) capture control of the Labour Party.
Second, the Labour Party is transformed into a revolutionary party.
Third, Parliament is sufficiently adaptable to become the instrument of revolutionary change as well as sufficiently powerful to prevent any attempts to sabotage the change.


Let us analyse these three conditions in turn, starting with the first. An examination of the Labour left shows that at no time in its history has it been as weak, both in political credibility and policy, as it is today. An analysis of it over the past fifty years reveals that the Labour left has become increasingly feeble. You have only got to compare the Michael Foots of today with the Jimmy Maxtons of yesterday to realise how precipitous the decline has been. Jimmy Maxton had been a close companion of John Maclean. He took a prominent part in the fierce industrial battles that occurred during and immediately after the First World War. Like the other ‘wild men on the Clyde’, elected at the 1922 general election, he was not only far nearer to a revolutionary position than the Labour pink MPs of today, but also had won standing as a working class leader as a result of leading workers in struggle. These were men who represented something. Thousands turned up at Glasgow station to cheer them off. And when they arrived in London, they met, amongst the other MPs, men like George Lansbury, recently out of his prison clothes, having led Poplar Council in its defiance of the law. [3]
One Labour MP of the time, John Paton, described the atmosphere at the 1922 general election, which made it unique: ‘Never again in subsequent elections was enthusiasm to rise to this height or possess quite this intense quality. It was an emotional outpouring expressing the sudden release of a new hope. [4] Another MP, David Kirkwood, former convenor of Parkhead forge, confirms this view in his autobiography: ‘We were going to do big things. The people believed that. We believed that. At our onslaught, the grinding poverty which existed in the midst of plenty was to be wiped out. We were going to scare away the grim spectre of unemployment which stands grinning behind the chair of every artisan. We believedit could be done ... Alas, that we were able to do so little!’ [5]
It is impossible not to agree with Kirkwood’s verdict. The ‘wild men of the Clyde’ accomplished very little. Granted Jimmy Maxton and a few others remained reasonably true to their socialist principles, expressing them, however, with less and less effect as the years went by. But others like Wheatley and Shinwell, sold out by accepting government posts. And, moreover the Clydesiders as a group were responsible for nominating Ramsay MacDonald as party leader. The most powerful, the most promising Labour left ever, produced at a time when large numbers of people had faith in the efficacy of Parliament, failed dismally.
The Labour left on the Twenties was much more impressive than that that emerged in the early Thirties, led by Attlee and Cripps, which never gained mass working class support. Even so, the Labour left’s policy in the thirties was very much better than the Tribune MPs now. Attlee and Cripps proclaimed:
‘In our view it is impossible to frame a socialist policy of any kind to satisfy the capitalist. An attempt to do so will inevitably lead the party into a position of being distrusted by its followers and not satisfying others.’ [6]
Consequently, they concluded, quite logically, that they had to spell out in detail what they stood for:
‘We do not want to get in by a kind of confidence trick saying, "We are very good boys, and we shall not do anything drastic unless you give us power and we will do it." If we are to rally the whole Country, we have to tell them that those things have to be forced.’ [7]
Hence Attlee and Cripps held mass meetings to explain their socialist policy. ‘Everywhere I go I find reviving enthusiasm and great meetings,’ Clem Attlee wrote in a letter to his brother. ‘George, Stafford and I endeavour to give them the pure milk of the word and no blooming gradualism and palliatives.’ [8]
Attlee visualises a Labour government carrying out extensive nationalisation: ‘The moment to strike at capitalism is the moment when the Government is freshly elected and assured of its support. The blow struck must be a fatal one and not merely designed to wound and turn a sullen and obstructive opponent into an active and deadly enemy.’ [9] To accomplish this task, the Labour government must be ‘armed with emergency powers for taking land and buildings without waiting for elaborate inquiries as to compensation, etc.’ [10] In a vague way, Attlee even approached the concept of a revolutionary party. He saw this as the role of the Socialist League:
‘The most urgent job of every socialist now is to see that in his own town at any rate there is ready a group of people ... who can trust one another, and who are trusted by the rank and file, people who have made it their business to see what a socialist government would require in their district, and to find out how it could be done. That is what the Socialist League is setting out to do – to create advance guards of the revolution, and to create them now. For when the revolution comes it will be too late.’ [11]
Attlee went as far as to suggest they ‘should train people to take over the commanding positions in the army and navy in the event of a revolution.’ [12] It would be interesting to challenge the Michael Foots and Eric Heffers to make public statements at the present time which were as left as Attlee’s of forty years ago. Indeed, it is a sympton of the Tribune MPs’ decline – of their political degeneration – that Clem Attlee appears a rabid revolutionary by comparison. But really it would be pointless trying to prod them into making such utterances: socialist words without socialist deeds are meaningless. Sir Stafford Cripps, the scourger of the financiers in the Thirties, became a tool of the financiers in the Forties. As Chancellor of the Exchequer, he imposed a wage freeze on the workers while prices and profits continued to rise. Similarly, Clem Attlee, who talked of a Labour government delivering a fatal blow to capitalism immediately it attained office, did nothing of the kind when he became prime minister. Rather he took Britain into NATO, a military alliance to defend capitalism, and consequently had to increase arms expenditure at the expense of social services.
The political evolution of Attlee and Cripps is a pattern followed by many Labour politicians. They initially go through a left-wing phase, thereby acquiring popularity and support from the rank-and-file, before subsequently moving rapidly to the right. Significantly, the Attlee administration’s anti-working class measures led to the emergence of the Bevanites, a left opposition that contained such notable socialists as Harold Wilson, Anthony Greenwood, Barbara Castle and R.H.S. Crossman! Yet, in many ways, the Bevanites’ credentials to be regarded as a Labour left have to be taken more seriously than those of Michael Foot and his friends today.
 
The Collapse of the Tribunites
At the height of the controversy over re-armament, Aneurin Bevan declared that,
‘The polarisation of British political life is not therefore as between Labour and Tory. The formal struggle will be expressed in those terms. But the real struggle is for the soul of the Labour Party.’ [13]
Because they felt this to be so, Bevanite MPs took the struggle into the constituencies, holding Tribune brain trusts, which were described as ‘the biggest, most continuous and widespread propaganda effort ever conducted within the Labour Movement.’ [14] You have only to compare this with the situation in recent years to see how the Labour left has atrophied. Whereas Aneurin Bevan saw the right-left dispute within the Labour Party as the storm-centre of British politics, Michael Foot did what he could to pour oil on troubled waters and lessen the criticism of the Wilson administration that came from the rank-and-file:
‘If the Government were torn to pieces by the actions of the Left within the party, the consequences would be appalling. The Labour Movement would be sundered for generations to come into sectarian fragments.’ [15]
Since his basic message to the rank-and-file was to cool it, to accept without demuring too much the reactionary measures of Wilson’s government, there was no possibility of the parliamentary Left mounting a nationwide protest campaign. Consequently, whereas there were as many as eight Tribune brain trusts held a week up and down the country in the early fifties, in recent years Tribune has usually confined itself to hold a mere three meetings a year – one at the Labour Party conference, another at the TUC and the third at the Young Socialists’ conference. All thoughts of conducting a serious and concerted campaign among the working class has evaporated; Because of this failure to make any impact – to differentiate themselves in the eyes of the working class from the reactionary Labour leaders – at general elections they have fared no better or worse than other Labour candidates. This is in marked contrast to the position in 1951. Then, Bevanites quite clearly attacked Attlee, made it understood to the electorate that they opposed the arms burden and the ensuing welfare cuts. As a consequence, there was a considerable difference between their performance and others. Tribune pointed out that had other Labour candidates done as well as the Bevanite ones, then no Tory government would have been returned. [16]
Besides failing to distinguish themselves in any serious sense from the Labour right-wing leadership, the Tribune group also did damage by spreading illusions about what could be expected from Wilson’s administration. It even spread the grotesque idea that the government was socialist! In euphoria after Labour victory at the 1964 general election, Tribune had as its masthead ‘The Paper that speaks for 12,205,576 voters’. It noted with pride that many of its former contributors were now ministers and proclaimed in a headline, ‘Tribune takes over from Eton in the Cabinet’. With such dynamic leadership, how could anyone doubt that ‘the job of building a new Britain has begun’? Richard Clements, Tribune‘s editor, explained,
‘There are differences between the policy of this paper and the views which Mr. Wilson puts forward. But they are of emphasis rather than of principle.’ [17]
Members of Parliament who previously had flirted with revolutionary organisations added to the chorus of those saying it was vital to support Mr. Wilson. Stan Newens said, ‘The new government has made a start which calls for the support of every socialist.’ He went on to say how ‘delighted’ he was to see the government had begun so well: ‘The fact that such a bold beginning has been made should give heart to us all. [18] Similarly, Eric Heffer opined:
‘Obviously for some of us the programme does not go far enough, for others it undoubtedly goes too far. But as Michael Foot has said, we all accepted it and we cannot expect more, but neither should we accept less.’ [19]
In the articles referred to by Heffer, Michael Foot had written:
‘Like it or not, the Labour Party programme on which we fought the election was one in which we envisaged working a mixed economy in a country involved in the western alliance and in the predominantly capitalist western world. The operation is extremely difficult. But, as Jimmy Maxton once said, if we thought we couldn’t ride two horses we should never have joined the bloody circus.’ [20]
While Foot apparently expected fatalistic acceptance of the electoral programme from the rank-and-file, he never went on to discuss what would be the effect on the working class of merely maintaining the existing economic system. It seems that he is unaware of the fact that capitalism, by its very nature, is a system that runs in the interests of capital and consequently against those of labour. Perhaps he should have read the truths uttered by Attlee thirty years before – that a Labour government which was simply content to administer capitalism would ‘inevitably lead the party into a position of being distrusted by its followers and not satisfying others’, that the least attempt to introduce progressive measures would turn ‘a sullen and obstructive opponent into an active and deadly enemy.’
But Michael Foot’s powers of understanding have always been weak, and added proof of this came after Wilson’s victory at the 1966 general election. Along with many of his colleagues, he completely misread the significance of this event. Tribune welcomed the result with the banner headline: ‘Socialism is Right back on the Agenda’. [21] The following week it said, ‘Labour’s left has played no small part in securing the victory. The argument now is about the implementation of Socialism in Britain.’ This was echoed by Eric Heffer: ‘It is now possible for the Labour Government with its substantial parliamentary majority to really begin to transform society by democratic parliamentary means; if Labour fails to do this, the opportunity will not be presented again for a long time to come.’ [22] Heffer continued, ‘I am not filled with pessimism’.
It might be worthwhile to ask why the rosy expectations of Heffer and Tribune came to naught. How was it that Wilson’s government, returned in 1966 with a commanding parliamentary majority, was so reactionary? The simple answer lies in the fact that, contrary to the illusions of left Labour MPs, important political issues are not determined by the number of parliamentary seats. Rather it is the relative strength of the various classes in society that decides the outcome. Obviously, in a capitalism system it is the capitalist class that is the strongest, and therefore this class was in a position to impose its will. It was able to make the Labour government forget the promises it made at the 1966 election: runs on the pound, threats to put new factories in other countries, and a variety of other forms of pressure were used. As Peter Shore, an ex-Labour minister, frankly pointed out in his book, Entitled to Know, the City was prepared to ‘veto Government decisions that it disliked.’
Therefore, the failure of the Labour left – its complete disintegration at the present time – can be attributed its inability to see where the main battle lies. In attempts to mobilise forces for the parliamentary struggle which, at the very most, is a side-show. It does not relate itself to the crucial struggle which lies in the creation of rank-and-file organisations in industry and elsewhwere as well as the building of a revolutionary party. The fact that it does not relate itself to these urgent problems means that increasingly the Labour left is seen as an irrelevancy. In size, cohesion and policy, it has never been as weak as it is today. Given the trend over the past fifty years, there is not the remotest chance of it capturing control of the Labour Party for socialist policies. Thus the first of the three conditions for destroying capitalism by parliamentary means does not exist nor is it ever likely to exist.
 
The Grassroots Wither
Obviously, the derelict state of the Labour left must be borne in mind when we turn to consider the second condition – that is, whether the Labour Party can transform itself into a party of social revolution. For this to happen, it would have to be an active and vigorous organisation, where socialist ideas were seriously discussed. But here, again, the trend is in the opposite direction. When the years 1966-9 are compared to those of 1951-5, Labour lost 212,000 members. [23] Probably this loss in quantitative terms is not as grave as the qualitative change: after the exodus, it is the aged and the middle class who tend to remain. This is even true in a proletarian citadel like Liverpool, as Barry Hindess’s interesting study reveals. His research showed that Labour Party membership was greater in middle class areas than in working class areas; that in a number of working class districts ward parties had, since 1965, stopped functioning; and, most significant of all, ‘there were no unskilled workers attending meetings in any of the wards studied.’ [24] In other words, Labour’s links with the working class at grass-root level were becoming more tenuous.
This, of course, has had profound repercussions. Dwindling membership resulted in less activity. Whereas in the early fifties, any political dispute within the working class found its most important and direct expression within the Labour Party, now this is no longer the case. When the Bevanites argued against re-armament, the Labour Party was the main battleground. When, in 1958, the campaign over CND began, it was begun outside the Labour Party, yet was brought within the ranks and there was the stormy Scarborough conference. But now, on burning issues of the present day, so few people are active within the party that there can be few debates of any consequence and the devaluation of the annual conference means that it really does not matter what decisions it takes. By implication, Labour activists accept this verdict: a third of constituency parties did not even bother to send delegates to the annual conference. [25]
Those that did make the effort to send delegates, it would appear, tended to be the more reactionary local parties. This can be seen from the fact that there was a swing to the right in the elections to the National Executive Committee. Topping the poll was Barbara ‘In Place of Strife‘ Castle, with Wedgwood ‘UCS’ Benn and H-Bomb Healey also being elected. It is interesting to compare these results with those at the first conference after the Attlee government lost power. In those days, the left was active and vigorous. At the 1952 Morecambe conference, it swept the board, taking all seven constituency party seats on the National Executive and knocking off two former ministers – Morrison and Dalton -who had been associated with the reactionary policies pursued. What is even more significant about the Labour Party 1970 annual conference is the failure of there to be any serious revolt by delegates against the election programme that contributed to defeat. With disarming frankness, both Harold Wilson and Richard Cossman admitted that it was the first election they had participated in where Labour’s programme had not contained any proposed reforms. Michael Foot went even further, describing it as a ‘parody of a party manifesto, the least creditable in the party’s history’. Yet, the rank-and-file -the few that remains of them – stayed quiet and did nothing to stop the issuing of a similar monstrosity at the next general election.
The disenchantment with the Labour Party has so far manifested itself in abstentionism. Good socialists have become disillusioned and dropped out of political activity. Similarly, the electorate have voted with their feet – by refusing to move them from the hearth-rug on polling day. At each general election, a smaller percentage go to vote. While the electorate has increased since 1951 by six million – including many young people because the voting age has been reduced from 21 to 18 – nevertheless, at the 1970 general election, Labour gained 1,800,000 votes fewer than it did in 1951.
This opting out of traditional-type politics shows there is a considerable potential for a revolutionary organisation. It also is indicative of the decline of the Labour Party as an effective political force. No longer has it the same roots in the working class or does its ideology appear so plausible. To think that it could be transformed so that Labour brought in socialism by parliamentary means, is ludicrous.
With the second condition unfulfilled, we can turn to the third, and final, one – whether socialism can be achieved by parliamentary means. In a sense, this question is redundant since, as we have seen, the other two conditions do not exist: the Labour left is on its knees and there is no chance of the Labour Party being transformed into the type of organisation required to introduce socialism. But if, for the sake of argument, we do consider it, we will see that Parliament could only be the instrument for creating a new society if the following things appertained:


that Parliament was the centre of the decision-making process;
that edicts of Parliament were honoured;
and that the state apparatus – army, police, etc. – would be prepared to deal with persons who used force or sabotaged the introduction of socialism.
 


The Capitalist State
None of these three points is valid. It is true that in the 17th century Parliament was the instrument of the rising capitalist class. Afterwards, it remained an important organ for moulding state policy. But in the 20th century, with the development of monopolies and their intimate association with the state, Parliament has lost much of its power. It has almost become an irrelevance. Under contemporary capitalism, the type of question that arises is not amenable to parliamentary solution. Let me give an example: in 1965 the Labour government drew up its National Plan, laying out how it wished the economy to develop during the next five years. This raised extremely important issues about the allocation of resources. But no Labour MPs were consulted in the drawing up of the document. And it is difficult to see how they could be. For what the government wanted to determine was how much expansion could be reasonably expected by 1970 of the chemical industry, motor industry, etc. No Member of Parliament had the necessary specialised knowledge or could speak for an industry. But businessmen like Lord Stokes and Lord Kearton could. It was with such representatives that the National Plan was compiled; the first thing Labour MPs knew of ‘their’ plan was when it was shown to them on the morning of publication.
This is not an isolated incident. Industrial units have now grown so big that the consequences of their actions have national repercussions. The state cannot be indifferent to their welfare, and, as a result, a close liaison has developed between businessmen , and Whitehall that by-passes Parliament completely. While it is valuable, from the capitalists’ standpoint, to retain the facade of Parliament – it gives proceedings an air of propriety and helps to conceal the extent to which industrialists dominate the state – there can be no question of it exercising any real power. Therefore, even were it possible to gain control of Parliament, it would have no real significance.
In any case, history is strewn with examples of instances where, when some vested interest or other is threatened, constitutional decisions become irrelevant. In 1913, the Curragh mutiny thwarted the will of Parliament to give home rule to the whole of Ireland. In 1951, although a Labour government was elected pledged to nationalise the steel industry and Parliament passed the measure, industrialists still continued to sabotage the decision. [26] In 1953, the people of British Guiana elected a mildly left government, led by Cheddi Jagan. Immediately, Whitehall suspended the constitution and imprisoned the prime minister. In all these instances, it has merely been a question of decisions being taken which were disliked; none of them threatened the very existence of the capitalist class. And, therefore, is it not reasonable to expect far more opposition, with no holds barred, when it becomes a life-or-death issue for the profit-making system?
The final fallacy in the social democratic approach concerns the nature of the state – the assumption that it will bend in any direction that Parliament happens to push it. This overlooks the fact that, incessantly, the state performs a function. It protects the interests of the employing class as a whole. This view was contested by Fabians, such as Bernard Shaw, who likened the state to an amiable policeman who would carry out any orders given him. But there are not so many amiable policemen around these days! They are more likely to be fighting pickets, spying on left-wingers and beating up demonstrators. Likewise the judiciary and armed forces, far from being impartial, are weapons of class oppression. They would not, therefore, be instruments that could be relied upon to help Parliament to smooth the transition to socialism. Instead of stopping sabotage and violent resistance, they are more likely to actively encourage it – indeed, be a party to it themselves.
It must be said, in conclusion, that there is no parliamentary road to socialism. None of the three conditions necessary for it to be accomplished actually exist or are likely to exist. To the extent that the Communist Party and Tribune peddle the view that a new society can be achieved in this way, they are spreading illusions that divert energy away from the vital struggle. To be a real socialist is to be a revolutionary socialist – there is no other kind.
 






The recent court case concerning the Spycatcher book has caused great embarrassment to the Tory government. But, as Raymond Challinor explains, the intelligence services have always been involved with Labour too.




FOR THE British ruling class, the year 1917 was the most traumatic. It lost all its investments in Russia. Discontent both at home and within the Empire grew. Most important, the October Revolution showed the existing social order could be overthrown: what happened in Petrograd could, unless prudent precautionary steps were taken, equally easily take place in London.
From that time onwards, the intelligence services, spearheaded by Sir Basil Thomson, concentrated their efforts on thwarting the threat of revolution. In this struggle, it was vital to have the Labour Party aligned with reaction.
In 1917 Morgan Phillips-Price was the Manchester Guardian reporter in Russia. A politically conventional person when he went there – indeed, a prospective parliamentary Liberal candidate – what he witnessed radicalised him. He caused a sensation when he revealed the existence of secret treaties, the dirty deals mutually entered into by the British and Tsarist governments behind the backs of their respective peoples.
On his return to England, Phillips-Price joined the Labour Party. Immediately he became one of the foremost advocates of Britain adopting a friendly, conciliatory approach to the new Soviet system.
Inside the Labour Party, the main arena for debating this issue was the NEC’s international sub-committee. There, naturally, the doves were led by Phillips-Price while the hawks’ chief spokesman was Rex Leaper.
What was not known at the time was that Rex Leaper was a government undercover agent.
Of course, for the next 20 years, the intelligence services played their part in fostering an anti-Soviet stance.
Suddenly, however, at exactly 6 p.m. on 22 June 1941, the situation dramatically altered. With the Nazi invasion of Russia, all those hitherto suppressed stories were pulled out of the cupboard, dusted and used by the media.
For anyone who did not experience the transformation, it is impossible to imagine how, virtually overnight, the criminals of the Kremlin became, to use Churchill’s phrase, “our gallant Russian allies”. Ordinary people went about whistling the Cossack marching song. Top of the pops was the song My Lovely Russian Rose. Workers volunteered to do overtime, making guns and tanks for the Red Army.
Obviously anything that could be construed as being remotely anti-Soviet, even fairy stories, had to be suppressed. That is why George Orwell, who finished Animal Farm in February 1944, found it impossible to secure a publisher.
A nauseating hypocrisy that pervaded literary circles disturbed Orwell. On 1 December 1944, he referred in Tribune to the tercentenary celebrations for Milton’s pamphlet, Areopagitica, extolling freedom of the printed word. But, wrote Orwell, they supported the principle in theory, not in practice.
Many writers attending the celebrations knew Leon Trotsky had almost finished his biography of Stalin at the time of his assassination. Yet nobody raised a word of protest about its suppression.
Behind the suppression of Orwell and Trotsky lay the hidden hand of Sir Roger Hollis and MI5, wishing to keep Anglo-Russian relations as cordial as possible. Once the Cold War had broken out, however, the publication of both Orwell and Trotsky needed to be encouraged.
Orwell’s Animal Farm became a Cold War warrior. It may, at first glance, seem surprising that a Ukrainian edition appeared. It is far from being Orwell’s best or most characteristic work. Nor is there any indication of a great enthusiasm for Orwell’s writing in the Ukraine. So why was it published?
Well, the explanation almost certainly is to be found in the Ukrainian emigré group, funded by CIA and MI5, which produced it. During the Second World War Hitler’s invasion of the Soviet Union was enthusiastically welcomed by many in the Ukraine.
So Orwell was being used by the intelligence services as a pawn in its efforts to destabilise the Russian government. And this happened under Attlee’s Labour administration, just as did the attempt to overthrow communist rule in Albania, where the plan was to reinstate that medieval monstrosity, King Zog.
This reveals the fatal flaw of Labour reformism.
If, like Harold Wilson, you propose to lead a government that preserves the status quo, then you require these intelligence services to resist those clamouring for change.
As Chapman Pincher pointed out in his book, Inside Story, the Special Branch supplied Harold Wilson with the ammunition with which a Labour government smashed the last seamen’s strike.
Wilson smeared Jim Slater (now NUS president) and the other rank and file strike leaders as “a small, tightly-knit group of politically motivated individuals” out for their own sinister ends, not to better the lot of the average seaman.
Under capitalism the present type of intelligence services are essential. As a far-sighted political observer said over 150 years ago, it is necessary to have close surveillance and control of the East End of London if Buckingham Palace is to be properly protected.
 



In his obituary of Edward Thompson, Duncan Hallas writes, ‘Any honest assessment must conclude that until 1956 Thompson was an uncritical apologist for Stalinism’.
Frankly, this is untrue. In the early 1950s, when I edited Socialist Review, I had a number of long discussions with him. Unlike other members of the Communist Party, he was not arrogant or aggressive. He respected points of view with which he disagreed. What is more, he already had doubts about the latest Stalinist encyclicals on subjects like Lysenko and linguistics.
A number of things went to make Edward Thompson a rebel. First, there was the influence of his father, one of the leaders of the struggle for Indian independence. In the course of that campaign, he had learnt to work with comrades whose political principles differed from his own. Toleration and mutual understanding were necessary ingredients of success.
Second, as his knowledge of the British working class grew greater and greater, he found it an increasing problem to reconcile the wisdom he had acquired with the inanities of Stalinism. The thought control the Communist Party sought to impose was deeply repugnant, a violation of his very being.



 


Raymond Challinor
Whitley Bay



 











IN HIS Diary in Exile Trotsky refers to a shock people suddenly experience – the sudden realisation of being old. Slowly, relentlessly, day by day, changes are imperceptibly occurring. Then a task usually easily accomplished – climbing a hill or running for a bus – proves to be too much for one’s dwindling powers.
It is my contention the same principle applies to the Labour Party. Born 86 years ago, it has long since lost the bloom of youth, the rosy years of young promise. Past, too, is the mature phase of positive achievement. Today senile dementia has set in: no longer has it any intellectual grasp of where it is or where it is going.
The steady decline takes many forms. In 1951 the Labour Party had an individual membership of 1,051,000; now it is down to 310,000. At the 1951 general election Labour secured 13,266,592 votes; at the last general election, despite a large increase in the number of people entitled to vote, it received only 8,456,934, the worst result since the MacDonald debacle of 1931.
But this deterioration should not be considered purely in quantitative terms. As its links with the grassroots of the class have atrophied, so workers’ expectations of what Labour might accomplish have also withered.
It is. impossible to envisage the scenes of wild excitement that greeted the election of the Clydeside rebels in 1922 ever being repeated. Then an ecstatic crowd of 200,000 assembled at Glasgow’s Trongate station to cheer their heroes as they set off on their journey to parliament.
The new MPs included Jimmy Maxton, the right-hand man of John Maclean, Dave Kirkwood, convenor of the militant Park-head Forge, the recently imprisoned Emmanuel Shinwell and John Wheatley, the great tactician of the Clyde Workers’ Committee. And who did they meet when they arrived in London? None other than George Lansbury MP, just out of convict’s uniform after successfully leading Poplar council’s defiance of the government.
These were men who had suffered in the class struggle, established strong links with the labour movement and were also personally dedicated to the abolition of capitalism. What a contrast with the well-heeled lawyers, smug middle class and upwardly mobile who grace the Labour benches today! Yet how much did Clyde-side rebels accomplish? As David Kirkwood honestly admits in his autobiography – very little.
This is the problem that has to be faced – a growing credibility gap. Down through the decades high hopes have been followed by dashed hopes, illusions in fundamental change through parliamentary politics has been followed by disillusionment. As a consequence, it has been possible to obtain a more realistic assessment of limitations of Labour-style organisations.
Before the First World War Trotsky regarded the Labour Party’s German equivalent, the SPD, as the socialist jewel of the Second International while Lenin thought that the edition of the SPD’s paper supporting the imperialist conflict, must be a police forgery.
They can, perhaps, be forgiven for their mistaken appraisals. However, anybody who made the similar mistake today should be diagnosed incurably insane. And why? Because 70 further years of German SPD theory and practice have helped to make it abundantly clear what its position is in the political firmament.
Any party that simply administers capitalism has to act in the interest of capital and against the interests of labour – in other words, of necessity, it adopts anti-working class measures.
Even the most successful reformist governments don’t buck this rule. Take the Attlee administration (1945-51). Some of the implications of its dirty deeds are only now becoming fully apparent.
From the outset of the Cold War, the Labour government backed US capitalism, a move that involved joining NATO, cutting real wages to fund increased arms expenditure and conducting a purge, albeit on a smaller scale than in McCarthyite America, of so-called subversives.
While the secret services superintended the sacking of left-wingers, we had no idea that, at the same time, they were cooperating with the CIA to secure the escape to South America of Nazi war criminals like Klaus Barbie, the butcher of Lyons.
Likewise the Labour government secretly manufactured the first British nuclear weapons. Neither the British people nor parliament were consulted about the decision. It concealed as well from the public the facts about radiation. The first civil defence manual, published in 1950, had pages 39 to 45 omitted at the last moment.
Only now is it known that this was done because the government got cold feet, fearing the panic which might be caused if the genetic effects of radiation became general knowledge.
Critics, though, can point quite legitimately to the Attlee administration’s positive achievements. But these reforms need to be seen in context. A widely diverse and contradictory set of forces interact to determine whether or not, at any particular time, reforms will be introduced. Of these, two stand out in importance.
First, there is the depth of feeling, organisation and resolve among the ruled to secure change. Second, there is the ability – or lack of ability – of the existing social order to grant concessions.
In 1945 working people were militant. A widespread determination prevailed that the promises of a bright new world, made during the war by politicians to bolster morale, would have to be kept. More to the point, over five million had served in the armed forces, thereby coming to possess military knowledge that could be put to dangerous use.
When placed alongside a powerful trade union movement, equally determined to see change, their power proved irresistible, particularly since the British ruling class, compromised by appeasement, had largely been discredited. Even that old fool Lord Hailsham, then known as Quintin Hogg, read the situation correctly: he saw the alternatives were either reforms or revolution.
The Attlee administration brought in reforms, so lessening the tensions of transition from war to peace. It could do this because the economy, more healthy than today, could bear the extra cost of all these welfare measures. By 1951, once the ruling class felt more powerful and secure, the Attlee government had served its purpose. It could be replaced by a Tory one.
Even so, the post-war boom continued to make concessions. Whereas at the present time, in contrast, increasing competition and depressed profit margins make reforms a too expensive luxury. Indeed, throughout the world, from USA to Scandinavia, the tendency is to whittle away welfare concessions already granted.
All this places Neil Kinnock in a predicament. The essence of reformism is reforms, the belief that things can be gradually improved, transforming the system without the painful class conflicts involved in revolution.
In the long run, reformism without reforms – or, rather, with existing reforms countermanded – does not remain a viable proposition. Moreover, unlike revolutionary socialism, where a greater understanding of the past helps to strengthen the cause, with reformism it has the reverse effect.
Not only negative things, like the already-mentioned nuclear skulduggery and secret service machinations, have a damaging effect, but also the positive things, the triumphs of which Labourism is proud, turn from gold to dross.
From a 1986 standpoint, the Attlee administration leaves Kinnock a doubtful legacy. He is liable to be asked: How was it possible to have full employment then but not now? Why could they afford a comprehensive welfare state, from the cradle to the grave, and not us? What made it possible for there to be a completely free National Health Service in 1946 – no charges for prescriptions, dental treatment or spectacles – whereas Labour regards it as totally impractical 40 years later?
Any Labour Party member who suggested a future Labour government should re-introduce these and other progressive measures brought in by Attlee would be making a suggestion so wild, so left wing, he (or she) would be in danger of being expelled from the party as an undercover supporter of the Militant Tendency.
Actually, the policy of the Labour Party today is of historic significance – in its entire 86 years existence it has never been so reactionary. Kinnock has been careful not to commit himself to repairing the damage done by Thatcherism since 1979, let alone restoring the swingeing public expenditure cuts of Chancellor of the Exchequer Denis Healey in 1976, when Healey embraced monetarism.
Although during the last decade inequality has grown immeasurably, Kinnock has made it clear he will not repeat the pledge – made in Labour’s 1974 election manifesto but not kept – to see there was ‘a significant but irreversible switch in the distribution of the national income from rich to poor’.
Kinnock’s poverty of vision would match the continued mass poverty; a growing hard-core of unemployed would be left to speculate how a Labour government today could not accomplish what a Labour government did 40 years ago, coming into office, running a delapidated economy, after a highly costly and destructive world war.
Obviously, sooner or later, Kinnock will encounter stiff opposition from socialists, both within and outside the Labour Party. His predecessors, finding themselves in the same situation in the past, have always been able to turn to right-wing thinkers, like Crosland, Gaitskell, Douglas Jay and Strachey.
However outrageous the conduct of Labour leaders, these provided a theoretical underpinning for it, a plausible justification, at least in some people’s eyes. But in today’s cold climate, it must be an embarrassment to Kinnock to turn to these right-wing reactionaries of yesteryear, a painful experience of how wrong the theoreticians of the Labour right were.
All their writings were profoundly influenced by the prolonged post-war boom and the illusions it engendered. The assumption was confidentially made that revolutionary change was unnecessary as all the fundamental problems of society had been solved. What lay ahead was a vista of uninterrupted progress. Keynes had refuted Marx; full employment was here to stay; the national income would continue to grow. Every sentence exuded optimism.
Anthony Crosland was the doyen of this school of thought. His book, The Future of Socialism, was the bible of the Labour right. At the beginning of the book, he contemptuously dismisses what he refers to as the fundamentalism of the left:
‘... in my view Marx has little or nothing to offer the contemporary socialist, either in respect of practical policy, or the correct analysis of our society, or even of the right conceptual tools or framework.’
You see – and here hold on to your seats! – Crosland thinks it is wrong to characterise contemporary society as capitalist. To back this assertion, Crosland pointed to profound changes, altering fundamentally the basis of Britain:


The state played a greater role in decision-making;
Economic control of companies had moved from shareholders to a salaried managerial group;
Industrial capital’s influence, anyway, has been curtailed by social and political influences;
Wealth has become much more evenly divided;
Capitalist ideology (individualism, belief in private enterprise, etc.) had little or no influence in present-day Britain.


Crosland believed society’s existing structure was fundamentally sound and that in such circumstances, workers can be assured that large-scale class conflicts, the industrial battles that characterised the inter-war period, belong to the bad old days, never to return:
‘One cannot imagine today a deliberate offensive alliance between Government and employers against the unions on the 1921 or 1925-6 or 1927 model, with all the brutal paraphernalia of wage cuts, national lock-outs and anti-union legislation; or, say, a serious attempt to enforce, as so often happened in the 1920s, a coal policy to which the miners bitterly objected.’
(Obviously, Crosland is correct: the 1984–5 coal dispute must have been a figment of the miners’ fevered imagination!) Consequently, Crosland concludes all major problems have been solved. What remains to be done is social engineering. More and more reforms, strengthening the welfare state and moving Britain towards Crosland’s ideal socialist society – Sweden!
All this may seem weird and old-fashioned, rather like the clothes of a bye-gone age, but this should not prevent us asking searching questions about Crosland’s The Future of Socialism, published first in 1956.
In the past 30 years it has been Keynes, not Marx, who has been sent to the economists’ knackers’ yard. As his methods of regulating the economy have been discarded, does this mean that there is no way of securing lasting full employment in a present-day society?
Was not Crosland’s analysis patently wrong that led him to conclude capitalism had collapsed? Would not the re-emergence of crises, increasing frequently and increasingly severe, rather lead to the conclusion that Marx’s analysis is fundamentally sound? And haven’t the theories of Marx, unlike those of Crosland and Co, stood the test of time?
The theory and practice of reformism has never been in such bad shape. Its understanding of the world has never been poorer. Its ability to secure reforms never so unpromising. But this will not deter Neil Kinnock in his dogged pursuit of high office.
What differentiates him from those that went before him is his limited political horizon, the meagreness of his appetite for change.
Not for him the ideal of a New Jerusalem; rather he would be content to administer things as they are. Indeed, Kinnock could be described as a believer in utopian capitalism, a system without inner contradictions. It never has existed – it never will.
 



IT IS a pity Donny Gluckstein did not bother to read my article carefully on the decay of Labourism before he rushed to criticise it (September SWR).
Nowhere does it characterise the Clydeside MPs as revolutionaries! Rather it suggested that they were the most militant, the most advanced group of reformists ever to be elected to parliament.
Many of them had been imprisoned either, like Maxton, for sedition (interfering with army recruitment in wartime) or for involvement in the riot that became known as The Battle of St George’s Square (an event that the Lloyd George government misread and thought was the beginning of the British revolution).
Besides having gained their personal reputations through the stand they had taken in some of the most ferocious class struggles experienced by Britain in the 20th century, they were sent to Westminster in a mass wave of left wing enthusiasm.
On arrival there they met George Lansbury, just out of his prison uniform, having led Poplar Council’s successful defiance of the law, that resulted in the government’s defeat: a much better performance than the Hatton-led Liverpool Council over ratecapping.
Donny Gluckstein may disagree, but it is my claim that these Clydeside rebels had a working class credibility, a working class following, a working class militancy unsurpassed in the history of the Labour Party. By comparison the Benns and Heffers of today are tame and toothless tabby cats.
Yet what did they achieve? In his autobiography one of them, David Kirkwood, explained:
“We were going to do big things. The people believed that. We believed that. At our onslaught, the grinding poverty which existed in the midst of plenty was to be wiped out. We were going to scare away the grim spectre of unemployment ... Alas, that we were able to do so little!”



 


Ray Challinor
Newcastle



 



Hugh Gaitskell, widely acclaimed by the press as “the heir to Attlee and Morrison” since he was elected Labour Party treasurer at Scarborough, has shown during the last few weeks that he aims top push party policy even further to the right than it is at present. It is obvious that he intends to use the immense influence he has gained by coming third in the hierarchy to strip the Labour Party of the last remaining vestiges of its Socialist tradition.
Within a few days of the end of conference he had written an article for the Sunday Pictorial. Gaitskell thereby showed that while National Executive Committee members would witch-hunt anyone who had the audacity to write for a struggling socialist weekly like Socialist Outlook, they were not averse to party leaders such as Gaitskell getting a three-figure salary for writing an article for the capitalist press.
The fact that he chose the Sunday Pictorial for his literary effusions was particularly significant. For on the Sunday prior to the conference the Pictorial had gone out of its way to slander Labour Party members. In a big, front-page splash, headed Dangerous Voices, it had solemnly warned its readers that “at least twenty speeches will be heard” at Scarborough “which will have been written deliberately by Communist party members… sympathisers and supporters.”
 
Typical Tory Tactics
Now why should an eminent labour leader like Gaitskell condescend to write in a capitalist paper, particularly when it attacks his fellow party members in such a despicable fashion? To smear one’s political opponents as the Sunday Pictorial did, is a typical Tory tactic. The Tories frequently trot “the smear” out at election times. It helps to conceal their own political bankruptcy and incapacity to put forward a convincing case for the continuation of the present class system and against the introduction of Socialism. It also is an endeavour to intimidate electors and bamboozle them into voting Tory. “Beware,” they shout, “The Labour Party are a bunch of disguised revolutionaries, who receive directions from a Russian, Zinoviev. They’re extremists out to pinch your post office savings, and to set up a Gestapo under the control of a sinister character called Laski.” All these are good lies – and good election propaganda. For their success they depend upon the eager co-operation of the capitalist press.
Yet the Labour leaders are quite prepared to write in these Tory journals of ill-repute, to use their columns to attack members of their own party, and in particular Aneurin Bevan. It would appear as if they fear the left-wing of their own Party more than they fear the Tories. Is it that they have more in common with the Tories than they have with the beanies?
 
Defending the Status Quo
Let Gaitskell answer: “I doubt if foreign policy will play a big part in the next election – not because it is unimportant, but because Mr Eden has, in fact, most carried out our policy as developed by Ernest Bevin.” (Sunday Pictorial, 2-10-54) In other words, gaits keel admits that the right wing foreign policy is identical to that of the Tories.
What about home policy? Here that organ of big business and high finance, The Economist (29-5-54) explains:
“The transformation of the Labour Party into a conservative party is already far advanced…. In their hearts the Labour leaders now recognise that the redistribution of the national income in favour of the working class has gone as far (though they dare not admit further than) is consistent with normal economic incentives; their basic instinct in this field is now the very conservative one of defending the status quo. As for Labour’s belief in public ownership, that has now degenerated into a desperate and equally conservative search for industries in which they feel that nationalisation should not make very much difference; probably the only industry that will be brought under public ownership in Labour’s next tenure of office is water, which is not likely to scare even Bournemouth very much.”
Home policy the same, foreign policy the same. The most influential capitalist journal agrees that they agree, Gaitskell agrees that they agree – and we agree that they agree! Of course, there must be a display of shadow boxing with some skilful pulling of punches. Otherwise the spectators are liable to get discontented with the party system. But this sort of sham fighting is successfully carried out in America by the Republican and Democratic parties, both of which accept the fundamental principles of capitalism. Why should not the Labour and Tory Parties do the same sort of thing in this country?
 
Says a Sixth Are Communist
This is the am of gaits ell, to make the Labour Party a poor man’s Tory Party. But if it is to defend capitalism, then it must employ traditional capitalist methods. The party boss, like the factory boss, must adopt an attitude of disdainful superiority to “his” workers. Therefore, it is not surprising that Gaitskell has contemptuously referred to the Labour rank-and-file as “the mob.” He even told an audience at Stalybridge soon after the Morecombe conference that “at least a sixth of the delegates were Communist or Communist inspired.”
The most generous interpretation of this obviously absurd accusation is that gaits ell suffers from mental delusions, and that the whole thing should be left as a private matter of concern only to himself and his psychiatrist. However, he has recently made an important pronouncement on the tactics that he considers should be adopted towards “Communists” so the fact that he considers the Labour Party to be riddled with them assumes a new and sinister significance.
 
Gaitskell for Suppressing Communists
For, in an interview with the Ceylon Daily News (12-3-54), he was asked what action he thought should be adopted if the Communist Party looked like coming to power through the ballot box. Gaitskell replied, “the democratic parties are entitled to stop it by suppressing the Communist Party. Democracy can only work if parties observe what are called the ‘rules of the game’.”
We wonder how many socialists regard the stern struggle against capitalist exploitation and war as some sort of “game,” and what the peoples of Kenya and British Guiana think of the “rules” by which it is played. However, be that as it may, this statement of gaits ell’s in the Daily News raises some important questions:


As he is in favour of suppressing the Communist Party if it looks like coming to power through the ballot box, is he for suppressing the sixth of the Labour Party, which he considers is “Communist or Communist inspired,” if it gains in numbers and influence and looks like ousting the present right wing leadership? Gaits ell & Co. seem as if they have already answered this question with their recent witch-hunt and suppression of Socialist Outlook. These are desperate attempts to stifle growing discontent from within the ranks in a tyrannical and most undemocratic fashion.
 
Assuming Transport House is unsuccessful in its attempts at thought-control and the right wing are replaced by a leadership of people Gaitskell dubs as “Communist” [1], would Gaitskell be for suppressing the labour Party if it looked like coming to power through the ballot box?
 
How can Gaitskell support the resolution on German rearmament passed at Scarborough? It calls for “free elections” In Germany, and Gaitskell is not for “free elections” since he calls for the suppression of the Communist party if it looks like coming to power through the ballot box.
 


Straying from Socialist Principles
These questions show how far gaits ell, along with many other prominent Labour leaders, has strayed from the principles of democratic socialism. As John Freeman has correctly said,
“the position of socialists is based on the double appreciation that the present boom is insecure and largely fortuitous and that the contradictions of capitalism are too great to be reconciled by Keynesian adjustments of the private profit. If that appreciation is wrong – if capitalism does work in the modern world – our raison d’etre is gone, and we had better surrender as gracefully as we can to the Butskells.” (The New Statesman, 9-10-54)
But events are rapidly proving us right. The growing hardship caused by rising prices, the continual fear and insecurity of losing one’s job in a slump and life in a war inevitably arouses mounting opposition to capitalism. It has produced an instinctive and elemental urge – not simply in Britain but throughout the world – for the reconstruction of society on a socialist basis.
But the Labour leadership defends the old order, capitalism. It seeks to impede the coming of the new. Since the arguments in favour of capitalism are as old and unworkable as the economic system itself, more and more Transport House is forced to curtail democracy, to clamp down on the left wing. Our reply must be to fight to preserve existing Party democracy and seek to expand it so that all genuinely held differences of opinion within the Party find expression. Under such conditions the victory of socialist ideas is assured: the right wing will wilt and disintegrate when they feel the full impact of the rank and file discontent with capitalism and their clamour for a socialist policy.

Footnote
1. Gaitskell’s definition of a “Communist” would seem to include practically everybody who is alive, has two legs, and does not entirely believe in Butler’s economic policies.
 



If there’s a war, you must work harder, if there’s an export drive, you must work harder. If there’s an economic crisis, then you must work harder. Whatever problems confront Britain can be easily solved. The answer is simple: WORKERS MUST WORK HARDER.
Of course, this might prove difficult if you are one of the increasing number of unemployed. But then when your drawing your 32s. 6d. at the Labour Exchange don’t become embittered. Surely it will gladden your heart to think of another man working harder and trying to do your job as well as his won? Then there’s that fine and noble character the boss. Reflect on how he’s saved paying your wages because he has got one man to do two men’s work.
All this is so obvious that one would consider it hardly necessary to extol the virtues of increased productivity. Unfortunately that is not the case. Workers seem suspicious of the plans to make them work harder. Consequently the Tory Government intends to enlighten them. They have recently begun a big publicity campaign, and hope to form Production Committees in 105 towns. Their job will be to stimulate enthusiasm and spread knowledge.
The whole plan got off to an encouraging start. It received the benediction of the big three of industry. First to speak at the opening ceremony was Mr R.A. Butler, the Chancellor of the Exchequer. He thinks increased production pays good dividends – and who should know better than him? Besides being Chancellor, he finds time to be a director of Courtaulds, the big rayon firm that increases its profits – but not its wages – with monotonous regularity. When, with the textile recession, the demand for rayon goods slackened, many workers at Courtaulds’ factories were unemployed. But profits were not affected. Last year dividends rose four per cent and net profits jumped from £3,815,000 to £7,920,000.
The second speaker, Sir Peter Bennett, represented the most powerful employers organisation in Britain, the Federation of British Industries. They are, of course, all in favour of increased work – so long as it is not them who are expected to do it! Sir Peter is no socialist. He does not advocate the principle that all able-bodied men who do not work should not eat. For if this ever applied, it would be a first-rate catastrophe for the FBI. It would result in more people dying of starvation at Bournemouth than at Bihar in India – and they would all be FBI members.
Although it would expand the working population or reduce the number of parasites – so that the burden of increased work could be more equitably shared out – Sir Peter does not aim at increased productivity this way. No, so long as Sir Peter has his way the idle rich will always remain in perfect idleness and the FBI’s slogan will be: Workers must work harder, but capitalists need not work at all.
For this objective to be achieved, workers must be provided with incentives. These must be carefully selected. Sir Peter and his friends only consider those where the benefit received by the workers will be far less than the inflated profits accruing to capitalists. The FBI hopes that the workers, like a set of dim-witted donkeys, will focus their whole attention on the elusive carrots, marked incentives, that are dangled before their noses and overlook the large profit that the capitalists have made from their exertions.
Should the workers see – and it is becoming increasingly difficult to miss – the ever-widening discrepancy between the value of the goods produced and the money they take home in their pay packets, then they must be told that they are making a sacrifice in the national interest. Everything can be justified that way. The only difficulty is that they never explain why it is always the workers, the section of the community least able to make sacrifices, that are always called upon to do so.
One might have expected that the workers’ representatives on this unholy trinity would have pointed this out. But Mr Lincoln Evans, of the TUC, was too tired. His brow was covered with lines of lassitude and languitude because he had spent so many gruelling hours remonstrating with Mr Ted Hill, General Secretary of the Boilermakers’, for saying to a London productivity conference: “If the conference expects to increase production without the workers getting something from it, then they are a bunch of fools.”
The TUC General Council’s criticism of this statement of Ted Hill implies that the workers must be prepared to increase productivity without getting something out of it. If this is what they mean, they are being truthful for once. But let us ask Lincoln Evans and his learned colleagues a question: Would the capitalist class be prepared to permit increased production if it did not get something profitable out of it? If the answer was “yes”, it would mean the end of the high monopolies and combines that restrict production to keep prices – and profits – high. Thirty thousand tons worth of fish would not be dumped back in the sea each year; fruit would not be left to rot on the trees in the Vale of Evesham; and housewives would find the cost of living problem much less acute.
But all this would mean interfering with the profit-making system – and that would never be allowed. Working class youths can be conscripted and sent to the Korean slaughter-house or to do British imperialism’s dirty work in Africa, but you can’t conscript wealth. Profit-making, not human life, is sacred. Workers can fall on the battlefield while the profits of arms barons continue t rise. And if you want to know the reason why Butler, Bennett, Lincoln Evans, Old Uncle Tom Cobleigh and all will tell you: “It’s in the national interest.”
 



An entire generation has grown up amid the Cold War, with the threat of nuclear holocaust ever-present. It therefore becomes highly apposite to ask two questions. How did it start? What were international relations like before it began? Some well-meaning people, believing that the ending of the Cold War has overriding importance, look back with nostalgia to the time when Britain, the United States and Russia lived in friendship with each other. They seek to end the Cold War without fundamentally altering existing political systems. They do not realise that the present international tension is the product of rival imperialisms, of state capitalism in Russia and monopoly capitalism in America. Rather these misguided people see the conflict in facile terms, as a consequence of misunderstandings, and believed that all would be well if these could be eliminated.
Of course, it is an illusion to believe that understanding necessarily leads to agreement. Indeed, this journal – International Socialism – is living proof of this fact. The more fully we understand the capitalist system, the more implacable our hostility becomes. But it is also equally wrong to regard the period of East-West friendship as some kind of bygone golden age; it was much more another kind of hell.
In his fine book, The Politics of War, Professor Kolko describes the cordial atmosphere that prevailed at the Yalta conference just 25 years ago:
The dinner meetings were often extremely cordial and personally friendly, so much so that Stalin and Churchill uttered effusive words equal to the occasions again and again, with Roosevelt making plainer, less eloquent homilies by virtue of his more limited oratorical talents, but also imbibing the atmosphere of goodwill. Churchill, who fought Bolshevism everywhere and had in prior weeks advocated the suppression of the Left by bullets and blood, could now talk of ‘Stalin’s life as most precious to the hopes and hearts of all of us,’ pledging ‘We shall not weaken in supporting your exertions.’ Stalin could reply in kind, even more expansively, toasting ‘In the history of diplomacy I know of no such close alliance of three Great Powers as this ... an alliance for lasting peace.’ ‘... the atmosphere at this dinner was as that of a family,’ like the relations between our countries, the less verbally agile Roosevelt could chime. [1]
The alliance between America, Britain and Russia rested on shared objectives. The Axis threatened their vital economic and political interests. Consequently, they all had a common concern to defeat it. Moreover, once the Axis was vanquished, they could enjoy the spoils of victory – in other words, their unity was based on the cohesive power of impending plunder.
Allied statesmen were singularly uninhibited about expressing themselves in terms of power politics. Churchill described the Big Three as a ‘very exclusive club’, where the entrance fee was ‘at least five million soldiers or the equivalent’. Stalin appears not to have uttered the remark so often attributed to him – ‘The pope? How many divisions has he got?’ – but he nevertheless believed that military might should be the supreme political arbiter. At the second Yalta plenum session, he said France’s views should be disregarded since she ‘had only eight divisions in the war’. Despite mounting democratic platitudes, Roosevelt likewise concurred with the opinion that the powerful few should dictate to the rest of the world. He declared ‘that the peace should be written by the three powers represented at this table’. To which Churchill added: ‘The eagle should permit the small birds to sing and care not wherefore they sang.’
Capitalist politicians often talk about defending the smaller nations from attack. It gives an idealistic tinge to their sordid dealings. Britain’s declaration of war against Germany in 1939 was ostensibly because of Hitler’s invasion of Poland. In fact, the underlying reason was to protect the extensive investments of British businessmen in the Balkans, wealth that was becoming more and more vulnerable as a result of Germany’s Dracht nach Osten [1*] – the drive to the East. Likewise today, NATO politicians suddenly feel obliged to refer the importance of the independence of small countries when Russia violates them, such as the suppression of the Hungarian uprising in 1956 and the military occupation of Czechoslovakia in 1968. What nauseating hypocrisy this all is was exposed in the ‘peace’ negotiations: the Big Three did not spare a thought for the right of peoples to self-determination and national independence.
 
In the Thieves’ Kitchen
Something of the contempt with which small nations were treated can be gathered from Churchill’s own account of how he reached agreement with Stalin, at Moscow in October 1944, about the Balkans:
The moment was apt for business, so I said, ‘Let us settle about our affairs in the Balkans. Your armies are in Roumania and Bulgaria. We have interests, missions and agents there. Don’t let us get at cross-purposes in small ways. So far as Britain and Russia are concerned, how would it do for you to have 90 per cent predominance in Roumania, for us to have 90 per cent of the say in Greece, and go 50-50 about Yugoslavia?’ While this was being translated, I wrote on a half-sheet of paper:



Roumania




      


Russia


  ......  


90%




The others


  ......  


10%




Greece




      


Great Britain


  ......  


90%




Russia


  ......  


10%




Yugoslavia


  ......  


50-50%




Hungary


  ......  


50-50%




Bulgaria




      


Russia


  ......  


75%




The others


  ......  


25%



I pushed this across to Stalin, who had by then heard the translation. There was a slight pause. Then he took his blue pencil and made a large tick upon it, and passed it back to us. It was all settled in no more time than it takes to set down ...
After this there was a long silence. The pencilled paper lay on the centre of the table. At length I said, ‘Might it not be thought rather cynical if it seemed we had disposed of these issues, so fateful to millions of people, in such an offhand manner? Let us burn the paper.’ ‘No, you keep it,’ said Stalin. [2]
In the disregard they showed for human life and values, the Big Three displayed a barbaric depravity reminiscent of the worst of the Roman emperors. For example, at the Teheran conference in 1944, Stalin, whose path to power in Russia had been along a trail of blood, moved a toast to the death of at least 50,000 German officers. Roosevelt thought this an excellent idea. But Churchill refused to drink, saying ‘Great Britain could never admit the killing of prisoners of war’. This led to a slight quarrel. [3] However, no such disagreement arose at the Yalta conference:
The President said that he had been very much struck by the extent of German destruction in the Crimea and therefore he was more bloodthirsty in regard to the Germans than he had been a year ago. And he hoped that Marshal Stalin would again propose a toast to the execution of 50,000 officers of the German army.
Marshal Stalin replied that everyone was more bloodthirsty thaiv they had been a year ago ... He said the Germans were savages and seemed to hate with a sadistic haired the creative work of human beings.
The President agreed with this. [4]
Then the Big Three drank their ghoulish toast. Later, Roosevelt’s chief adviser, Harry Hopkins, admitted to Stalin ‘he looked forward to what for him would be a pleasant spectacle, the present state of Berlin and he might even be able to find Hitler’s body.’ [5]
In such a frame of mind, Allied leaders could contemplate mass murder of both soldiers and civilians with equanimity. This was clearly revealed when they came to discuss the fate of Silesia and East Prussia at the fourth Yalta plenary session. Stalin said there would be no problem since the Germans fled from those regions before the oncoming Red Army. Churchill then replied that this was only a partial solution since they had simply fled into the heartland of Germany and would have to be handled there.
’We have killed six or seven million,’ Churchill continued, ‘and probably will kill another million before the end of the war.’
’One or two?’ asked Stalin.
’Oh, I am not proposing any limitation on them,’ replied Churchill.
The Allied statesmen watched the collapse of Germany like vultures, ready to grab any tender morsels. Stalin wanted to take German factories to be re-assembled in Russia. He also wanted millions of German workers used as force labour in Russia. This method of re-building the battered economy of USSR neatly fitted in with the interests of British capitalism: Churchill made it plain that, while Russia grabbed German factories and workers, Britain would be free to snatch Germany’s export markets. So the alliance rested upon a confluence of exploitive interests.
Behind this lay an even greater kinship of interests: the desire to crush revolutionary forces that were emerging in every country as the war drew to a close. The Big Three were conscious that the Old Order was very vulnerable. In Germany the capitalist class – particularly the big capitalists like Krupps, IG Farben and Thyssen – had supported fascism financially and in every other way. In other European countries under German occupation, the ruling classes had reached a detente with Hitler. They discovered that it was not only prudent but profitable to support the Nazis war effort. This meant they had become politically discredited, completely alienated from the rest of the population. At the same time, the majority of the people in these countries wanted to see new societies built after the war, not reconstruction along the old lines. What made things even more dangerous, many of them were not merely left-wingers but also armed and disciplined members of resistance movements.
In these circumstances, the Big Three found the restoration of bourgeois society a difficult, delicate operation. For, with greater justification than when Marx first uttered it in 1848, it could be said, ‘A spectre is haunting Europe – it is the spectre of communism.’ Fortunately for the various ruling classes, capitalism found its saviour in Joseph Stalin – a man who already possessed great experience at exterminating Bolsheviks.
It is interesting to compare Stalin’s role with that of Lenin after the First World War. While Stalin praised the decisions taken at Yalta, Lenin attacked those of Versailles:
We see a monstrous intensification of oppression. We see a reversion to colonial and military oppression far worse than that which existed before. The Versailles Treaty has put Germany and a number of other vanquished countries in conditions in which economic existence is materially impossible, in conditions of utter lack of rights and degradation. [6]
Lenin denounced ‘the thieves’ kitchen’ in 1919; Stalin was one of the main thieves in 1945. Differences did not end there. Lenin was deeply imbued with the spirit of socialist internationalism whereas Stalin had nationalist prejudices. Frequently, in his speeches, Stalin would utter racialist remarks, such as ‘the Germans are savages’ or the Poles are ‘quarrelsome’. It is obvious he did not believe that, as the Communist Manifesto said, workers have no fatherland. Such sentiments were alien to Stalin, who pressed the claims of the Kremlin bureaucracy for fresh territory in Tsarist terms. He wanted slices of northern China because, he told Roosevelt, they belonged to Russia before the Russo-Japanese war of 1904. He introduced his own draft of the agreement at Yalta on February 8, 1945, with the following reactionary preamble: ‘The former rights of Russia violated by the treacherous attack of Japan in 1904 should be restored, viz. ...’ He went on to justify the grabbing of the Manchurian railway with the argument that ‘the tsars had use of the line.’ [7] Stalin’s inspiration came from the Romanov dynasty rather than from revolution.
Lenin made it clear his attitude was totally different:
My task, the task of a representative of the revolutionary proletariat, is to prepare the world proletarian revolution as the only salvation from the horrors of world war. I have to reason not from the point of view of ‘my’ country ... but from the point of view of my participation in preparing, preaching and hastening the world proletarian revolution. (Emphasis in original – RC) [8]
This policy of Lenin was the exact opposite of Stalin’s policy in 1945, and the reason for this must be sought in Russia’s internal regime. By a series of measures in the twenties and thirties, the Kremlin bureaucracy had installed itself as the ruling class of a state capitalist society. If, at the end of the Second World War revolution broke out in any part of Europe, it might easily spread and endanger the Stalinist regime in Russia. Therefore, the Kremlin had a vested interest in trying to maintain the status quo. A further advantage that might arise for Stalin from such a policy: by playing a counter-revolutionary role – in other words, helping the United States and Britain to make capitalism secure in Europe – he was likely to endear himself to them. In turn, America and Britain might reciprocate and show their goodwill by letting the Russian rulers plunder defeated Germany even more viciously.
 
Holding Off Revolution
In the grand design of the Kremlin, its obedient servants – the CPS in the various countries – had a vital part to play. As Professor Kolko rightly remarks, ‘the Communists throughout Europe inhibited decisive action by the local leftists, giving the Old Order a breathing spell.’ [9] He continues by saying: ‘If the Russians had not given the West a respite, in fact Washington may have realised its worst fears everywhere in 1945. For only Russian conservatism stood between the Old Order and the revolution.’ [10] Professor Kolko proves this thesis with a wealth of factual material, which makes his book extremely valuable. Let me cite some of it:
Italy:
In 1943, Marshal Badoglio, the fascist general who had led Mussolini’s invasion of Abysinnia, is placed head of the provisional government in that part of the country occupied by Allied troops. Both Badoglio and the king, Victor Emmanuel, ‘were universally regarded as remnants of the equally widely hated fascist order’. (p.46) Yet, the Russian government recognised this regime and called upon the Italian people to support a coalition government under Badoglio’s leadership. (p.52) The Italian CP obeyed this instruction, and Badoglio praised Togliatti as ‘the most effective collaborator’. (p.54) This co-operation was given despite the fact that ‘many anti-fascists were still in prison’ (p.56) and that Badoglio’s government ‘strongly opposed any serious dismissal of the fascists’. (p.57) Liberals like Sforza ‘and the Socialists under Pietro Nenni were consistently more troublesome than the Communist party. For one thing, they were not under Moscow discipline, which was now a moderating factor.’ (p.55)
France:
The large and influential French CP ‘helped to disarm the Resistance, revive a moribund economy, and create sufficient stability to give the Old Order a crucial breathing spell – and later took much pride in its accomplishment’. (p.95) ‘The unity of the nation, Thorez never tired of reiterating, was a categorical imperative.’ (p.95) CPers joined a coalition government under De Gaulle’s leadership. As a minister, Thorez ‘banned strikes, demanded more labour from the workers, and endorsed the dissolution of the FFI’. (p.95) He even urged ‘miners to send their wives and daughters into the pits to increase production’. [2*] (p.444) ‘De Gaulle appreciated Thorez.’ (p.94) Foreign Minister George Bidault assured the Americans he was ‘the best of the lot’. (p.94)
On colonialism the French CPers ‘stance was for all practical purposes one of “Progressive Empire” and at no time did they advocate immediate colonial independence’, (p.442) ‘During mid-1945 the Communists severely condemned the first post-war stirring of the independence movement against French control in Algeria as “fascist” uprisings.’ (p.443) CPers were in the government that sent troops to Indo-China to restore French colonial rule and fight against Ho Chi Minh.
Professor Kolko does not deal with the British Communist Party, which has always been small and insignificant. Nevertheless, it is interesting to examine its role. In industry, communists led the speed-up campaign, broke strikes and called for the victimisation of militants. The CP supported Conservative candidates in parliamentary bye-elections. [11] Not merely the Trotskyists but also socialists like James Maxton, MP, and Fenner (now Lord) Brockway were described as ‘Hitler’s agents’ and Trotskyists. [12] A CP pamphlet recommended: ‘Expose every Trotskyist you come into contact with. Show other people where his ideas are leading. Treat him as you would treat an open Nazi.’ In other words, this was a clear incitement to use violence against the Left. At the same time, the Communist Party displayed affection towards the Right. In his history of the CP, Professor Pelling tells how, as the 1945 general election approached, the party called for a peace-time coalition government:
(Pollitt said that)
there should be a ‘new National Government’ which should include ‘representatives of all parties supporting the decisions of the Crimea Conference’. Believing that Winston Churchill, with all the prestige of an architect of victory, would be invincible at the polls, the party favoured the maintenance of the coalition at the end of the war – or, as Dutt put it, ‘the firm united stand of the majority supporters of Crimea in all the principal parties’ ... Unfortunately for the Communists, the Labour Party leaders were in no mood for a coalition, having decided, with a shrewder sense of political realities, that they stood a good chance of winning an election as an independent force. [13]
The CPs policy at the 1945 general election had strange repercussions the following year, when the party applied for affiliation to the Labour Party. At the 1946 Labour conference, Herbert Morrison, speaking for the national executive, advised delegates to reject the resolution. With delightful irony, Morrison showed that the Labour Party’s line had, at the general election, been far to the left of the Communists, who had advocated a ‘policy which was inconsistent with the principles either of Karl Marx, the doctrines of class consciousness, or the doctrines of class struggle’. He continued: ‘Behind this policy for the General Election there was, first of all, a belief that Labour could not get a clear parliamentary majority. That was defeatism, just before the election began.’ Morrison castigated them for advocating ‘a policy of full co-operation with capitalism and a complete desertion of socialist principles ... They are not a Party of the Left as far as I can see.’ [14]
That a Labour leader like Morrison, an extreme right-winger, could adopt a political position to the left of the Communist Party merely indicates how right-wing the CP happened to be. The same situation prevailed throughout the world: wherever possible, the CPS attempted to direct popular forces into channels that were harmless to the ruling class. But to this general pattern, there appears to have been three kinds of deviation:
 
The Exceptions
First, where the Communist Parties entirely owed their power and influence to their own exertions and were therefore in a position where they could disregard the conservative Moscow line (e.g., in Yugoslavia). Second, where the Communist Party was too small and the Resistance Movement too large for the CP to control it (e.g., in Greece). Third, where the society was in such an advanced state of degeneration that it was in practice impossible for the Communist Party to maintain the status quo (e.g., in China).
Let us analyse these three situations in turn.
 
(1) After the German invasion of Yugoslavia in 1941, a three-sided conflict developed. There were the Chetnik guerrillas, led by Mihailovic, who wanted to restore the reactionary monarchy. Then there were the partisans, led by Tito, only about 5 per cent of whose membership were initially communists. These two resistance movements became openly hostile to each other – indeed, probably fought more among themselves than with the German invader – because Mihailovic realised that, if Tito’s partisans gained large popular support, they would constitute a serious (and armed) threat to the restoration of King Peter’s monarchical despotism. Tito and his comrades also represented a long-term threat to the Russian bureaucracy since their growing popularity came from appealing to Pan-Slav nationalism, federal principles and national equality, ideas which were at variance with the Kremlin’s desire to extend its influence throughout the Balkans.
The Russian leaders showed their displeasure with Tito’s partisans. They recognised King Peter as the rightful ruler of Yugoslavia. They refused to read Tito’s proclamations over Moscow radio. They even sent a Russian military mission in 1943 and military aid to Mihailovic.
‘It was during this period that a telegram Stalin received from the Partisans which began, “If you cannot send us assistance, then at least do not hamper us”, profoundly shaped his impression of Tito. Georgi Dimitrov, the leading Bulgarian communist, reported that Stalin “stamped with rage”.’ [15]
Nevertheless, despite Stalin’s disapproval, the Yugoslav partisans succeeded, largely by their own efforts, in expelling German troops from their country. This achievement, which was accomplished at immense personal cost, was nothing less than miraculous: it is not generally known that the Yugoslav partisans kept more German and Italian divisions engaged than the Allies did in North Africa nor that they killed 477,000 German and Italian soldiers and took 559,434 prisoner. [16]
After making such tremendous sacrifices, the Yugoslav partisans were in no mood to accept orders from Moscow. They were not prepared to see the Humpty-Dumpty-like figure of King Peter re-installed in his Belgrade palace again. Stalin’s orders were disobeyed.
 
(2) In Greece, too, the resistance movement already had considerable power before British troops arrived. The National Liberation Front (EAM), a coalition of six political parties, had created the People’s Liberation Army (ELAS) in 1942 to combine the armed and political struggle. Professor Kolko gives some idea of their success:
By liberation the EAMS labour organisation controlled the entire working class, and it helped lead strikes in occupied territories throughout the war; the EAM itself administered two-thirds to four-fifths of Greece and claimed one and a half million members out of a total population only five times that figure – a claim, even if exaggerated, that probably was not far from the unknown truth. [17]
Professor Kolko continues:
Of all the groups in the EAM, the Communists were the most willing to submerge social objectives to the needs of a United Front and the only group willing to explicitly designate Greece, as early as 1943, as part of the general British sphere of influence after the war. [18]
But the Greek Communist Party (KKE) had only a small membership and were unable to direct EAM in the way they wished. For the Greek people had good reason to hate British capitalism and fight against it again dominating their economy. Thraldom to Britain began early in the 19th century. By the end of the War of Independence in 1821, Greece owed British bankers £5m, though she had only borrowed one-third of that amount. Between 1825 and 1898 Greek governments borrowed £140 million from London banks, although she only received a small fraction of that figure. By 1945 all loans had been paid for sevenfold (interest, carrying charges, etc), but still none of the principle had been paid off. By 1935, Greece was setting aside one-third of her total income for servicing these loans. Even during the depression of the thirties, British bankers compelled Greece to pay interest in gold in spite of the fact that Britain itself was off the gold standard. A neo-colonial situation accompanied this economic domination, as Hal Draper, an American socialist, described:
‘The money that the Greek government did receive from the loans went largely into maintaining an army and navy, which served as a British adjunct. The poverty-stricken people of Greece were the slaveys and bondsmen of British capital.’ [19]
In 1945, Britain was as determined to re-assert its control as the Greek people were to prevent this happening. Sixty thousand British troops, under General Scobie, fought with ELAS to re-establish the Old Order. When ELAS laid down their weapons, savage repression ensued:
There was casual terror of random assassinations and beatings, the systematic repression by security committee and court-martial that simply arrested EAM supporters and detained them without trial. The government tightly controlled trade unions, and charged former EAM underground government tax collectors with robbery and looting ... When the British Parliamentary Legal Mission visited Greece at the end of the year they reported that with a very minimum of 50,000 prisoners. [20]
The British authorities used Royalists and fascists in their reign of terror. As Professor Kolko points out, Stalin remained loyal to British capitalism: ‘No one heard a word of reproach of British policy in Greece from the Soviet Union throughout this bloody period and Churchill appreciated it’. When, in January 1945, Churchill tried to justify the Allies armed intervention in Greece, he told Parliament that British troops were there to prevent a situation ‘in which all forms of Government would have been swept away, and naked, triumphant Trotskyism installed. I think Trotskyism is a better definition of Greek Communism and certain other sects than the normal word. It has the advantage of being equally hated in Russia ‘. [21]
Churchill used the term ‘Trotskyist’ very loosely to denote organisations that




were not amenable to Moscow’s control and
threatened British interests.




He displayed the same inexactitude over ‘Bolshevism’, as Kolko shows: ‘When the Russians did send a mission to Tito, Churchill relates, they discouraged the introduction of Bolshevism in Yugoslavia.’ [22]
 
(3) The corruption and chaos in China in 1945 beggars description. Perhaps the venality of Chiang Kai-Shek and his Kuomintang warlords is best shown by a few facts:

By 1944, an American-made tyre cost 1,000 dollars and a sparking plug 75 dollars in Chungking.
It cost US military forces eight to 10 times the cost to service units in China compared to what it would cost in the United States.
Chinese generals discovered their troops were a greater asset dead than alive: if alive, the generals could only steal half their meagre rations; dead, the generals could steal the entirety. [23]

Henry Morgenthau, Secretary to the us Treasury, described Chiang Kai-Shek’s clique as ‘just a bunch of crooks’. General Stilwell, an American adviser in China, shared this view; as did his successor Wedemeyer. [24] Despite such criticism and the tremendous cost, the United States was determined to back Chiang Kai-Shek to the utmost. It did this, first, because it saw that China was potentially a good market for us exports once the war had ended. Secondly, because the lavish aid made Chiang’s clique a stooge government, which would do whatever USA ordered. The United States bought for itself an extra vote in the ‘peace’ negotiations.
The Kremlin rulers, simply concerned with their interests as a ruling class, were prepared to support Chiang Kai-Shek irrespective of the consequences for Mao Tse-tung. This had clearly been shown in an earlier period, when Japanese victories over Chiang threatened the balance of power in the Far East and thereby endangered the interests of the Russian state:
By the end of 1939, they (i.e., the Russians) supported the Kuomintang government against the Japanese and therefore against the Communists, for the arms Russia sent to Chiang would also be used against Mao’s forces. As the rest of the world hesitated for fear of alienating Japan, Russia sent Chiang weapons. In the last two months of 1939 almost two-thirds of the arms shipped to Chiang through Rangoon were of Russian origin ... Russia gave Chiang’s governments vast credits, amounting to well over 50 million dollars by mid-1940 ... [25]
Subsequently, Stalin was equally accommodating with the Americans. He assured them that he wished to see a strong China united under Chiang’s leadership. He ridiculed Mao and his followers, explaining to an American diplomat, ‘The Chinese communists are not real communists – they are “margarine” communists.’ [26] At the same time, Stalin wrote to Mao, urging them to ‘unite with, be included in and under the National Government in China’. [27] Mao attempted to comply with Stalin’s policy and opened unity negotiations with Chiang Kai-Shek. But such a course of action proved to be impossible: Chiang did not want co-operation but capitulation. Thus Mao and his followers were perforce compelled to fight – compelled to fight a regime which was so riddled with corruption it was unable to fight. Nemesis for Chiang – the complete downfall of the Kuomintang on the Chinese mainland – came by 1949.
In all three types of situation instanced above – in Yugoslavia, Greece and China – the internal dynamics, the push of forces beyond Stalin’s control, resulted in developments that the Kremlin bureaucracy did not want or encourage. It was only with the outbreak of the Cold War, when the Russian leaders wished to cause inconvenience to Western capitalism, that a switch of policy occurred. Only then did Stalin offer verbal (although not armed) support for the resistance in Greece and for Mao’s campaign in China, or show some gratitude to Tito. These changes in policy were an effect of the Cold War rather than one of its causes.
 
Myth and Reality
The view that Russia in 1945 was hell-bent on world domination, and used the various Communist Parties as tools towards this end, is a myth that has been peddled in Western countries to justify re-armament. The truth is that Russia emerged from the Second World War m an extremely battered state, quite incapable of fighting a further global conflict. She had borne the brunt of struggle: for most of the war Russia was fighting 70 to 75 per cent of the German army; Britain, America and the other allies fought the rest. [28] Consequently, Russian casualties were colossal, as Isaac Deutscher relates:
When, after the war, the first population census was carried out in the Soviet Union, it turned out that in the age groups that were older than 18 years at the end of the war, that is, in the whole adult population of the Soviet Union, there were only 31 million men compared with 53 million women. For many, many years only old men, cripples, children and women tilled the fields in the Russian countryside. Old women had to clear, with bare hands, the immense masses of rubble from their destroyed cities and towns. And this nation which had lost 20 million men in dead alone – and only think how many of the 31 million men that were left alive were the cripples and invalids and the wounded of the world war and how many were the old-aged – this nation with so tremendous, so huge a loss, this nation was supposed to threaten Europe with invasion! [29] (Emphasis in original)
However much they might whip up hysteria to deceive the masses, the overwhelming majority of Western politicians knew there was never the remotest chance of a Russian attack. Even the notorious John Foster Dulles admitted in one of his franker moments:
So far as it is humanly possible to judge, the Soviet Government, under conditions now prevailing, does not contemplate the use of war as an instrument of its national policy. I do not know any responsible official, military or civilian, in this Government or any Government who believes that the Soviet Government now plans by open military aggression. [30] (Emphasis added)
As one has to dismiss the charge against Russia, it is tempting to see the United States as entirely responsible for the Cold War. This explanation, which is frequently advanced by crers and fellow-travellers, has the virtue of simplicity. But such a uni-causal explanation, while containing an important element of truth, in my opinion does not lead to a full understanding of the highly complex international relationships that created the Cold War. There was a basic and fundamental incompatibility of America’s and Russia’s views of how the post-war world should develop.
The United States envisaged an international liberalisation. It wanted free trade and the right of business to invest anywhere in the world without let or hindrance. As the us State Department explained in 1944, ‘This doctrine in its pure form would provide that the capital and enterprise of all countries should have equal opportunity (even with the capital and enterprise of the country in whose territories the resources existed) to participate in the ownership and development of natural resources.’ [31] When the State Department talked of ‘equal opportunity’, it failed to add that some would be more equal than others. America, her economy expanded and strengthened by the war, would be very favourably placed compared to any other country.
Obviously, such a policy would give us capitalism hegemony over the world economy. A leading American statesman, Cordell Hull, openly recognised this fact when he said, ‘Leadership towards a new system of international relationships in trade and other economic affairs will devolve very largely upon the United States because of our great economic strength. We should assume this leadership, and the responsibility that goes with it, primarily for reasons of pure national self-interest.’ [32] It was a responsibility that Henry Wallace, the us vice-president, gleefully accepted. ‘The American business man of tomorrow,’ he said, would understand that ‘the new frontier extends from Minneapolis ... all the way to Central Asia.’ [33]
But America’s grandiose plans for post-war expansion conflicted with Russia’s interests at three sensitive points. First, there was the question of defeated Germany. The Stalinist bureaucracy, wanting to re-build Russia’s ruined economy, favoured wholesale looting and plundering. The American politicians, on the other hand, recalled what happened to Germany after the First World War: stripping her of productive potential made it impossible for her to fulfil the reparation requirements of the Versailles Treaty. Indeed, the United States, with its Dawes and Young Plans, had to pump more money into Germany than it obtained from Germany. Obviously, the us government did not want to see history repeat itself. It also had another reason for objecting to the Russian policy: the growth and stability of European capitalism would be impossible without an economically viable Germany. All this meant that America’s plans for long-term exploitation were not reconcilable with Russia’s for short-term exploitation.
But the Stalinist bureaucracy’s thirst for capital, the urgency of its need to accumulate, threw it into conflict with the United States in a second way. It proceeded to rifle Eastern Europe in a fashion that was reminiscent of the worst excesses of British imperialism in India and, in the course of its plundering, showed little concern for who happened to be the legal owner of the property they seized. Let me exemplify this point by taking the typical case of Rumania. In his book, Stalin’s Satellites in Europe, Y. Gluckstein wrote:
The most important machinery of the Ploesti Oil Refineries was dismantled by the Russian military authorities, and the Rumanians also had to hand over a fifth of the machinery of the textile and metallurgical industries ... It has been estimated that in fact Rumania, from the armistice to June 1, 1948, paid the USSR $1,785 million in goods, etc; a figure which would represent 84 per cent of Rumania’s national income for that period. [34]
As this vicious and inhuman policy of the Stalinist bureaucracy stripped Rumania of anything of value, the plight of the Rumanian people became appalling, as the Manchester Guardian described:
the peasants are moving away in gangs in search of food, meanwhile eating grass and acorns and even chewing clay-bearing soil to assuage their hunger. They have slaughtered their cattle or bartered it for grain and have even, it is said, consumed seed corn although the authorities soaked it in oil before distributing it. [35]
The American and British governments were not worried about the tremendous sufferings of the Rumanian people; their concern was simply limited to the fate of their investments. For only 15 to 20 per cent of the capital of Rumanian industry was owned by Rumanians; the rest belonged to foreigners, mainly British, French and American capitalists. [36] So the Russian attack on Rumanian property was, by proxy, an attack on Anglo-American interests. This was resented by Western capitalists not only when it occurred in Rumania but also as it happened elsewhere in Eastern Europe.
It was not merely that they lost large investments in the Balkans, but also that Americans were made to understand, by Russian conduct there, that the Stalinists’ method of exploitation was diametrically opposed to their own. Their modus operandi – relying upon the state to extract the maximum surplus value – was incompatible with the American method of relying upon giant corporations to extend us influence. Indeed, Russian state regulation, extending into and dominating East Europe, effectively roped this entire area off from the liberalisation of trade and investment which were an essential part of American postwar plans. Thus, a third source of conflict arose.
The Cold War should not be seen as a gigantic misunderstanding. Nor was it caused by the evil designs of any particular country or politician. But it developed because the imperialist interests of America and Russia did not coincide. Professor Kolko’s book, in a magnificent fashion, gives a wealth of factual detail on the origins of the Cold War. Unfortunately, he does not possess the theoretical knowledge to underpin his argument to prove this point.
 






Raymond Challinor, who lectures in Government, is the prospective parliamentary Labour candidate for Nantwich. Until last May, he was a councillor on the Newcastle-under-Lyme Borough Council, and this article is written in the light of his experience there.





Local government is a bore. Among socialists to-day it arouses little interest. Self-satisfied councillors, indulging in squalid squabbles and, occasionally, petty corruption all seems remote from the real issues. And even remoter from the pioneering period of the labour movement when left and right-wingers alike saw local politics as an instrument for securing their ends. Symptomatic of the importance then attached to this sphere of activity is that in 1894 40 percent of all pamphlets issued by the Fabian Society dealt with local affairs. In contrast, at the present time serious socialist journals pay little attention to it; no article on local government has appeared in either International Socialism or New Left Review since their inception.
But, as usual, apathy gains its own rewards. The absence of sustained interest inside the labour movement, and informed socialist criticism, has enabled the Conservative Government to achieve its objectives without encountering extensive opposition. Not only has it achieved its aims, but, due to the absence of concerted criticism, much of the blame for unpopular measures has fallen not on the real culprits but on docile Labour councils.
The first important objective, pursued since the Tories returned to office in 1951, has been to increase the burden of rates. As can be seen from the following table, rates have risen out of all proportion to the cost of living, and the re-valuation of property, to be introduced in 1963, will probably further emphasize this tendency:–



Average rate levied per head of population in England and Wales




County Boroughs


£  7 16   2


£15 12   8


+ 100%




Metropolitan Boroughs


£16 4 11


£34   1 11


+ 110%




Non-County Boroughs


£  8   1 11


£16 14 11


+ 107%




Urban Districts


£  7   5   5


£14 18   0


+ 105%




(Source: IMTA Return of Rates)



Rates are a regressive form of taxation. A man with £10,000 a year will pay much more income tax than an average worker, but his rates are unlikely to be correspondingly greater. The poorer sections of the community – men with large families, old aged pensioners, etc. – are often exempt from paying income tax, but they still have to pay rates; whereas the exemption from rates goes to the rich industrialist and farmer. Consequently, to change the form of taxation, transferring the burden from income tax to the rates, has the effect of redistributing the national income in favour of the wealthy. This is precisely what the Tories have done: rates have gone up in the £ while income tax has gone down.
A second method the Conservatives employed to reinforce this incomes policy was by altering the method of local government finance. Under the Labour Government (1945-51), local authorities borrowed money to finance capital projects through the Public Works Loan Board, usually at a low rate of interest. However, in 1953 R.A. Butler forced local authorities on to the money market, and closed down the PWLB. This meant that councils had to borrow money, often at crippling rates of interest, because the Government introduced, from time to time, a ‘dear money’ policy. All told, in ten years, the Government altered the bank rats eighteen times, which automatically, via the money market, affected councils – creating uncertainty, a lack of continuity in municipal development and, most important, higher costs all round. A three-bedroom council house cost, after loan repayments, just over £3,000 in 1951, but because of interest charges the same house would cost £6,400 – an increase of 111 percent to-day.
Moreover, the situation is worsening. Local authorities, without other means of raising sufficient revenue for their requirements, are forced to become further indebted. Each year another £500 million is added; at present the amount outstanding is £6,000 million – the equivalent of £133 for every person in England and Wales. Interest payments have shot up from £81 million in 1950 to £289 million in 1960. Councillors, receiving public opprobrium for rising rates and rents, have become, in reality, the unpaid servants of the Government and City financiers, for whom they collect handsome sums of money. [1]
But to cause confusion among any potential opposition, dividing it and diverting attention from unjust Tory policy, the Government introduced the block grant system. Ministry spokesmen heralded this measure, saying it would give councils greater freedom; within broad limits, they could determine how they spent their revenue. In fact, the block grant curbed the expansion of enterprising local authorities, by curtailing Exchequer contributions, hitherto on a percentage basis, as well as intensifying the rivalry between committees for the limited funds available. Few councillors appear to have realised that this newly conferred ‘freedom’ was ‘freedom’ within the context of Tory financial policy, not a freedom to challenge it.
Local authorities are severely limited in the measures they can adopt against the Government. Being legally-created bodies, their powers are strictly laid down by law, which gives little room for manoeuvre. If they exceed their powers, individual members of the council render themselves liable to fines and imprisonment. For instance, in 1922 Poplar Borough Council, led by George Lansbury, refused to administer the then locally run unemployment relief in accordance with Government regulations. The council was prosecuted and 30 councillors jailed. By their courageous stand, Poplar aroused a national outcry against the Government, which forced it to amend its policy.
Local authorities can play an important role in national politics. But this, according to law, is not what they are supposed to do: local government should be concerned with local affairs; it is not its task to modify or alter national policy. When Poplar, three years after the unemployment row, decided to pay its employees a minimum wage of £4 a week, it led to a High Court action, where a judge ruled Poplar wrong since the question of whether a minimum wage was desirable was a national, not a local, issue. [2]
Similarly, in 1953, Birmingham Corporation decided to introduce free travel for old aged pensioners on its municipal bus service. But a Birmingham ratepayer took legal action. Although no statutory provisions prohibited the scheme, nevertheless the court ruled it illegal and ultra vires. The judge said that Birmingham’s proposed scheme amounted to subsidizing a particular class of people and that, on general principles, it was a matter which only Parliament could decide to do, and therefore outside the jurisdiction of any local authority. Birmingham appealed to Parliament, tried to get through a private Bill to authorise free transport for the aged, but failed. [3] Likewise local authorities are not allowed to extend municipal enterprise, unless Parliament has specifically sanctioned it. In a well-known case, Fulham Council, which has been authorised, under the Bath & Washhouse Acts (1846-78), to run a washhouse where people could clean their clothes, thought it would provide an extra service – that of actually washing the clothes – for a small extra charge, but this was ruled ultra vires. [4]
Not only is it rigorously laid down what a council is prohibited from doing, equally it is clearly stated what it is compelled to do. For example, in 1954 Coventry disbanded its Civil Defence, believing there to be no effective protection for the civilian population from nuclear war. But under the Civil Defence Acts, councils are obliged to have Civil Defence, it is a compulsory power, and therefore the Home Office stepped in, ran Coventry’s CD, and charged the city £50,000 for doing so.
Summing up the position in his book The Passing of Parliament, Professor G.W. Keeton says, the ‘expression of democratic freedom in local activity was in harmony with our long tradition of local government. Since then, however, the scene has been transformed ... Today, the elected councillor is to a substantial degree in the hands of his permanent officials. This is partly because the nature of their work has increased enormously in bulk and complexity with the steady extension of social legislation, and because the local officials themselves must work in close association with Whitehall, which not only exercises constant supervision over what they do, but also supplies much of the finance, on the fulfilment of specific conditions. The result is that the local councillor feels an increasing sense of frustration, and there has been in consequence, a progressive decline in local government, which directly corresponds with the increase of central control.’ (pp.190-1, my emphasis – RC)
A vast regiment of government inspectors, district auditors, and Whitehall bureaucrats exercise this central control; local authorities are hamstrung. As we have seen, the redistribution of income, albeit in a small, local way, is pronounced illegal; the extension of municipal ownership runs up against legal barriers; and so will most proposals with even a mildly progressive flavour. Local authorities must be-prepared either to be pliant tools of the capitalist state, carrying out its orders with complete obedience, or they must be prepared for a battle in which the state will use every weapon in its armoury.
For most Labour councils the decision is easily taken – they obey Whitehall. This harmonizes with the traditional principles of right-wing Labourism, content to work within the framework of British capitalism, to administer it and make piece-meal reforms. Socialist advocates of wholesale change, on the other hand, argue it is necessary for Labour to storm the commanding heights of the economy, to take industry into public ownership and to create a new, socialist state. From such a viewpoint, to administer capitalism, whether at national or local level, inevitably involves working in capitalist interests – and against those of the workers. The balance sheet of Labour councils – in other words, of so-called reformism – shows, at local levels, what are the likely consequences of accepting capitalism as an established fact and striving to do whatever can be done within that context. While Labour councils vary considerably, certain characteristics are fairly common:–
First, a lack of militancy and socialist spirit. Labour councillors, as a whole, are probably to the right of Hugh Gaitskell. During the South African boycott campaign the National Executive Committee asked all Labour councils to stop buying South African goods, but most Labour Groups just disregarded this request. Similarly, although the Labour Party’s policy nationally is in favour of comprehensive schools few Labour councils had the courage or conviction to implement this conference decision. [5]
Second, ostensibly the aim of reformism is to introduce reforms, but frequently it fails to achieve this objective. A failure of local authorities ‘to deliver the goods’ – to build better houses, roads and schools, etc. – is swelling the Titmuss-Galbraithian outcry of ‘private affluence, public squalor’. About slum clearance there is nothing revolutionary – many capitalist countries have swept away slums – yet in Britain, as a recent supplement in New Left Review shows, appalling conditions exist in many industrial towns. Many of these towns, significantly, have Labour councils. Of course, in the final analysis, the blame lies with the Tory Government, but many electors are not farsighted enough to see the last analysis. All they see is a Labour council doing nothing about the slums.
Third, many councillors are afflicted with an eye disease – council cretinism – which prevents them from seeing farther than the parish pump. They regard things in local terms, do not see their national implications, and therefore do not unite with other authorities to bring pressure on the Government over such issues as slum clearance. Instead of treating each other as brothers-in-arms, far too frequently a Labour group in the authority will look with hostility and suspicion on its neighbours. Some years ago Staffordshire County Council and Dudley Corporation – both Labour controlled – spent £50,000 in legal fees battling over a small strip of land. ‘They won’t get an inch of our county,’ said the Staffs CC chairman. After this unedifying spectacle, ‘our county’ went Tory at the next elections.
Fourth, as they are not going to contest elections on socialist principles, Labour candidates tend to project their general qualities – initiative, enterprise, powers of management, public benevolence, etc. But Labour representatives are unlikely to have a monopoly of these qualities. Indeed, Tory councillors, usually recruited from among small businessmen, managers, and professional classes, may have to use initiative, enterprise, powers of management, etc., during their daytime employment, and consequently may, in these qualities, claim to possess them to a greater extent than Labour councillors. In any case, the electorate may feel, if it is merely a question of administering capitalism, then it would be better, and more natural, to have capitalist representatives in charge.
Fifth, because of the political behaviour of Labour councillors, in local elections few important issues emerge and a smaller percentage vote than at General Elections. Not putting forward a clear class position, even to the degree it does at parliamentary elections, Labour fails to mobilise potential voters; too many think there is little to choose between respective candidates. And, consequently, Labour gains a smaller proportion of the seats in local than in national elections.
Further, the behaviour of Labour councillors, far from bringing credit on themselves, may reflect adversely on the party as a whole. In his speech to the 1959 annual conference, Hugh Gaitskell cited, as a contributory cause for Labour’s defeat at the General Elections, the actions of some Labour councils. [6]
The foregoing analysis, I think, shows the bankruptcy of so-called reformism in local government. It fails to mobilise the people against the Tory Government; it fails to protect them from the reactionary measures of the central government; and it even fails to achieve reforms. At the lowest level, it hardly acts as a good electoral advert for the Party.
What should socialists do then? A left-winger is sometimes confronted with the opportunity of becoming a councillor. Should he? I think this cannot be answered in a general fashion. It all depends on the level of socialist consciousness in the area, the amount of his time that would be devoted to trivial, administrative detail, and the gags that might be imposed to stop him putting forward socialist ideas in the council chamber.
Certain general principles can, however, be enunciated:–


The council chamber should be used as a forum for expressing socialist ideas. National questions are often lost on the public; they gain a better idea when put in local terms. ‘Truth is concrete,’ Hegel once said. Instead of talking abstractly about land speculators, it has a greater impact if you can say about a landlord everyone knows, ‘Lord A, who bought this land for a song, is selling it to the Corporation for £X pounds, and it will mean an increase in your rates.’ Also, more attention is paid when the interest burden is put forward in terms of how much we in Little Twiddlecombe have to pay per head each year to these so-and-soes. Further, the futility of civil defence can best be shown in local terms : for example, Newcastle-under-Lyme, population 74,000, has 8 blankets, one ambulance, one geiger counter. So let the Russians do their worst – we’re alright, Jack!
 
Socialist ideas should lead to socialist practice. Labour councils should be made the bastions of revolt, carrying out an uncompromising struggle against the Tories. They should let no impediment stand in their way. In the past, the trouble has been that the majority of councils have been dull and apathetic, while a small minority of councils have been left-wing. The left-wing councils have been carried away by their enthusiasm, not related their mode of criticism to the level of consciousness of their supporters, and, as a result, isolated themselves – and plunged into defeat.
 
Perhaps the best corrective to ultra-left secretarianism (of the type indulged in by St. Pancras Council during its Lawrence period) is to try to get some cohesion, some co-operation, between left-wing councillors throughout the country. The discussion of mutual problems; the co-ordination of activities; possibly, the publication of an occasional symposium. All these could help to break down isolation and increase socialist efficiency.


But it should not be thought that the task is easy. Councils in Britain have never had a reputation for being left, and any socialist who becomes a member of one of them must be prepared to swim against the current. Even so, it sometimes gives socialists a forum for expressing their ideas and a greater local influence than they have hitherto possessed.

Notes
1. The Radcliffe Commission, published in 1959, expressed concern over the rise of short-term local authority indebtedness – £512 million in 1958, an increase of £342 million compared with three years previously. Often it puts councils at the mercy of foreign speculators, who provide the money, which can be withdrawn from the country at short notice.
2. Roberts v. Hopwood (1925) AC 578.
3. Prescott v. Birmingham Corporation (1954) 3 WLR.
4. Attorney-General v. Fulham Corporation (1921) 1 Ch. 440.
5. Please see note 7 at below.
6. Special note, for Mr George Brown: in his speech Mr Gaitskell made particular mention of the disciplinings, expellings, and expulsions, in which some Labour Groups indulge. He said it gave the Party an image of intolerance that was an electoral liability. Mr Brown, I am sure, would not like to commit the same blunder on a national scale as Labour Groups have done at a merely local level!
7. Interestingly, Georg Lux in his article on The Decline of German Socialism (International Socialism, Spring 1962) describes how local government exercised a right-wing pull on the German Social Democratic Party. At the end of the last war it was quite left wing until the Occupying Powers allowed it to dabble in local affairs: ‘They (i.e., the SPD – RC) were content to have the lower levels of administration, the towns and provinces, left to them. When the officials took up these positions their revolutionary desires soon pooled. In the local councils they played at party politics in the manner of the 19th century.’
Lux also says that the pressure to strip the SPD’s programme of all socialist content – the infamous Bad Godesburg programme that rejected all forms of nationalisation – ‘was led in particular by Land and local government councillors and officials, as well as a section of the parliamentary party.’
 



Fabian Essays
With a new introduction by Asa Briggs
Allen & Unwin. 30s.
This book is a monument – or is it a gravestone? – to British Socialism. Originally published in 1889, to mark the centenary of the French Revolution, its main task was to extinguish revolutionary fires – and it did its job exceedingly well. From that day to this, no. prominent or influential party in Britain has advocated social revolution. Meanwhile the Essays, their effect pervasive and prolonged, have been reprinted six times.
The famous theory of gradualism, the essence of Fabianism, is expounded in two distinct and conflicting ways. On the one hand, there is the idea that society is automatically socializing itself, that – as Webb says – ‘the economic history of the (19th) century is an almost continuous record of the progress of Socialism’, and that ‘there will never be a point at which a society crosses from Individualism to Socialism. The change is ever going forward; and our society is well on the way.’ (Besant) This theory leads them to contend that socialism permeates all classes and parties (‘we are all socialists now’, as Sir William Harcourt, a Liberal politician once said), and the only duty of an avowed socialist is to help this process along; there is no need for a separate socialist party, with an outlook and program all of its own.
The second theory, on the other hand, holds that, while powerful economic forces inevitably push society towards Socialism, the actual introduction of Socialism can only be brought about by a separately organised party. Its strategy must, or ought, to be struggling for piecemeal reforms; in time, brick by brick, reform by reform, a new socialist society will be built. This second theory, most clearly expressed in Hubert Bland’s essay, gives short shrift to the idea, implicit in the first, of permeating all political parties and sections of society.
To a left winger living in the cold disenchantment of the 1960s, the basic mistake of both schools of thought is that they equate Socialism with increasing state ownership and control. This error is not entirely their own property: the Fabians share this delusion with communists and latter-day Trotskyists. They fail to realise that capitalism is moving towards greater centralisation and state control because of an inherent tendency for a declining rate of profit; it should not be confused with Socialism, which involves a drastic change in the relationship of classes, with the workers gaining power. Writers workings in the Fabian tradition today – like Crosland. Douglas Jay, and Strachey – continue to advocate piecemeal reforms, although many critics would maintain that the pieces of meal are so small, so microscopic, as to involve little or no change to society’s structure. But the real contradiction in their stand is between home and foreign policy: in home affairs they are the chief apostles of gradualism, but in foreign affairs they are the chief advocates of a nuclear strategy. I might be wrong, but I don’t think that nuclear weapons – the equivalent of millions of tons of TNT – are the best means for achieving a gradual change.
 



FOR the overwhelming majority of the working people the recent Tory Government measures – increased Health Service charges, increased National Insurance contributions and, thanks to dear Mr Brooke, increased rents – are all part of a definite pattern, an attempt to whittle down the Welfare State and to attack workers’ standards.
However, in a deeper sense, these measures accord with fundamental Tory philosophy. One of its bedrock principles is that people should be made to pay, as far as possible for everything they receive, whether they be luxury goods or the necessities of life; they should never (except, conveniently, through inheritance and “sound financial investment”) get something for nothing. Those unable to pay their way, the victims of this highly competitive society, are regarded as social cripples. They should be pitied, charitably helped – but kept on the bare minimum. Lest they grow indolent, the State should make their lot remain difficult; perhaps a bed of thorns will prick them into doing something for themselves. It is this idea, a guiding principle for workhouse administrators in the 19th century, that pervades all Tory social legislation.
But just as the ability to pay his own way, the amount of money in his pocket, is the criterion of an individual’s worth, so must an industrial project be judged solely by its returns in hard cash. And when we look, in terms of hard cash, at exactly who is benefiting from the Welfare State it is certainly not the working class; and when the working class are losers it can only be big business that gains.
In fact, when we look at the eighteen largest drug companies in England (nine of them American subsidiaries) we see that their aggregate profits jumped from £35m to £46m from 1959 to 1960 – this increase mark year being more than the increase in the NHS drug bill which the Government are imposing. To quote from the Civil Appropriation Accounts report published early this year:
“the profits of these companies, expressed as percentages of capital employed, had been above those of general industry throughout the period, examined and had lately tended to increase whereas the rate for general industry had been falling. While the position, varied greatly, between individual manufacturers and groups of manufacturers, it was noticeable that the profit rates of the British subsidiaries of American concerns had consistently been much higher than, those of general industry.”
Of course the drug firms argue that their profits are justified because of the tremendous amount of medical research they have to undertake. However, according to the Times Review of Industry, only £6.2m is spent annually on research by the industry. Also we can only guess how much of this ‘research’ is merely finding out what other firms know in order to prepare another version of the same thing.
“On the other hand advertising expenditure is beyond all reason. The cost of total advertising of ‘medical products’ in the press and on TV alone was around £10 million in 1960. But this does not include the flood of glossy, five-colour advertising material together with samples sent direct through the post to general practitioners and others in the medical profession, which, as every doctor can testify, involves quite a problem in refuse disposal, though figures of the cost involved are not available.”
All this racketeering on the part of big business is, as can be expected, aided and abetted by the Tory Government. In December last year some minor modifications to the NH scheme revised the definition of new drugs, which are free from price control during their first three years, to exclude drugs which owe nothing to fresh research.
“A decision which shows how right those critics were who suggested that much of the so-called ‘research’ was not research at all.”
As well as directly assisting the big drug combines the Government have clamped down on the doctor and the individual trying to escape the pernicious and unnecessarily high cost of inscription charges.
“The first result of the levy of 1s. per item in 1956 was that doctors tried to counteract the price increase to the patient by prescribing larger quantities at a time; indeed the Hinchliffe Committee found that the new charge was one of the main causes of waste and extravagance in prescribing. The Government has tried to tackle this with seemingly more energy than they have tried to tackle drug firms; at the beginning of 1960 a circular was sent to doctors telling them to limit the quantities prescribed to a week’s supply except where larger quantities are clearly justified and steps have been taken to ‘carpet’ doctors who go in for ‘excessive’ prescribing. Thus the charges themselves have produced irresistible incentives to over-prescribing, and, their own bit of machinery for trying to curb it.”
Some argue that, while the Health Service charges will increase ill-health in the community, it might restore the Parliamentary Labour Party to fighting fitness. For here at last is an issue which they can get their teeth – or rather dentures – into.
Alas! this is extremely improbable. So far, all we have seen is a verbal battle, carried out strictly within the parliamentary framework. Whilst making Cabinet Ministers lose their sleep is highly commendable – their consciences should have done that long ago – it still doesn’t alter things one iota. The Bill still goes through.
The Gaitskellites, in any case, are themselves too compromised to lead any principled opposition. For it was Hughie, our lad, who first introduced prescription charges. How can we expect him to point out that had the Government pegged the arms bill at last year’s figure, almost all the money to be raised by Health charges could have come from that source? Being as much an apostle of the Cold War as Macmillan, Gaitskell has hamstrung himself. With, his own behaviour when Chancellor of the Exchequer still fresh in people’s minds he cannot even hint that to spend £1,655 million each year on ‘defence’, that gives us four minutes warning of annihilation, might be a trifle too expensive, or that the money could be better spent improving old age pensions, the Health Service and the other social services.
Similarly, the Gaitskellites, by their own behaviour, have made it impossible to conduct a vigorous opposition to the increased National Insurance contributions. They were largely responsible for foisting on to the Labour Party the National Superannuation Plan, a plan which was the first to moot the idea of differential contributions. Instead of arguing workers should have an adequate pension as a right, the Plan tied it to the size of the insurance contribution.
Instead of paying for old age out of taxation, where the super-taxpayer would fork out the most, the Plan wanted to be self-financing. Using the same principles as embodied in Labour’s official Plan, the Tory Government have, with a subtle twist, enacted, a vicious piece of legislation, with regressive taxation in the form, of a poll tax.
But of all the ways in which the Gaitskellites retard the struggle the most important is by perpetuating the myth of the clear division between political and industrial activity. As even the most simple-minded worker knows, although a shadow Cabinet Minister may not, the effect of the Tory Government’s increased charges is to lessen his wages, the amount he takes home. It is tantamount to a wage cut. And, as such, the only effective countermove is to greet these measures as one would a wage cut.
The Derbyshire Miners have pointed the way, by their suggestion of strike action. If the Labour Movement stood united, prepared to meet any attack on the Welfare State with, in the last resort, a general-strike, then MacMillan and his colleagues would lose more sleep over that than they ever will through all-night sittings.

All quotations and statistical information from Labour Research, March1961.
 



WHEN considering the evils of 19th century industrialism, such as women and young children working in coalmines, we tend to slide into complacency. We say, “Of course, this sort of outrageous thing couldn’t occur in our enlightened age.”
But we would do well to remember that what to-day is unanimously thought to be wrong was then considered perfectly proper. For example, in North Staffordshire, where I live, workers opposed the ending of child-labour because it would lessen family incomes. To them, children working in the pits was regarded as quite natural and inevitable.
Now I contend that many of the things, unquestionably accepted by this age of unrivalled smugness, will be considered scandalous and barbaric a 100 years hence – that is if Mankind is still alive. Our successors will, I think, cite examples like these to show that a society which could spend millions on armaments and advertising could not meet the most elementary human needs:
Cancer patient 8517. Poor widow (67) with three motherless grandchildren to care for. Nourishing foods particularly needed. Can you help please? Old jewellery, etc., gladly utilised ...
Cancer patient 0657. Spinster (37) outlook grim, with elderly Father to look after, needs warmth and extra nourishing foods ...
Cancer patient 60953. Poor man (68) with wife also suffering from cancer. These unfortunate OAPs are bravely facing their tragic circumstances but find it very difficult to provide the nourishing diet they so badly need ...
These appeals, and many others, have appeared in the British Press recently, issued, by the National Society for Cancer Relief. But such voluntary societies, however well meaning their efforts can only help, a lucky few among the misfortunate many; they cannot hope to satisfy the need, which can only be fully, met by a reallocation of the community’s resources.
To make adequate provision for the sick, to attend to their needs for, food and shelter, are basic duties of any state, and not beyond the powers of Britain today. Other countries, such as Sweden and Denmark, have much better records.
The fundamental reason for Britain’s failure, as Professor Titmuss has pointed out, is because the crucial decisions on how the national resources should be apportioned are taken by small groups of businessmen. They are influenced by financial considerations and thoughts of personal prestige; the welfare of the people is not within their frame of reference.
And, far from trying to counteract this tendency, the Government accentuates it. Nobody can accuse the Exchequer of being prompted by thoughts of the greatest good for the greatest number when it allocates a mere £650,000 a year to research into cancer, one of the two great killer diseases, which results in the death of 250 people each day in England alone. This compares with £240 million – 360 times as much – spent by the Government on military research.
In the House of Commons recently Mr. Denzil Freeth, Parliamentary Secretary for Science, defending the meagre sum spent on cancer research, claimed it was not lack of funds or scientists, but lack of new ideas, and promising leads that was hindering progress.
This appears a lame excuse: lack of new ideas and promising leads has never curtailed expenditure on military research. Think of the frenzied activity, the desperate, concerted efforts that went into tackling the obstacles to manufacturing nuclear weapons. If the same effort could be put into the discovery of new means of preserving life that is put into devising new methods of destroying it, then dreaded illnesses like cancer would quickly lose their sting.
But, in any case, Mr. Freeth overlooks the important point that, where cures for some types of cancers have been found, the treatment is often administered under conditions that are not conducive to success. For full benefit from medical attention cannot be derived if a patient is inadequately fed or, like a friend of mine, recovering from cancer of the bladder, cannot have the proper period of convalescence because of sheer economic necessity.
Such examples, by no means uncommon, show the Welfare State has far too low a standard of welfare. If Britain is to be judged by what is done for the least fortunate section of the. Community – the sick, aged and infirm – it will be judged and found wanting.
 



The Cold War and Its Origins
D.F. Fleming
Allen and Unwin. £5. 5s.
The Cold War has frozen political life into a series of grotesque postures, with politicians hopeless. A sign of the sheer despair is the absence of any realistic plan to end it. Both sides make elaborate preparations for continued military ‘progress’, stretching well into the 1970s, while all disarmament proposals are regarded merely as propagandist ballyhoo. Even the most sanguine politician hopes, at best, for merely a maintenance of the present balance of power. But it is a highly fragile balance and cannot continue for ever. If either side develop a new more powerful weapon, that balance would be knocked awry. The Cold War is, therefore, not a permanency, to be handed on as our contribution to posterity; it must be ended before it ends us.
Professor Fleming amasses a tremendous wealth of data to trace the antagonism between Russia and the West from 1917 to the present day. He reveals that secret that is more closely guarded than the H-bomb itself: the Cold War is one nobody can win. Unfortunately, he does not analyse Russia’s difficulties in detail. He gives the impression that no basic changes have taken place in the Kremlin; Lenin, Stalin and Krushchev presumably reacted in the same automatic way to the vagaries of Western policy.
However, he marshals a tremendous amount of American material – including quotations from the Knickerbocker Weekly – to show that ‘the saviour of the free world’ is well on the way to getting herself crucified. He says:
‘That the coming era will not be “The American Century” seems to be already decided. There was a considerable amount of talk about that in 1945, but this dream has been dissipated by the Cold War and its corollaries: world-wide alarm over our belligerence; fear of world annihilation; aversion to our alliances with dying regimes abroad; alarm at our economic expansion into many countries; distrust of our almost complete identification of private enterprise with freedom; and our shocking exhibition in ourselves and in freedom at home’.
On contemporary issues, such as Berlin, Professor Fleming has many illuminating things to say. He points out that capital and labour have drifted out of Berlin because there is no future there. Little industrial development is taking place and young workers are choosing to live elsewhere where there is greater security: Berliners themselves are not prepared to defend the city to ‘the inconvenience’ – let alone the death.
These two volumes are to be recommended. Fleming’s understanding of Russia may be incomplete and fragmentary, but his analysis of American foreign policy is devastating. All socialists should read it.
 



Marxism. An Historical and Critical Study
George Lichtheim
Routledge. 40s.
Marxists, priding themselves on their historical approach, have been reluctant, paradoxically, to examine the historical development of their own ideas. The reason for this is quite obvious: it results from the tendency to regard each Marxist classic as the holy writ, that cannot be improved upon or amended, and therefore cannot be seen as a partial view, set against the background of personal and historical limitations.
George Lichtheim, being a non-Marxist, has no such inhibitions. Yet he does not fall into the customary trap of anti-Marxists of attributing every misfortune, right from the Paris Commune to last week’s flu epedemic, to sinister red machinations. Instead, with a wealth of detail and commendable objectivity, he traces the development of ideas in their political context.
This leads to many startling discoveries and fresh insights. He lucidly shows the changing emphasis, indeed in some places flat contradiction, between Marx’s early philosophical writings and latter ones of Engels; the central role of Kautsky in the pre-1914 German Labour Movement; and the importance of Plechanov to Russian Social Democracy.
But all these points are made merely to support Lichtheim’s central thesis: namely, that Marxism, to use its own jargon, contains ‘the seeds of its own destruction’. The conditions that gave rise to it – the growing pains of industrial society – have now vanished, and with them has gone the relevance of Marxism. The confusion and fragmentation of the Left today are, to Lichtheim, simply indications of this fact.
Now personally I disagree with Lichtheim’s views. Undoubtedly Marxism is in a profound crisis, but I think it resembles that of Hegelians in the 1840s, when they divided into right and left Hegelian thinkers, those who strove to use their ideas in the interests of the state, to quell discontent, and those who sought to kindle the sparks of rebellion. To-day we have Marxism in Russia, employed to bolster a class society, while protest movements throughout the world, trying to abolish exploitation, increasingly use Marxist concepts.
So far nobody has analysed these conflicting trends sufficiently. Yet within, they contain the key to understanding our present epoch. And whenever anybody does come to examine them, they are sure to turn to Lichtheim’s book, stimulating, provoking – and a challenge to all who consider themselves Marxists.
 



Capitalism Yesterday and Today
by Maurice Dobb
Some Economic Illusions in the Labour Movement
by J.R. Campbell
Key Questions for Trade Unionists
by Jim Gardner
Nationalisation
by H. Pagan
Lawrence & Wishart. 2s. 6d. each
The Socialism Today series (published for the Communist Party) aims at giving the reader concise accounts of particular subjects. Attractively produced, these pamphlets contain much useful information. For those who can sift the socialist wheat from the Stalinist chaff, they are well worth buying.
The first is the best. With the help of useful statistical data, Dobb clearly shows that capitalists have not lost their power and influence; that an income revolution has not occurred; that the problems of the business cycle have not been solved. Basically, the tasks of the Labour Movement remain what they were. The most interesting section is where Dobb discusses the considerable growth of State Capitalism. He shows how the western economies, unable to make the rapid transition from peace to war by using the price mechanism were compelled during the Second World War to develop state regulation and control. This was continued after 1945.
In Britain today the state is responsible for almost half of the gross national investment. But Dobb does not attribute the relative stability of contemporary capitalism to the intervention of the state. He argues instead that, after an initial period when production was geared to replacing worn out machinery, replenishing stocks, and making food the war’s destruction, the main reason for continued economic expansion has been the high demand for investment goods. We are, Dobb suggests, in a period of intense technical innovation, associated with the introduction of automation. This has kept demand buoyant. He does not, unfortunately, develop this point.
While Dobb’s pamphlet contains much acute thinking on economic topics, his politics are marred by Stalinist blemishes. He attributes the participation of Communists in French and Italian coalition governments after the War to the influence of the ‘socialist sector’ of the world.
He evidently thinks this was a progressive development for he bemoans the fact that the Stalinists were later ‘jockeyed out of office by the growing pressures of the cold war’ (p.53). Now, if we are to reinterpret politics à la Dobb, let us start with Ramsay MacDonald. When he joined Baldwin’s Tory Coalition in 1931 he was doing much what Thorez and the French Stalinists did in 1945 when they joined de Gaulle’s government Perhaps the British Left should stop talking about MacDonald’s ‘betrayal’ and refer to it instead as a ‘sign of the existence of an expanding socialist sector’.
Jim Gardner’s pamphlet contains some useful facts on wages and hours, trade union structure, and the ‘battle for democracy’ (the way this is being fought in the ETU is not mentioned). Gardner shows how many trade unions proclaim Socialism their objective and stand at least on paper for workers’ control.
While Gardner quotes all this to show how militant trade unions once were, he himself, ironically enough, could not subscribe to these aims. Being a good Stalinist he could never favour workers’ control. There is no workers’ control in Russia; the bureaucrats dominate production, setting norms, imposing their discipline.
Fagan’s pamphlet on nationalisation shows up the Stalinist attitude to workers’ control more explicitly. Fagan proposes a ‘long term programme’ which in its truly visionary approach rivals that other scintillating document The Future Labour Offers You. Fagan generously suggests that workers ‘would have their say in management’ (p .62). ‘Development plans and output targets would be put (by whom?) ‘before the workers in every pit and job for discussion and joint agreement’. (How this would differ from joint consultation, as practiced in coal mines at present, is not explained). It has often served the bosses well to have talking shops of this kind where the workers would not exert real power but where they could be saddled with unpopular decisions. Fagan makes it as plain as Khrushchev’s bald pate that there are certain people he trusts more than the workers. He envisages ‘close control by Parliament with information given to its members’. ‘It would be the unyielding right of MPs to question and cross-examine Ministers on all issues, reports and plans affecting the nationalised industries’ (p. 62). At best this would mean an extension and ‘improvement’ of the type of relationship now existing between Parliament ... and the Post Office. Should this r-r-revolutionary plan take your breath away, remember that it cannot be accomplished overnight. As dear Mr. Fagan points out it is ‘a long-term programme’. In my opinion, it should be dumped in a short-term dustbin.
 






Raymond Challinor is a Councillor on the Newcastle-under-Lyme Borough Council. He is a member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament’s Labour Advisory Committee, an Executive member of the Newcastle Constituency Labour Party. He writes for Tribune and, frequently, for Socialist Review.





In May 1960, the Communist Party’s Executive Committee called upon all party members to join the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. Five months later, at the Labour Party conference, Hugh Gaitskell described supporters of unilateral nuclear disarmament as ‘neutralists, pacifist, and fellow travellers’.
An analysis of the Communist Party’s attitude to the Bomb is imperative. Gaitskell’s smear must not go unanswered. Nor must members of CND, who are now more likely to meet members of the Communist Party and their arguments, be left ill prepared; that party’s twists, turns, and the implications of its policy must be thoroughly exposed. For since 1945, the Communist Party has reeled to and fro, like a drunken man. But the poison has not been alcohol – it has been Stalinism. The one constant factor throughout has been the undeviating way the Communist Party has meekly carried out the commands of His Master’s voice in the Kremlin. It has been the interest of the Russian rulers, not the British people, that has overridden all other considerations.
In 1945, before the East-West conflict had developed, the Russian leaders hbped for friendly co-operation with the United States and Britain to divide the spoils of war; to exact forced labour from the German people; and to carve up German industry between the victors. Generally speaking, this plan was agreed to by the British and American Governments at the Yalta conference. It was natural, therefore, for the Russian rulers to place great emphasis on the Yalta agreement and, as a token of goodwill, make their English underlings pledge support for any government which said it would uphold these decisions. The London District Committee of the Communist Party called for a coalition government, headed by Winston Churchill, which would help to implement the agreement. While in 1945 the Communists favoured a coalition government, the Labour Party stood firmly for a government completely independent of the Tories. ‘The Communist Party are not a Party of the Left so far as I can see,’ declared Herbert Morrison, quite correctly, to the 1946 Labour Party conference. ‘They are not here, they are not abroad. In the United States, in 1944, the leader of the American Communist Party, its secretary, Mr Earl Browder, advocated a policy of full co-operation with capitalism and a complete desertion of socialist principles.’ It might seem ironic to hear Morrison who, like all right-wingers, now supports NATO, opposing Communist affiliation to the Labour Party on the grounds that they favour ‘co-operation with capitalism’. However, his analysis was basically sound. Morrison continued ‘They have, it is true, at times, insisted on giving us support, largely to our embarrassment, and even in connection with the General Election, when they were seeking to give us support, they advocated a line of policy which was inconsistent with the principles of either Karl Marx, the doctrines of class consciousness, or the doctrines of class struggle. Mr Pollitt said in a booklet they would fight in the General Election “to secure the end of a Tory majority, and after that election the continuation of national unity, but national unity based upon a new government having behind it a majority of Labour and progressive Members of Parliament ... This new national government should include representatives of all Parties supporting the decisions of the Crimea conference.”
The Communist position on the Bomb was a continuaiton of this attitude. In 1945, after the dropping of the Bomb on Hiroshima, they supported the use of this weapon of mass destruction. The Daily Worker has the dubious ‘honour’ of being the only British newspaper editorially to call for the employment of the new weapon on a substantial scale. They thought, ‘It will enormously increase the strength of the three great powers in relation to all other countries.’ [1] Probably, this statement was the first exposition of atomic diplomacy. On August 14, 1945, their front page headline read: Japs still trying to haggle. In the article they denounced the Japanese for their delay in accepting the Allied armistice terms and criticized the Allied Powers for allowing the Japanese to procrastinate: ‘There was no official hint of the length of delay that the Japanese are to be allowed before the full force of Allied power – including the atom bomb – is loosed against them, in a blow intended to be final’.
Other Communist papers abroad took a similar line. L’Humanité, the organ of the French CP, said,
‘The atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima seems to have caused considerable destruction, American reports suggest nothing less than the disappearance from the face of the earth of a town of 300,000 inhabitants. The effects of the discovery is considerable. Nevertheless, the Vatican has been pleased to disapprove of it! May we be permitted to express our surprise, because when the Nazis had the privilege of waging total war with total cruelty, the Holy See was not equally indignant.’ [2]
The Italian Communist paper, L’Unità observed.
‘The news that an atomic bomb was dropped by the American Air Force has made an enormous impression throughout the whole world, and has been received on all sides with a sense of panic and condemnation. This shows, it seems to us, a curious psychological perversion and a doctrinaire obedience to a form of abstract humanitarianism.’ [3]
Among those guilty of what L’Unità calls ‘an abstract humanitarianism’ was Albert Einstein, the scientist, whose pioneer work in nuclear physics made nuclear energy – and the Bomb – a possibility. He was heart-broken, at the news. He had repeatedly pleaded with the American Government not to drop the atomic bomb on a city. When Einstein saw the fruit of his life-times work in the ruins of Hiroshima, he said, ‘If I had only known, I would have been a locksmith.’
A few years later, the Communists changed their tune. Instead of the joyous shouts that greeted the dropping of the Bomb on Hiroshima – L’Unità ’s article was headed In the Service of Civilisation – an entirely different attitude was adopted. On August 7, 1952, for example, the Daily Worker contained an article entitled A Date to Remember. Speaking of Hiroshima, it said, ‘The excuse that, in the long run, this bestial action saved lives is worthless. There has never been a crime committed in war which this excuse has not been used to justify. It is a rotten excuse which is used to cover up every relapse into barbarism. As such, it was always a favourite with Hitler and the Nazi sadists.’ Conveniently, the Communists forgot that, seven years before it was exactly this argument – ‘the favourite with Hitler and the Nazi sadists’ – that the Daily Worker used: ‘The employment of the new weapon on a substantial scale should expedite the surrender of Japan. Valuable lives in the Allied nations will have been saved by the new discovery.’ [4] Actually, this was an arrant lie. The dropping of the Bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the murder of more than a quarter of a million people, was not justified. At the time Japan was suing for peace. The United States Strategic Bombing Survey, an official American Government Commission, admitted: ‘By employing the methods of the Wehrmacht over Coventry of indiscriminate incendiary bombing, such a condition of general paralysis has been wrought that the economy was grinding to a standstill. The responsible leaders in power correctly read the situation and embraced surrender well before the invasion was expected.’
“The Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bombs did not defeat Japan, nor by the testimony of the enemy leaders who ended the war did they persuade Japan to accept unconditional surrender. The Emperor, the Lord Privy Seal, the Prime Minister, and the Navy Minister had decided as early as May of 1945 that the war should be ended, even if it meant the acceptance of defeat on Allied terms ... Japan would have surrendered even if the atomic bombs had not been dropped, and even if no invasion had been planned or contemplated.” [5]
In Herbert Feis’ book, The China Tangle, there is an account of how the Japanese Government tried to keep Russia out of the war and to get Russia to mediate to end the war. Peace overtures, made in late May and early June 1945, were turned down: Stalin said he would pay no attention to them.
Then, on July 12th, four days before the opening of the Potsdam conference, the Japanese Government had asked Sato, its Ambassador in Moscow, to inform Molotov that the Emperor wished peace and was prepared to send a special envoy to Moscow to arrange it. Prince Konaye, who had been Prime Minister when Japan flung herself into the war in 1941, was the person in mind for this mission. The radio message containing this instruction to Sato was intercepted by the Americans ... Sato was told that Molotov was too busy to see him because he and Stalin were getting ready to go to Potsdam. The answer, therefore, would be delayed, explained Lozovsky, Vice-Commissar for Foreign Affairs. [6]
Then, three weeks later, with the full knowledge that Japan wanted peace, the United States Government ordered the dropping of an atomic bomb on Hiroshima. Why? What prompted the American Government to commit this act of wanton destruction? The reasons were, I think, three-fold. First, the atomic bomb was an important bargaining counter. Scientists throughout the world knew the Bomb was theoretically possible, but nobody was sure that the practical difficulties could be surmounted. The fact that the United States had done this, with devastating success, meant that she had a powerful weapon not yet in the hands of other nations. It enhanced her position in a world of naked power politics, where might was the only criteria. Churchill had referred to the Big Three as a ‘very exclusive club’, with an entrance fee of ‘at least five million soldiers or the equivalent’. The atom bomb was an important counter, a valuable thing for America to use in order to get its own way. For the so-called peace conferences between capitalist countries are usually conducted in a hostile atmosphere, amid threats and counter-threats, and 1945 was no exception.
Second, America could not be sure when a situation might arise that directly led to war. In such a situation, possession of a monopoly of nuclear weapons was like having all the trumps. And America was not too modest to use her advantage: as early as autumn 1945 she was seriously considering using the Bomb to enforce the ‘peace’ agreement’s call for the evacuation of troops in Northern Persia.
Third, was the astronomic cost. As a senior officer of the Manhattan Atom Bomb project said, ‘So much money had been spent on it. Had we failed how could we have explained the huge expenditure? Think of the public outcry there would have been.’ When the war with Germany ended, work at the atom plants was speeded up. They thought the Pacific war would finish before they had an opportunity to ‘justify’ their expenditure. ‘It was a relief to everybody concerned,’ he said, ‘when the Bomb was finished and dropped.’ [7]
Despite the more recent declaration of humanitarian principles, the Communists are equally as guilty as the American leaders. They knew Hiroshima was wanton destruction because they knew of Japanese peace proposals. Yet, far from denouncing the dropping of the Bombs, they were a party to the crime. Not merely did they enthusiastically welcome the murder of these two cities, they also spread the completely false story, first used by President Truman, that the atom bombs saved the lives of Allied troops.
By 1947, however, the tune of the British Communist Party had entirely changed. The Cold War had begun; Russia was faced by a hostile America, having a monopoly of nuclear weapons; some Western officials, including George Kennan, advocated a ‘preventive war’, that is to say, using the American superiority in atomic weapons while it still lasted. Faced with this situation, the Communist Party’s task was to conduct an intensive campaign to outlaw nuclear weapons. If successful, this would, from a Russian standpoint, have been highly advantageous. It would have ended American superiority in the one military field in which America had a marked advantage. At the same time the Red Army, with more troops under colours, would have been left virtually as strong as before. Communist Parties throughout the world launched the Stockholm ‘Peace’ appeal. It claimed more than 500 million signatures, including one million in Britain. The appeal’s two main points were: first, the banning of nuclear weapons through international agreement of the big powers; and, second, that any country which used the Bomb first should be branded a war criminal.
In view of Gaitskell’s smear about ‘fellow travellers’, it is interesting to note that the Communist ‘Peace’ petition stood for multilateral, not unilateral disarmament. Like Gaitskell himself, the Communists favoured international agreement on nuclear weapons. They also placed great emphasis in the Stockholm ‘Peace’ appeal, just as the Labour right-wing did at the Scarborough conference, on the pledge not to be the first to use nuclear weapons.
While this pledge is almost meaningless – in a nuclear war events would move so fast that it would be impossible to hold a judical enquiry into who actually struck the first blow – it is nevertheless significant that the Russian Government have withdrawn it. When asked by the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, Khrushchev refused to forego the luxury of pressing the button first. Indeed, there is nothing to choose between American and Russian leaders. Both assert their intention, if possible, of being the quickest off the ground with their bombers and missiles. Neither side have the least doubt but that a Third World War would be waged with nuclear weapons. Speaking of Russian dependency on such weapons, Marshal Zhukov said, ‘in the event of a great military conflict, atomic weapons would inevitably be put into use as the basic means of destruction.’ [8] For the Americans, General Gruenther, former head of NATO, said as long ago as 1945 that the West had already ‘passed the point of no return’ so far as conventional weapons were concerned and, as commander, he had no choice except to use atomic weapons whether the enemy does or not.’ [9] It is only Gaitskell and his right-wing colleagues, who purport to be in favour of making NATO less dependent on nuclear weapons, that do not realise – or pretend not to realise – that NATO must be pre-eminently a nuclear alliance. Window-dressing the sinister assumptions of his policy, Gaitskell seeks to conceal the harsh military realities of NATO, and involvement in the Cold War. As both sides think that, right from the start, any Third World War would be fought with H-bombs, it inevitably affects their plans. To adapt the old proverb, they realise, Twice armed is he who hath his quarrel just But thrice armed be he who gets his blow in fust. The colossal devastation, effecting the enemy’s powers of reprisal, which would come from striking the first blow has led to a new military concept – that of the ‘pre-emptive strike’ – being evolved. When tension increases, and war seems imminent, then the thing to do is to try and strike a knock out blow, destroying the enemy’s bombs and rockets while they are still on the ground. This concept is fraught with danger: it places the button firmly in the militarists’ hands and attempts to give them a justification for starting a nuclear war because the other side may – I repeat, may – be considering making an attack.
Yet, despite the extreme hazards, military leaders in both Russia and the West accept the idea of the ‘pre-emptive strike’. George H. Manon, Chairman of the US Appropriations Sub-Committee on Defence, said that America must be able ‘to launch an attack before a would-be aggressor has hit either us or our allies. This is an element of the deterrent which the US should not deny itself. [10] While the Russian opinion On the Role of Surprise in Contemporary War is put by Marshal Rotmistrov:
‘The duty of the Soviet armed forces is not to permit an enemy surprise attack on our country and, in the event of an attempt to accomplish one, not only to repel the attack successfully, but also to deal the enemy counter blows, or even pre-emptive surprise blows, of terrible destructive force. For this the Soviet army and navy possess everything necessary.’ [11]
This view endorsed by an editorial in Voennaia Mysl of March, 1955: ‘We cannot ignore the lessons of history, and we must always be ready for pre-emptive actions against the perfidy of the aggressors.’
Such Russian statements, one would have imagined, would have led to some serious thinking. But not a bit of it, at least not in the Communist Party. They have heralded each development of weapons of mass destruction in America as steps towards war while similar developments in Russia have been contributions to peace. In fact, as Russian strength has grown, the Communists have strutted about like jingoists, no doubt proud of the efficient way Khrushchev could blow them – and everybody else – skyhigh.
In 1953, when the Russians first succesfully tested a hydrogen bomb, the Communist journal, World News joyfully mentioned, ‘the signs of real disturbance about the strength of Soviet technical and scientific advance. It is obvious that the hydrogen bomb explosion in the Soviet Union caused the Americans great concern. A recent article by the American commentator, Walter Lippmann points out that while America is worried about its vulnerability, Britain and Europe are in fact far more vulnerable than the US. [12] Swallowing the reactionary ‘negotiate from strength’ argument hook, line and sickle, World News continues: ‘It is clear that in this situation there is a powerful basis for widening and extending the peace movement.’ Palme Dutt, vice-chairman of the Communist Party, summed up the position:
‘There is no Western nuclear superiority. Once that fact is recognised, the entire strategy of the White Paper, of the so-called “Great Deterrent” collapses. It is the Soviet hydrogen bomb that is the true “Great Deterrent”, because its existence compels the Western strategists to hesitate before embarking on the hazard of a hydrogen bomb war, to which they know their countries would be the more vulnerable. [13]
The fact that the Communist Party accepts such reactionary ideas as ‘the great deterrent’, ‘negotiation from strength’, makes it hardly surprising that it adopted a hostile attitude to the aims of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament right from its inception. At trade union conferences Communists have opposed, quite consistently, all resolutions favouring unilateral nuclear disarmament. For instance, at the 1959 conference of the National Union of Mineworkers, Abe Moffat, Communist Party leader of the Scottish National Union of Mineworkers, spoke in favour of the official right-wing TUC-Labour Partv statement and opposed a CND resolution, moved by Bert Wynn, of the Derbyshire Miners. On September 12, 1958, Tribune explained the situation at the TUC:
‘Some delegates at last week’s Trade Union Congress were puzzled over the size of the opposition to the Fire Brigades’ Union motion urging unilateral disarmament. Many of the unions, traditionally supporters of nuclear disarmament, either voted against it or abstained. Some of them even failed to support the later Public Employees’ resolution urging “the drastic curtailment of military expenditure”. What happened within these union delegations? The answer is simple: the Communist Party members within them urged this course of action in line with the policy line plugged by the Daily Worker. This alleged that to call for unilateral abandonment of the H-bomb destroys unity and splits the “peace forces” because it is a “maximalist demand”. The Communist Party is urging this action because it believes that the cessation of the manufacture of the Made-in-Britain Bomb would place the Soviet Union in an embarrassing position.’
This position was re-affirmed by the Communist Party at its 26th Congress last year, when it clearly demonstrated its opposition to the aims of CND:
‘Congress cleared up some mistaken ideas about our attitude to the demand for unilateral banning of the H-bomb. John Gollan pointed out that the Communist Party had always been against the bomb. We were the only political party in the last General Election to oppose its manufacture and we still do. The question is what policy will unite the greatest number of people to get rid of the bomb. Experience has shown that unilateralism only divides the movement, and diverts attention from the real issue, namely, international agreement to ban nuclear weapons. This is the only way to banish the menace of nuclear war and also the issue on which the greatest number of people agree.’ [14]
Support for nuclear disarmament by international agreement, rather than Britain giving a lead by opting out of the Cold War, is exactly the position of the Labour right-wing. Gaitskell and Gollan agreed in their attitude to the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. Had supporters of CND wished to be indelicate, they could have pointed out who were ‘fellow travelling’ with Gaitskell and backing his resolutions of the Bomb. However, the Campaign, wisely, has not stooped to smear tactics, whatever our opponents may do. The Communist Party’s change of line in May, 1960, is just a further example of its unprincipled policy on the Bomb. Completely disregarding the decision of its own Congress, which is supposed to be the body that formulates party policy, they have now come out in favour of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and advocated all their members joining it. This is not because the Communist Party has changed its position fundamentally on the H-bomb. It merely means that they saw the mounting support throughout the country for CND and thought, for opportunist reasons, it would be a good thing to get on the fast-moving bandwagon.
Faced with this new tactic, CND supporters must thoroughly expose the Communist Party’s dishonest line and make completely sure they don’t achieve their objective, to inveigle members of CND into the Communist Party. We must, as well, rebut the false accusations of being fellow travellers made against the Campaign by hard-pressed Gaitskellites and the Tory Press.
However, it is true, in a sense, the strength and vigour of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament owes much to Comrade Khrushchev. But Eisenhower and MacMillan, also, have helped to swell the ranks of CND. This may sound paradoxical but without their activities – or rather antics – the feeling against the Bomb would not have reached such intensity. Their desire to pile bomb upon bomb, even after military experts have agreed that existing stocks are sufficient to exterminate one’s opponent, is just one symptom of mental derangement. The rulers of the world have brought us to the present impasse, where the production of nuclear weapons imperils Mankind’s very existence. The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament is a product of, and a protest against, this fact. As such, it is a protest against the policies of both Camps, the H-bombs of both Camps, and the bases of both Camps.
But this is not true of the Communist Party: they oppose missile bases in East Anglia, not in East Germany. They do not believe in any form of independence, and argue that countries must take sides, for or against the Russian bloc. Indeed, Kadar, the Hungarian Prime Minister, claims Imre Nagy was guilty of this fault – and grievously he paid for it. Neutralism, according to Jacques Duclos, the French Communist Party leader, is ‘a refuge of defeated imperialists seeking to escape their own confusion. [15] Arnold Kettle, writing in Marxism Today said, ‘For the Socialists of one particular country to adopt such a position is in the long run unrealistic and in the short run simply opportunistic.’ [16] The Communist Party thus opposes the basic trend, the underlying aim of CND, to create some tangible alternative to the senseless piling up of arms on both sides of the Iron Curtain. Moreover, and more important, the Communist Party does not accept the basic principle the bedrock principle that unites all disparate supporters of the Campaign. It is this: we would never be prepared, as individuals, to press a button launching a bomb that murders three million men, women and children. And, not being prepared to do it ourselves, we are not prepared to see others doing our dirty work. Further, we are not prepared to consent to the pressing of a button that could easily lead to a chain reaction that wipes out Mankind. Humanitarian principles decree that it would be wrong, hideously wrong, to drop an H-bomb, whether it be on Leningrad or London. However, Communists cannot accept this principle. It would be quite pointless for Russia to manufacture H-bombs unless there were circumstances under which she was prepared to use them. And we know, as my quotes from Russian military strategists show, that they would not only be prepared to use it, but to use it first. Therefore, the British Communist Party, which has never uttered a squeak of protest against the Russian H-bomb policy, must tacitly admit there are circumstances in which they think it right and proper for London to be blown up.
It would not be so bad if some Communist leaders did not contemplate the thoughts of a Third World War with such equanimity. Disregarding Professor Bernal’s statement that existing nuclear stockpiles are sufficient to kill all Mankind ten times over. Mao Tse-tung has said,
‘If the imperialists should insist on launching a Third World War, it is certain that several hundred million more will turn to Socialism; then there will be not much room in the world left for the imperialists, while it is quite likely that the whole structure of imperialism will utterly collapse.’ [17]
This statement clearly shows how far the Chinese Communist leaders, themselves a rigid ruling class, are from socialist principles. For Socialism, as all its pioneers accepted, must be achieved through the working class – that is the progressive element in society. But H-bombs, weapons of mass destruction, would inevitably, whatever the country they dropped on, have the masses as their main victims. That is why nuclear weapons are thoroughly anti-socialist, irrespective of whose hands they are in. They can never be used to help the transformation of society, only the destruction of society. Further, socialists consider ideas reflect material conditions, that the development of the means of production leads to developments in society. However, if large tracts of the world are devastated in a nuclear war, the material prerequisites for Socialism – a highly developed industrial society and working class – would not exist. Consequently, nuclear war and nuclear weapons are intrinsically, inevitably anti-socialist.
The arms program, all over the world, helps to buttress the existing social order. The immense arms expenditure in Western countries acts as a pep pill, preventing their economies plunging into a slump. Capitalist statesmen realise wars and preparations for wars are not only terrible – they are terribly profitable. In China, too, they help to overcome, at least temporarily, the economic contradictions. With the Chinese propaganda machine continually saying the enemy is at the gates, likely to attack at any time, it becomes easier for the rulers to get the Chinese peasants and workers to make sacrifices. They pull in the belt, consume less – and the Communist state takes a greater surplus. The Cold War, though, creates its opposite, a yearning for peace, which is universal and transcends the barriers of the Iron Curtain. All over the world people realise that the arms-race does, as even Eisenhower admitted, ‘signify, in a final sense, theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and not clothed.’ Arms expenditure has rocketed from £500 million in 1918 to £40,000 million to-day – an eightyfold increase – while, at the same time, the last 25 years have seen a rapid rise in the proportion of the world’s population suffering from malnutrition. But it is not only people in the backward countries who bow under this oppressive burden; people both sides of the Iron Curtain feel it acutely as well. That is why, in both East and West, people are beginning to question, to think for themselves – and not for their rulers. The East German rising of 1953, Poznan and Hungary in 1956 are signs of discontent in the Russian bloc. And each time, in rumble the tanks belonging to the Russian led Warsaw Treaty organization, to quell the uprising. While the West has its Algerias, where napalm bombs, supplied through NATO, are dropped in an attempt to burn out the colonial people’s desire for freedom, and its Angolas where naked slavery flourishes. Both alliances – the Warsaw Treaty powers and NATO – have their hands besmirched with the blood of massacre, with tortures, and oppression.
So, to the Gaitskells and Gollans, who wish to pull us into one or other armed camp, we of the British Labour Movement must say, No! We must say this not because we want to retreat into our shell, to become Little Englanders, but because we want to realise the full potentialities of the Big-World. We know both sides are arming for nuclear war and neither side can bring peace. Yet, the overwhelming majority of people throughout the world fervently desire peace. It is up to us to give the lead.

Notes
1. Daily Worker, 8 August 1945.
2. 8 August 1945.
3. 10 August 1945.
4. 7 August 1945.
5. pages 12-13.
6. pages 323-4.
7. Kelly and Ryan, Star Spangled Mikado.
8. Red Star, 3 March 1957.
9. Manchester Guardian, 1 March 1955.
10. Time Magazine, 9 May 1960.
11. Voennaia Mysl, February 1955, p.14.
12. 24 October 1953.
13. Labour Monthly, April 1955.
14. Marxism Today, May 1959.
15. France Nouvelle, 13 January 1951.
16. October 1960.
17. On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the People.
 



Must Labour Lose?
Mark Abrams and Richard Rose
Penguin Books, 2s 6d.
Unless we are careful, the spiritual inspiration of the Labour Party will be neither Marx nor Methodism, but Messina. Pandering to political prejudice, soliciting votes, the Labour Party acts more and more like a prostitute. Stripped of all principles, it just strives to give the customer what he wants. What does it matter if nationalisation or nuclear disarmament are justified on economic, political or moral grounds? Everything must be sacrificed on the altar of electoral expediency.
This book attempts to analyse the electorate. Ralph Samuels has already pointed out in New Left Review that some of the author’s statistical data are highly suspect. This makes the book of dubious value. But even if all the data were accurate, it is a pretty naive view of politics that leads a party slavishly to follow public opinion. Successful politicians, of whatever persuasion, have succeeded because they have anticipated, not followed, public wishes. Had Labour’s present methods prevailed in days bygone the whole history of the party might have been startlingly different. History books would doubtless have recorded thus:
‘One day Keir Hardie thought of forming a new political party, to be called the Labour Party. He first consulted the Gallup Poll. This showed little support for the project and no chance of a Labour majority for at least, two decades. Being a political “realist”, Hardie abandoned his futile project, advised his supporters to remain in the Liberal Party, and went back to bed.’
Come to think of it, after finishing this book, that’s precisely what I intend to do – go back to bed.
 



Essays in Labour History
Edited by Asa Briggs and John Saville
Macmillan. 42s.
This volume, originally conceived in homage to Professor Cole on his 70th birthday, had to be changed, due to his unfortunate death, into a memorial to him – a well-earned tribute. For G.D.H. Cole, more than any other British socialist, has been responsible for transforming the study of the Labour Movement’s history from being a grubby, suspect business, carried out by a few cranks, into an accepted part of historical study. All socialists owe him a debt of gratitude.
He was the Barbara Moore of the Labour Movement, keeping on, accomplishing tremendous feats of physical and mental endurance. His enormous output of books, essays and articles, almost invariably of the highest standard, has never been matched in recent years. Cole’s culminating work – a massive, five volume History of Socialist Thought – is a classic, an enduring work of immense value. Such books, by filling in the general outlines, helped to make more detailed studies on limited aspects of Labour history possible. Indeed, in an important sense, he can be regarded as the author of Essays in Labour History, which is dedicated to him.
But this book is not merely a monument to the greatness of Cole, it also displays his weakness. For while he was a Barbara Moore of the Labour Movement, he was a Barbara Moore who never quite knew whether he was going in the right direction. His political life was marked by violent changes of outlook. At the beginning of his career he was a Guild Socialist, emphasising the importance of workers’ control. Later, he veered right, making an uncomfortable peace with reformism. At other times, he went through Stalinist and Marxist phases.
Cole’s political ambiguity is reflected in this book. Right-wing contributors, like Gaitskell, jostle with Marxists (Collins, Saville and Thompson) and unrepentant, if unorthodox CPers, like Hobsbawm. While all contributions in Essays in Labour History reach a high standard, illuminating previously obscure aspects of working class activities, they are not united by a common method or approach.
The first essay, by Professor Asa Briggs, traces the evolution of the idea of class. Before the 19th century, the term was never used. Professor Briggs shows, in a fascinating way, how the impact of the Industrial Revolution made the use of the term meaningful. It is a pity, however, that Professor Briggs restricts his essay to this country. For the notion of class conflict first arose during the French Revolution, with the emergence of the Third Estates as a social force and its conflict – the most severe there had been up till then – between the Third Estates and the aristocracy. Other valuable contributions include Hobsbawm on wages and Labour conditions in the 19th century; Henry Collins on the fragile and tenuous connections between British trade unions and the First International; and Peter Brock, exploring completely fresh ground, with his essay on the period of bitter disillusionment among Polish socialists after the defeat of the rising against Tsardom in 1830.
But perhaps the most fascinating, and most relevant to practical activity to-day, is the essay of Edward Thompson. Homage to Tom Maguire. Tom Maguire was a little known socialist of the 1880s who did much painful and, for a long time, seemingly unrewarding work that ultimately led to the formation of the ILP.
Living, as we do, in a time when real socialists are as rare as four-leafed clover, we can readily appreciate Maguire’s position. He reached political maturity well after Chartism had collapsed. The few veteran Chartists who remained were extinct volcanoes. Thompson recounts the pathetic episode of how they assembled in 1885 at a Halifax Temperance Hotel to toast Gladstone’s Liberal Government with lemonade! It is a pitiful – but timely – reminder that the revolutionaries of one generation often become the reactionaries of the next.
In the 1880s the prevailing political attitude was one of comfortable complacency. With an innocence only exceeded by Tony Crosland, Sir Jacob Behrens’ inquiry into the Conditions of the Industrial Classes (1887) showed the worst abuses of capitalism had been abolished. The workers had never had it so good.
Yet, within three years of his inquiry, cries of discontent swept the textile towns. Even local Liberal and Conservative papers carried exposures of decaying slums, insanitary conditions, appalling social evils. Why this sudden, dramatic change? Thompson explains:
“a new generation was arising which demanded more of life than had contented their parents ... It required a new generation, and the new militant unionism, to twist ‘self-help’ into socialist campaigning. The prevalent tone of the earlier years is one of surfeited, self-satisfied Liberalism.”
Tom Maguire and a small band of young socialists, helped by favourable conditions, changed the political climate. In 1885, the Leeds Socialist League had 16 members. After four years’ intensive work, it had risen to 30. But no progress appeared to have been made in broad, working class circles. The vast majority of the workers remained unconcerned about the calls for Socialism. Disheartened, the League’s members began to quarrel and split. But, as Thompson writes, “the years of seemingly fruitless propaganda, when the joint forces of Leeds and Bradford Socialism had tramped like a group of youth hostellers, spreading ‘the gospel’ in villages and singing Morris’s song in country lanes, had not been wasted.” When the industrial struggles of 1890–3 started, the slow but incessant spreading of socialist ideas in previous years helped to push the movement along socialist lines.
A turning-point proved to be the textile workers’ strike at Manningham Mills, Bradford. When it ended in defeat, workers learnt from experience the need for independent political action. Economic oppression and social injustice could only be lessened – but not abolished – by industrial struggle. The need was for a political party that would fight, both in Parliament and on the local councils against unemployment and for better schools, houses and medical services. Above all, in an industry fragmented by sub-contracting and ‘sweatshops’, the textile workers unifying demand for a Legal Eight Hour Day could only be achieved through political action. Further impetus towards the formation of an independent labour party came from the rapid organizing of unskilled workers into unions in which the young socialists played a prominent part. Then, in June, 1890, came the Leeds gas strike. The Liberal-dominated Leeds Council, who owned the gasworks, sought to use a drop in the demand for gas as a pretext for withdrawing concessions conceded to the workers after they had joined the union. In the ensuing bitterly fought struggle, the Liberals’ high-handed actions alienated the working class and some of the middle class. It led to a general realisation that the old Liberal Party could never be fashioned, or altered, so as to be a vehicle for expressing workers’ aspirations.
The time-worn pattern of politics, where genteel Liberals and Tories played their game of ins and outs, lay broken. A new social class, raising its own banner, had entered the political arena. As Thompson says, “the two-party system cracked in Yorkshire because a large number of Yorkshire working men and women took a conscious decision to form a socialist party. The fertilisation of the masses with socialist ideas was not spontaneous but was the result of the work, over many years, of a group of exceptionally gifted propagandists and trade unionists.” To-day we also live in a period of Liberalism. The leaders of our own Party are liberals at heart. They are content to work within the capitalist framework, making minor alterations but not changing the basis of the social system. Therefore, our task to-day, very much like that of the small bands of socialists in the ’80’s, is to keep banging away, putting the socialist case. For when the breakthrough comes – as come it surely will – socialist ideas will spread, like a forest fire, throughout the working class and smash capitalism. This truly will be the best homage to Tom Maguire – and to G.D.H. Cole.
 



MARX was fond of saying history repeats itself, first as a tragedy, then as a farce. The Second World War, resulting in the loss of 56 million human lives, the wholesale destruction of cities and the reduction of countless people to semi-destitution, was a tragedy of unparalleled international dimensions.
Forty years later, the celebrations to commemorate the end of the war proved to be, with their bickerings and Bitburgs, not only a farce but an insult to the fallen.
Why were so many prepared to die? What did they think they were fighting for? In the German capital a Russian woman soldier scrawled on a shattered wall of the Reichstag: ‘We have fought from Stalingrad to Berlin to put an end to war.’ Similar sentiments were expressed by a young British tank commander named Edward Thompson, a veteran of the Italian campaign. This is how he described the future as foreseen by himself and his fellow soldiers:
‘All of Europe, from the Urals to the Atlantic, was moved by a consensual expectation of a democratic and peaceful postwar continent. We supposed that the old gangs of money, privilege and militarism would go. Most of us supposed that the nations of west and southern Europe would conduct their anti-fascist alliance towards some form of socialism.’
Alas, despite all the fervent wishes, the glittering tomorrow never came. The real tragedy of 1945 was that the new society, desired almost universally by working people everywhere, was so nearly in their grasp and yet so far away. Never before had the various ruling classes been so vulnerable, so isolated. Never before had the working classes been so well armed and so angry. A united states of socialist Europe could have been built. The big problem was that neither communist nor socialist parties wished to see fundamental change.
Yet, as the example of Germany reveals, the plight of the capitalists was parlous. All the German ruling class had been Hitler’s accomplices: big business financed the Nazi Party’s rise to power, benefited from Hitler’s policy of territorial aggrandisement, used slave labour in their wartime factories until the workers dropped, and then despatched them to the gas chambers. Likewise in occupied Europe, the vast majority of politicians and businessmen collaborated; resistance came overwhelmingly from the working class.
Even in countries like Britain, almost everybody wanted to see drastic changes. In the course of the war, the British public’s attitude altered, as its experiences led it to view the 1930s in a new, more critical manner. The idea that, to quote Vera Lynn’s song, ‘It will be a lovely day tomorrow’ was essential for the war effort. The creation of the welfare state after 1945 needs to be seen against the background of a determined and well-organised working class menacing the existing order.
As the years passed, however, the danger receded, and those reforms have gradually been whittled away. The much-vaunted Beveridge Plan, abolishing the dreaded Means Test and providing security, as a right, to all from the cradle to the grave has vanished.
The NHS, in its original conception as a free and comprehensive health service, has become a thing of the past. And then, of course, the promise never again to allow human beings to suffer the hopelessness and degradation of being thrown on the industrial scrapheap has been dishonoured.
Now Thatcher rules in the spirit of the 1930s rather than that of 1945.
 
Workers suppressed
How did we get into the present mess? Why did the optimism of 1945 evaporate?
An imperialist peace followed an imperialist war, not really fought against fascism but rather over spheres of influence, raw materials, markets. At international conferences politicians showed scant regard for the wishes of subject nationalities; workers wanting to secure some control over their own lives were unceremoniously suppressed.
In the East Stalin imposed ruthless dictatorships in each country, weeding out militants and other undesirables. Significantly, in both halves of Europe the rulers relied on civil and military personnel with disreputable Nazi pasts.
Despite the savagery with which the German Sixth Army had swept through Russia, its commander – General von Paulus – became a good comrade, a Kremlin-appointed spokesman for the ‘Free Germans’. Similarly, in Italy the Americans and British appointed fascist General Badoglio, responsible for using poison gas during Mussolini’s invasion of Abyssinia, to run the Allied ‘liberated’ Italy.
France provides a good illustration of what happened in that honeymoon period of East/West co-operation. The French Communist Party joined a coalition government led by the reactionary General de Gaulle.
The British Communist Party played an equally reactionary tune in 1945. After some hesitation, the Labour leaders decided to break the political truce. They went on to fight the general election as an independent party, trouncing the Tories and winning a large Labour parliamentary majority. This, at the time, was much to the left of the Communist Party, which wanted to see a coalition government, including Conservatives and Liberals.
When at the 1946 Labour Party conference the Communist Party applied for affiliation, Herbert Morrison, for the NEC, quite rightly pointed out that the CP’s position, had it been adopted, would have meant ditching what was to be the first majority Labour government.
In those days, the Communist Party was immeasurably stronger than it is now. Far from finding a need to distance itself from Moscow, the CP basked in the Soviet Union’s prestige, proud of the unparalleled progress made there. But as the years passed by, that image became tarnished; not merely were there the revolts against Russian rule – East Germany 1953, Hungary 1956, Czechoslovakia 1968, Poland 1980 – but also the split with China and the revelations of the 20th Party Congress. As a result, the Communist Parties in Europe would be unable to play again the counter-revolutionary role as effectively as in 1945.
Likewise Labour reformism has lost, over the years, much of its dynamism and popular appeal. Though not fundamentally changing the social system, the Attlee government nevertheless introduced the most important improvements ever enacted by a parliamentary administration in the general conditions of working people. But subsequent Labour governments have, in most areas, nibbled away at the post-1945 achievements.
The decline of traditional organisations (Labour and Communist) has led some individuals, such as Professors Hobsbawn and Stuart Hall, to assume they are a symptom of the decline of the working class itself, and have gone on to propose some desperately right-wing remedies. But what these individuals overlook is the existence of a political tendency – Trotskyism – that has grown greatly since 1945.
Turn to its publications at the end of the Second World War and you will find, broadly speaking, the same ppints that I have made in this article, namely, first, that the imperialist horse-dealings at the Yalta and Potsdam conferences would not provide the basis for an enduring peace; secondly, that Stalinism and reformism would play a counter-revolutionary role; and, third, that the working class itself, through its own struggles, was the only force that could bring socialism.
The tiny Trotskyist organisation in 1945 had a membership of less than a tenth of the SWP today and probably less than a twenty-fifth who consider themselves now to be Trotskyists. Simultaneously, in that period the amount of Trotskyist literature has increased both quantitatively and qualitatively while penetration into the class, involvement in class struggles, has also greatly expanded.
In 1938, Trotsky had prophetically written: ‘The world political situation as a whole is chiefly characterised by a historical crisis of the leadership of the proletariat.’ Seven years later people everywhere yearned for peace and prosperity.
Yet, despite the weakened and discredited state of the various ruling classes, no serious attempt was made to overthrow the existing system. 1945 was a missed opportunity – next time it comes it must not be missed again.
 



TIMES are bad; the consolation is they have been worse. In periods of despondency we can comfort ourselves in the knowledge that we will never have to bear what Karl Marx had to endure. He developed the basic principles of socialism in the 1840s. In a letter to F.A. Sorge written in 1872, he confessed that no British person had yet under stood his ideas.
The 30 lean years that followed the 1848 revolutions did not arise because Marx was politically lazy, expressed himself without clarity or was inept. Rather it happened because, to most people, the world seemed to be walking in the opposite direction to Marx.
Capitalism had entered into a long period of rapid expansion, of rising living standards and lessening class tension. In other words, Marx found himself functioning in the most profound and prolonged downturn ever experienced by the socialist movement.
That is why he laboured so hard, spent so many years and ruined his health writing Das Capital. In an important sense, his great work is an impressive compliment to capitalism. It is a grudging recognition of its liability and durability, If it had been obvious the collapse of the system was imminent, then it would not have been necessary to go to such extraordinary lengths to prove it possessed inherent inner contradictions. It was the fact that the overwhelming majority of people regarded the existing system as natural, inevitable and everlasting that spurred him on to puncture, at least theoretically, the balloon of overweaning self-confidence.
 
Ideas and reality
Assuredly, today nobody will have to repeat Marx’s Herculean efforts. Now there is almost universal acceptance that capitalism is crisis-ridden. Even those who fondly believe Reagan or Thatcher have the answer to present economic ills, do not consider we are on the threshold of an era of tranquility and progress. The certainty of stability which prevailed in Marx’s day has vanished. The system feels unsure of itself, under threat.
This, in my opinion, illustrates a highly significant philosophical truth, one that gives us grounds for optimism: correct ideas do not merely move reality, but reality moves towards correct ideta, thereby giving the ideas an added power. Expressed like that it may seem rather obscure. So let me illustrate it by taking a couple of quotations from Marx, plucked almost at random.
The first is the well-known ending to the Communist Manifesto ‘Workers of the world unite’. When considered in its historical context, this initially seems to be a wildly impractical utterance. For in 1848, in five of the six continents, the working class was either infinitesimally small or non-existent. The vast majority of Africans and Asians would not have agreed with the Manifesto even if they had possessed the ability (which they did not) to read it. Their experiences and problems found no connection with its pages.
As for the sixth continent – Europe – the position there was only slightly better. Large tracts remained stuck in rural backwardness. Britain, the most economically developed, has correctly been termed ‘the first industrial nation’. Yet the Britain of 1848 was hardly promising. Its working class was still small and immature.
The Chartist movement constituted the vanguard of the class. For several years, one of the main preoccupations of this proletarian vanguard had been the Chartist Land Plan, an impractical scheme to turn back the economic clock. It had visions of resettling factory workers back on the land, giving them two acres and a cow. Is it realistic to think a socialist society could be built by people still hankering after private ownership, the dream of returning to a peasant past?
Nevertheless, all this did not and does not invalidate Marx. His thought was essentially dialectical, seeing things in terms of being and becoming. He accurately discerned the trends. What has happened since simply confirms his judgement. There has been the growth of the international economy, enmeshing people throughout the world, making their destiny mutually interdependent. Simultaneously, multinational companies have emerged. As a result, all have become imprisoned in the same exploitive relationships. Consequently, unlike 137 years ago, the same basic problems exist internationally – and can only be solved internationally.
What is equally vital for that solution, a working class has grown up throughout all six continents. This means, for example, that a country like South Korea, which had no working class in 1848, now has one that is bigger than the British working class was in 1848. Today, therefore, Marx’s writings, have relevance to the predicament of the typical Korean, a wage labourer like most people in other industrialised countries. No longer did they have to remain mysterious and incomprehensible to him; his own liberation depends on a realisation of the truth of the final sentence in the Manifesto.
But before the erroneous conclusion is reached that everyone can sit back and leave it all to the red mole of history, burrowing away and undermining capitalism’s foundations, let me turn to the second quotation.
 
Advance and decay
In 1856, the People’s Paper celebrated its fourth anniversary with a public meeting. James Watson, a veteran Chartist from Newcastle, made the first speech. It was along traditional lines: knowledge is power; the People’s Paper spreads knowledge; therefore, the People’s Paper is good.
Sitting next to Watson on the platform was a strange, bearded character, who spoke with a strong foreign accent. A newspaper report described him as ‘Dr Carl Marx, the well-known German émigré’, and his message was somewhat different. Mercifully Marx did not mention the obscure Hegelian principle of the interpenetration of opposites although it underlay his remarks. He described what he thought were the essential features of existing society:
‘On the one hand, there have started into life industrial and scientific forces, which no epoch of the former human history had ever suspected. On the other hand, there exist symptoms of decay, far surpassing the horrors recorded in the latter time of the Roman Empire. In our days everything seems pregnant with its contrary.’
Today, paradoxically, we can understand what Marx meant better than Marx did himself. In 1856 he could not have foreseen the creation of H-bombs, laser weapons, star wars, the restriction of food output while millions starve. Even if, by some magical means, he had predicted these things, none of his audience would have believed him. They would have considered him insane, a prospective inmate for Dr Tuke’s lunatic asylum, where Chartist leader Feargus O’Connor had been put. But we, having hindsight, can see that the social system is insane, not Karl Marx. His prophecy looms as an ever-more menacing warning so long as capitalism survives.
But political and ideological forces are operating, sometimes subterraneously, to undermine the established order. Accompanying the growth of a working class throughout the world has gone industrial strife and manifestations of political discontent in places which were unknown or quiescent 25, 50, 100 years ago. These struggles require socialist theory and practice, and as we have already seen, Marxist theory has gained in power as the world more closely approximates to it. Consequently, when a crisis eventually detonates mass discontent – as it inevitably will – then it will be much more widespread, much more profound than it was after the October Revolution of 1917 in Russia.
Prior to the October Revolution, it is worth recalling there also had been a political downturn. The crushing of the 1905 Revolution had left Russian socialists demoralised and exceedingly weak. Some of them went in for the craze of God-seeking. Most just dropped out of activity. By 1910, in Moscow the Bolsheviks had been reduced to eight members, seven of whom were police spies.
It is interesting to compare the attitudes of Lenin and Trotsky to the downturn. Trotsky was the optimist. He had developed his theory of permanent revolution. This gave him confidence. Irrespective of Tsarism’s apparent power and invincibility, his analysis revealed conclusively its downfall was ultimately inevitable. In exile, he always had his bags half-packed, expecting a call to resume his chairmanship of the Petrograd Soviet.
By contrast, Lenin was much more the pessimist. Only a few weeks before the February Revolution of 1917, ironically he told a meeting of young Swiss socialists he did not expect to see socialism in his lifetime. His economic analysis was not as accurate as Trotsky’s. Nevertheless, in one respect he was much more correct. He liked to quote the great Russian novelist, Tolstoy, who had once seen a man squatting in a doorway making strange gestures. At first glance he seemed to be a madman. Then on closer inspection, Tolstoy discovered the man was doing a perfectly sensible thing – sharpening a knife on a stone.
To an outsider, the heated arguments, factional struggles, splits that convulsed the Russian left in the 15 years before 1917 must have seemed like a particularly severe form of insanity. Yet, Lenin realised this was a necessary process, the sharpening of the revolutionary knife upon a stone. Without Bolshevism, the mass discontent would eventually be dissipated: Bolshevism was the vital murder weapon that struck the fatal blow to the old system.
 
Optimism and realism
In my opinion, this has an important lesson for us today. What we must combine is the optimism of Trotsky with the organisational realism of Lenin.
Looking back on 43 years of political activity, I see the socialist movement today has a bigger and harder core but less flesh than it did in my youth. Then a deep-seated anger existed among many sections of the British working class determined, after the sacrifices of the war, not to return to the dole queues and hopelessness of the Thirties. Our message then reached receptive ears. In 1945 I remember meeting an old age pensioner, Dai Thomas of Merthyr, who sold 312 copies of the Socialist Leader each week. The Trotskyists, roughly 400 strong, got rid of as many as 20,000 copies of their fortnightly Socialist Appeal. Even the most dedicated comrade now would not achieve the same result. The reason is the periphery has shrunk.
However, it would be wrong to look at those 43 years negatively. In various respects, considerable progress has been made. Today there is a much greater store of knowledge and experience. The theoretical level is generally higher. Also, organisationally there has been progress. The Independent Labour Party, the largest body on the left, had a membership in 1945 of less than 3,000. While some of them were revolutionaries, like the group around Reg Groves and Hugo Dewar, at the same time there were many more who believed in the parliamentary road. In fact, the ILP had sunk in the swamp of centrism, equidistant between reform and revolution. As for the Trotskyists, dedicated and good comrades, although wrong on a number of important points, they had a size of less than a tenth of the present day SWP.
So, in these circumstances, I do not consider that there is any reason to be disheartened. As Marx wrote in Capital: ‘New forces and new passions spring up in the bosom of society.’ The downturn will not continue forever. And, when the upturn comes, socialists will be better placed than ever before to achieve their objective.
 







Fifty years ago this month, the US entered the Second World War. But their aims in the conflict were not self defence, as Raymond Challinor points out, but imperialist aggression





On 7 December 1941, Japanese pilots dive bombed the American naval base of Pearl Harbour. The result was devastating. President Roosevelt reacted angrily.


 



Monkeys: racist images of the Japanese



But the United States had already intercepted Japanese messages, and therefore knew an attack was pending. Prudently, the US navy had sent its most modern vessels to sea. The Japanese bombed a junkyard.
Deception and diplomacy go together under capitalism. The US government wanted to enter the Second World War. The trouble was that the majority of the American people saw the struggle as of no concern of theirs: they were peace loving and neutralist. Only a catastrophic atrocity would inflame passions, replacing the pacifist with warlike attitudes.
Why did Roosevelt and his advisers want to enter the conflict? In the autumn of 1941 the outcome of the war was far from certain. To most Western advisers, it seemed probable the Soviet Union would topple under Germany’s onslaught. This would leave Hitler free to march into the Middle East, where he would control most of the Anglo-American oil supplies.
Such a calamitous loss would probably smash Britain’s already fragile morale. Roosevelt envisaged a nightmare scenario, where the world would be ruled from Berlin, not Washington.
War provided the United States with the opportunity of dealing with two problems simultaneously. For if Germany was a threat internationally, Japan was a threat in the Pacific.
The British government’s policy arose from its desperately weak position. Above all else, it wanted to entice the United States to enter the war. In the meantime, however, while America remained a non-combatant, inevitably Britain’s preoccupation was with the struggle in Europe. It had not the resources to withstand Japanese pressure in the Far East. Consequently, Churchill resorted to appeasement, hopeful this would dissuade Emperor Hirohito from gobbling up British colonial possessions.
Even with the beginning of hostilities, Anglo-Japanese cooperation continued. In cities like Hong Kong and Shanghai, big commercial centres where key posts were held by Westerners, it was in their mutual interest to retain the existing structures. The Japanese government, wanting to exploit the parts of China its army had occupied and not having the time to train and replace top or middle management who happened to be white, adopted a conciliatory approach.
From the standpoint of British capitalism, it also made sense for them to keep the key jobs in these ports. Not only could money be made during the war but, when peace returned, British companies would be well placed to assert their predominant influence again.
On 22 June 1942, the manager of the Shanghai branch of a British export house succeeded in getting a letter through to his relatives in this country:
‘We are doing good business with our Japanese customers ... We are being exceedingly well treated here – no restrictions whatsoever and we have no complaints.’
The backers of British blood sports must have been cheered when their journal, Hare and Hounds, informed them that in Hong Kong the Japanese occupation authorities had permitted horse racing, an immensely popular sport in the colony, to continue, though they did stipulate 30 percent of the tote’s takings should go to the Japanese army.
All this is a world away from the experiences of the hapless prisoners toiling away – and dying – on the Burmese railway. Or, for that matter, soldiers involved in battle. The war was characterised by a savage barbarism, an unprecedented racism that acted as a justification for any atrocity.
The British media highlighted the war crimes of the enemy. The white skinned Europeans were clearly superior to the sub-human orientals. No criticism was made when Admiral Halsey ordered aircraft to machine gun survivors from torpedoed Japanese ships in the water.
But there was another voice in Britain, one of those opposed to the war. Journals like the Trotskyist Socialist Appeal argued that British imperialism was every bit as bad, if not worse, than its Japanese counterpart. Courageously, it printed a leaflet showing that British troops had used the same methods as the Japanese. A photograph of Burmese peasants, beheaded because of their opposition to the British Raj, was included to rub home the point. It led to outbursts of rage in the press. MPs called for the Socialist Appeal to be banned. But threats failed to silence it.
Equally, the New Leader, organ of the ILP, proclaimed its internationalist stand. The ILP’s Japanese counterpart had been smashed, its leaders executed in 1937, because it opposed Japanese aggression against China. Nevertheless, this did not prevent the New Leader editorial, immediately after Pearl Harbour, sending greetings and solidarity to Japanese socialists.
One article declared there were two Japans: the Japan of the reactionary emperor, about whose person superstitions had been woven into a reactionary religion, the industrial magnates who dominated the economy, and the warlords.
But there was also another Japan, of workers who formed clandestine organisations to fight for better living standards, of socialists who strived to overthrow the existing system of exploitation, and of those opposing the imperialist war. This second Japan was our Japan, the power that would ultimately contribute to the creation of socialism.
It was precisely this second Japan that Allied governments after 1945 wanted to prevent from triumphing. So, once Japan’s rulers had acknowledged their subordination to American imperialism, they were again re-established in power. Emperor Hirohito, the giant industrial concerns and the Japanese generals all were recalled to keep the lid on a discontented society. Those who ordered the attack on Pearl Harbour in 1941 were required after 1945, under Allied instructions, to attack the enemy at home – in other words, the Japanese working class.
 



THAT ubiquitous correspondent Keith Flett is wrong (November SWR). He has not understood the main thrust of W.P. Roberts’ argument against registration under the Trades Union Act 1871. The Miners’ Attorney-General’s opposition arose because he considered what trade unions were gaining under this new legislation was less than what they were losing.
Keith Flett can look at pre-1871 labour history. The Tolpuddle Martyrs, the Glasgow spinners, the victims of the pitmen’s Bond – he will find countless examples of the savagery of the law towards working people. There is, however, one thing he will not find: a trade union being arraigned before the courts. Workers yes, workers’ organisations no.
The reason is quite simple. Pre-1871 unions were located in a limbo land between legality and illegality. They had no legal existence. Like the football crowd at Liverpool’s Kop, they could neither sue nor be sued as a collective entity.
But the 1871 act altered that. It began a journey that led to Taff Vale, where the NUR’s forerunner had damages awarded against it because its members had gone on unofficial strike, and ultimately ended up with the sequestration of all the NUM’s assets during the 1984-5 coal strike.
W.P. Roberts could foresee this harmful development happening. Therefore, he wanted to give as few hostages as possible to judicial misfortune. Presumably, the SWP acts on the same principle today: while having no illusions about the law, still it tries to order its activities so as to minimise the possibility of costly and damaging legal actions occurring.
Through the ages, right wing union leaders have had a rather different approach. One has only to look at the way they now do not want any future Labour government to repeal Thatcher’s anti-union legislation. It gives them a useful weapon with which to stifle rank and file activity.
Yet the law holds no fears for the union bureaucrats themselves. They may even be rewarded from on high for seeking to maintain ‘good’ industrial relations, i.e. tranquil conditions where profit making can continue unimpeded. As an unofficial dockers’ leader ruefully remarked in the 1970s, there were more noble knights on the TUC General Council than ever King Arthur had sitting at his round table at Camelot.
In W.P. Roberts’ times, the union hierarchy was just beginning to emerge, assert itself, establish control over the organisation, dominate the membership. Keith Flett should try to understand this fact dominated Roberts’ attitude to industrial legislation. It aided and abetted a process of differentiation that has led to a situation today where general secretaries of the TUC receive peerages while rank and file union members receive prison sentences.
This may appear quite appropriate to Lord Len Murray; on the other hand, the mass of miners fined and imprisoned may have a slightly different view.



 


Raymond Challinor
Whitley Bay



 



THE BLISTERS, sore feet and even colds have now gone – so what remains of the 50 mile march to Aldermaston? Not merely those, like myself, who marched all the way, but also the thousands of people who sympathized with the aims of the march must ask themselves: has it made a lasting impact upon the British public? What is the next step?
Undoubtedly, one of the most encouraging signs was the number taking part. Never below 600, the ranks swelled to well over 4,000 on the first and final days.
That so many people are prepared to sacrifice their Easter holidays and to rough it, shows there is a definite, determined Opposition, to the H-bomb in Britain. A strong and vocal nucleus exists to carry the struggle into every crevice of British life – until the bomb is ultimately banned. Another encouraging sign was that four-fifths of the marchers were under 30, just the age group politicians accuse of being politically apathetic. But surely this march proves that apathy is manufactured by the politicians themselves. Youth are not prepared to take an active part in political parties because, being without microscopes, they find it difficult to detect the differences between the two major parties. They regard the parliamentary parlour game, where heat is generated over trivialities, as of little consequence to themselves or anybody else. But when an issue of life-and-death importance arises, it is youth that gives the lead. Their infectious enthusiasm, confidence and boisterous energy was in evidence throughout the march.
 
Public support
Even uncommitted members of the general public were impressed. The march clearly showed that the cause of nuclear disarmament was not the proud possession of cranks, but the fervently-held opinion of many ordinary men and women like themselves. The banners, songs and chants illustrated the dangers of the current Government – and official Opposition – policy of placing faith in the amassing in larger and larger stocks of nuclear weapons.
Many spectators clapped, made the thumbs-up sign, and offered to help. Others gave food, chocolate and drinks to the Marchers.
All these indications of public support show that the march was a success, an important blow in the war against war, and a danger signal to bomb-crazy Macmillan. There is a need for other marches and demonstrations up and down the country to mobilize public opinion against the Bomb.
But, by themselves, these demonstrations will not be enough. It is necessary to wed the movement for nuclear disarmament with the organized Labour Movement and the struggle for Socialism. Without this the campaign will flounder to defeat.
Unfortunately, many of the Aldermaston March Committee would not accept this analysis. Underlying their objection is an entirely different attitude to the causes of, and struggle against war. They attribute war to people’s wickedness, fear or misunderstanding. Consequently, they point to the dangers of nuclear war, promote goodwill and understanding, and everything will be all right. Peace can be achieved without even breaking a vase in the Establishment’s grand mansion. Tranquility and Capitalism can snuggle close together.
 
The Socialist view
The socialist view, on the other hand, is that war is a function of capitalism and inextricably bound up with that system. Hence, to fight against war, you must fight against capitalism. An analysis of the economy of this country or the United States shows the most profitable sectors are those producing arms. With the growing danger of an American slump – not because of any increased threat from the East – Eisenhower has decided to give a further boost to arms expenditure.
To expect the governments of these, countries to pull away the props that are keeping their wobbly economies standing is like expecting Ind Coope, Bass and other brewers to lead a campaign for temperance. It’s just not in their interests.
Being opposed to socialist ideas, the Nuclear Disarmament Committee sought to confine the protest march to purely bourgeois limits. Speakers advocating trade union action were not allowed. Banners, such as the Socialist Review’s and the Newsletter’s “BLACK THE BOMB! BLACK THE BASES!” were discouraged. Indeed, an attempt was even made, at the behest of the Chief Marshall to take our banner down by force. So much for pacifist consistency!
While the Socialist Review considers the decisive factor will be workers’ action, we can see nothing against – in fact, everything in favour of – a broad movement, embracing many differing views but all agreed on the urgent necessity of arousing the public to the danger, and need to oppose, nuclear warfare. However, such a movement can only exist if there is respect and tolerance for the other person’s point of view.
 



Literature and Revolution
by Leon Trotsky
Russell & Russell, New York, 25/-
Leon Trotsky’s book, which considers the relationship between politics and literature, makes an extremely useful contribution to this subject. Although it deals with the Russian literary scene in the immediate post-Revolution period. Trotsky’s main points have relevance – indeed, greater relevance – at the present time. The fact that he makes his points while, at the same time, rattling the bones of literary corpses, many of whose names have even sunk into the limbo of the forgotten, does not alter this one iota, and should not deter socialists from reading the book.
Trotsky starts by emphasizing the importance of material factors. The elementary problems of food, shelter and illiteracy must be solved before a new culture, firmly based upon the masses, can arise, “Culture feeds on the sap of economics,” he writes, “and a material surplus is necessary, so that culture may grow, develop and become subtle.” Under Tsarism, whore the conditions of the masses were so appalling, only the rich ruling class actually had a culture, Russian literature expressed the prejudices of noblemen and bureaucrats. After the October Revolution things did not miraculously change: the new regime inherited the poverty of the old. What is more, the new regime was primarily the work of those who worked with their hands; those who worked with their brains – the intellectuals – were, at best, passive spectators and, perhaps more often, supporters of the counter-revolution. Therefore, the traditional estrangement between manual and mental workers that exists under capitalism continued in an exacerbated form. It took tine for intellectuals to realise that the Soviet system would not topple at the first gust of counter-revolutionary wind. To their sheer amazement, a social order controlled by the workers and peasants had not only come into existence but, what was more astonishing, looked as if it was going to continue! More and more intellectuals decided that they would reconcile themselves with this, reality.
But in this reconciliation, as Trotsky realised, there were problems. For the overwhelming majority of post-revolutionary Russians were peasants. While under the leadership of the urban workers they had played an important part in the revolution, as more normal times returned, their minds tended to hanker after their age-old dream – each owning a sizeable plot of land. Trotsky consequently saw that they could not be relied upon to impart a socialist outlook to the intelligentsia, who were increasingly identifying themselves with the peasantry,
Trotsky concludes that all talk of creating a proletarian culture is nonsense. Not simply was the economic and intellectual basis lacking, but also he points out that cultural developments take considerable time. Capitalist culture, for instance, which began with the Renaissance, took centuries to grow and mature. Similarly a socialist culture will take more than a hectic fortnight’s activity to create. It will only arise after the political struggle for socialist mastery of the world has been fought and won. With the abolition of classes, a culture will emerge – not a proletarian culture – but a classless culture.
Trotsky does not bemoan the absence of a proletarian culture; he points to the sheer impossibility of it ever arising. Had Trotsky’s words been heeded,then much fruitless activity – attempts to create proletarian culture artificially – would have been avoided. Fewer unreadable books would have been written, and no writers would have had their talents crucified on the cross of “socialist realism”. This doctrine was particularly debilitating when applied, as it usually was, by the Stalinists, For, to them, it did not mean a set formula to be rigidly adhered to, but that “literary creations” had to conform to the ever-changing Communist Party line. These actions of the CP hierarchy transformed talented writers into mere hacks, well-trained parrots of the Politbureau.
On the other hand, Trotsky thought socialist writers should be allowed, complete freedom of expression in a socialist society. He argued that no attempt should be made to enforce political standards to quell discussion of artistic problems. Throughout history mind – as well as literary expression – has limped after reality. Therefore Trotsky looked to the future. For the socialist writers who would be able to weave their stories and plays around heroic incidents in the Russian Revolution.
Of course, Trotsky, writing in 1924, could not have foreseen that the October Revolution, the supreme event in Man’s liberation, would be changed under Kremlin dictatorship into its dialectical opposite. The growth of Russian state capitalism has meant an end for the time being to any attempts to build a socialist culture in Russia. However, when writers to come do cast off – as they surely will do – the mental straitjackets of Stalinism, they will find that this book is of great help to them in their task.
 



On July 29th, 1921, a strange procession wended its way from Poplar, through Whitechapel, and on to the City of London. Led by the corporation mace-bearer, the procession consisted of the worthy Mayor, aldermen and councillors of the Borough of Poplar. Confident but determined, they marched to the accompaniment of a band a number of supporters and a big banner bearing the inscription “POPLAR BOROUGH COUNCIL marching to the HIGH COURT and possibly to PRISON.”
The elected representatives of Poplar had been summoned to appear before the High Court judges because, it was claimed, they had not carried out their statutory commitments. They had failed to pay outside authorities the “precepts,” that is, a levy made out of the rates for services rendered to the ratepayers by other bodies. Poplar’s main debt was to the then Tory-dominated London County Council of about £270,000.
The decision not to pay the “precepts” had been made on March 22nd, 1921. A short, jovial, old-style trade unionist, Charlie Summer, moved, and Charlie Key, a schoolmaster, seconded the resolution not to pay on the grounds that the council’s resources were already overstrained. The council had to pay relief to a large number of unemployed because at that time the whole administration of unemployment benefit was done on a local, not national, basis.
If Poplar Council had paid the “precepts” it would have involved cutting the amount of relief granted to the unemployed or, alternatively, increasing the rate burden. As both unemployed and ratepayers were ordinary workers, to take either course of action would involve further reductions in the living standards of that section of the community least able to make it.
 
Labour to do Tories’ work
The capitalist government of the day, led by Lloyd George, looked forward with pleasure to seeing the elected representatives of the poor being compelled to take measures that would adversely affect the poorer section of the community. Like the present Minister of Housing and Local Government, Henry Brooke, the Government relished the idea of Labour Councils up and down the country meekly carrying out Tory directives from Whitehall – increasing the burden of rates cutting down municipal services – and probably getting blamed by the electorate for these measures. Far better let Labour get the blame than the real culprits.
To carry out such a policy successfully, the Lloyd George Government calculated, just as Macmillan has today, that Labour representatives of local authorities would be so engrossed with trivial local problems that they would make no effective protest against the government’s economy cuts. However, the government miscalculated: it had not reckoned on George Lansbury and the rest of the Poplar Council standing by their socialist principles as firmly whilst they were in the council chamber as outside. With pungency, Lansbury pointed to the growing problem of unemployment – at that time it numbered about a million throughout the country – and said that he did not see why those working-class areas which had the misfortune of having a large number of unemployed should have to bear the burden of maintaining them while middle-class residential areas, places with far more wealth, did not have any unemployed to maintain. Lansbury illustrated his case by taking two nearby councils – Westminster and Poplar – both with roughly the same population. In Poplar a penny rate raised £3,643, in Westminster £31,719. Yet Westminster’s rate for unemployment relief was negligible while Poplar’s took a large portion of its 2s. 10d. total rate.
It was a fight on the broad principle that the workers should not be made to foot the bill for unemployment maintenance, that other sections of the community were in a far better position to do so, that George Lansbury & Co. stuck out, despite threats, despite the taunts of right-wing Labour leaders such as J.H. Thomas, and despite prosecution.
 
Prison life
One judge asked, “What would happen if all borough councils did this?” “Why, we should get the necessary reforms,” Lansbury benignly replied.
But while this statement was no doubt true, it did not satisfy the judges. They sent nearly the whole of the council to prison. Only the Tories, one renegade Labour councillor and the Deputy Mayor, to conduct official business, remained free. The other thirty members were sent to Brixton jail for “contempt of court.” They were to remain there indefinitely until they were prepared to carry out the judge’s decision that they must pay the “precept”.
Brixton prison was hardly hospitable, but the Poplar councillors made the best of it. When they arrived the chief warden spoke to them in his usual stern tone and was greeted with, “Where’s your union card?” Worse jolts for prison discipline were to follow. The councillors refused to work; they demanded footballs, exercise, open cell doors and newspapers. Every day, council officials would visit them because it was necessary to consult them “on business.” Brixton prison rapidly became an adjunct of Poplar’s town hall.
The rest of the prisoners quickly became envious. They sent deputation to the Governor asking for the same privileges as the Poplar councillors. The Governor sent for Lansbury, hoping that he would back the authorities in their attempt to maintain rigid discipline in the rest of the prison. But Lansbury would not do this. He said, “These people should have the same privileges as us; after all, they’ve only broken the law, just as we have.”
 
Poplar Council wins
But it was not only the prison authorities who were becoming increasingly disturbed by the activities of Poplar Borough Council. Lloyd George’s Government were also disturbed. They were finding the Poplar Council as much trouble in prison as they were outside. While they were behind bars, they were the centre of public interest, the vocal point of opposition to the Government’s economic policies. Inspired by the self-sacrifice of the Poplar councillors, Bethnal Green voted to follow their lead, while Stepney and Battersea looked likely to come out – or rather be locked in – because of their solidarity with Poplar. Lloyd George’s Government was confronted with the dismal prospect of placing more and more borough councillors behind bars.
Meanwhile, Lansbury and his comrades were unperturbed. Each night large crowds would congregate outside Brixton prison to hear Lansbury denounce the Government through the gratings of his cell-window. “Where’s young Edgar?” they would sometimes shout up. Amid cheers the face of Lansbury’s son would appear in the prison window.
But there was nothing to cheer the government. The situation was getting out of hand. Even moderate Labour Mayors headed by Herbert Morrison, who deplored Poplar’s action, sent a deputation to the Prime Minister. They realised that unless agreement was reached the whole of London local government would soon break down.
As a result, in October, after little more than a month in jail, Poplar won their case and were released from prison. Their courageous stand received national acclaim. This action of a small east London borough had defeated the Government and its corrupt legal system. Faced with the threat of “Poplarism” spreading – that is to say, other councils “going on strike” and refusing to pay their precepts – the Government was forced to hold a conference and then introduce a bill that equalised rate burdens, increasing unemployment benefits and making them a matter that was administered nationally.
What Lansbury did 30 years ago we can do with far greater success today. Labour’s support throughout the country is great; the Tory Government is groggy and unsure of itself; and its policies are unpopular.
What are local councillors going to do about it? Are they meekly going to administer the various Government decrees, to apply the Tory policy of cutting down workers’ living standards? In which case they are making themselves the eunuchs of Whitehall, the unpaid servants of the Conservative Central Office. Their servility, lack of backbone, and reactionary policy will undoubtedly result in widespread unpopularity. People will say – and rightly so – that they are just as bad as the Tories.
Or are Labour councillors going to take the road to Brixton prison? The road tramped so courageously by those who built our mighty Labour Movement. Such leadership would not only prevent Tory attempts to increase rents and rates, but would also provide an invaluable spearhead to the movement to get the Tories out now.
 



From Labourism to Socialism
Michael Barratt Brown
Spokesman Books, £3.25
The seriousness of any political tendency can be gauged from its ability to learn from the past, to acknowledge errors and thereby discover new truths. By this yardstick, Barratt Brown and the coterie to which he belongs have displayed their political bankruptcy. In their writings, including the book under review, they make no attempt to explain – or even consider – their previous blunders.
Presumably, Barratt Brown hopes, for example, that we will forget that he and his friends fervently advocated the incomes policy of the Wilson administration, providing a left-wing gloss for a reactionary policy. Nor does he analyse the role of the Tribunite MPs, their ineffectiveness in Parliament both during the Labour government and that of Edward Heath.
Yet, if Barratt Brown is to be believed, it is these Labour lefts, operating through constitutional channels, who will bring in socialism. Outside Westminister, our gallant parliamentary Jacobins will not need a strong, powerful revolutionary organisation for support. They will be able to rely on a ground-swell of discontent with the ruling class:
‘Broad alliances of many diverse groups crystallising around the gathering crisis of capitalism will be the appropriate method of a move towards socialism’ (p.240.)
The policies of IS are futile in Barratt Brown’s eyes. To build up rank-and-file organisations in unions like the T&G to fight the bosses and the union bureaucracy is not necessary, as Jack Jones has ‘put himself at the forefront of the movement for workers’ control and trade-union democracy’ (p.235)
Equally wrong is the attempt to provide the working class with new political organisation: ‘Those who would destroy the Labour Party and end the adherence to it of left-moving trade unions would have to construct a new Labour Party with almost the same constitution as the present party’. It is an indication of the extreme thickness of the reformist bone of Barratt Brown’s cranium that his mental horizon does not extend beyond the limits of social democracy.
This book, I am afraid to say, can only be read as a symptom of political degeneration. To paraphrase the old song, ‘The old new left, it ain’t what it used to be.’
 



The Development of the British Economy 1914-1950
Sidney Pollard
Edward Arnold. 30s.
Let me recommend this book to all serious students of politics. It is notoriously difficult to write contemporary history, to analyse the main issues clearly before the dust of controversy has finally settled and to achieve a proper prospective of events that have only recently occurred. Yet, on the whole, Dr Pollard succeeds. It is possible to cavil with him on this or that interpretation, but it does not alter the fact that he has written an eminenly readable book, packed with useful information, a compendium of knowledge with helpful footnotes to assist the student who wants to delve more deeply into a topic.
Dr Pollard’s views on the post-war Labour Government might be of interest to readers. He points out that the Attlee administration inherited most of its controls from the wartime government, and therefore cannot claim that its economic policy contained much originality. Moreover, nationalisation, while it aroused considerable political controversy, had little economic effect. Far from being a step towards a socialist society, it did not dominate or transform the economy, but was ‘well within a long tradition of the growth of Government responsibility’. Nationalisation only enabled society, including private industry, to operate more efficiently.
On page 397, Dr Pollard produces a table on how personal incomes changed under the Labour Government. The percentage of the gross national product going to employees and members of HM Forces rose from 57.2 per cent in 1946 to 57.3 per cent in 1950. On the other hand, incomes from property, including undistributed profits, rose from 24.0 per cent in 1946 to 26.0 per cent in 1950. So much for the slogan, ‘Fair Shares For All’. Trade unionists would do well to remember this before they accept the wage freeze carrot – it is coated with strychnine!
 



There is a fatal flaw in Chris Harman’s article (October SR) on guerrilla wars. He only cites examples which bolster his case. He makes the underlying assumption that the final victory is simply determined by military might. But this has never been the socialist line. War is a continuation of politics by other means. The reason wars are fought, the manner in which they are conducted and the ultimate outcome is political – Clausewitz asserted that military grammar must always be subordinated to political logic.
From Algeria to Cuba, Cyprus, Kenya and Vietnam, it is possible to give examples where poorly equipped and numerically weaker bands of guerrilla fighters vanquished the might of the imperial powers.
I still vividly remember how that brilliant journalist, the late James Cameron, described the fall of Hanoi in 1955. The French colonial troops, clad in speckless uniforms and with their well polished weapons, marched through the capital in perfect order. They were defeated! Then enter the conquering heroes – the Vietminh, an odd assortment of individuals with an even odder assortment of ancient rifles, wearing tattered clothing, sauntering along to the acclaim of the populace.
To take another example – Cuba – Castro began his invasion with only 81 supporters. Their vessel landed at the wrong place and a catalogue of catastrophes followed. Two years later, on the top of the Sierra Maestra, Castro addressed the remnant off his band. They were only 12 and they faced the dictator Batista’s 50,000 troops, equipped with the most up to date American weapons. Castro’s message was quite simple: we have them on the run. And Castro was correct!
Why does Chris Harman think that this sort of strange thing could happen in countries like Vietnam and Cuba? Why could the anti-colonialist David beat the imperialist Goliath? I would suggest the decisive factor, in the last analysis, is not military but political. It is a struggle for hearts and minds. Is your will to win greater than that of your enemy? Guerrillas fighting against foreign domination are usually prepared to give whatever it takes, whereas soldiers fighting to maintain imperialist domination find their enthusiasm vanishes once they start to suffer setbacks.
The same applied in Ireland during the Troubles of 1916-22. Though Britain had infinitely greater military power, eventually it had to concede independence to 26 of the 32 Irish counties. What now remains is the problem of the remaining six. Look at the situation from the ruling class standpoint. After 30 years of warfare, the Provisionals are as strong as – in fact stronger than – they were 30 years ago. The British authorities find themselves with an unending and unwinnable task. At the same time continued British rule leaves a dangerous minefield where explosions could happen at any time. A still greater nightmare for the British ruling class is the impact on the mainland. Why should British workers simultaneously suffer welfare and other cuts from Blair’s government while their taxes help to preserve an everlasting subsidy to Ulster? A continuation of the status quo is liable to lead to still greater problems. The anger of thwarted Irish nationalists is liable to merge with that of British workers. It could occur on a much bigger scale than in the 1960s and 1970s, when Bernadette Devlin, Eamonn McCann and others came over to this country to address mass protest meetings. Correctly, they told these large gatherings that the cause of British and Irish workers was the same. This is quite different to the message of Sinn Fein. Gerry Adams and co. look to Washington for their salvation, not to the working class.
International socialists need to both commend and criticise the Provisional IRA. In a superb way it has conducted the armed struggle against the imperialist invader for 30 years. Yet in that time it has never endeavoured to unite workers across the sectarian divide. Sinn Fein may secure its objective of a united Ireland – a united capitalist Ireland. But this will do nothing to abolish the gulf between rich and poor, the struggle between capitalists and workers. But I think we should take an entirely different position – that of James Connolly. He fought for a workers’ republic not only in Britain but also in Ireland.
 



Though I do not disagree with the main thrust of Alex Callinicos’s article, Where does political power lie? (March SR), I think he omits to mention a crucial aspect of the problem. Vital sections of state functions lie beyond the purview, let alone control, of either the government or parliament.
Take, for instance, the first Labour government. Ramsay MacDonald, the prime minister, asked to see his own personal security files. This would have given him some idea of the type of information collected by the intelligence services and its accuracy. Yet, despite him formally being their head, MI5 and MI6 denied MacDonald access.
The fatal consequence of this lack of control came a few months later. The intelligence services forged the Zinoviev letter, a document that purported to show the Labour government was in cahoots with the Communist International. The Tories gleefully seized on the document, filling newspapers with red scare stories. Thanks to the Zinoviev letter, the Labour Party suffered a crashing defeat at the general election.
Similarly, in 1974 a disaffected section of the intelligence services devised the Wilson plot, an attempt to overthrow the duly elected government of the country. They stirred up trouble in Northern Ireland, including the Orangemen’s strike, and fed the media character assassinations and innuendoes about Labour politicians.
While their conduct was completely unconstitutional, no action was taken against them. Had it not been intelligence officers but some other kind of state employees – say, civil servants or teachers – do you think the whole affair would have been just quietly overlooked?
But there are other privileged groups whose actions sometimes remain hidden and beyond critical scrutiny.
Quite naturally, after the Second World War almost everybody in Britain was intensely anti-Nazi and specially loathed those who had committed wartime atrocities. Yet this did not prevent the top brass of the military and foreign office arranging secret ‘ratlines’, the means whereby the Klaus Barbies and Eichmanns were spirited away to avoid retribution.
Ante Pavelic, leader of the Croatian Ustashi, who fought against Tito and the partisans in Yugoslavia, had personal habits that were hardly nice: by his office desk he liked to keep a wastepaper basket full of the eyeballs of anti-fascists he had tortured and killed. However, after 1945, despite the Yugoslav authorities giving the street and number of the house in Innsbruck, part of the British occupation zone, where Pavelic lived, the British army refused to hand him over.
In the same way, without any sanction from cabinet or parliament, let alone public debate, Anglo-American undercover agents took over supporting and supplying resistance movements that had previously fought alongside the German army. In the Baltic States and the Ukraine they sustained the armed struggle against the Red Army till at least 1952. Surely people in this country would not have backed this provocative behaviour had they known it was taking place.
In 1957 an Oxford undergraduate wrote an article in the student magazine, Isis in which he told how, while doing national service, he discovered British submarines were secretly landing saboteurs on the Latvian coast and sending fast motorboats into Leningrad harbour to test its radar defences. For revealing these acts of subversion by the British state, he was prosecuted under the Official Secrets Act.
High ranking officials, aware that ‘knowledge is power’, are often economical with the truth. Reformist politicians are not merely hamstrung, as Alex Callinicos points out, because of the way they divide political and economic issues, but also because they do not possess the full facts upon which to make policy decisions.
Tony Benn admitted as much. When he was minister of energy in the Wilson government, top level civil servants were careful not to inform him about a nuclear disaster that had occurred in Siberia, 1,000 miles from Sverdlovsk, which had strewn a huge amount of radioactive contamination over a wide area. Had he known this, Benn says he would not have sanctioned the construction of the nuclear power station at Hartlepool, a project that destroyed 7,000 miners’ jobs.
If the establishment will conceal relevant information on the comparatively piddling issue of building a nuclear power station, we can be sure it will use much more energy and ingenuity in concealing information on the gargantuan issue of destroying capitalism and building socialism. Any politician who thinks otherwise is blind – and will lead only those with similar visual impairment.
 

: Ernest Haberkern and Arthur Lipow (eds.), by Raymond Challinor 1997


Raymond Challinor 1997
Review: Ernest Haberkern and Arthur Lipow (eds.), Neither Capitalism nor Socialism, and Hal Draper, War and Revolution
Source: New Interventions, Volume 8, no 1, Summer 1997
Ernest Haberkern and Arthur Lipow (eds), Neither Capitalism nor Socialism: Theories of Bureaucratic Collectivism, Humanities Press, New Jersey, 1996, pp 203, £32.50
Hal Draper, War and Revolution: Lenin and the Myth of Revolutionary Defeatism, Humanities Press, New Jersey, 1996, pp 159, £32.50
If you could only see half a soccer field, you would gain a false and inadequate idea of the football match. In the same way, there must have been many comrades, like myself, who secured a lopsided, sometimes erroneous view of the battle in 1939-40 in the Trotskyist movement over the class nature of the Soviet state. In those days, thrust into your hands, almost immediately you joined the movement, was a copy of Trotsky’s In Defence of Marxism. No attempt was made to give an accurate statement of the views he opposed.
Haberkern and Lipow’s book helps to repair this omission. I had always thought that Trotsky’s workers’ state theory was first questioned in 1939, a panic reaction by petty-bourgeois members of the US Socialist Workers Party to the menace of impending war. Actually, objections surfaced three years earlier, when The Revolution Betrayed appeared. There, Trotsky envisages either a revolutionary party overthrowing the Stalinist bureaucracy, or a bourgeois party smashing the workers’ state.
James Burnham and Yvan Craipeau query this scenario, and subsequent events seem to prove them correct. One can point to the courageous defence of the Soviet Union in 1919, attacked by 19 marauding armies, during the Civil War. No similar resistance happened after 1989 in response to Gorbachev’s and Yeltsin’s changes. On the one occasion, workers thought they were fighting to protect their state and their interests, and to establish a beacon of hope for the oppressed of the world. On the other occasion, they saw the Russian state as an exploitative apparatus, not worth lifting a finger to protect.
Other essays are by Jack Brad, Joseph Carter, Hal Draper, Max Shachtman and many others. They deal with the implications of the Hitler – Stalin non-aggression pact, query whether collectivised property inexorably provides the basis for socialism, and assert the need for revolutionaries to adopt a Third Camp position, campaigning for neither Washington nor Moscow but international socialism.
In my opinion, many contributions have withstood the test of time remarkably well. Indeed, in some instances, revelations have surfaced that simply serve to underline what had been written. For instance, it now emerges that Ribbentrop and Molotov secretly met behind German lines in 1944 to discuss whether there could again be peace between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. Negotiations broke down because of Molotov’s sticking point  –  the Kremlin insisted on the restoration of all Tsarist territory. Who says the Second World War was not an imperialist conflict?
Hal Draper remains an unrecognised giant amongst Marxist theoreticians. All his books are well worth reading. In the one under review here, he explains and dissects the various views that socialists have expressed towards war. Though I don’t accept his central thesis, nobody could put the case against revolutionary defeatism better than Draper.
 


 Raymond Challinor Archive






I think that Ian Kershaw’s biography of Hitler is the best so far to appear, but I am far from being as enthusiastic about it as Alex Callinicos (November SR). Kershaw fails to make a consistent class analysis of fascism, and therefore fails to understand its dynamics.
I consider that Trotsky’s extensive writings on fascism have withstood the rigours of time. Yet Kershaw does not appear to be acquainted with them, let alone make an evaluation of them. The same goes for Daniel Guerin’s classic work, Fascism and Big Business, not to mention Alfred Sohn-Rethel’s Economy and the Class Structure of German Fascism. A German Marxist, Sohn-Rethel was working in the private inner precincts of the leading organisation of German capital when it reached its amicable understanding with the Führer. His first hand experiences are of great value.
That big business provided the backbone for Nazism is, according to Alex Callinicos, the orthodox view of the Third International under Stalin. However, I would argue that it was the revolutionary left, those opposed to Stalinism, who advanced this view consistently. By contrast, the rulers in the Kremlin had an ambivalent attitude, a love-hate relationship with Hitler. At times Soviet national interests would dictate cooperation with Germany. The German Communist Party simply followed the line dictated in Moscow.
This is thoroughly explained in an excellent work by Peter Petrov. He, of course, had been a hero of the 1905 Russian Revolution, after which he fled to Scotland where he became the comrade in arms of John Maclean in the revolt on the Clyde. After the October Revolution he returned to Moscow and joined the Russian government. However, the rise of Stalin and the policies Stalin pursued in the 1920s sent him on his travels again. He witnessed the demise of the Weimar Republic and the rise of the Nazis.
Forced to flee once more, Petrov came to England. The Hogarth Press, run by Leonard and Virginia Woolf, published his The Secrets of Hitler’s Victory. Towards the end of this book he explains why it was so disastrous for the German CP to meekly obey their Moscow masters’ pro-Nazi line. They were not following socialist principles but those of a particularly ruthless ruling class:
‘As a basis of despotism, state capitalism becomes unbearable. Because an established state capitalism – as we see today in Russia – makes the citizen in all spheres of his life a dependent on the state: the state is his employer, his landlord, his tradesman, and by no change of employment or lodging can he escape from it. The state decides the admission of his children to higher schools, of members of his family to hospitals. A conflict with the state as employer might easily lead to reprisals by the state as tradesman, landlord or schoolmaster. A corrupt, petty administration, which is a feature of every dictatorship, could not but drive citizens to despair.’
The Secrets of Hitler’s Victory remained shunned, a work neglected by Ian Kershaw as by other historians. Published in 1934, it predates Tony Cliff’s Stalinist Russia by 14 years.
I have just been reading the excellent book published by Redwords, Victor Serge’s Witness to the German Revolution. The editor, Ian Birchall, writes,
‘The claim that Ford was financing Hitler first appeared in the New York Times (20 December 1922), which contained an account of a visit to Hitler’s headquarters: “The wall beside his desk in Hitler’s private office is decorated with a large picture of Henry Ford. In the antechamber there is a large table covered with books ... published by Henry Ford. If you ask one of Hitler’s underlings for the reason of Ford’s popularity in these circles he will smile knowingly and say nothing.” At Hitler’s trial in 1924 evidence was given that “the Hitler movement was partly financed by an American anti-Semitic chief, who is Henry Ford”. In August 1938 Henry Ford received the Grand Cross of the German Eagle, a Nazi decoration.’
Would Ian Kershaw – or for that matter Alex Callinicos – like to suggest that there were no German industrialists, the equivalent of Henry Ford, who did not have the same enthusiasm for the Führer?
 







This article is the first of a three part study of the Second World War which aims to illuminate the black holes left by official propaganda. It looks at the way in which the authorities sought to maintain military discipline. The second part – yet to be written – will deal with the revolts and other acts of defiance the top brass faced. The third and final section will examine why the prognostications of the revolutionary left – “preparing for power” – proved to be groundless.
The author’s research so far is contained in his book The Struggle for Hearts and Minds: Essays on the Second World War. He would be grateful to hear from anyone who can increase his knowledge, particularly in connection with military revolts.





THROUGHOUT the war, the overriding aim of the military hierarchy was to maintain the cohesion and fighting efficiency of the armed forces. Towards this end, it combined close surveillance of all military personnel with a complex system of rewards and punishments. But inevitably problems arose. Disciplinary measures that may on one occasion secure compliance, on another could arouse rebellion. Moreover, there remained the question of the impact of punishment on the morale of those not directly affected.
In the First World War the high command retained the ultimate penalty. At least 254 men faced firing squads, presumably on the Voltairean principle that is would encourage the others. Yet, the opposite seems sometimes to have been true. Till his dying day, Victor Sylvester, the dance band leader, remained haunted by memories of being detailed to take part in an execution. [1] When news filtered through to the Western Front that the British military authorities had begun to execute those who participated in the Dublin Easter Uprising, the fighting spirit of Irish troops immediately plummeted. It provided one of the reasons for halting the executions after only 15 of the 1,000 or so who had committed treason – taking up arms against the British crown – had paid the ultimate penalty.
Though no document outlining the new policy can be cited, in the Second World War the high command decided not to resort to executions. Instead it sought to locate potential trouble-spots, dealing with the difficulties as soon as they arose. Far better immediately give first aid to a scratch than let it develop into gangrene.
Against troublemakers, a number of weapons were used. Those whose politics would almost certainly make them centres of discord could be prevented from joining. Those who had been accepted, like Aircraftsman Frank Ward, could simply be told their “services are no longer required”. He concealed neither the fact that he belonged to the Revolutionary Communist Party nor that he put forward his views whenever the opportunity arose. [2]
But dangers were inherent in this tactic. Many men disliked the armed forces; it could become the vogue to shout revolutionary slogans merely to secure demobilisation. Moreover, expulsion may not solve the problem, merely shunt it elsewhere. The case of Frank Maitland illustrates this point.
When he came before a Conscientious Objectors’ Tribunal at Glasgow in the summer of 1939, he proclaimed himself to be a revolutionary socialist, opposed to all capitalist-imperialist wars. Not unduly impressed, the Tribunal did not regard this as a justifiable reason for placing him on the register of COs. So he was forced into the armed forces. In the RAF, Frank, a person with very considerable talent, quickly rose to the rank of corporal, while still writing his revolutionary articles and pamphlets. The crunch came with a work he wrote to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the formation of the Red Army. Maitland praised its founder, Leon Trotsky, who had made it a powerful force for spreading socialism; he castigated Stalin for transforming it into an instrument of oppression. [3] Hauled before his commanding officer, once he had admitted authorship of the pamphlet he was ordered off the camp without even being permitted to collect his personal belongings. [4] However, Frank Maitland saw this not as a setback but as an opportunity. It made him free to stomp the country, employing his magnetic oratorical skills to address mass meetings, denouncing Churchill and all his works. Definitely, this outcome was not a success from the authorities’ standpoint.
The aim of the military chiefs remained to preserve discipline at the minimum cost, that is to say, with the least possible disruption. Better have infractions of discipline punished by fines or confining a man to barracks. To send him to the “glasshouse”, a military detention centre, represented a double defeat for the authorities: not only did it mean he was no longer performing his military duties but also another man had to be detailed to supervise his imprisonment. On top of this, there was the expenditure of resources, both men and materials, on building and maintenance of the glasshouses, all regarded by the top brass as an unproductive use of scarce military resources.
Detention camps probably varied considerably in their interpretation of regulations. Some were comparatively lenient on their inmates. This approach contained an inherent danger: an individual might re-offend, since the punishment, for those sentenced again, was so mild. Undoubtedly, there were some servicemen who just deserted, lived off their wits or from stealing, and on recapture had another short period in a glasshouse. A BBC television programme on the Second World War, screened in 1994, interviewed a man known as Spud Murphy who fell into this category: already with a criminal record, he repeatedly deserted the army as he did not fear imprisonment to which, during his criminal life, he had grown habituated. The overstretched police force and the failure of many householders to lock their homes, especially when scurrying off to the shelters during an air raid, meant he had easy pickings, an easy life. [5]
A lot of other detention centres, however, seem to have had much tougher regimes, administering an earlier version of the short, sharp shock. Prisoners claim they were subjected to inhumane and degrading treatment. Behind the formal rules, a lot of camp commanders did not grieve if their staff behaved violently – indeed, they sometimes expected it. In an article entitled Britain’s Concentration Camps, G.W. Young recounted personal experiences of the ordeal he underwent while under detention. Thrown against a brick wall, he asked his assailant why he had done that. To his surprise the answer came: “I’m a married man with kids. Do you think I like doing this sort of thing? We do what we are told.” [6]
Deaths in detention were far from unknown. While most newspapers might not prominently report these tragedies, rumours quickly spread about military brutality and violence. In December 1941 Sydney Silverman, the MP whose private members’ bill ultimately was responsible for the abolition of capital punishment in 1965, raised in the Commons the question of the treatment of Private James Grogan, of Liverpool. Detained for being absent without leave, he was arrested and the military policemen endeavoured to handcuff him. In the ensuing struggle Grogan died, and Silverman remained unconvinced by the official explanation. [7]
The following month a quite serious disturbance happened at Dingle Vale glasshouse on Merseyside. For quite a time there had been tension. One reason was the practice, also applied in some other glasshouses, of discrimination against war resisters during an air raid. Other prisoners would be taken to the relative safety of the shelters; war resisters would remain locked in their cells. In the ensuing fracas a number of war resisters were injured and five faced the charge of mutiny. Prompted by a battery of parliamentary questions, an official inquiry was set up into the troubles, but Captain Margesson, the Minister of War, refused to divulge its findings to the Commons. This answer failed to satisfy John McGovern MP, who called upon the minister to prosecute the governor for his brutal and violent treatment of detainees. After this demand had been rejected, McGovern decided to conduct his own personal investigation.
The first that Colonel Greenwood, the governor of the detention centre, heard of McGovern’s arrival at Dingle Vale was when it was reported to him that a Member of Parliament had made an unauthorised entry to the establishment and was wandering around asking questions. When Colonel Greenwood went forth to confront the unwelcome intruder, he was in for an unpleasant surprise. Far from being the weak, effeminate pacifist he probably expected, John McGovern had all the aggression and venom of an untrained rotweiler dog.
Growing up and learning his politics on Clydeside’s meanest streets, he had become accustomed to making his socialist points forcibly, sometimes using a blunt instrument as an educational aid, which he applied to the craniums of his more backward pupils. Over the years, McGovern had been involved in many physical battles. On one memorable occasion, it took the sergeant-at-arms and seven assistants to eject him from the Commons. In the battle some of the chamber’s venerable woodwork was shattered. The “grave disorder”, as the Speaker described it, led to the suspension of the Right Honourable Member for Shettleston as well as the sitting of the Commons itself. [8]
So, not surprisingly, McGovern was far from being overawed by a mere prison governor, particularly as he had already sustained war injuries. An angry and unequal confrontation did not last long: the governor soon saw the force of McGovern’s arguments. Colonel Greenwood agreed to assemble all nine war resisters in the camp. Then McGovern spoke with them privately. He made notes of their grievances, which he promised to raise in Parliament. They were told to contact him at the Commons if any further problems arose.
In the next couple of months the affairs at this glasshouse unravelled. Four non-commissioned officers were prosecuted, though only one was found guilty. As for the five prisoners charged with mutiny, the case against them was dropped. [9]
But, despite the exposure of the Dingle Vale scandal, brutality and death persisted in these military hellholes. Many commanding officers used the “ice box” as a form of punishment. Prisoners, denied adequate bedclothes or heating, were thrown into a small cell. Then freezing air was blown in throughout the night to heighten their agony. But sometimes they did not merely suffer – they died. In the 1940s the existence of hypothermia remained unknown to medical science. Yet one might have thought that military bird-brains would become aware, as the deaths accumulated, of the lethal effects of the ice box. It is probably indicative of the scant concern the army brasshats had for those supposedly in their care that the problem was never discerned.
But the lives of the war resisters seem to have been regarded as of little consequence. For example, when three out of four men consigned to the ice box at a Somerset detention centre were found dead the following morning, it was deemed merely a minor matter. Just like the death a few weeks later from German bombing of Albert Brown: he had been deliberately left in his cell at Walton prison, Liverpool. [10] In May 1941 Desmond Bray, who refused to don an army uniform, also died in Walton jail in the same manner. [11] In December 1942 Victor Walker, a 25-year-old ILPer who had been sentenced to a year’s hard labour, died because he was denied proper medical treatment. The military authorities refused to heed either the prisoner’s son or his family’s pleas as his condition deteriorated. Publicly, John McGovern denounced the authorities’ callous inaction, branding it as tantamount to murder. [12]
Consequently, in order to allay public disquiet, the government decided to hold an inquiry into conditions at detention centres. With Judge Oliver presiding, the three-man commission selected at random 91 of the 500 inmates who wanted to give evidence. Of these, 85 made complaints about their treatment while in detention. Forty-one alleged they had been victims of violent and inhuman abuse. The inquiry found almost all of these complaints were groundless. It praised the dedication of the staff, suggesting, for good measure, that flogging be reintroduced to further enhance standards. The Oliver report contained one misgiving – it related to the safety of the prison staff. What this meant – looked at from the rather different perspective of a former inmate – was “that these bullies dare not venture out for fear of hostile demonstrations from local inhabitants and soldiers stationed in the district, as they apparently fear that their victims will one day turn and administer their well-invited punishment”. [13]
The writer of these lines confessed that he had told the Oliver inquiry about his own mistreatment: “I gave evidence but was not believed.” The person who gave such malicious, worthless testimony was Jasper Ridley, later to become one of the country’s most distinguished historians and barristers. He described the Oliver report as “an insult to British soldiers and workmen. The evidence of British soldiers is rejected as lies or hysterical exaggeration; the indignation of British workers at ‘Gestapo-like’ treatment of their comrades is said to be unjustified”. [14]
Reconsidering these events after more than 50 years, Jasper Ridley remains unrepentant, still harbouring the same hostility against the army authorities. In a letter, written to me on 23 July 1995, he stated:
“When we first arrived in the detention barracks, the sergeant in charge told us that his aim was ‘to make your life a perfect Hell so that you will take good care you never come back here’; and every soldier, and every soldier’s wife and family, knew that this was the case. I have recently seen films on TV of the prisons recently opened for hardened offenders in the USA, which some people think should be introduced here, and they remind me exactly of the military detention barracks at Langport in 1941.”
Jasper Ridley continued:
“Did you know that when Hitler opened concentration camps in Nazi Germany in 1933 (I am referring to the concentration camps like Dachau, not the extermination camps like Auschwitz, which were opened during the Second World War), he modelled them on the pre-Weimar army? The detention camps of the British army were run along the same lines.”
No-holds-barred discipline did not always succeed. The desertion rate might rise. It could also have a destabilising effect in the army ranks as well as sometimes in the wider community. A case that occurred at roughly the same time as the Oliver report appeared illustrates this fact.
Harold Woods, a Sunderland shipyard welder, was subject to military regulations because he belonged to the Home Guard. One day, after working his regular shift from 7.30am to 5.00pm in the shipyards, he was required to do gun drill from 7.30 to 8.30pm and again from 9.00 to 9.30pm. Ordered to do a third drill, he refused to comply, claiming he felt he was going to collapse from exhaustion. His insubordination led to him being court-martialled for “using insubordinate language to a superior officer”, and he was sentenced to 28 days’ detention. Shipyards along the river Wear greeted this news with anger. At mass meetings rank and file leaders pointed to Harold Woods’ frail health, the fact that he suffered from tuberculosis and had been operated upon four times. They also pointed out that it indicated the undemocratic character of the Home Guard. Notwithstanding criticism from the press, all the workers along the Wear downed tools, voting not to return to work until Harold Woods had been released. Speedily the authorities reviewed their conduct and permitted him to go home after serving only four days of the 28-day sentence. [15]
Imprisonment could also have wider political repercussions. In 1942 the Scottish National Party (SNP), after a rowdy, heated debate, decided to oppose the war. By a slender majority, it reached the conclusion that the conflict was being fought for the power and privileges of the English rich, not for the Scottish people. But the SNP’s resistance toughened when the party’s chairman, a kilted giant of a man named Douglas Young, was sentenced to a year’s imprisonment. Historian Angus Calder suggests “he began to attain the status of a martyr”. [16]
His imprisonment provided the Scots Nats with a focus around which to launch a national campaign. As well as calling for his release, the SNP drew attention to the authorities’ persecution of Nationalists. Once he was out of prison, an unrepentant Douglas Young told the press: “Tell your readers, if they want to know what it is like in prison, they had better stand up for Scottish liberties and they will soon find out.” Despite the imprisonment of its members, both civilians and those in the armed forces, the SNP experienced a great accretion of support. In February 1944 Douglas Young stood at the Kirkcaldy by-election and, with his anti-war message of Scottish socialism, secured 41% of the vote. A year later, the SNP’s secretary, Dr Robert McIntyre, also a strong socialist, fought Motherwell. Though the constituency usually had a rock-solid Labour majority, and on this occasion the Labour Party enjoyed both Tory and Liberal backing, Labour still lost the seat. Far from cowing the Nationalists, official persecution helped to strengthen the SNP, hardening the members and increasing its popular support. [17]

Notes
1. The Guardian, 6 March 1988.
2. Socialist Appeal, Mid-August 1944.
3. Frank Maitland, The Red Army, Tate Memorial Publications, 1943.
4. Letter from Frank Maitland, now living in Hastings, 23 May 1987. His other pamphlets were The Revolution in India and The North African Tangle.
5. Steve Humphries and Pamela Gordon, Forbidden Britain, 1994, pp. 41–50.
6. New Leader, 10 July 1943.
7. Ibid., 6 February 1941. Emrys Hughes’ biography, Sydney Silverman: Rebel in Parliament, 1969, details Silverman’s harsh treatment as a war resister from February 1917 onwards, but it fails to mention what a close personal friend of his, Bill Braddock, told me: he was threatened with being sent to the Western Front where disobeying military orders would render him liable to execution. Surely this throws a significant fresh angle on his opposition to capital punishment – he could himself easily have been a victim.
8. John McGovern, Neither Fear Nor Favour, 1960, pp. 71–2.
9. New Leader, 1, 8, 22 March and 12, 24 April 1941. Also, The Strange Occurrences at Dingle Vale, by A. Joseph Brayshaw, in Denis Hayes, The Challenge of Conscience, 1949, pp. 91–100.
10. New Leader, 15 May 1941.
11. Ibid., 24 May 1941.
12. Ibid., 21 December 1942.
13. Socialist Appeal, December 1943.
14. Ibid.
15. Sunderland Echo, 4 and 6 November 1943.
16. Angus Calder, The Myth of the Blitz, 1991, pp. 72–3. According to historian James D. Young, Dr McIntyre has one of the best collections of Trotskyist literature he has ever seen.
17. It may be that it was misgivings at losing the seat that prompted the Churchill coalition government never to declare a by-election in the Midlothian and Peebleshire constituency. Captain A.H.M. Ramsay, the elected MP, spent the war sitting in Brixton prison, not the House of Commons. So, in a war supposedly fought for democracy, the hapless electors of that constituency found themselves without a democratically elected representative.
 



Conservative cabinet ministers are holding a festival of hypocritical speechifying. “Release the 51 individuals seized from the US-Embassy in Teheran”, they shriek, yet all this talk about respecting diplomatic procedures and practices relies upon one essential thing – a lack of knowledge on the part of their listeners.
For the British government behaved in 1918 with much less courtesy towards Soviet diplomats than the Iranians are doing today. The Russian ambassador, Maxim Litvinov, was arrested and imprisoned in Brixton jail. So was George Chicherin who, like Litvinov, was later to become Russian foreign minister. Similarly, John Maclean, that great Scottish socialist, found the Foreign Office not prepared to recognise his appointment as Soviet Consul in Scotland. He, too, was quickly pushed behind bars.
At that time, a large number of people from Eastern Europe, many of them political refugees, lived in this country. Without any diplomatic protection, they stood helpless before officially-backed persecution. For example, Peter Petroff, a wounded hero of the 1905 revolution and a close friend of Maclean, was imprisoned. Then the authorities threatened to hand him over to the White Russians, a decision that would have meant certain death. A campaign by British socialists and trade unionists, led by Mrs Bridges-Adams, stopped this from happening. But they were unable to prevent indignities occurring to Petroff’s wife. She was made to share a cell in Aylesbury prison with a prostitute suffering from syphilis. They both had to use the same eating and washing utensils.
The main reason why Britain took such actions was because its leaders were gripped by an anti-socialist frenzy. They desperately wanted to overthrow the newly-created workers’ state in Russia. By the summer of 1918, British troops had already joined counter-revolutionary forces. This military intervention would have been put in jeopardy had the Soviet embassy in London continued to function. Britain was committing an act of naked aggression against the Soviet Union; doubtless Litvinov, if he had remained at liberty, would have been able to strengthen even further the mounting “Hands off Russia” agitation.
But there was another, less obvious, reason for the British government’s action. After the revolution the bulging files of the Tsarist police fell into Bolshevik hands. At one strike this gave the Soviet government not only the names of all Okhrana agents operating abroad but also of their contacts in the British secret service. Obviously, this was highly dangerous for British intelligence. Litvinov and his colleagues, therefore, had to be silenced to prevent them from using this sensitive information.
Revolutions have a knack of uncovering the murky corners in state archives. This is equally as true of Iran as it was of Russian.
Undoubtedly, revolutionaries in Teheran will have discovered some interesting papers. These will show how the Shah’s cruel and despotic regime owed its very existence to the CIA; how America and Britain helped him to erect the panoply of his police state; and how for almost 30 years, Western support propped up this sadistic dictator.
It stretches credulity, in view of CIA subversion in various parts of the world, to suggest that a sizeable section of the American embassy staff in Teheran were not spies or CIA agents. Indeed, an interesting fact was implicit in the abortive rescue attempt; despite the detention of the 51 Americans, a network of US agents still operates in Iran.
It is fascinating to speculate what British reactions would have been if the Russians had behaved in 1918 in the same manner as the Americans did recently. Suppose a contingent of the Red Army had secretly landed in Britain with the intention of forcibly freeing Litvinov and his comrades from Brixton prison. The screams about “international piracy” and “unprovoked violation of British sovereignty” might have been even louder than the nauseating hypocrisy we hear from the politicians and press today.
 
Murky Connections
The files of the Tsarist secret police captured by the Bolsheviks after the revolution, proved to contain many surprises. They discovered an over-zealous police agent named Azev had hatched a plot which led to his employer, Interior Minister Plehve, being blown to pieces; that the same agent provocateur had even planned to assassinate the Tsar but fortuitously failed when one of his collaborators, a genuine revolutionary, dropped out of the conspiracy.
They also found out that Roman Malinovsky, a key man in the Bolshevik organisation and the leader of the Party’s deputies in the Russian Duma, had for a long time been a police agent. Similarly, in 1910, when the Bolsheviks were going through a bad patch, seven of its eight members in Moscow were also police agents, a fact that had none-too-pleasant repercussions for the eighth man.
The Tsarist state apparatus employed 40,000 spies in a desperate but vain attempt to eliminate subversion and so its files were detailed and voluminous. One murky area they threw light on was the close, intimate collaboration that existed between the Tsar’s Okhrana and the Special Branch, who, undoubtedly, did everything to assist their opposite number.
Opponents of Russian autocracy in this country were harassed and imprisoned. A trade union – the Russian Seamen & Firemen’s Union – that had set up its headquarters in London, after being outlawed in Russia, was smashed by the Special Branch and its general secretary, Anitchkine, arrested. Once the Civil War in Russia began, the British government exerted pressure an Russians still living in Britain, to enlist in the counter-revolutionary armies. Some of those who did were killed or injured, but Britain refused to accept liability and pay compensation to the next-of-kin.
This pattern of behaviour was not exactly new. In fact, Britain, at the very outset, modelled its force on its Tsarist counterpart. And how is this known? The information comes from a highly interesting source. William Briggs, the Chief Constable of Bradford, employed agent provocateurs and spies on a large scale to help him to quell Chartist uprisings in the city in 1840 and again in 1848. However, he became disenchanted with his anti-working a class role. After resigning from office, in 1851 he wrote a pamphlet, The Police Spy System Exposed, and, for good measure, got Engels’ close friend, James Leach, to publish it.
The case of William Briggs reveals that, when society is undergoing profound and deep-seated convulsions, no section is immune from the impact. Undoubtedly, the police are the most conservative, the most backward part of the working class. Still the state cannot always be guaranteed of their loyalty. In the strife-torn Britain after 1918, not only did the police form their own trade union and come out on strike, but individuals like Inspector Sye completely identified himself with the workers’ cause, addressing demonstrations, enduring hardships and even going to prison.
So, perhaps, Home Secretary William Whitelaw should not sleep too comfortably in his bed at night. How can he be certain of the continued loyalty of the men and women he is supposed to control? Who knows when a defector may not reveal the truth about the murder of Blair Peach and the other murders committed by the boys in blue?
Clearly, the lesson is easy to see. From Tsar Nicholas II to that shambling wreck, the former Shah of Iran, it is obvious that even the most elaborate police system is not sufficient to protect a social order that is fundamentally rotten.
* * *
One of the individuals employed to sift through the files of the Tsar’s secret police was the revolutionary writer, Victor Serge. His booklet, What Everyone Should Know About State Repression (New Park Publications, £1), has just been published for the first time in English, and is well worth reading. One of the lessons Serge draws is that socialist organisations have to consider counter-measures to protect themselves from state surveillance, hut at the same time not be overawed by the might of the enemy’s repressive apparatus.
 



Les Forster
Rocking the Boat: Memoirs of a Glasgow Socialist and Whistleblower
Milnagavie, 1995, pp. 69, £3.95
LES FORSTER, born in 1920, came from a working class family in Maryhill, Glasgow. He grew up on the mean streets of Clydeside, where poverty and violence were endemic. Attending an open-air Anarchist meeting kindled his interest in politics. He served a long prison sentence in the Communist Party. Eventually, the rigid discipline and mind-rotting conformity became too painful to endure.
Along with Harry McShane and a few others, he escaped from Stalinist servitude, and began a journey through revolutionary politics. This took them into cooperation with Eric Heffer and I.P. Hughes, publishing the Syndicalist journal Revolt.
When Revolt foundered on the rocks, Gerry Healy, anxious to recruit them to the Socialist Labour League, sped to Glasgow. The ever-optimistic Gerry had even obligingly written a public declaration, recounting all the virtues of the SLL, which he expected them to sign. But, alas, they were not so obliging. Further amorous advances, extending over many years, were made by the Socialist Workers Party. These, again, were rebuffed. They did not see Tony Cliff as the messiah.
Perhaps the reluctance of Les Forster and his comrades to join any of the Trotskyist tendencies partly arose because they thought that these organisations shared some of the characteristics of the Communist Party, a political line that was determined from the centre. Yet it was probably also as a result of the great importance they attached to local issues. They were usually preoccupied with purely Clydeside affairs, not with building a national organisation.
The great value of this book is the fresh light it throws on working class politics in Glasgow. The fight for better education and housing, and the struggles of the railwaymen and of the left on Glasgow Trades Council; all the time the emphasis was placed on rank and file activity, the need for militancy rather than parliament to find the solutions. Throughout, Harry McShane remains a father-figure, a leader who always espouses the doctrine of Socialist Humanism.
It seems a shame that Les Forster did not recount the final days of Harry McShane. As Les, Hugh Savage and others know better than I, Harry McShane died cursing Tony Cliff and the SWP. He thought that he had been used by them; his name would appear on billboards advertising public meetings, and his reputation would attract a bigger audience. Yet at these actual meetings, they would confine him to making a token appearance. He was there for decoration, not for a political contribution.
Harry McShane’s hostility did not stop Tony Cliff and his cronies from flying up from London to hijack his funeral. They hoped to claim his corpse for the greater glory of the SWP. However, their attempt did not succeed.
This book can be obtained from the author, 24 Keystone Avenue, Milnagavie, Strathclyde G62 6HZ.
Raymond Challinor
 



Dear Comrades
A couple of interesting facts could be added to your obituary of Bernard Dix. As a founder member of the Socialist Review Group and editor of its journal for several years, I can well recall when Bernard Dix, along with John Reekie, Ron Keating and Shirley Lerner joined us. Bernard’s membership was especially welcome. With my final degree examinations at university looming, I did not have the time required to produce a monthly journal, but Bernard did.
Bernard was then working for the TUC, getting out its monthly journal, Labour. So something happened, almost certainly unique in revolutionary politics; a revolutionary journal, Socialist Review, was surreptitiously produced at Congress House alongside the stuffy organ of the General Council.
The other fact is that Bernard’s collaboration with Max Shachtman’s organisation was much closer than your obituary suggests. He contributed many articles to both Labor Action and New International. These appeared under the nom-de-plume Owen Roberts – Robert Owen in reverse.



 


Fraternally
Raymond Challinor



 



The General Strike
Margaret Morris
Penguin, £1.00.
The Great Lock-out of 1926
Gerard Noel
Constable, £5.25.
The General Strike
Robin Page Arnot
EP Publishing, £3.50.
As May 1976 approached, the BBC became uneasy. How should it commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the General Strike? The top boys at the Beeb feared that in the potentially explosive industrial situation then – and, incidentally, still – prevailing it would be unwise to screen a lot of material showing large numbers of workers going on strike. It might give some people ideas. So the Beeb approached some members of the General Council of the TUC for advice. Doubtless not wanting workers to be reminded of the way their predecessors on the General Council betrayed the miners in 1926, the union leaders recommended the anniversary be played down. So the BBC virtually forgot the General Strike ever happened.
Another possible stratagem would have been for the Beeb to have approached Margaret Morris to have produced some programmes. Clearly, from the book she has compiled, it is certain her efforts would not have harmed the Establishment. Ingrained into her very being is the bureaucratic approach. She fails to have any sense of struggle or feel for the workers’ standpoint. When she attempts to enliven her dull narrative with some personal remainiscences from actual strikers, she relies upon a small handful of people – Vic Feather, Jim Griffiths, Will Lawther, for example – who became so remote from the rank and file that they could have been living on a different planet. Even worse, Margaret Morris lightly brushes over the General Council’s decision to call off the General Strike. From her book, you gain no idea that the union leaders may have betrayed their members.
Ironically, Gerard Noel, a son of the fourth Earl of Gainsborough, has written a better, and far more left-wing, book than Margaret Morris, who is a member of the Communist Party. He has taken the trouble to interview far more workers; he has not limited himself, as she as done, to those who reached the upper echelons of the trade union apparatus. As a result, he conveys in human terms what the struggle was like. He does, moreover, extend his narrative beyond the General Strike to the period when the miners stood alone. If you want to read an account of what happened in those seven agonising months before the miners were eventually starved into submission, Gerard Noel provides the best description so far produced.
The weakness of his book arises from his lack of political understanding. Like Margaret Morris, he greatly understimates the role of the Communist Party. It had few members, but a lot of influence. Had the General Strike continued, this certainly would have grown. The logic of events was pushing the contestants into more extreme positions. The General Council was being made to see, with increasing clarity, that the struggle was against the State. In such a situation, the moderate union leaders had no heart for continuing the fight. To have done so would have involved walking along the road to revolution.
Duncan Hallas wrote an excellent article on the General Strike in IS 88. He provided a critical evaluation of the Communist Party. In it, he could have cited what happened in the North East, where the strikers’ resistance was probably more effective than anywhere else in the country. Under a Northumberland and Durham Council of Action, which gave the orders, local Councils of Action sprang up in all the localities. These secured real power: for a time, the government had little control over what happened in the region. And who was responsible for devising the plan that achieved this remarkable success? One man, Robin Page Arnot. Admittedly, the potential power was there; he was the person who harnessed it.
Just republished is Page Arnot’s book on the General Strike. Originally got out by the Labour Research Department, it is a collection of documents from all sources. As such, it is exceedinly valuable for anybody who wishes to know exactly what was said, and in what context, during the nine days.
 



The Labour Party and the Struggle for Socialism
David Coates
Cambridge, £5.00 hardback, £2.00 paperback.
The Evolution of the Labour Party 1910-1924
Ross McKibbin
Oxford, £5.75.
DAVID COATES has written a first-rate book. A measure of his achievement is that any future study of the Labour Party will certainly have to give serious consideration to his views. Likewise all socialists will find the book invaluable, a veritable arsenal of facts and arguments to prove there is no parliamentary road to socialism. Every supporter of IS should read it.
While David Coates has undoubtedly written the best work so far on the subject of the Labour Party, this does not mean it is without flaws. I think he relies too heavily upon official manifestos. These tend to be written for a single purpose – the winning of votes – and are not necessarily the clearest indication of political beliefs. Often statements made in the heat of battle, impromptu and under pressure, reveal more accurately the underlying principles upon which political behaviour is based.
Then his book would have been further improved had he bothered to consult a greater variety of left-wing sources. Although reformism has remained the dominant trend in the British working-class, there has always been a revolutionary current inside it This left opposition has published many journals containing useful information about, and arguments against, the various Labour leaderships. To be specific, David Coates would have gained a fuller insight into the development of social democracy before the First World War had he consulted The Socialist, monthly organ of the SLP. Similarly, the Socialist Review (predecessor to the present-day Socialist Worker) contained material that would have enriched his understanding of Bevanism in the Nineteen-fifties.
His failure to have an on the ground, as opposed to merely theoretical, knowledge of the political battles he analyses resulted in him making a number of questionable interpretations of events. For example, he suggests that 1955 marked the high-water mark of the Bevanite revolt, when the Labour leaders narrowly avoided defeat on the issue of German re-armament. Yet, it is arguable that 1952 was the time of greatest left pressure. Then Tribune’s circulation reached its highest point, with the regular productions of pamphlets, like One Way Only, which had a considerable impact; the Bevanite MPs in parliament displayed their greatest cohesion and fight; and the Constituency Labour Parties were places where matters of policy were furiously debated. David Coates should remember that by 1955 the Labour left were adopting an easier option than in 1952: it involves much less courage to attack military expenditure of another capitalist state than it does the military expenditure of one’s own . country. This is particularly true when it is remembered criticisms of German re-armament were laced with anti-German prejudices, In contrast, the criticisms of military expenditure In 1952 were made at a time when British troops were fighting in Korea. This needed much more guts and had greater socialist significance.
But this leads to a more general point David Coates maintains that the Labour left is now stronger than ever before. This is a rather different conclusion to the one I reached in an article in IS 52: I will not recapitulate my arguments for likening the Labour left to a clockwork toy, gradually running down, being more and more feeble, and slow as time goes on. Let me merely say that whereas David Coates sees the Labour left influencing the decision-making process, I see it enmeshed in the party apparatus so enthralled with its parliamentary manoeuvring that it allows its class roots to wither. But if David is right and the Labour left is stronger than ever before, then I think the obvious conclusion should be that we all should be inside the Labour Party. If ...
Alas, Dr Ross McKibbin’s work does not consider wider political issues: he concentrates his attention entirely upon the electoral development of the Labour Party. Almost nothing is said about the Labour Party’s attitude to industrial unrest and the suffragettes in the period before the First World War. The indifference or hostility of Ramsay MacDonald and most of his colleagues remains unanalysed. Consequently, his book tends to be rather dry and uninteresting, not dealing with the burning political issues of the day. And he makes a number of dubious assumptions, For example, he almost completely omits consideration of the First World War period, contending that this had little influence on Labour’s future development But it was during the First World War that Labour politicians had their first taste of office. Not only did this serve to whet their appetite, but it also allayed the fears of politicians in the two traditional parties. Far from Labour leaders disrupting the class system, they showed they were a powerful force for the maintenance of the status quo. Henderson denounced workers who went on strike in wartime; he journeyed to Russia, hoping in vain to bolster up Kerensky and keep the Bolsheviks out by making a few socialist utterances; and he thoroughly supported repression in Ireland, when news reached Parliament that the wounded James Connolly had been executed by the army, Henderson led the Labour MPs in a round of cheering.
Clearly, the rich had nothing to fear from the likes of Henderson and Ramsay MacDonald. That was why, quite correctly from their point of view, they did nothing to prevent the formation of the first labour government in 1923.
 



The State: Its Origin and Function
William Paul
Proletarian Publishing, £1.25
IN THE First World War, William Paul belonged to that small band of courageous men, ‘the flying corps’ – flying away from the police and military, spreading anti-war propaganda while still evading arrest. Largely due to Paul, The Socialist appeared regularly every month and the SLP maintained cohesion and a sense of direction. Dearly, the authorities would have liked to capture him. Realising he was high on the wanted list, William Paul appears to have asked himself, ‘What would Karl Marx have done in these circumstances?’ He, therefore, took himself off to the British Museum. In those days, the British Museum does not appear to have been one of the haunts of the Special Branch, so Paul was left to complete the book under review without being disturbed.
Veteran Harry McShane, who writes the preface to the present edition, described The State: Its Origin and Function as a ‘neglected classic’. Undoubtedly, this is correct, although Harry exaggerates when he calls it ‘the only solid piece of theory ever to have been done in this country’. Not that I am wanting to decry the book: it has many virtues. First published in 1917, it shows that many of the ideas subsequently thought of as Bolshevik had been developed quite independently in Britain.
William Paul and his comrades realised that the capitalist state could not be gradually transformed into a socialist one, that it had to be smashed, and that to do this it was necessary first to build a revolutionary party. Equally perceptively, he foresaw capitalism, as class conflict grew in intensity would come to rely increasing upon the State. Far from this being a step forward, as many social democrats aver, it would merely add to the exploitation:
‘The desire to control national production, the fear of industrial unrest, and the wish to enforce discipline upon the workers will compel the capitalist class to extend state control. The bureaucrats will only be able to maintain their posts by tyrannising and limiting the freedom of the workers.’
William Paul thought this trend towards state capitalism created fresh problems in the struggle for socialism:
‘Instead of having to overthrow a system buttered by a handful of individual capitalists, the workers will be faced with a gigantic army of state-subsidised officials who will fight like tigers to maintain their status and power.’
Even so, he considered the working class could win. What was required was both political and industrial organisation: a revolutionary party to smash the existing state apparatus while militants in the factories wrested control from the capitalists and put workers’ control in its stead Many of the concepts expounded by William Paul have since become well known. It may appear strange that his book, which helped to popularise these ideas, should have been forgotten. But there are a number of reasons for this. Not written under ideal conditions, in places it reveals the scars of hasty construction. These are particularly noticeable in chapters 10 and 11, dealing with Modern Capitalism and Revolutionary Socialism. While fundamentally correct, they do not go into sufficient detail about the inadequacies of Labour reformism. That only the final couple of chapters deal with the contemporary political scene is an indication that William Paul was writing in the tradition of Engels’ Origin of the Family. He wanted to give a panoramic view, discussing the development of human society from prehistoric times right down to the present day. Certainly, this was useful. Far too many people wrongly believe society and the state are synonymous; they are not aware that for thousands of years of Mankind’s existence there has been no state in being. Moreover, when in some future age Mankind becomes truly civilised, there will again be no oppressive state apparatus.
Yet, the Engels-Paul approach does have its dangers: both of them wrote books that need modifying in the light of recent research and, more important, it is an approach which presupposes the reader has a bent for history, which many, of course, do not have. Consequently just as more people have learnt about the class nature of the state from reading The Communist Manifesto than The Origin of the Family, so in the subsequent development and expansion of these ideas Lenin’s pamphlet, State and Revolution – simple, direct, incisive – had a greater impact than Paul’s more involved statement of the same case. But this should not be permitted to detract from .the fact that William Paul blazed the trail: his work appeared in English two years before Lenin’s did.
I hope that William Paul’s book is widely read. It deserves to be. Not only does it demonstrate the falsity of historians like Walter Kendall, who claim there was no indigenous revolutionary tradition in Britain and say it was imported from Russia, but also Paul’s work has intrinsic merit. It is far easier and less painful to discover the nature of the capitalist state through reading its pages rather than from a policeman’s truncheon.

P.S. It I may be permitted to add a footnote: Lenin’s State and Revolution, jointly published by the SLP and BSP in 1919, was translated from the Russian by a talented Glasgow engineer, W.P. Lavin, who played a prominent part in the revolt on the Clyde during the First World War. Subsequently, having doubts about whether Russia was a workers’ paradise, Pat Lavin developed ideas along the lines similar to IS. In the 1950s, he contributed to Socialist Review, the precursor to Socialist Worker, before emigrating, I believe, to Australia. Does anyone know what has happened to him? He was one of the great pioneers. R.C.
 



Useful Toil
edited by John Burnett
Allen Lane, £2.50 paperback.
PROFESSOR Burnett had a bright idea. He decided to try and unearth new sources that shed fresh light on working people’s lives. Appeals in the press led to a response: he received a number of diaries and autobiographies that had apparently merely been lying about in attics collecting dust. Professor Burnett has now published a selection from them – 27 extracts that come from wheelwrights, stone-masons, miners, kitchen-maids, navvies, potters, shop assistants, and a variety of other occupations.
The result is altogether fascinating. From reading them, one can gain more insight into the pay, conditions, attitudes and leisure pursuits, sometimes of sections of the working class whose activities have largely remained shrouded in mystery.
It could almost be propounded as a law of capitalism that the notice taken of you is in inverse proportion to your contribution to society. While the antics of the aristocracy have been sedulously chronicled, little interest was taken in the poor, benighted agricultural labourer. One has only to think about the terms that were applied to the agricultural labourer in the 19th century – ‘brother of the ox’, ‘secret people’ – to gain some idea. His long hours of back-breaking toil were done in obscurity, without society knowing or caring about him. If he starved to death – say, as sometimes happened, found near a hedgerow with his stomach full of grass, then it was unlikely that the authorities would bother to hold an inquest. Only in the mid-1850s, when agricultural workers formed their own union, did the ruling class start to pay some attention.
Looking at the information he has assembled, Professor Burnett says:
‘The picture which emerges from these writings is of men and women who are materially very poor by contemporary standards, who are uncomplaining in their poverty, who lead lives of hard work but rarely expect to find fulfilment from it, and for whom the family, interpersonal relationships, and relationships with God are centrally important. Their intellectual and cultural horizons are strictly limited: very few concern themselves with national events or politics, even with local trade union or labour movements.’
This, in my view, shows the limitation of Professor Burnett’s albeit fascinating book. While I am prepared to admit that working class organisations were generally not as well supported in the 19th century as they are today, there were nevertheless many significant revolts. People were not doffing their caps to the squire all the time. Also, they did think about political questions.
Perhaps Professor Burnett’s study will stimulate some other historian to journey down this avenue which he did not enter. It would be very worthwhile if someone issued an appeal, extensively publicised, for people whose ancestors wrote their experiences of participation in radical, socialist and trade union movements to bring them forward. When excerpts were collected, it would make an interesting companion volume to the one under review.
 



‘The tradition of all dead generations weighs like a nightmare on the brain of the living.’
This quotation from Marx is particularly apt when considering the British labour movement, a movement inured with reformist prejudices. For the past 120 years – except, perhaps for a brief period after the First World War – there has been no serious threat to the existing order. The prevalence of parliamentary illusions and the acceptance of constitutional procedures effectively tethered the working class to the capitalist system.
The last time revolutionary ideas acquired mass support in this country was during the Eighteen-forties. Chartism’s significance arises from the fact that it represents both a beginning and an end. It was a beginning because, as Trotsky pointed out, it compressed into a few years the whole gamut of proletarian struggle:
‘All the basic processes of the class movement of the proletariat – the mutual relationships between parliamentary and extra-parliamentary activity, the role of universal suffrage, trade unions and co-operation, the significance of the general strike and its relation to armed insurrection.even the reciprocal relationships between the proletariat and the peasantry – were not only crystallised in practice out of the Chartist mass movement, but also found in it their answers in principle.’ [1]
Nevertheless, Chartism also represented an end: it was the last protest movement to arise before the British working class became a clearly-defined, separate entity. Within its ranks assembled a heterogeneous band of rebels, some wanting to call back yesteryear, regarding the agrarian and industrial revolutions as calamities that needed reversing, while many others accepted industrial society and sought to make it more palatable for the proletariat by re-distributing power and incomes. Professor Rudé is right to draw attention to this cleavage in Chartism:
‘There were divergent social elements, of which some looked longingly to the past and others, gropingly, towards the future. Of the first, there were the domestic outworkers, the hand-loom weavers, woolcombers, and framework knitters of the west and Midlands and the Yorkshire West Riding, who were being squeezed, uprooted, and impoverished by the new industrial system and for whom the future appeared as one of unrelieved menace and disaster. On the other hand, there were the factory hands of the new industrial areas, the cotton workers of Lancashire and Scotland, and the miners of Northumberland, Durham, and the Black Country of the midlands, for whom machinery, though by no means an unmitigated blessing, had come to stay, and who were increasingly seeking their remedies through trade unions, co-operation, and working-class association, and less and less through the old ‘natural justice’ methods of the past.’ [2]
Chartism, reflecting the social diversity of its support, inevitably spoke with many, contradictory voices. At times of crisis, such as during the general strike of 1842 and the various abortive attempts at armed uprising, the movement was never able to secure the necessary internal cohesion. Nor did it have any clear, thought-out strategy. A part of the membership, mainly the more affluent artisans, believed in ‘moral force’ and looked to Parliament to remedy their grievances. On the other hand, ‘the fustian jackets, unshorn chins and blistered hands’ constituted the ‘physical force’ wing, those who believed that only an armed uprising would end hunger and oppression.
Both these tendencies represented a dead-end simply because, given the conditions then prevailing, there was no way forward. To petition Parliament proved to be futile. It was done on three occasions – 1839, 1842 and 1848 – and each time the Commons threw out the petitions by large majorities. Yet, if that was a waste of time, then the only other course of action would result in a waste of lives. The army prudently provided a display of its sophisticated hardware to dampen the ardour of revolutionaries and give them some idea of the bloodbath that would await them.
After Chartism’s collapse, capitalists saw they must come to terms with this new force in society – the working class. While revolutionary flames might temporarily be dampened, they would re-appear in an even more dangerous fashion unless something was done to appease the lower orders. As the working class grew in numbers, so its potential power increased proportionately. The big question was: What could be done about this ‘many-handed monster’? How could the proletariat be tamed?
Far-sighted politicians understood the challenge. A Tory like Sir Robert Peel confessed:
‘I do feel that the point at which all ought to strive is to improve the conditions and elevate the feelings of the great labouring class. I tell you it is not safe unless you do it.’ [3]
Gladstone spoke in a similar vein when he said:
‘We have got to govern millions of hard hands ... it must be done by force, fraud or good will.’ [4]
Of course, the ruling class has used all three methods. Nevertheless, Gladstone was convinced that, whenever possible, it was desirable to gain the good will of the workers rather than rely upon force or fraud. For this reason, he favoured making concessions, an exercise in conciliation rather than conflict.
The period after 1850 was propitious for the adoption of this type of policy. Britain underwent a period of rapid expansion. She became the workshop of the world. Employers were concerned about maintaining uninterrupted production and, with their large profit margins, were prepared to buy themselves out of trouble. Between 1850 and 1875, real wages increased by a third. [5] For workers this came as a welcome and novel experience. It was in marked contrast to the first half of the nineteenth century, when real wages had only slightly improved – some historians, like Eric Hobsbawm, even believe there may have been a deterioration. [6]
Political expansion accompanied economic improvements. The British Empire grew, making Britain the most powerful country in the world.All sections of society basked in imperialist sunshine, convinced that they were God’s chosen people. Capitalism, the system responsible for bestowing all these blessings, appeared to be not merely stable: it also seemed natural and inevitable.
In numerous ways, the ruling class endeavoured to foster this notion. They granted reforms as a reward for good behaviour. Intellectuals, such as Beesley and Harrison, began taking an interest in the labour movement, thereby acting as a transmission belt for capitalist ideology. ‘New model’ employers, like Mundella and Lord Elcho, strived to reach an understanding with the trade unions, thus increasing the influence of the moderates. The whole emphasis was placed on involving workers in the system, both politically and economically, instead of struggling against them.
Seeming to have a stake in the well-being of capitalism, the working class changed its whole outlook. In 1870, Thomas Cooper,an old Chartist leader, visited Lancashire and compared the workers then with what they had been in the Eighteen-forties:
‘My sorrowful impressions were confirmed. In our old Chartist time, it is true, Lancashire working men were in rags by the thousands; and many of them often lacked food. But their intelligence was demonstrated wherever you went. You would see them in groups discussing the great doctrine of political justice ... Now you will see no such groups in Lancashire. But you will hear well-dressed working men talking, as they walk with their hands in their pockets, of “Co-ops” and their shares in them, or in building societies. And you will see others, like idiots, leading small greyhound dogs.’ [7]
Professor Royden Harrison also describes this transformation:
‘Between the second and third quarters of the nineteenth century, the Co-operative Movement did pass from community-building to shop-keeping; the trade unions did become less like “schools of war” and more like the workman’s equivalent to the public school ... working-class politics became less of a “knife and fork” and more of a “collar and tie” question. In the first period the Labour leadership was largely recruited from the crowded ranks of prophets, visionaries and demagogues; by the second it had exchanged these “outside” enthusiasts for “great men of business” trained into “carefulness” through the management of the substantial institutions which they controlled.’ [8]
Instead of demanding wholesale changes, workers contented themselves with ‘small deeds and humble virtues’. They no longer appluaded the inflammatory speeches of Chartists like J.R. Stephens. [9] Rather they opted for ‘revolution by a thousand modifications’, ‘the revolution by inches’ which, of course, was no revolution at all.
When such opinions prevailed, the existence of working-class organisations could prove beneficial to the system. Employers soon learnt that they had much to gain from co-operating with labour leaders. In a study of the miners’ president, Alexander MacDonald, I have shown some of the tangible benefits the employers acquired. [10] In periods of trade depression, when the owners wished to introduce wage cuts, they discovered that the proposed reduction had greater chance of acceptance by the men and less chance of a dispute arising, if it were put to them by one of their own union leaders. Likewise they were more ready to agree to new working methods when one of their spokesmen had already acquiesced. Union officials could also be used to boost morale and inculcate a more responsible attitude among the workers, getting them to eschew drunkenness and absenteeism. [10a] Furthermore, since conflict was bound to arise in industry, it was better to settle differences with union leaders, by accepted methods of conciliation and arbitration, rather than allow them to develop into massive class confrontations.
The typical trade union leader was a respectable, sober citizen, who accepted the values of capitalist society as readily as his counterpart, the employer. He knew the virtue of perseverance and thrift since he himself was likely to have got on through hard work (‘which kills no one’). Special relationships developed between employer and union official. Lord Elcho, the coalowner, used to invite Alexander MacDonald, the miners’ leader, to champagne breakfasts. A.J. Mundella congratulated himself upon the mellowing effects that had resulted from wining and dining delegates to the TUC.
This kind of behaviour yielded political as well as economic dividends. When Mundella was selected as parliamentary candidate, one of the union leaders, Robert Applegarth, greeted the news with the following outburst:
‘The Sheffield workers have selected as a candidate for Parliament one in whom they have full confidence, and in whom they believe they have a faithful representative of their interests. And who is this candidate they have selected? Is he a firebrand from among their own ranks; a blind advocate of their interests regardless of the interests of others? No; he is an employer who ... has won the position he now occupies and is equally respected by his fellow manufacturers as he is by his workpeople.’ [11]
Alexander MacDonald was even more fawning. He told a Royal Commission in 1868,
‘I think that there is not a body of 600 men in which more kind-hearted men are to be found than are to be found in the House of Commons.’ [12]
The ‘moral’ force Chartism, which believed the way forward was to influence Parliament, had degenerated, twenty years later, into the immoral grovelling before the bourgeoisie of leaders like MacDonald.
Such union officials even depended upon their own innocuousness for survival. A very interesting letter, sent from the Miners’ National Union to the coalowners in 1877, reveals the logic behind such a stratagem. It pointed out that the employers might well have sufficient industrial might to crush the union. But this might be an expensive victory. For, with the union leadership smashed, the moderation influence on the rank and file would no longer be there and it was probable that ‘a kind of guerrilla warfare ... far more hurtful to the employers’ would ensue. The letter went on to remind the coal-owners that ‘the most prolonged and most damaging struggles between employers and employed have been carried out in England by workmen not in the union beyond such union as was improvised for the occasion.’ [13] What this was tantamount to saying was that the working class had reached such a level of maturity that, whether the capitalists liked it or not, there would be some form of class organisation. All employers could do was to influence the form this organisation took and whether it was led by somebody like Alexander MacDonald or by a militant.
Hence an epoch begins in which the capitalists exert a subtle influence on the labour movement. They bring pressure to bear so that the ‘right’ – that is to say, right-wing – leaders are chosen. Never possessing the illusions of the anarcho-syndicalists, businessmen were always aware that a crucial question was who controls an organisation. In a sense, well before Lenin, they saw the importance of leadership to the working class.
Of course .industrialists secured an added bonus if they were able to make the entire work force as co-operative as the workers’ official representatives. What they desired was a pliant proletariat. Their model workman would be the kind that socialists would regard as the worst type of wage-slave – namely, the man who does not realise he is a slave: servility has become ingrained, part of his nature. But increasingly it has become difficult to inculcate this attitude, this deference to wealth among the working class. What it has meant is that employers have been faced with a perennial problem, a never-ending struggle to tame the proletariat and stamp out militancy.
Under the existing system, both sides of industry are condemned to toil like the legendary Greek, Sisyphus, who was compelled, for all eternity, to push a large boulder up a mountain only to see it roll down again. Trade unionists find themselves forced to push up their wages to keep pace with rising prices; the only thing is that, when they have drawn level, prices proceed to rise again. Similarly, employers find themselves endlessly trying to tame the proletariat; the only difficulty is that, as quickly as they weed out the militants, a new crop of ‘troublemakers’ emerge.
Nevertheless, there were periods of respite, times when the problems of the two sides of industry do not seem as pressing as they are today, when capitalist decline raises issues such as inflation and militancy in a particularly forceful manner. In the latter half of the Nineteenth Century, capitalism had greater strength: it had more manoeuvrability and power to make concessions. The result was that the ruling class was able to placate the proletariat, keeping all protest movements within definite limits: both sides accepted the existing economic system as a natural, inevitable part of things. This acceptance, at the most fundamental level, of the status quo, the failure to challenge basic capitalist beliefs, meant that the working class was content to regard itself as a junior partner in British Capitalism Limited.
It has always been the duty of socialists to acknowledge the facts as they are, irrespective of how unpalatable this may be, and Frederick Engels did not flinch from doing so. In October 1858, he wrote to Marx:
‘the English proletariat is actually becoming more and more bourgeois, so that this most bourgeois of all nations is apparently aiming ultimately at the possession of a bourgeois aristocracy and a bourgeois proletariat as well as a bourgeoisie. For a nation which exploits the whole world this is of course to a certain extent justifiable.’ [14]
Replying to a question from Kautsky, twenty-four years later, Engels still spoke in the same vein:
‘You ask me what the English workers think about colonial policy. Well, exactly the same as they think about politics in general: the same as the bourgeois think. There is no workers’ party here, you see, there are only Conservative and Liberal-Radicals, and the workers gaily share the feast of England’s monopoly of the world market and colonies.’ [15]
It was as a result of growing industrial competition from America and the Continent, causing British capitalism to lose its world ascendancy, which ultimately disrupted class amity in this country. But the rise of a movement that challenged the ruling class did not occur automatically. A socialist movement only rose through hard and relentless struggle. In some respects, it faced a situation similar to that which confronts us at present. Although we are now emerging from isolation, there was a period – roughly from 1930 to 1960 – when Social Democracy and Stalinism dominated the minds of the working class with the result that socialist consciousness was almost entirely extinguished.
 



On September 7 1940, the Conway Hall in London was packed. John McGovern MP had just started to speak. He told his audience that the war was not a struggle between Democracy and Dictatorship. It was a capitalist-imperialist war, a fight of have-empires against have-not-empires. At that moment, the air-raid sirens wailed. Then the anti-aircraft guns opened up. German bombs started dropping.
For fifty-three days, virtually continuously, day and night, the Luftwaffe pounded London.
Ordinary people’s lives were suddenly disrupted. The normal difficulties experienced by working-class families became immeasurably greater. Food shops opened less; their queues grew longer. Getting to school could be both dangerous for children and stressful for the parents. Trying to go to work could be hazardous: it could involve long hours of standing in vain at a bus stop, exposed to bomb and bullet, waiting for a bus that may have been cancelled or re-routed because of enemy action. And, of course, after arriving at work, there was no guarantee of getting home again. Bomb craters, fires, streets cordoned off, no transport – these were a few of the possible obstacles to be surmounted.
Nor would home necessarily be a secure refuge. Many of the worst raids happened at night. Once the air-raid warning had sounded, families would scurry off to whatever shelter they could find. Public protection remained exceedingly inadequate. Despite many building workers being unemployed, few deep underground shelters had been built. Admittedly, there were a greater number of brick-built shelters, situated above ground in the highway, that afforded a little protection from flying debris for persons trapped by a surprise attack. Most people, however, either had to make do within a flimsy Anderson shelter, which they dug themselves in the back garden, or crouch beneath kitchen tables. Popular pressure, an illegal campaign largely led by the left, forced the authorities to keep the tube stations permanently open. Thousands bedded each night on the platforms. Others, less fortunate, spent their nights sleeping under railway arches or in sunken warehouses. One of the most notorious of these was at Tilbury, where up to 14,000 people regularly dossed down, despite being disturbed by hawkers selling their wares and prostitutes plying their trade. On the Isle of Dogs, an American journalist found 3,000 people with only eight vile-smelling improvised toilets. [1]
But Britain was a class-divided society. Not everyone had to endure these hardships. The American journalist, already mentioned, went from the Isle of Dogs to the Dorchester Hotel. There he discovered the management had converted the cellars into expensive luxury shelters. Nine peers slept there each night. One of them was Lord Halifax, the foreign secretary. Throughout the night, he stayed well-supplied by a waiter with his favourite brand of whisky. [2] Their wives and lady friends tended to frequent part of the subterranean complex that had been turned into a games room. Other wealthy people arranged for their own private shelters to be built. The most expensive belonged to Mrs. E.M. Rawcroft, 31-year-old millionairess, the daughter of Sir Edward Wills of Imperial Tobacco. Built in the garden of her mansion at Torbay, Devon, it cost £24,000 and never needed to be used. Costing a small fraction of this, yet still a sign of gross extravagance, was the Soviet ambassador’s refuge from aerial attack – a mere £1,600. It aroused the socialist wrath of the New Leader: undiplomatically the editor reminded readers of Maisky’s counter-revolutionary past in Tsarist Russia as a member of the Black Hundreds, of the fact that he only joined the Bolsheviks after the October Revolution had been victorious, and he suggested Maisky’s London shelter symbolised his privileged position that differentiated the Stalinist bureaucracy from the working class, both in Britain and the Soviet Union. [3]
Still greater safety than any shelter, however deep, however well protected, could provide, would be secured by adopting a simple expedient: sail away on a magic carpet of money to the peace and tranquillity of the United States. In his diary, Chips Channon, the heir to the Guinness fortune, described the scene at Euston station where he, along with other affluent parents, bade farewell to their offspring, as they boarded the boat train and began the journey to the New World: “There were a queue of Rolls Royces and liveried servants and mountains of trunks. It seemed that everyone we knew was there.” Clive Ponting, in his book on 1940, gives an impressive list of those leaving this emerald isle, set in a silver sea, for safer climes. All sections of high society were represented: Lord Mountbatten sent his wife and children, cabinet minister Duff Cooper his son. John Julius Norwich, city magnates like the four Rothschild families and Sir Charles Hambro dispatched their children. There were even individuals who gained political fame – or should it be notoriety? – in a time yet to come: Paul Channon, destined to be Mrs Thatcher’s Minister of Transport; Jeremy Thorpe, to lead the Liberal Party; and Shirley Williams, to become a Labour cabinet minister. An estimated total of 17,000 children left this country. The intelligence services confidentially confided to the government that a million parents would have availed themselves of the opportunity to send their children abroad, given the opportunity – or, rather, they should have said, the money. [4]
The existence of two Britains could not be illustrated better than by the fact that canine lives were more valued than most children’s. The Scottish Daily Express announced that the aristocrats of Scotland’s dog kingdom had been evacuated to the United States and the colonies. Not wanting to run the risk of rare strains being wiped out in air raids, many famous prize winners and most of the older pedigree stock left “for the duration of hostilities.” [5]
Evacuees from working-class homes did not receive such cosseted treatment. Dispatched to country areas, they were often unwelcome visitors, interlopers overstraining already inadequate facilities. Not only did the influx aggravate existing education and housing problems, it brought in individuals not adjusted to their new habitat. Some of the new arrivals, of course, came from problem families. In his novel, Put Out More Flags, Evelyn Waugh has a cunning character who traipses some disreputable, dirty and delinquent evacuees from house to rural house, threatening to billet them on the unfortunate occupants unless he is given an inducement to do otherwise. It was a way, to put it in legal parlance, of gaining money by menaces. Yet, even well-behaved evacuees could constitute a threat: coming from unhealthy city slums, they might spread disease.
The tensions engendered quickly aroused conflict. In September 1939, a Tory MP complained about the verminous evacuees from Glasgow arriving in his constituency. This immediately evoked a furious outburst from George Buchanan, the Labour M.P. for the Gorbals: “You are taking the fathers to fight, yet you come here and make villainous, slanderous statements about their children.” The ILP Member for Glasgow Camlachie, Campbell Stephens, then joined in, providing instances of the shabby treatment often meted out to evacuees. He cited the example of 150 mothers and children, dumped in a cold village hall and given straw or dirty mattresses to sleep on. Only two toilets were provided. Yet nearby was the Duke of Argyll’s castle virtually empty. [6]
The authorities found themselves assailed from all sides. The rural recipients, clamorously complaining, demanded the evacuees’ removal. Equally the evacuees themselves were often unhappy, not adjusted to their new environment and without the money for the train fares to visit their parents. The parents grumbled because they did not have the time or money to visit their offspring, as well as about their treatment. When in the first months of the war the massive air raids that were expected failed to materialise, the majority of evacuees started trickling home. As a result, most children had returned to the danger zones when, by the autumn of 1940, the German air raids began in earnest.
In some official quarters, the onset of the blitz in the autumn of 1940 occasioned signs of panic. Hurriedly, fresh evacuation plans were devised. One of these was to move children from London to Brighton. This was rather as if the British generals in the Crimean war had ordered the cavalry from their barracks and to gallop in the direction of Balaclava … for their own safety! Dr. R.D. Worrall, Brighton’s Medical Officer of Health, on his own initiative, produced a leaflet denouncing this lunatic move. The leaflet stated that the evacuation only increased the danger to children since Brighton was “in the front line”. For his troubles, Dr. Worrall – who, incidentally, was a pioneer of British Trotskyism – was fined £100 under a defence regulation and dismissed from his post as Medical Officer of Health. But then, for officialdom, two embarrassing things happened. First, Churchill, on a well-publicised visit to Brighton, used the same phrase as Worrall, boasting that he had come “to the front line”. The other was that tragically a German bomb exploded in a cinema during a children’s matinée, killing many of the evacuees. Dr. Worrall was reinstated and his fine reduced to £5. [7]
At another southern city – Portsmouth – morale seems to have plumbed the depths. Ordinary people’s depression grew as they became accustomed to seeing the affluent leaving the city each night, not wanting to experience the dangers of the bombing. Their exit was made more conspicuous by the fact that only one road connected Portsmouth to the mainland. However, attacks did not happen simply at night. Often solitary German aircraft, largely for nuisance value, would fly over to disrupt the city’s economic activity. In order to lessen the impact of these irritating intruders, the authorities refused to open the air raid shelters unless the threat was considered to be a serious risk. But their judgement could be flawed. On one occasion, a solitary aircraft appearance proved to be merely the prelude to a full-scale raid. In terror, people ran to the shelters. These remained closed. Crowds clamoured to break open the locks as the police, under orders to keep the shelters closed, baton-charged the anxious multitude. A riot ensued. As a consequence, many were injured and two men killed. Later, a protest meeting was held. A resolution was passed condemning police violence and calling for all shelters, both public and private, to be kept open. Captain R.E.B. Beaumont, Tory Member for Portsmouth Central, led a protest delegation to the Home Office. [8]
Sudden loud explosions, the result of anti-aircraft fire, caused people to rush to Bethnal Green underground station and resulted in the worst civilian disaster of the blitz. A woman with a baby, it seems, apparently slipped on the badly-lit winding staircase. Those following piled on top of her, within a minute creating a mass of dying humanity. All told, 173 lives were lost – 27 men, 84 women and 62 children. An official inquiry was held, but the Home Secretary kept its findings secret. A bland and unilluminating explanation was provided to Parliament: “The effective cause of the disaster was that a number of people lost their self control at a particularly unfortunate time and place.” But survivors dispute that there had been any panic. They pointed to the narrow entrance to the stair-well, a hazard that local people had, months before, drawn to the attention of the Home Office. It may be that the authorities, opposed to the occupancy of underground shelters anyway, felt no compulsion to make entry easier. Even so, it left the local populace with a smouldering hatred. In 1993, a commemorative plaque was unveiled at the station’s entrance. The Sunday Observer, giving many facts about the tragedy, headlined the article Bitterness lingers at worst civilian disaster of the war. Until then, the Home Office had kept the cause and extent of the disaster secret. One of the survivors, Mrs Faull, recalled how the government sought to stifle protest: “My father went to 10 Downing Street with a petition. He was marched off by soldiers with bayonets.” [9]
The bombing also served to draw attention to other grievances festering away in British society. Opposed to sexual discrimination, Campbell Stephens complained in Parliament about the big difference in compensation awarded to men and women. A man totally disabled by enemy action received 32 shillings and sixpence a week whereas a women worker only got 22 shillings and sixpence. Even worse, he argued, was the treatment of the totally disabled, housewives and old persons, who received nothing whatsoever. In official eyes, they made no economic contribution to society and hence their loss of limbs merited no compensation. [10]
The plight of old people in air raids was liable to be dire. They had never been included in any evacuation plans. Yet, in air raids their reduced mobility made it more difficult to reach the security of shelters. The blind, deaf and senile may easily be terrified, disorientated and unable to comprehend what is happening. Fortunately for many with these handicaps, they lived in working-class areas, where a strong community spirit and tradition of mutual help existed.
Working-class dwellings, situated close to factories and other military targets, were more likely to be bombed than middle-class estates, located in the leafy suburbs. Even so, sometimes the latter did receive the unwelcome attention of the Luftwaffe. Then the authorities tended to apply a discriminatory policy. Kingsley Martin, in the New Statesman, observed the differential treatment:
“People dug out of their shelters in the West End are immediately taken off by taxis to hotels, given hot drinks and warm beds in an underground shelter – so they should be. Some of these people in East London wandered about for 13 hours, having lost all possessions in the world except what they stood up in, and were directed to a series of addresses which involved as much as eight miles walking before they were cared for.” [11]
Newspapers carried headlines like Homeless East Enders don’t know where to go and Abandoned us – cry London’s homeless. In the capital an estimated 80,000 people had been made homeless by the bombing. Some were forced to sleep at Epping Forest in the open air. Herbert Morrison, the Home Secretary, was exhorted to compile a register of empty dwellings. But he seemed more concerned to retain the men of property’s goodwill, not the people’s. Some landlords still expected tenants to pay rents – indeed some were even increased – when the houses were unfit for human habitation. In face of official inactivity, the Left called upon direct action: Take over the shelters and houses of the rich shouted the New Leader headlines. [12] Squatting, though rarely mentioned in the Press, became regarded by many as the answer to homelessness, even to just overcrowding. By 1942, an estimated 40 per cent of Britain’s housing stock had been destroyed or damaged. The bad pre-war housing problem had become immeasurably worse. [13] The temptation to occupy unoccupied dwellings grew greater. Either because its slender resources did not stretch to it or because it did not wish to court the unpopularity that would inevitably accompany a policy of confrontation, the Home Office did not resort to evictions. Squatting was largely overlooked.
The government was worried about the growth of nests of sedition, bands of angry and disaffected individuals who challenged the basic tenets of capitalist society. In particular, the authorities feared what might happen in air raid shelters, where many huddled together, spending many hours when conversations take place unsupervised as well as uncensored. Long boring nights in subterranean blackness might drift along dangerous revolutionary lines. The fears were not entirely groundless. People started taking matters into their own hands. In some places those taking refuge published their own magazines, such as the Hampstead Shelterers’ Bulletin. Partly through these publications, but also through discussions with others elsewhere facing the same problems, a network of contacts throughout London grew up. In November 1940, a conference was held. A total of 79 delegates from 50 shelters decided to form the London Underground Station and Shelterers’ Committee. They elected Harry Ratner, a Trotskyist, as chairman, and Alfie Bass, of the Communist Party (later to become well known on television) as secretary. [14]
The Committee’s immediate task was to protect existing shelters from official incursions. Smarting from the fact that people, by direct action, had illegally occupied underground stations, the authorities wanted gradually to claw them back. They attempted to carry out evictions under the pretext of “clearing the passages and stairs.” They also sought to re-establish their authority and regain the initiative by settling any disputes between inmates that might arise. Aware that once this outside interference had secured a foothold there was no saying where it would end, the London Committee set up self-governing local shelter committees where they did not already exist. The inmates themselves democratically formulated the rules. Marshals were elected to enforce them. Order came out of chaos. The squalid scene, already mentioned, that was witnessed by the American journalist at Tilbury had been completely transformed. Tom Harrisson, the pioneer of Mass Observation, reported that the community had become self-regulating. He found “laws enforced not by police and wardens (who at first proved helpless in the face of the multitudes), but generated by the shelterers themselves.” [15]
As what had started out as a random assortment of individuals began to develop a feeling of collective identity and comradeship, they acquired a sense of their own power. People had to be listened to and their demands taken seriously. When they called for improvements to existing shelters, they struck a responsive chord throughout many parts of society. Even The Times’ correspondent echoed their views: Guy Clutton-Brock said the shelters were
“lacking dryness, warmth, satisfactory sanitation arrangements, adequate lighting and ventilation, washing facilities, bunks, canteens, health services, children’s corners and, in fact, all those things which, it would appear, could easily have been provided during the last three months, while the greatest evil is overcrowding, which can only be relieved by the provision of additional small communal shelters for which there are plenty of sites available.” [16]
Bumbling incompetence appeared to lurk behind official attitudes. The failure to construct sufficient shelters seemed inexcusable: in July 1940 57,000 building workers remained unemployed. Government spokesmen then blamed shortages, bottlenecks that impeded progress. But the public’s mood grew increasingly restive, unwilling to be fobbed off by governmental blarney. An angry audience at a Midlands civil defence conference heard a novel method of overcoming the shortage of cement. E.W. Barnes, the Bishop of Birmingham, bemoaned the fact that in this country the people did not possess the draconian powers Hitler did in Germany. Amid cheers, he told delegates that the Nazi authorities would not tolerate the cement shortage that existed here: they would simply shoot six manufacturers; those who remained alive would then quickly ensure abundant supplies of cement were always available in future. [17]
Poor quality bricks and shoddy construction also proved to be a problem. By a piece of skulduggery, the officials of Bradford City Council arranged meetings at times when the four ILP representatives could not attend. The four excluded councillors resolved to use the extra spare time by conducting their own survey of the city’s street shelters. When they pronounced many of them sub-standard, the Lord Mayor dismissed it as just alarmist talk. So the ILPers enlisted the assistance of scientists from Bradford Technical College. Their investigation revealed 28 shelters with soft bricks, four with loose bricks, 46 with soft mortar and 13 with structural weaknesses. Two things then happened that underlined their findings. First, one of the shelters simply collapsed when there were no Luftwaffe aircraft within 100 miles of Bradford. Second, Professor J.B.S. Haldane, one of Britain’s most eminent scientists, visited Yorkshire. He was pictured in the local press crushing a brick taken from a Bradford shelter in the palm of his hand. Bradford’s embarrassed Lord Mayor then wrote to the four ILP councillors congratulating them “for substantiating the suggestion that certain shelters in Bradford have been jerry-built.” [18]
Much worse than shoddy shelters was to have none at all. Regarded as beyond the range of the Luftwaffe, Plymouth’s civil defence remained an extremely flimsy, half-hearted affair. Its citizens were quite unprepared when the heavy German raid occurred. Widespread confusion and panic was still gripping the city – the authorities, too shocked, had taken no steps to evacuate the population – as the Luftwaffe delivered four more heavy blows. Completely overwhelmed and under-resourced, the authorities feebly attempted to evacuate women and children in private cars, many of which ran out of petrol thereby clogging the exit roads. Slightly before the final raid, Whitehall officials arrived to survey the scene. They found many survivors, cold and dazed, sleeping out rough on the moors. Assessing the tragedy in the Daily Herald, an angry Richie Calder wrote: “Somebody should be impeached for the cruel chaos which followed the Plymouth blitzes.” He suggested that Herbert Morrison and Ernest Bevin, two of the Labour ministers in the coalition government, were suitable candidates. [19]
Sleeping out, clad only in a nightie, or a few hastily snatched clothes, was a greater ordeal for the very young and the very old. This especially applied where deprivation and poverty had already undermined bodily well-being. In more northerly cities, accustomed to winter temperatures below freezing-point, a further dimension was added to the suffering. In Glasgow, for example, Dr. Nora I. Wattie, the child welfare officer, reported that infantile mortality had been 93.1 per 1,000 live births in 1938; from January to June 1941 the figure had shot up to a staggering 131.5. [20] Doubtless air raids like the one lasting nine hours one night, with one of five hours the following night, helped to push up the numbers of those who died as an indirect consequence of the bombing as well as the casualties of the bombing itself. Terrified families in the Gorbals, huddled in the squares, surrounded by the large tenements, could hear their world crashing down around them. Even the all-clear did not end anxiety: there remained unexploded bombs among the rubble.
To bolster civilian morale, government propaganda boasted that German cities were being bombed, too. In a recent raid on Hamburg, there had been what was termed “a bombers’ moon”: the full moon completely illuminated the city, allowing the pilots to pick out their targets easily while it kept them hidden, in the inky blackness above, from the enemy anti-aircraft batteries. But, as the Glasgow Forward pointed out, exactly the same weather conditions prevailed when Glasgow received its severe poundings. The paper thought it was sure the working men and women of both Glasgow and Hamburg could agree at least on one thing – a resolution to abolish the moon. [21]
In fact, the British people generally were far from wholeheartedly endorsing a vindictive let-the-German-bastards-have-it attitude. The areas that tended to be bloodthirsty were those that had not themselves experienced bombing. An opinion poll that appeared in the New Chronicle, of 17 May 1941, reported that 45 per cent of people in inner London wanted reprisal bombing of Germany, whereas 47 per cent did not. By a small majority, the “Noes” had it.
In the destruction of the blitz, three significant attitudes developed among working people.
First, there was the growing sense of community, the feeling of mutual dependence, a new realisation that one another’s problems and aspirations were exceedingly similar. In air raid shelters, people’s barriers broke down; strangers became friendly with persons they had never dreamt of even speaking to under normal circumstances. In an emergency, a person you did not know may risk his (or her) life to save yours. No wonder a sense of solidarity, of common purpose, emerged from this baptism of fire.
If a feeling of the great us grew up among people of varying skills and status, there was, secondly, the contrary feeling of them, a hatred for those not making sacrifices – indeed, waxing rich – from the misfortunes of others, the black marketeers, the fat cats, those who had positions and influence. The ruling class, who were responsible for the present mess and whose bumbling ineptitude had led to the war, seemed to be largely immune to any of war’s ill effects. This widely-held feeling may have been ill-defined. Nevertheless it was strongly held.
Third, through painful experience, people began to understand that they had to do things themselves. No Labour leader would back any agitation. If you occupied an underground station, then it was no use appealing to Labour leaders. A prominent Labour right winger, Herbert Morrison, as Home Secretary, remained responsible for the civil defence fiasco. He was assisted by the darling of the Labour left: Ellen Wilkinson was not merely Morrison’s understudy, she also became his lover. No Labour leader ever backed the illegal occupation of underground stations. No Labour leader ever backed illegal squats. Yet they occurred. People were resorting to do-it-yourself politics.
These were the rebellious seeds – nay, revolutionary seeds – that henceforth plagued British capitalism. The impact is revealed in later industrial and political unrest. It also created an attitude of critical hostility which pervaded society, resulting, among other things, in the defeat of Churchill-backed candidates in by-elections held in what had been rock-solid Tory constituencies.

Notes
1. Andrew Sinclair, War Like a Wasp: the Lost Decade of the Forties, London (1989) p. 55.
2. Sunday Express, 8 September 1940. Also, Andrew Sinclair, ibid.
3. New Leader, 7 November 1940 and 3 May 1941.
4. Clive Ponting, 1940: Myth and Reality, London (1990), pp. 140–1.
5. Scottish Daily Express, 4 July 1940.
6. Forward, 22 September 1939.
7. The Pied Piper, Rats, Left Book Club (1942), p. 88. Also, interview with Dr. Worrall, of Seven Oaks, 12 July 1992. Pied Piper was the nom-de-plume of J.P.W. Mallalieu.
8. New Leader, 7 December 1940.
9. Observer, 20 February 1993.
10. House of Commons, 23 October 1939.
11. New Statesman, 5 October 1940.
12. New Leader, 19 September 1940.
13. Plebs, February 1945.
14. New Leader, 16, 30 November and 28 December 1940.
15. Tom Harrisson, Living Through the Blitz (1978), pp.118–9.
16. The Times, 22 December 1940.
17. New Leader, 7 December 1940.
18. Ibid., 4 April 1941.
19. Daily Herald, 3 May 1941.
20. New Leader, 29 November 1941.
21. Forward, 18 March 1941.
 



I was involved with the organisation from the first meeting. If I remember correctly that was October 1950.
There were 34 members. But that really exaggerates the size of the organisation. A number of the members had been in the Open Party faction of the Revolutionary Communist Party (RCP) – that is, they did not want the RCP to fold up – and were really burnt-out. These people quickly dropped out.
Our biggest branch was Birmingham with six members.
I lived in Crewe and was associated with the Manchester branch.
I had been convinced for some time that Russia was not socialist and not, as the Trotskyists said, a workers’ state. I accepted the theory of state capitalism and had put the idea forward in an article which appeared in Left, a socialist discussion journal, in June 1948.
There were articles produced before then putting the state capitalist point of view. The first I have seen is in Peter Petrov’s book The secrets of Hitler’s victory, produced in 1934. Petrov was a veteran revolutionary, wounded in the 1905 revolution and subsequently a leading official in the Soviet government. When he fell out with Stalin in the 1920s he went to live in Germany, where he experienced the betrayal of Stalinism and reformism first hand. He developed his theory of state capitalism on the basis of his close knowledge of both the Russian state and the Comintern.
Dr. R.D. Worrell, a pioneer of British Trotskyism, wrote an article in Left in 1940 on the same theme.
Cliff’s book on state capitalism appeared in its original form in the RCP’s internal bulletin in 1948. So these ideas were being discussed.
I first met Cliff in December 1947 at a meeting of the Thames Valley RCP. We basically agreed on the theory of state capitalism. Our difference was that Cliff believed it was important to argue the case inside the Trotskyist movement. He believed it would be possible to convince them of the theory – and, in fact, at the time people like Jock Haston were toying with the idea.
I disagreed with Cliff because the Trotskyists were so dogmatic. Their workers’ state theory was the Ark of the Covenant and they were not about to abandon it. I thought that a new generation, with new ideas, would have to emerge from outside Trotskyism.
I think Cliff’s theory emerged in response to what he saw as the failure of Trotskyism. Remember that Trotsky had predicted that the Second World War would lead to either workers’ revolution or the degeneration of the working class. And that had led James P. Cannon, in 1945, to claim the war had not ended. The orthodox Trotskyists, with their rigid dogma, could not accept that the great man’s predictions had been wrong.
In the US the Johnson-Forest tendency – C.L.R. James and Raya Dunayevskaya – grappled with the lunacies of the Trotskyists’ position. They produced a lot of material developing the theory of state capitalism. I had a letter from Raya saying she met Cliff in 1946 at the Fourth World Congress. They agreed she would devote her time to study of the philosophical implications and that Cliff would look at the economic issues.
When the Red Army went into Eastern Europe and murdered large numbers of socialists and smashed their organisations the Communist Party said that socialism was being built and the Trotskyists said that workers’ states had been formed. This is all very difficult to come to terms with if you believe that the workers can only come to power when the working class is consciously in favour of socialism and fighting for it.
The theory of state capitalism was central to understanding what was happening in the world.
Cliff was absolutely correct in his economic assessment of post-war Britain. The Fourth International believed that there would be a slump. Cliff, backed by the RCP majority faction, advanced the theory of the permanent war economy. In a semi-Keynesian way, through vast military expenditure, capitalism could avoid crises of over production – at least in the short run. This was denied by individuals like Mandel and Grant.
Healy compounded the error by back-breaking activism.
Cliff played a useful role in standing up to a problem Trotskyist organisations – particularly those associated with Gerry Healy – have always had: the idea that the revolution was just around the corner. The Trotskyists did not have the perspective of the long haul. They wore people out. It was like trying to run a marathon as if it was a 100 meters race.
And the problem with the Trotskyists was not just a capitulation to Stalinism – they capitulated to reformism too. Just before the breakup of the RCP Jock Haston came to stay with me in Crewe. He argued that the Labour government, which had nationalised 20% of the economy, was transforming Britain towards a socialist society. I thought this was nonsense.
The same relations at the point of production still existed in the nationalised industries.
Haston went over to reformism and subsequently became Education Officer for the right-wing union, the ETU.
But even Healy made concessions. His paper Socialist Outlook claimed that the Bevanites “gave the lead the workers want.” Healy even said that the only thing wrong with Labour was its foreign policy.
We had no illusions in people like Bevan.
Tony Cliff has made a very useful contribution over many years to the socialist tradition. If I have any criticism of Cliff is that in factional fighting there are no holds barred. For example in the late 1960s Cliff brought into IS a group called Workers’ Fight around Sean Matgamna. He did this to deal with the libertarian wing of the organisation which people like Peter Sedgwick and myself were associated.
There were a whole series of events like this. And it stems from his view of the Bolshevik model of the party as the be-all and end-all for socialist organisation. But the problems which face us in Britain are not the same as those which confronted Lenin in Russia in 1917. Capitalism has changed since 1917 and Lenin’s old formula can not be applied mechanically.
 



In his review of John Saville’s book on the capitalist state (February SR), Mark Thomas spews out genuine 100 percent bourgeois nonsense. He says in April 1848 the authorities prevented the planned march from Kennington Common to parliament and consequently Chartism collapsed.
But this is a myth, deliberately peddled in orthodox history textbooks.
What actually happened was that, after the Kennington Common demonstration, the government’s position grew increasingly precarious. Economic conditions worsened. Links between Irish nationalists and Chartists were forged. Numerous revolutionary conspiracies were hatched. Around Whitsun, the threat to the ruling class reached its height.
Mark Thomas will find this if he turns to my book. Dealing with Chartism and trade unionism, I use the life of W.P. Roberts, a firebrand lawyer active in both movements, as a peg around which to weave the account. Alternatively, he could read David Goodway’s excellent book, London Chartism.
Both these works are written from a revolutionary standpoint, in the tradition of Reg Groves. So many of the other history books are besmirched with a reformist-Stalinist porridge.
 



A group of economists, purporting to be Left-wingers, have been and continue to be staunch advocates of an incomes policy. The argument of this article is that their support for the Labour Government’s incomes policy was and is a grave error; and, that the whole context in which discussion about incomes policy takes place, leads to fundamentally anti-working class conclusions. Finally, within the capitalist system it is impossible to have a socialist incomes policy administered by the powers-that-be.
Among these economists, John Hughes and Ken Alexander wrote the first pamphlet, A Socialist Wages Plan (1959), which raised the idea of incomes planning for serious discussion within the Labour Movement. There they envisaged that the national income would cease being divided by the traditional method, the struggle of class forces. Instead they wished to devise a committee, representing government, employers and trade unions, to reach agreement among themselves on how to allocate the country’s wealth. It was hoped that, as the years passed by, the committee would gradually increase labour’s share at the expense of capital, a painless, peaceful, if slow, method of ultimately achieving the socialist goal.
At the time, the Hughes-Alexander plan encountered strong opposition. Eric Heffer observed that the authors ‘did not call for an increase in nationalisation and expanding public ownership as part of the policy.’ Hence, the basic structure of society would remain unchanged: ‘The economy is capitalist. Capitalist laws apply, and certainly will continue to apply, even in the event of a Labour Government, certainly if it merely buys shares in the various industries and fails to expropriate the owners. The British State is a class State, created by and for the British ruling class.’ It was therefore inconceivable, claimed Heffer, that the State would be so obliging as to fashion and implement an incomes policy designed to expropriate precisely that class whose interests it was there to defend. So Heffer regarded the Hughes-Alexander proposals as unrealistic and impractical. ‘We have had too many false dawns,’ he wrote. ‘I’ll settle for the old thinking based on class struggle.’ [1] Another critic, Michael Kidron, adopted a different line of attack. He thought the Hughes-Alexander plan for a 3 per cent annual rise in wages was extremely modest, comparing unfavourably with what was actually being attained in some capitalist countries. In Japan wages had risen by an average of 7 per cent a year, and in West Germany, by 8 per cent. Kidron could have added that the mere 3 per cent conceived by Hughes-Alexander closely resembled the figure for growth given by R.A. Butler, the Tory leader, when he talked of doubling the standard of living in 25 years in 1953-54. Aneurin Bevan ridiculed Butler’s ‘most modest and cautious’ estimate, ‘a tortoise crawl of 3 per cent per annum.’ He went on to warn trade unionists that Butler hoped, by creating the vision of a future land of plenty to curb present wage demands; Butler’s remarks were ‘a cold douche to those workers who think they ought to have a substantial improvement in their living standards now or very soon. In effect, he was saying to them, “It is over the hills and far away.”’ [2]
Bevan’s strictures apply with equal force to Hughes and Alexander. Indeed, probably more so. For, whereas Butler, a wealthy industrialist, is treated with natural suspicion by trade unionists, Hughes and Alexander are likely to receive a sympathetic hearing. When they call for moderation, support for the Government’s incomes policy and depict ultimate prosperity if the policy is permitted to work successfully, then there is a greater chance of workers responding favourably, curtailing their wage demands. Yet, although Hughes and Alexander embroider their writings with socialist phraseology, the kernel of their plan entails profoundly unsocialist priorities. The assumption that the State, big business and trade unions can collaborate on the distribution of the national cake, and that the trio’s melody will be pleasing to working-class ears, does not bear critical examination. To make this assumption involves making a mistaken analysis of the roles in society of social democracy, the capitalist class and the trade-union bureaucracy. Since the same error is committed by all ‘Left’ advocates of incomes policy, it may be worthwhile considering these three roles separately and in more detail.
First, the role of social democracy. Hughes et al place great faith in a Labour Government’s ability to transform the economy. They see their own function as that of pushing such a government as far left as possible. ‘Probing the limits of reformism’ is the fashionable phrase. But they do not ask: historically, is there any evidence, from any country at any time, that a Social Democratic government has significantly increased the working-class proportion of the national income? From every part of the world, wherever a Labour Government has been in power, the answer seems to be negative. In Sweden, where social democracy has had more than 30 years of uninterrupted rule, profit-margins are high and even the most mentally unstable Swedish capitalist does not have the least fear that the social democratic rulers will ever change the status quo. The same is true of Labour Governments in Britain. Actually, Hughes and Alexander, in their pamphlet, give abundant statistical data on how monopoly profits, and profit margins generally, soared during the Attlee Administration. [3] Yet, at the same time, real wages fell when Cripps introduced his wage freeze. [4] The next Labour Government provided few higher hopes. In 1957, Harold Wilson, then Labour’s shadow Chancellor, wrote a pamphlet, Remedies for Inflation. It was given the party’s official insignia of approval: published by Transport House, with a foreword by the leader, Hugh Gaitskell. Wilson makes it quite clear in the pamphlet that the next Labour Government has no plans to limit profits. On the other hand, he calls for ‘something approaching a Crippsian approach to the whole issue of wage restraint.’ [5]
John Hughes chose to disregard Harold Wilson’s repeated avowals of capitalist orthodoxy, and continued to hope a Labour Government would make great strides towards a socialist economy. In the manner of the 18th century French philosophes, progressive ideas had only to be expounded for Right Reason to prevail. Hughes did not analyse social democracy, to investigate the powerful forces within it that militate against radical change. Unwittingly, Hughes expresses the quandary of social democracy in the following way:
‘Labour cannot be satisfied in its democratic and social objectives unless it makes significant advances in organised social control over the economy; to a large extent this must be at the expense of the present power of massed capital. Yet, at the same time, the State must work with the private sector, must system-matically cooperate with profit-making industry in “managing” current output and the pattern of future development.’ [6]
He accepts that this necessitates ‘compromises to win business confidence.’ [7] Here we see the two aspects of Labour – reformism and conformism. The logic of reformism, as Hughes says, requires making significant inroads into ‘the present power of massed capital.’ Conformism, on the other hand, the consequence of acting within a capitalist framework, involves ‘compromises to win business confidence.’ Now these two things are mutually self-exclusive: either win capitalist confidence and have no reforms, or introduce reforms and encounter growing capitalist hostility. But the Labour Party has never been a revolutionary party. Its aim has always been small – not drastic – change. So, tied to capitalism and with no plans for a new system, a Labour Government adopts the road to conformity; as Wilson has shown in recent months, reforms are put in the deep-freeze when capitalist necessity dictates. This leads to Hughes’ second fallacy – about the role of the capitalist class. The wages pamphlet assumed that hard-headed businessmen were so naive, so lacking in understanding, that they would cooperate in the running of an incomes policy designed to whittle away ‘their’ incomes. But past experience shows how chary businessmen are to collaborate with a Labour Government even when it is basically working in their interests. The Attlee Administration flew the white flag – not the Red Flag – in the City of London, and, during the economic crisis of its latter years, attacked workers’ wages rather than capitalists’ profits. Yet, the business community showed a peculiar, sort of gratitude and deliberately aggravated the balance of payments problem. An official Labour Party policy statement admitted that ‘of £645 million of private capital which left Britain during 1947-49 only £300 million represented genuine investment in new projects. Some £350 million was “hot” money quitting Britain because its owners disliked the Labour Government’s policy of fair shares (?! – RC) or were engaged in currency speculation.’ [8] After 1949 the flow of money abroad became a torrent. Businessmen sent a further £315 million overseas and stockpiled, often unnecessarily, to the sum of £610 million. Thomas Balogh, who quotes these figures, commented:
‘The next Labour Government will not have at its fingertips those levers, inadequate even though they were, which it held between 1945 and 1950. It then inherited an almost intact war economy, hardly distinguishable from a fully planned system: this legacy of existing wartime controls far offset in value the handicaps due to war damage and losses. Even so, the means which the Government possesses to discipline and direct private enterprise were far from completely effective. The control over capital issues did not prevent investment from differing widely and wildly from estimates. The powers taken under the 1946 Act over the banking system proved grossly inadequate. The Court of the “nationalised” Bank of England was more hostile to the purposes of Labour than its “private” predecessor. Mr Gaitskell’s instructions to restrict credit could be, and were, disobeyed with impunity, and necessary cuts in imports could not be enforced for months. In 1951, conclusive proof was given that the enemies of Labour still held the economic power to produce, for Labour, a political crisis ... The fall of Labour was brought about largely by a speculative flight of capital and equally speculative purchases, for stock, of imported goods. Government controls were inadequate to forestall or prevent this attack due to lack of “confidence.” There is no need to talk in terms of capitalist “conspiracy;” the instinctive response is quite sufficient to upset a Labour Government.’ [9]
Mr Balogh, now economic adviser to the Wilson Administration, continued prophetically:
‘The next Labour Government will be infinitely more vulnerable. The process of “liberalisation” begun before 1951– the stoking of the bonfire of controls lighted, so ill-advisedly, in an effort to secure press popularity – has been pursued with gusto by the Tories.’
Another instance of business hostility to the Attlee Administration was chronicled by John Hughes himself. He showed that the steel barons tried to wreck plans for steel nationalisation. Top management refused to assist in turning the industry over from private to State hands: ‘a political strike ... for the specific purpose of sabotaging an Act of Parliament,’ the Minister alleged. [10]
As John Hughes says,
‘steel nationalisation raises sharply the problem of the resistance by entrenched industrial power groups to measures which directly challenge their power and threaten to put it in the hands of bodies responsible to the community. The hidden premise of much Labour Party thought on the matter has been that such groups will acquiesce in their loss of power when confronted by a government with an electoral mandate for change. Now, although Labour leaders condemn as unconstitutional any industrial action by workers directed against government policies, it is by no means clear what will be their reaction when confronted with such action by a business power group. Apart from the formal, constitutional issues raised by such action, steel nationalisation is very revealing for understanding the political power of monopoly capitalism, and for the light it throws on the reaction of a Labour Administration to such a challenge.’ [11]
Later, Hughes added,
’The history of steel nationalisation seems to suggest that we cannot glibly dismiss the doubts of those who believe the British industrialists might use their industrial power and political influence to prevent the loss of that power,’ [12]
although, he added, the steelowners knew they would get away with it because of ‘the weakness displayed by a Labour administration in tackling such a major power group.’ [12] The steel article was written in 1957 when Hughes was much more Left than today. To justify his present position, he must explain why he thinks capitalists as a whole will now behave differently to the steelowners in 1950. Is there any chance capitalists would assist in implementing an incomes policy that resulted in them being out of pocket? Inescapably, one is driven to the conclusion that a gradual transformation of society, the slow diminution of profits, is not even a remote possibility. Finding their wealth threatened, capitalists would indulge in unconstitutional action, sabotage and, if necessary, turn to fascism. [13] R.H. Tawney was correct when he said you can peel an onion, leaf by leaf; you can’t strip a tiger, claw by claw. But, what is more surprising in the Hughes-Alexander schema is their vision of trade-union leaders as intrepid tiger-tamers, people anxious to make drastic changes in society’s structure. Surely the gentlemen of Congress House are pillars of The Establishment, the quintessence of respectability, who would never wish to see the profit-making system harmed? As Britain develops towards State capitalism, they become increasingly part of the State apparatus. An intermediary between management and men, their essential role is to keep production going at all costs and, where possible, speed it up. From the ruling class standpoint, the trade-union bureaucrats play a vital role as industrial peacemakers and also as purveyors of capitalist ideas to the workers. To think otherwise is tke third major mistake in the wages plan.
To sum up, the Hughes-Alexander-type incomes policy is unrealistic. It is impossible to envisage a committee composed of government officials, businessmen and trade-union leaders amicably agreeing to redistribute the nation’s wealth more equitably. The government would not propose it; the businessmen would not allow it; the trade-union leadership would not want it.
* * *
But it is not simply that the Left economists who supported an incomes policy were wrong or muddle-headed: a number of significant consequences flow from their position. Without exception, they initially supported George Brown’s economic policy. None of them foresaw that, as the economic crisis deepened, the Wilson Administration would try to solve the country’s problems at the expense of the working class. In the columns of Tribune, they acted as invaluable allies of George Brown, protecting his Left flank. Ever since Wilson’s return in 1964, this journal, along with others, argued that workers must prepare defensive positions, ready to defend their shop stewards’ and other rank-and-file organisations from a combined attack from the employers and the State. From the beginning we did not doubt that a Labour Government would preserve capitalism. The prevalence of widespread illusions about Wilson’s role in the class struggle, the goodwill and loyalty workers often showed to him, made him particularly dangerous. In contrast, incomes policy supporters visualised an alliance between trade unionists and the Labour Government achieving considerable progress. Writing about what they described as the incomes policy’s ‘positive character,’ Barratt-Brown and Royden Harrison said:
‘Just 100 years ago, Marx, in his inaugural address to the International, hailed the 10 Hours Bill and the Cooperative Movement as “victories of the political economy of labour over the political economy of property.” The scene is once again set for a decisive victory for the political economy of Labour.’ [14]
In this jubilant frame of mind, Barratt-Brown and Harrison saw George Brown’s Declaration of Intent as, ‘among other things, opening the way, especially at enterprise level, to a major challenge to management prerogatives.’ [15] Another of this group, Dr Henry Collins, argued that the Labour Government’s effectiveness depended on its gaining trade union support. [16] Consequently, he tried doing his own, personal bit. He sought to get the usually progressive Fire Brigades’ Union to back the Government’s economic policy, but he got a dusty answer from militant firemen. [17] Thwarted, he turned his attention to the Declaration of Dissent, a pamphlet published by the five technicians’ unions. Here, Collins chided them for their militancy. Appealing to them to back Wilson, he said:
‘While much can be achieved through industrial action, it is only through planning and socialist legislation that it is possible to make inroads into capitalist privilege.’ [18]
So, presumably, Collins believed Wilson’s Government might make inroads into capitalist privilege. He went on to liken the five unions’ approach to that of Enoch Powell and warned that the alternative to an incomes policy would be mass unemployment. [19] (In fact, they do not now appear to be alternatives but concomitants). More recently, Dr Collins has commended Callaghan’s ‘Breakthrough Budget’ and favoured a six-month incomes and prices freeze slightly before Wilson introduced one, [20] and John Hughes attacked Tribune for criticising the National Plan. [21]
* * *
The full character of such attitudes becomes apparent when they are placed in the context of the Government’s prices and incomes policy. It takes a peculiar blend of naivete and self-deception to believe this policy has the remotest connection with Socialism. John Hughes et al have immense skill in blinding themselves to the mounting evidence of its intrinsically capitalist character:

– The Prices & Incomes Board’s terms of reference. Government spokesmen have repeatedly emphasised they see nothing wrong with profit-making. Every official utterance has avoided the slightest hint that the policy is aimed at redistributing incomes from Capital to Labour. Tacitly, it is accepted that the present pattern of the distribution of wealth, where one per cent of the population owns 42 per cent of the wealth, will continue indefinitely. Whilst the Labour Party, in Clause Four of its constitution, embodies the principle on which a socialist incomes policy would be based, the Wilson Administration operates as if this Clause did not exist. The incomes policy is not designed to give workers by hand and brain the full fruits of their labours.
– The Composition of PIB. The Board’s 9 members are overwhelmingly hostile to workers’ interests. Its chairman is an ex-Tory MP, Aubrey Jones, former chairman of Staveley Industries Ltd and Director of Guest, Keen & Nettlefolds Steel Co Ltd. He has publicly stated that the Board thinks that, to increase industrial efficiency, it is necessary to obtain a greater degree of inequality. [22]
– The Conduct of the Board. So far, all its efforts have been directed at keeping wages down, particularly the most poorly-paid workers, like bakers and railwaymen. Never has the PIB taken action against profit-levels. Surely this type of behaviour speaks for itself. In a fight, if a third man seems always against you, and never against your adversary, it is legitimate to conclude he has lined up with your enemy. The PIB is this third man: It has squarely placed itself on the side of capital and against labour in the class struggle.
– The Effects of the Incomes Policy to date. In 1965, the first year of the incomes policy, workers’ real wages declined. An International Labour Organisation report shows that only in Britain and three other countries – Ireland, Hungary and South Korea – did workers’ purchasing power diminish. Elsewhere, in every industrial country, workers grew more prosperous. [23] Likewise British industrialists grew more wealthy. The Financial Times index shows that declared dividends rose by 12.8 per cent.
– Likely future effects of the Incomes Policy. The present freeze is designed to tilt the balance in favour of profits and against wages. Frozen wages are lost forever; profits are simply stored away, to be paid later. But this attempt to keep down wages, far from a temporary expedient associated with the current crisis, seems to be a long-term objective of the incomes policy. Extrapolating from statistical tables in The National Plan, some have deduced that the Government wants the workers’ share of the national income permanently reduced. [24]

But the incomes policy has other implications. It is not merely designed to affect the distribution of wealth, but also to alter relations at the point of production. Aubrey Jones himself made the absurd claim that in industry ‘supreme power is no longer at the top but at the bottom.’ [25] The Board wants to restore the unchallenged authority of management and lessen the power of workers. This involves attacking shop-steward committees and other rank-and-file organisations. Yet, Hughes and Alexander support this approach, and it follows from their analysis. For an incomes policy requires the centralisation of decision-making. To allow workers at this or that factory to interfere with the plan would ruin the plan. So the powers of stewards’ committees to extract wage concessions, above those agreed at national level, have to be eliminated. This is an obvious corrollary of the incomes policy, as clearly understood by economists of the bureaucratic Left as by Aubrey Jones: only when all wage increases arise through nationally conducted negotiations will trade-union leaders’ power over their members be secure. But ‘Left’ economists encounter opposition when they put this line. [26] Frequently, nationally agreed wage rates are very low; it is the local factory agreements that bring them up to a tolerable level. Moreover, national trade-union leaders are often unresponsive to pressure; rank-and-file militancy has little influence on them. It is the shop stewards that spearhead the struggle for increased pay. Yet ‘Left’ economists, consciously or unconsciously, add their mite of support to the campaign against them. Barratt-Brown and Harrison may complain, ‘It is no part of our intention to throw out the shop steward with the wage drift.’ [27] But the two are inseparably linked. Most of the shop stewards’ influence is derived from their ability to achieve monetary gains; stripped of this they are virtually powerless. Another move to curtail shop stewards is to restrict their rights to raise grievances about working conditions. At present most unions prudently have rights of consultation over speed-up or new working arrangements. They are thereby able, at least, to limit exploitation and usually to keep factory life tolerable. But Hughes and Alexander want these safeguards bartered away for a little extra money:
‘Where trade unions bargain away the protective devices and restrictive practices that have set limits to productivity improvements in many industries (”bargaining away the rule book” as it has been somewhat critically called), they are entitled to expect considerable tangible improvements in the wage bargain.’ [28]
What this means, in practice, can be seen at Fairfields’ shipyards, Glasgow, where Ken Alexander sits on the board of directors. A new agreement, signed in May, abolishes all direct representation of Fairfield workers. They can take no action over victimisation, job-protection, bad conditions, speed-up, etc. On the men’s behalf, the unions have committed them not to indulge in stoppages, overtime bans, go-slows, or ‘other limitations on production.’ The shop stewards are participating in work-study, productivity classes, production committees, and have aligned themselves with the management in a drive for increased output. The convenor stated publicly that he sees himself in his new post, not as a workers’ representative, but as a link-man between management and workers. With all their defences dismantled, as Peter Bain quite correctly points out, ‘the Fairfield workers can expect to see their interests increasingly ignored.’ [29] Alexander himself testifies unwittingly to this fact. In his pamphlet, quoted above, he talks about considerable wage increases to compensate for ‘bargaining away the rule book.’ But the Fairfield men got no such compensation. He told this year’s Scottish TUC summer school that wages at Fair-field’s shipyard were ‘lagging behind increases in productivity.’ This, he said, was necessary for the firm’s survival, but he hoped the disparity would be corrected in two years’ time. [30] Apparently, Ken Alexander seeks to guide industrial relations in this country along the road taken in the United States. The Fairfield set-up looks remarkably like the description some American socialists provide of the situation in some factories there:
‘The trade-union apparatus acts as the bodyguard of capital. Conducting all negotiations with management, processing all grievances through its elaborate grievance procedure, it sits at the bargaining table in a hierarchy of posts parallel at every level with that of management. In an American plant the shop steward or the committeeman represents not the workers, but the union apparatus. He is bound by the elaborate contract governing all issues of production which the union leadership sign in return for wage increases, pension plans, etc. The committeeman is responsible to the union and to management for the carrying out of this contract.’ [31]
John Hughes also appears to favour this type of development. He is a great advocate of package deals, the long-term contracts fashionable in the States. If British unions fail to adopt this kind of arrangement, Hughes says, it ‘would be damaging to forward planning of the economy.’ [32] (Alas, he does not explain whose economy.) But what is likely to happen, as long-term contracts spread throughout British industry, is probably a further spread of the American pattern. The introduction of long-term contracts in the US received universal acclaim from capitalist and union hierarchies. C.E. Wilson, president of General Motors, hailed the five-year settlement as allowing the company ‘to run our own plants,’ and as ‘the union’s complete acceptance of technological progress.’ Union leader Reuther hailed the settlement as a ‘tremendous step forward ... stabilising labour relations.’ But what it meant to the workers was described by a General Motors’ employee. In the early days, before this type of arrangement, he says that
‘if a worker had an argument with the foreman, the foreman would try his best to settle it. The foreman never wanted the worker to call the steward. He knew the steward would defend the worker. The workers used their strength against the company, even if it meant going out on strike. The union leaders were forced to go along with them. They depended on the strength of the workers. The feeling of solidarity was close and felt by the average worker ... (However) today, the steward spends practically all of his time in the office on supervision, or walking around with his arms around company officials. They have hardly any time to talk to the workers unless it is election time. They agree with the company on most of the differences between workers and management. When a worker has a difference with the foreman today, the foreman will say, “Call the committeeman.” He knows which way the committeeman will act.’ [33]
As capitalist production relations grow more tense, unions become increasingly involved – not in expressing workers’ views – but in controlling and disciplining them. They are essential to capitalist survival, a second foreman for whenever production breaks down. Long-term contracts further this assimilation. Union officials interpret and enforce the contract; less initiative remains with the shop-floor. It is also beneficial to the manager because it permits him to estimate labour costs reliably.for years ahead. On the other hand, it leaves the workers without protection should technological changes occur, or if the cost of living should rise dramatically. Nor are they assured their wages will keep pace with the rise of wage-levels in other industries. [34]
Bureaucratic economists are not worried by this possibility. Indeed, it fits in well with incomes policy doctrine. Essentially, this requires decisions to be made at the top, by leaders of both sides of industry, while the workers remain docile. Consequently, John Hughes et al. write to influence policy-making at the top. They see the working class as an object to be manipulated.
* * *
The errors of the ‘Left’ economists stem from a misconception about capitalism. They regard planning and State control per se as progressive. They welcome the tendency in every capitalist country for the State to play a growing part in the economy. It supervises and co-ordinates investment, supplementing private with public where the former is inadequate. It takes over and runs industries whose inefficiency and technological backwardness impairs the functioning of the whole of capitalism. It helps to discipline the workers. The State is now the most permanent and powerful influence in capitalism – the system could not survive without it. When Barratt-Brown and Harrison write,
‘Enoch Powell and the employing class understand how fatal it is to capitalism to treat incomes, not as subject to market forces, but as the proper object of social planning and control,’ [35]
they are making a grave mistake. Enoch Powell may hanker for a return to an earlier phase of capitalism, but not the ruling class as a whole. Industrialists, in fact, understand it would be fatal not to have incomes planned and controlled. Major companies plan their investment for years ahead. Naturally, this is extremely hazardous: millions of pounds are committed to projects that might easily be wrecked by unforeseen developments. It lessens the risk considerable if one important imponderable– labour costs–can be reliably estimated. Hence an incomes policy becomes a necessity for capitalism. Far from being a lever, as Hughes et al fondly imagine, for slowly transforming the present economy into a socialist one; it is a central control for maximising exploitation.
This can be shown in another way. It is only possible to conceive of incomes policies with one of three objectives:

to redistribute wealth from labour to capital;
to retain the status quo, so classes get the same share of the national cake as at present; or
to redistribute wealth from capital to labour.

The first is unacceptable to socialists since it increases inequality and diverges further away from a classless society. Likewise with the second, sometimes euphemistically referred to as a ‘planned growth of incomes.’ If we envisage, for the sake of argument, that incomes were to double in a given period, then, the man with a million pounds would have two millions while the old age pensioner, now with £4 a week, would have a princely £8. So the second policy would only serve to magnify existing inequalities. Socialists of widely differing views would find this quite indefensible. As Bernard Shaw once pointed out, ‘The moment you begin to think of our present sharing as a fixture, you become a fossil. [36] The third alternative is impractical under capitalism for three reasons. First, the ‘commanding heights of the economy’ are in the hands of Capital and it would not hesitate to use its immense power if ever its interests were threatened. Second, profits are the life blood of capitalism. Gradually diminish them, and the system is slowly strangled. Investment tapers off, out-of-date machinery is left unreplaced, and the country’s competitive position in world markets declines. Third, Britain’s position in the world would become impossible if it gradually tried to lessen profits. The maintenance of sterling as an international currency requires that short and long term capital be attracted to Britain. This can only be done by maintaining the profit-making system. No investor is likely to invest with an international banker who discourages profit-making.
For these reasons, the third type of incomes policy – the only one socialists can support – can never be implemented within a capitalist system. The kind of gradual, bureaucratic transformation beloved by Hughes et al is a chimera. There can be no substitute for a complete change – public ownership with workers’ control – carried out all at the same time. The class struggle is the only means to attain this end.
 



Permanent Revolution
Sigmund Neumann
Pall Mall, 50s.
The author contends that while totalitarian regimes have existed in the past they have always been regarded as temporary constructions, there to cope with a given emergency, and to be supplanted when the difficulty has gone. But today totalitarian governments are built to last. Herr Neumann thinks this distinction arises from the special conditions encountered by contemporary democratic government. It finds itself unable to give society direction, cohesion, or a sense of purpose. From the ashes of democratic failure, the vulture of totalitarianism arises. Herr Neumann buttresses his argument with a mass of interesting data (and an extremely valuable bibliography is appended). But his book is unsatisfactory, for he fails to distinguish clearly between the various types of totalitarianism, to relate them to the class basis of society, or to give a satisfactory answer to the problem of how to combat encroaching dictatorial power. It is quite inadequate to write, ‘A new social vision will be needed’ (p.309) or to suggest that if, by self-denying ordinance, we do not discuss contentious questions, democratic unity will stand a greater chance of being preserved.



Deterrence and Strategy
André Beaufre
Faber, 30s.
Annihilation and Utopia
Errol E. Harris
Allen & Unwin, 45s.
I am writing this review during Mental Health Week, with grave personal doubts about my own sanity. My difficulties began when I read Mr Beaufre on the prospect that politicians might ‘humanise nuclear war’ (p.76). Matters grew worse as he told me about those benighted and befuddled individuals who want nuclear disarmament; as Mr Beaufre says, ‘they could not be more wrong’ (p.98). Then, when he told me of the necessity of countries threatening each other with weapons of mass destruction – ‘multilateral deterrence’ was his snappy phrase – continuing right into the 21st century, I relapsed into permanent paranoia.
Mr Beaufre is one the gentlemen, like Mr Kahn, who has worked out the moves and counter-moves of nuclear confrontation along lines similar to a game of chess. Unfortunately, it is, by its very nature, a game that contestants will only play once. The dangers are uppermost in Mr Harris’s mind. He writes clearly and persuasively about the almost certain annihilation that would be triggered off by a nuclear war, even if started in a limited way. He sees, as the alternative to disaster, mutual compromise and the creation of an international world order.



The First Hundred Days of Harold Wilson
Anthony Shrimsley
Weidenfeld, 30s
A new genre has been created: the book, usually written by a highly professional journalist, describes a political event in minute detail. It tries to combine the thrills of the sports’ page with the vicarious delight acquired from reading the gossip columns and thereby knowing the goings-on in high society. This type of book eschews any serious consideration of political issues. The author does not analyse events; he contents himself with a camera-like recording of them.
The Making of a President, a blow by blow account of the Johnson-Goldwater contest, was followed by a book, in a similar vein, on that close-fought match between Wilson and Home. Mr Shrimsley has now written what is, logically, the follow-on: describing how the victor is using the spoils. Interesting, lively, readable, Mr Shrimsley’s book leaves me wondering about one thing: how could the blurb call it ‘thought-provoking?’






Ray Challinor reviews Barbara Taylor’s book Eve and the New Jerusalem, and argues a controversial case about women workers in the nineteenth century.



* * *
Barbara Taylor has written a good book, the first serious study of socialism and feminism in the nineteenth century. She has rescued from obscure oblivion a clutch of courageous women – Margaret Chapellsmith, Emma Martin and others – who were prepared to defy all persecution in order to state their message. They denounced emerging capitalism. The industrial revolution left in its wake countless dead and maimed workers, but even those lucky enough to survive had been compelled to endure degradation, exploitation, the denial of freedom. Moreover, they went on to point out that, while this was the lot of the majority of men, women suffered a far worse fate. The answer, they argued, both for men and women, was the creation of a socialist society, based upon freedom and equality. This entailed a complete transformation, not only in economic and social, but equally in sexual relations. For them, socialism was a doctrine of total human liberation.
 
Fatal weakness
The positive side of these Owenite feminists is explained exceedingly well in this book. Where Barbara Taylor’s work is less satisfactory is when she needs to take the scalpel of criticism in hand, revealing the deficiencies in their political standpoint. Perhaps because she belongs to the Stanislavski school of historians – so engrossed in her study that she has almost become a latter-day Owenite feminist herself – she fails to see the fatal weakness: Eve might have a glorious vision of the new Jerusalem; she had not the faintest notion how to take the first step towards getting there. Barbara Taylor conveys the impression the movement just fizzled out after the collapse of the Queenwood community experiment. This however, is not correct.
The causes lay much deeper. Like Robert Owen himself, these women believed in the all-powerful qualities of human reason. The same principles applied in the social sciences as in the pure sciences. Just as in physics, for example, any individual, irrespective of class, colour or nationality, will accept, say, Boyle’s law, similarly the Owenites believed, by patient explanation, everybody could be got to see the evils of present-day society and the need for socialism. But I do not accept this view: I do not consider, even if I could put the most powerful arguments in the world, I would be able to persuade the likes of Sir Campbell Fraser, head of the CBI, to become a revolutionary socialist.
Thinking of his big, fat salary, not to mention his recent increase, he is likely to conclude capitalism was not too bad. In other words, golden ties of economic self-interest link this kind of person to the established order. By the same token the worker, enduring deprivation and suffering under the present system, will be more receptive to calls for capitalism’s overthrow.
Yet, the Utopian socialists rejected this conclusion. Robert Owen always hankered after the rich and powerful, urging them to come in and build the new society. Cooperation to him meant class collaboration, as the title of an organisation he formed – Association of All Classes of All Nations – implies. He did not regard the working class as the essential ingredient for change. For this reason, he remained aloof from the developing trade union movement. Barbara Taylor, relying upon the old studies of G.D.H. Cole and the Webbs disputes this contention; however more recent historical research has made it abundantly obvious that the Grand National Consolidated and the other unions of the 1829–34 period were only Owenite in name. As Professor A.E. Musson remarks: ‘Robert Owen was never really interested in trade unions as such; he regarded them as futile and hoped to convert them to his schemes of co-operative socialism.’ While this approach was wrong in the 1830s, it became disastrous in the 1840s and 1850s, when trade unions had achieved more strength and stability.
One mistake leads to another. The failure of the Owenites to realise the paramount importance of the class struggle, their failure to become involved in the bread-and-butter struggles of the working class, helped to give them an erroneous understanding of the role of the state. They did not see it as the bosses’ state, constantly striving to assist the employers against the workers, and consequently the overwhelming majority of Owenites did not join the Chartist movement. One looks in vain for the involvement of Owenites in the revolutionary struggles of those times – the Newport uprising, the 1842 general strike, the attempted insurrection of Chartists and Irish Confederates in 1848. Yet, as state papers amply show, it was these events that alarmed the ruling class, not the setting up of co-operative communities in Hampshire.
 
Distinctly different
In his classic, Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution (vol. 1, p. 183), Hal Draper refers to the very great indebtedness owed by the author of Das Kapital to the Chartist experience. He writes: ‘In general, the influence of left Chartism, then the most advanced proletarian revolutionary tendency in the world, on the maturation of Marx and Engels has been undervalued.’ Of course, it did not end there. Julian Harney’s Chartist journal, The Red Republican, first published The Communist Manifesto in English, its translator was Helen MacFarlane, of Burnley, a remarkable woman, who wrote articles herself under the nom-de-plume Howard Morton. But she does not even merit a mention from Barbara Taylor, whose book concentrates upon Utopian socialism rather than scientific socialism.
The two schools of thought are distinctly different. The approach of one is static, the other dialectical; the one argues in terms of abstract principles, the other regards truth as concrete; the one sees education as the driving force of change, the other sees education as merely a part, albeit an essential part, in the class struggle. People who hold the latter position are exceedingly reluctant to make general propositions, claiming them to be true at all times and in all places. However, Barbara Taylor does err in this direction. She maintains that women today should have the same employment prospects as men; to deny them this, she quite rightly says, helps to perpetuate their subordinate position in society. Ergo, she argues, the same proposition was equally valid in the nineteenth century. But, surely, may not a move that can be progressive in one context be reactionary in another?
 
Conditions for women
In my opinion, there was nothing inherently progressive about women working down the mines in early Victorian Britain. Typically, at the Wigan collieries of Lord Balcarres – incidentally, his great-grandson is now a Tory MP – women laboured 12 to 14 hours dragging coal to the surface. Belted round the waist, with chains running between the legs – an unpleasant business if you happened to be pregnant – they received a penny for every three tons of coal they hauled out. In the same way Engels, in his book on 1844, did not comment favourably on the fact that only 96,599 out of a total of 419,590 operatives in the British textile industry, less than quarter happened to be adult males. Nor did Marx refer kindly to the gangs of agricultural labourers, many of them women, who wandered around Lincolnshire and East Anglia: ‘women and children, when once set to work, tend to work till they drop (as Fourier well knew), whereas the adult male labourer is usually shrewd enough to economise in his labour, power.’ Later in Capital, he writes the gangs are ‘making the adult male labourer superfluous’.
The first effective measure to restrict women’s work was the 1842 Mines Act. This was generally welcomed by miners. William Cloughan, leader of the Scottish miners, told a national union conference at Newcastle how much more civilised conditions were in the North East coalfields, where female labour was not used, compared to Lanarkshire, where it was. Both Marx and Engels appear to have endorsed this view. Clearly, they could well have been wrong. Perhaps they should have organised protest demonstrations, carrying banners that read: ‘Repeal the 1842 Act – let Mrs Marx work down the pits’. But somehow I think they were wise not to do so.
It must be remembered the position of women was rather different then. To produce two children there had to be six conceptions. Most wives had more than two children, however, so they were regularly having children, still-births or miscarriages. Add to this the drudgery of housework: Monday was washday, the whole day would be spent over the mangle. Another day would be devoted to baking. And so on. It is in this context that Engels’ remarks must be considered: ‘The employment of women at once breaks up the family; for when the wife spends 12 or 13 hours every day in the mill, and the husband works the same length of time there, what becomes of the children? They grow up like wild weeds ...’ As for women in the pits, Engels wrote: ‘The women seem to suffer especially from this work, and are seldom, if ever, as straight as other women. There is testimony here, too, to the fact that deformities of the pelvis and consequent difficult, even fatal, child-bearing arise from the work of women in the mines’.
 
Altered attitude
It is worthwhile mentioning the changes that have occurred since the 1840s in the position of women, significant differences in life-situation that justify an altered attitude to the question of female employment. These include the shortening of the working day, the less physically arduous nature of most work, the much wider use of contraception, the smaller size of families, the installation of labour-saving devices in the home, and the involvement of males – admittedly still on a grossly inadequate scale – in household chores, hitherto regarded as an essentially female preserve. All these factors (and many others) create the material pre-requisites for the call for sex equality to be made on a firmer foundation.
It is helpful to visualise these changes as part of a wider process. Throughout its entire existence, capitalism has relentlessly developed the means of production. In doing this, ironically it establishes the material prerequisites for its own destruction. For whereas in a primitive society, unable to produce sufficient food and clothing to go round, there has to be a division into haves and have-nots – the necessary basis for socialism not existing – this is no longer true today. The poverty, poor housing and malnutrition in Britain now result from a failure to harness the country’s productive resources satisfactorily rather than their inadequacy. Yet, so long as these evils exist, women will bear an unfair share of this misery. This means that the struggle for socialism and sex equality are inextricably intertwined.
 



It is a pity Ann Rogers and Colin Sparks had not studied the British coal industry before they rushed to pen a letter attacking me. Their defence of women (and children?) working underground is a mish-mash of misleading statements and errors.
On two points, however, they are perfectly right. The first is that the initial impetus for the 1842 Mines Act came from individuals deeply imbued with Victorian morality and, second, that progress for working people comes through developing their own separate, distinct, class organisations.
Ann and Colin would find these propositions advanced in considerate detail if they consulted the book The Miners’ Association: A Trade Union in the Age of the Chartists, of which I am co-author. In it we maintain the Shaftesbury report, graphically describing the horrors of coal mining not only for women and children but also for men, had the effect of showing the coal owners in a highly unfavourable light while the controversy surrounding the report helped to widen miners’ mental horizons, making them realise that their own local problems were not unique but basically the same as miners elsewhere and could only be resolved by national organisation.
Two years later, the 1842 Mines Act was passed. Insofar as this restricted the supply of labour relative to the demand, it helped to give the colliers’ trade union greater economic muscle. The Miners’ Association grew to become the strongest working class organisation in Victorian Britain. So unwittingly – and this sometimes happens – what started as a scream of moral outrage helped to promote, from the capitalist standpoint, an unexpected and alarming development.
Ann and Colin wrongly suggest the 1842 Act was passed because of employers’ fears that, if women continued to work underground, the next generation of miners would possibly not be reproduced. In those times, however, all demographic studies show colliery communities had the highest birth rate of any occupational group.
Equally wrong is their contention female miners no longer suited the needs of the coal industry. Rather it was the coal owners’ leading representative in Parliament, Lord Londonderry, who argued certain seams were uniquely suited to female labour. He claimed that without them the quantity of coal mined would go down and the price would go up; since Britain’s industrial progress depended upon cheap and plentiful supplies of coal, these do-gooders were threatening the country’s entire existence with their silly measure.
Coal owners in Parliament, to a man, resisted the legislation. Their arguments have a somewhat familiar – may I say Thatcherite? – ring to them. They argued in terms of the national interest, of having the freedom to choose employment and of parents’ right to do what they considered in their children’s best interests. They hated the idea of Whitehall snoopers nosing round their collieries, believing in privatisation rather than public control of mines inspection.
If I were Ann Rogers and Colin Sparks, I would be rather disturbed by the company I kept. Let me challenge them to give me a single quote from the progressive camp – Chartist, trade unionist, miner’s wife, Marx or Engels – that comes out in opposition to the 1842 Mines Act. By the same token, can they cite any coal owner who wholeheartedly backed the measure? Currently, I am writing my fourth work on the coal industry, specifically relating to industrial law between 1830 and 1870, so, if they have discovered something I haven’t, it will be of great interest.
But in any case, whatever the response of Ann and Colin to this challenge, there still remains for them my final and fundamental point. Material being determines social consciousness. I recall reading recently that in 1900 the typical American wife did 100 hours of housework a week and was pregnant or breastfeeding a baby for 16.4 years of her life. To the best of my knowledge, nobody has produced comparable figures for colliers’ wives of the 1840s in Britain, but it would seem reasonable to assume they were as great, perhaps even greater.
When Ann Rogers and Colin Sparks talk about organising women miners in the 1840s, it is important that they understand the obstacles there are to it – 60 or 70 hours of physically exhausting work underground, often a long walk to and from work, 100 hours of housework, the cares and troubles of the children. On top of all this, our two comrades expect these overworked women to drag themselves out of the house again to a union branch meeting. It is more than Dick Turpin, on his famous ride to York, asked of his horse!
Yet, without organisation, there can be no resistance to oppression: women, like everybody else, remain simply fodder for exploitation.
 



In this period of housing shortage, rising prices, and industrial discontent, with the fear of unemployment and war ever present in our minds, it is hard to recall the enthusiasm and high hopes that accompanied the return of a Labour Government in 1945. Why has this mood changed? what has happened to make so many of the Labour Party’s supporters disillusioned and pathetic? Why is the Government confronted with continually mounting discontent on all sides?
Any attempt to answer these questions makes an appraisal of the Labour Government’s policy imperative. Even assuming that the confidant predictions of the Labour leaders have been fulfilled that the “peaceful revolution” of which Herbert Morrison boasts had already been accomplished, it would still be necessary to draw up a balance sheet. The success-story of the Labour government would then be a guide to the Labour Movements elsewhere where they still needed to struggle against capitalism and colonial oppression. For social transformations are not achieved by speeches. Neither are they achieved by hard world alone. They can only occur when a party understanding the economic processes operating in society takes full control and changes them.
Without this knowledge of the economic system every attempt to change the existing social order must fail. Any such attempt is as futile as that of a quack doctor attempting to perform a major operation without the benefit of an elementary knowledge of physiology, and, usually, will produce even more disastrous results! It was no accident that Lenin often stressed that without Socialist theory there can be no socialist practice, for theory is the motor of progress. When the theory is incorrect, the machine splutters, jerks and, eventually (as in the case of both the ILP and RCP) comes to a halt.
We must, therefore, pay meticulous attention to theory. The validity of each theory must be tested and re-tested, revised and improved in the light of further information. Basically, it should perform three functions:


interpret past events in a convincing manner;
provide a sound basis for current activity;
and, lastly, give some indication along which lines trends are likely to develop.


The working class, in the course of its long struggle for better conditions and a new social order, has accumulated a vast store of experience – Marxism and revisionism – with Fabianism as the anglicised version of the latter. As the Labour Government bases itself upon Fabian theories and attempts to apply them, it is important that Fabianism must first be discussed.
Fabianism must be considered in conjunction with the period of capitalist expansion at the end of the last century when the theory was originally developed. Monopoly capitalism was gradually superseding private capitalism, and imperialism was beginning to emerge. Colonial exploitation and the discovery of fresh markets gave capitalism a period of relative prosperity. Class antagonism seemed to slacken, capitalist production expanded, and even the working class received a few crumbs of what accrued through this increased prosperity.
It is not surprising, therefore, that doctrines originating during this period were imbued with optimism. It was during that period, for example, that Herbert Spencer postulated his theory of the “inevitability of progress”. he envisaged mankind’s struggle as one against superstition and ignorance, which would eventually succeed through the dissemination of knowledge. Final victory would be achieved when the world was populated by walking editions of the Encyclopaedia Britannica!
Fabianism, a child of this age too, was equally naïve, equally optimistic. Basing themselves on a superficial view of reality, the Fabians decided that every class conflict could be settled in an amicable drawing-room manner. Capitalism would become more and more antiquated and ineffective. At the same time, the working class, because of their newly acquired knowledge, would begin to advocate Socialism. Socialism would then be tried out in the more inefficient sectors of industry. Both the working class and the capitalists would soon realise how vastly superior it was to capitalism, and opposition to further socialist measures would slowly decrease.
In contrast to this idyllic picture of the capitalist class slowly accepting its own liquidation, Marx wrote that no ruling class relinquished power without a fight. This was true of the slave-masters of Ancient Rome, and it was equally true of the feudal landlords. Why should the capitalist class be any different? Marx considered that they would fight even more tenaciously to maintain their power because they have at their disposal more powerful means of repression and propaganda than have previously existed. Only social revolution could break their political and economic stranglehold.
What did Marx mean by revolution? He did not mean killing people, but taking over the social apparatus – in the first instance the state – and the means of production by a new class. Revolution has no necessary connection with bloodshed. Bloodshed usually occurs when the ruling class prove unwilling to part with their power without a fight. Where the revolutionaries are strong little or no armed resistance is possible, and bloodshed is avoided.
As the Labour Government’s actions are based on the ideas of Fabianism, if their administration for the last five years has been a success from the socialist point of view, then Marx and all his works can be consigned to the dust-bin. But, should we find the reverse to be true, what should we then consign to the dust-bin? It is certainly not possible for the reformists to slink behind the plea that (as in 1929) they were a minority government, condemned by necessity to administer capitalism. For the last five years the Labour Government has had complete power. How have they used it?
The first thing that has become obvious is the fallacy of the “inevitability of gradualism”. returned in 1945 with one of the biggest majorities in British parliamentary history, Labour only got returned in 1950 by the barest margin. Since then there has been increasing criticism of the Government’s actions, and the greatest hostility, due to rising prices, could easily mean a labour defeat if there were a general election.
Nor are the workers particularly appreciative in those industries, where the “peaceful revolution” has occurred! For instance the General Secretary of the NUR, Mr Figgins, is reported in Reynolds News (17/12/50) as saying that
“A new dictatorship by the Railway Executive is a challenge to the fundamental principles of trade unionism ... This procedure was something we have never experienced, even in the days of the private company”.
With such outspoken complaints as those being voiced by workers’ leaders, it is hardly surprising that Labour speakers make social services their main propaganda plank. The Labour Government, they say, was responsible for the creation of the “Welfare State”, and the maintenance of it largely rests upon taxation of the rich.
The Tories, on the other hand, contend, that, besides being extravagant spending, it is also true that the social services, as Robert Boothby MP, put it, in The Times (9/4/50), “are now being paid for, not by the rich, but by the poor”.
This statement is borne out by a factual account appearing in the Economist (1/4/50). It is a reproduction of an official report of the Marshall Plan Administration entitled Report of the European Co-operation Administration to the United Kingdom. After detailed investigation, this mission found that the current “social service” income per working class family, taking into account food subsidies, national insurance, family allowances, education and current taxation paid by a working class family, both directly and indirectly, amounted to an average of 67.8 shillings per week. Therefore, for from the social services representing an addition to the workers’ income, it is entirely paid for by him. In addition, the worker pays an average of 10 shillings per week per family for the maintenance pf the military and police forces, and in respect of the national debt.
One further fact must be added; these figures were compiled before Atlee announced the new rearmament drive. This will cost at least £3,600 million over a three year period, whereas at the time the report was issued this total rested at a mere £760 million. According to the New Statesman (9/12/50) even the latest huge sum will look more like £4,200 when soaring prices and the loss of the American loan are taken into consideration. The disparity between taxation and social services must now be much greater.
Whilst rearmament for the Third World War is the principal drain upon taxes, the national debt is a close runner-up. The National Debt consists of vast sums borrowed from the capitalists since as long ago as the Napoleonic wars. It has accumulated to the fantastic figure of £25,000 million, and would take four hundred years to repay even at £1 million per week, without taking interest into account! Assuming that interest charges of 2½% were made on this capital, this figure would double every forty years.
There would be little chance of this figure diminishing, however, even if it were repaid at the rate of £1 million per week, for the labour Government has pledged itself to a continued policy of nationalisation with compensation. The staggering amounts handed out in compensation – in the case of the railways, for example, over £100 million – will simply rocket the national debt to new and even more fantastic heights.
This procedure, the payment for nationalisation on the instalment plan, cannot but adversely affect any plans for the redistribution of wealth. Here reformists are on a very thorny ground when they claim that there has been a redistribution of wealth since the Labour Government came to power. They are perfectly right – but not the way they intended. The Government’s policy of wage-freezing, coupled with a pious appeal to the capitalists “not to declare bigger dividends”, has resulted in a larger percentage of the national income going in profits than during the pre-war years under a Tory administration.
Transport House statisticians, by combining a complete laziness in collecting facts with a prodigious energy in distorting them, “prove” that rents, dividends, and interest in 1949 amounted to 28% of the national income, being reduced to 25% after taxation. Wages, on the other hand, were 45 per cent before taxation and rose to 48 per cent of the national income after.
Even assuming these figures were correct, it could hardly be said to support the contention that there has been a radical redistribution of wealth, or that there has been a “peaceful revolution” as Morrison claims. However, these figures are entirely suspect, since they are arrived at by disregarding the effect that indirect taxation has on the workers’ wages. The revenue from beer, tobacco, etc., the bulk of which comes from the workers’ pockets, has risen from £341 million in 1938 to £1,547 million in 1948.
A more correct table, making allowance for these factors, was published in the Daily Worker Educational Commentary No. 28, entitled Rich and Poor in Britain: An analysis of the National Income, and showed the following results:–



Division of Income after Taxation




 


 


1938


 


1946


 


1949




Wages and Forces Pay


41


49


42




Rents, Interests and Profits


35


30


36



According to these figures, the Labour Government has in fact restored the balance, not in favour of the workers, but of the capitalists. However, whilst the war-time figures appear to reveal a shift against the capitalists, it must be borne in mind that an enormous amount of war profit took the form of augmented capital, and did not appear in any income returns.
In 1938, about £1,535 million, after taxation, went to rent, interest and profit: in 1948, the figure, again after taxation, came to £2,922 million. Since 1948, there has been a rapid increase in profits. The Observer (7/1/51) quotes the latest analysis of industrial profits compiled by The Financial Times, which says that “the gross profits of 2,757 industrial companies in 1950 were £1,146 millions, an increase of £96 million, or 9 per cent over the previous accounting period”.
This leads inexorably to the conclusion that little has changed since a Labour MP made the following statement in the New Statesman (30/10/48):–
“despite death duties, great wealth is concentrated in a few hands ... If in 1947 there had been a 1005 death duties, the revenue would have totalled over £600 million and a third of it would have been contributed by less than a third of one per cent of those liable for death duties. Faced with these facts, the class-conscious worker is easily convinced that Marx’s theory of the class struggle is true”.
At a later stage, we intend to deal with the Labour Government’s claim to have maintained full employment, and to prove that the high level of unemployment experienced since the war has been primarily due to circumstances over which they had little or no control. However, before arguing this contentious point, it is interesting to note that Mr Strauss, Minister of Supply, is reported by The Manchester Guardian (29/12/50) as saying, when announcing new economy measures, that “this will mean redundancy or unemployment in certain areas, the full amount of which cannot at present be judged”. How are other Government spokesmen reacting to the unpleasant reality that linking Britain’s destiny with the United States inevitably means war? Here is the Minister of Works, Mr R.R. Stokes, one of Bevan’s “left-wingers” during the war, brazenly giving a Christmas message to some of the unemployed in his constituency at Lowestoft:–
“There are two useful ways in which some of the unemployed could occupy themselves. There is great need for men in the Armed Forces, and the Civil Defence needs recruits.” (Daily Worker, 17/12/50)
Perhaps it would be too much to expect Mr Stokes to remember the typical socialist argument during the inter-war years to the effect that poverty and unemployment, caused by a Tory administration, were the real recruiting sergeants for the Army. Mr Stokes would also probably be suffering from convenient amnesia if asked whether he remembered the boasts of the Labour party in its 1929 election manifesto. Labour and the Nation:–
“We can conquer unemployment ... We claim full and complete maintenance for those who cannot find work”.
Within a few months of being returned on the basis of this programme of work or full maintenance, George Thomas was reported as saying:–
“Durham, Northumberland, Lanark, and many other places, like South Wales, have got this great mass of unemployed, and, as far as one can see, there is no hope of dealing with these people unless we get them out of these districts.”
In other words, the promises of the Labour leadership in 1929 were as baseless as they are to-day. The differences between the Ramsey MacDonalds and the Attlees are of dress, habits, appearance but not of political ideology.
* * * *
Having dismissed the crude and hypocritical claims of Transport house apologists, we can now get down to the task of drawing up a balance sheet of the Labour Government, and of assessing the effects its measures have had on the structure of British capitalism.
As a result of the war, the decline of British capitalism, discernable since the turn of the century, has been greatly accelerated. Whereas during the nineteenth century Britain held undisputed naval supremacy, her ships traversing the seven seas and bringing back untold wealth t the capitalists in this country to-day the United States has ousted her from this favoured position.
British capitalist wealth was seriously depleted during the war. Overseas investments had to be sold to pay for vital food supplies and raw materials; overseas markets went by default sine Britain had little time to trouble about them whilst engaged in a gruelling war with Germany; India and Burma were lost, thus depriving her of a large arena of colonial exploitation. In other words the structure of British capitalism had been undermined to a critical degree.
It was not feasible to meet this desperate need to compete by slashing working class standards of life, for there was no sizeable fascist party capable of ruling by iron fist methods, nor was there much chance of one being created in the immediate future as the war had discredited fascism.
The situation seemed hopeless from a capitalist standpoint. It is ot surprising that they were reduced to a state of jitters upon the return of a Labour Government. Democracy is a luxury that capitalism can ill afford in its period of decline.
Ironically, the Labour Government turned out t be the saviour of British capitalism. It succeeded in diverting the demands of the working class for the reconstruction of society on a socialist basis into harmless channels, and in nursing the dying capitalist society back into some semblance of health.
To understand why the Labour Government administration led to the preservation of capitalism, it is first necessary to analyse the nature of the nationalisation measures that they have enacted. Nationalisation measures are not intrinsically socialist, despite the popular belief that this is so. In fact, the first nationalisation bill put through Parliament was brought in by a Tory Government in 1857. This was immediately after the Indian mutiny. The motive of the Tories was certainly not to improve the living standards of the Indian workers, let alone to introduce socialism! No, they were only concerned with efficient railways, needed to transport troops quickly to the scene of uprising, thus ensuring the continued exploitation of the Indian masses.
To return to the situation in 1945. As we have noted above, if British capitalism were to survive at all, major adjustments had to be made in the economic structure. Those industries which had old and obsolete machinery had to be modernised. In cases where these industries were not only in a position to attract the requisite new investment, the only alternative was for the state to take over, and to set about the modernising process itself, milking more profitable concerns in order to do so.
In the case of both the railways and the mines, nationalisation was absolutely essential, since the British economy rests on cheap coal and cheap transport.
Another way in which the Labour Government was able to assist the capitalist class to regain its balance was by the maintenance of labour discipline. The workers, having certain class loyalty to the Labour Party, restrained, albeit somewhat grudgingly their demands for improved conditions and higher pay. Their loyalty was somewhat bolstered by a series of reforms that the government carried through. Why, during a period of capitalist decline, was this possible?
The world had experienced a war eight times more destructive than the 1914-18 war. Consequently almost every country in the world was crying out for goods with which to reconstruct their battered economies. Even the United States, with the greatest industrial capacity yet known to man, almost twice as great as she possessed in 193, was unable to fully satisfy the unprecedented demand. Britain, therefore, was also able to cash in upon the world market.
The capitalist class of this country, amassing more profits than at any other time in their history, were willing to permit, without much opposition, some concessions to the workers, thus allowing the labour government to maintain the guise of being progressive, of creating a “welfare state”, and also to retain the mass support of the workers.
By 1948, however, conditions had gradually began to change. The world markets were being replenished, and countries which had been buyers of British goods rapidly became competitors in the dwindling market. The basis for further reforms had gone, and the labour government commenced the process of stripping off, layer by layer, its progressive pretensions, and undermining the reforms that had already been introduced. This trend can be traced right through from the imposition of wage-freezing to the present campaign for an increased working week. As for full employment, its continuation has become more and more dependent upon expanding the armament programme on the production of non-consumer goods.
The New Statesman noted this trend (16/9/50) and commented:–
“The Labour leaders have accomplished all their plans. As their Policy Statement (i.e. Labour Believes in Britain – RC) showed clearly, they have nothing constructive to offer the British people except the smoothing of the rough edges of the welfare economy that has emerged since 1940. It looks as though the impetus of British Socialism has nearly been exhausted and the Labour Party has become the defender of the status quo.”
Daniel de Leon, with far greater political acumen than the neo-liberal New Statesman, more correctly analysed the Labour Government’s actions – but over forty years before they took place! In his classic Two Pages from Roman History, he shows that Labour leaders of the social-democratic variety are ideologically supporters of capitalism, and, accordingly, in a class-divided society, are the enemies, active or potential, of the working class. However, since they depend upon the working class for their support they must always appear to be enemies of the capitalist class, or lose their support. If in power during a period of acute class conflict such as that which Ramsey MacDonald found to exist in Britain during the term of the second Labour Government, they are forced to slash the workers’ living standards in the same way as the Tories. And yet each repressive measure undermines their own basis! No wonder that social democrats deny the existence of the class war, for its very existence is necessarily fatal t their careers.
The period of relative calm is almost over for the Labour Government. The soaring cost of living is being seriously faced by the working class. This will ultimately lead to mass criticism of the Labour leadership from within the Labour Party itself, although during the initial period, it will mainly be confined to the industrial sphere.
It is time for those elements within the Labour Movement who genuinely want an end to policies of class collaboration and subservience to American capitalism, to make themselves more clearly heard. Only by applying the socialist ideas fathered by Karl Marx can we finally ensure an end to all wars and the beginning of socialist reconstruction.
Support for American capitalism is a blind alley that can lead to nothing but destruction. Support for Soviet totalitarianism is not whit better. It is our task to see that the British Labour Movement changes its policy, and gives leadership in the creation of a world third force, equally opposed to both systems of capitalist exploitation, the force of international socialist revolution.
 






For indeed I am a communist of the old school – reddest of the red.
John Ruskin, Fors Clavigera: Letters to the
Workmen and Labourers of Great Britain



Raymond Challinor who died after protracted illness at the Windsor Court Care Home Wallsend, Newcastle-on-Tyne, on 30 January 2011 was a labour historian of the old school. A lifelong Marxist of a libertarian bent, he was a member of the Independent Labour Party (ILP), the Revolutionary Communist Party (RCP), the Socialist Review Group (SRG) and the International Socialists (IS). With Marc Bloch, he held that the good historian is a student of humanity who engages with the living as well as the dead. With Marx, he maintained that the role of the intellectual is not simply to understand the world but to help in changing it. Workers, for their part, learned from study as well as struggle: an appreciation of labour’s past was integral to its future emancipation. To that end, he contributed scores of articles to the socialist press. He believed they would stimulate wider interest in the history of the working class. He hoped they would spur activists to emulate and transcend the aspirations, solidarity and creativity of their predecessors. Without exception they radiated faith in ‘socialism from below’. They exuded rejection of what he termed ‘the two monsters of social democracy and Stalinism’. [1]
He possessed few illusions in the academy. Conventional scholarship, he considered, represented progress. But socialist intellectuals had a responsibility to develop it through research and writing which spoke to a working-class audience as well as professional historians. He spent a quarter of a century in further and higher education and his scholarly activity, conducted against the odds, was reflected in the books he produced between 1967 and 1995. In accordance with what was once regarded as the proper time-span of the labour historian, he studied the century from the 1840s. He wrote not only about Chartism but about the birth of British Communism, not only about the early trade unions but about the Second World War. Like most labour historians of his generation he thought collectively. He was an enthusiast of the Society for the Study of Labour History (SSLH). He served it as executive member, vice-chair, chair and vice-president. At regional level he contributed prodigiously to the success of the North East Labour History Society (NELHS)
Raymond Corrick Challinor was born at Stoke-on-Trent, the largest of ‘the five towns’ in the English Potteries on 9 July 1929. His father, Arthur Bertram Challinor, a schoolteacher, for a time a head master, was the grandson of a miner. Arthur’s father followed him underground before becoming a pottery worker and, finally, a composer of songs and Methodist hymns who was awarded degrees in music by the University of Durham. Arthur attended boarding school in Scotland and had hoped to become a doctor. The lingering impact of gas poisoning in First World War France, where he served in the Royal Flying Corps, cast a shadow over his life. Ray’s mother Leonora Margaretta Gertrude (née Gibson), known as Gertrude, was an independent, outspoken woman whose moral rectitude and scepticism of authority was passed on to her son.
On her father’s side, she came from a family of ironmongers who built bicycles and ran a bus service in the railway town of Crewe in Cheshire. Her mother was German, which caused periodic tensions in the local community. Educated at the Bluecoat School, Walsall, Gertrude was a school teacher. Both his parents took an interest in politics. Arthur was involved in the Labour Party in Stoke and inclined towards the Communist Party (CP) in its milder moments. His wife supported the ILP. She had been a friend of Lady Cynthia Mosley, Labour candidate and then MP for Stoke between 1925 and 1931, and a staunch ILPer. Gertrude invariably defended her as a sincere socialist. She was a passionate advocate of adult education and sometime secretary of the Longton branch of the Workers Educational Association, the site of the pioneering classes of R.H. Tawney in ‘Industrial History’ in 1908-9.
Ray grew up in depression and war. When he was eleven his parents separated and his world disintegrated. Arthur’s drinking and gambling had placed strains on the marriage. His sister, Joan, four years younger, remained with her father’s family in Stoke; he moved with his mother to Crewe. He attended Crewe Grammar School and subsequently, in a second uprooting, the George Fox boarding school run by the Friends in the small county town of Lancaster. He admired the Quakers, although at an early age he declared himself an atheist and cleaved to that credo throughout his life. A well-known social historian of his acquaintance liked to remark that nothing had happened in Lancaster since the abolition of the slave trade. However he dated his political awakening to the by-election there in October 1941. It crystallized an interest in politics sparked by his parents’ involvement and fanned by the war and his mother’s opposition to it. When the Labour Party, acting in accordance with the electoral truce, refused to oppose the Conservative candidate, the diplomat Fitzroy Maclean, the ILP stepped into the breach in the person of Archibald Fenner Brockway.
Under the banner ‘Shorten the War by Socialism’, Brockway urged nationalization, an end to profiteering, a minimum wage and colonial freedom. Barely twelve years old, Ray was encouraged by his teachers to attend meetings. It confirmed his inherited allegiance. He remembered leading ILP figures – Bob Edwards, John McNair and Jimmy Maxton, and the, in retrospect, tragic irony of the latter’s insistence that he would give up food before cigarettes – speaking at the Jubilee Hall and the Friends Meeting Place. He recalled his mother’s pleasure at Brockway’s advocacy of higher wages for women workers. In later years he still savoured his elation when the ILP garnered almost 20 per cent of the vote. The behaviour of the Communists left a lasting impression. Declaiming ‘A vote for Brockway is a vote for Hitler’, the followers of Hitler’s ally of four months before outdid some Conservatives in their support for MacLean.
He left school at the end of the war and worked on the Crewe Guardian, one of the town’s two newspapers. He sometimes referred to himself in later years as a journalist and always enjoyed writing. His ideas developed through reading the ILP’s New Leader and its discussion journal Left. He was excited by the contributions of the free thinker, historian and erstwhile supporter of Trotsky, Frank Ridley. They strengthened his sense that socialism could not be identified with state ownership. He sometimes cited Ridley’s use of examples stretching back to the nationalization of the Indian railways to speed-up troop movements, to illustrate that social ownership per se did not facilitate human liberation.
At an ILP summer school he met the Scottish journalist Frank Maitland who, after experience in the CP, the successor groups to the Socialist Labour Party (SLP) and the Trotskyist movement, had found a home of sorts there. Maitland impressed upon him the significance of work in the unions and the importance of industrial struggle in furthering socialist progress. Their friendship was cemented in the 1950s and endured until Frank’s death in 2001. As a plural, comparatively tolerant milieu for the free-ranging discussion of ideas, the ILP left a deep mark on somebody who experienced it as a teenager in his first, sharp encounter with socialism. As late as 1958 he wrote to Maitland: ‘My political line is that of the ILP’. [2] In 1997 he spoke to me emotionally about its importance to his political formation.
Called up for national service in 1946 he registered as a conscientious objector. He was exempted on condition he undertook two years of horticultural work under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture. He had numerous jobs, largely in the South of England. He never lasted long: awkwardness and lack of co-ordination rendered him accident-prone. His introduction to Trotskyism came via T. Dan Smith and Bill Hunter whom he met at the ILP’s 1945 conference which ratified the expulsion of Smith who had sat simultaneously on the leading bodies of the ILP and the RCP. He had discussions with Ted Grant and Roy Tearse, leading lights in the firmament of British Trotskyism. He read its papers, Socialist Appeal and Workers’ International News, and as much as he could find of Marx and Engels, Lenin and Trotsky. The RCP was more active and interventionist; it seemed to possess a more coherent programme and superior organisation. The ILP was falling apart.
In 1947 he joined the Thames Valley branch of the British Section of the Fourth International. He worked on its behalf in the National Council of Labour Colleges (NCLC) and as an entrist in Chertsey Labour Party. Karl Westwood, a veteran of the Labour Party in the 1920s and C.L.R. James’ Marxist Group in the ILP in the 1930s, and now a leader of the RCP’s entry work, was an inspiration. Westwood became the Labour Party’s prospective parliamentary candidate for Richmond and Barnes and a full-time organiser of the NCLC before his untimely death in a motor-cycle accident at Whitsun 1951. While living with Karl and his wife Cath at the Cottage Café they ran at Staines, he met Tony Cliff (Ygael Gluckstein). Cliff, he recalled, ‘had the most profound influence on my political development’. [3]
In his eighteenth year he commenced a struggle to understand the world that Hitler, Stalin and the capitalist democracies had made. The RCP was a rigorous school; dogma rubbed shoulders with heresy. In 1946, Jock Haston, its talented leader, raised the possibility that Russia and its imperium in Eastern Europe was moving towards state capitalism. He quickly reverted to the received Trotskyist doctrine that Russia was a degenerated workers’ state. Cliff travelled in the opposite direction. Another handful of RCP members agreed with the American Max Shachtman and the Irish section that Russia was neither state capitalist or a workers’ state but a novel bureaucratic collectivist formation. In a break with orthodox Trotskyism and its umbilical links with Stalinism, the innovators agreed that socialists had no obligation to defend Eastern imperialism against Western imperialism. [4]
In this context, but largely independently, and at 17 precociously, he arrived at a state capitalist position. He was familiar with such debates from the ILP: they had been aired there since the 1930s. His article, State Capitalism – A New Order, came out in Left in June 1948 as part of a debate involving Tom Colyer and C.A. Smith. It appeared simultaneously with Cliff’s more substantial internal RCP document, ‘The Nature of Stalinist Russia’. There were a number of problems with this analysis, from the composition of the new ruling class and its structural relation to the economy to the operation of the law of value in Russia. At a time when many activists on the left believed that Russia and its conquests were in some sense socialist and intellectuals, increasingly influenced by Isaac Deutscher, pronounced the Eastern Empire progressive and capable of self-reform, it was important and liberating. It affirmed that Stalinism, and Deutscherism, entailed a rupture with the tradition of Marx and Engels, the tradition of socialism as workers’ self-emancipation and self-government. Ray insisted that those who defended Russia discarded these inalienable concepts. To defend despotism and exploitation, he wrote, ‘harms not only the cause of the Russian worker but that of Revolutionary Socialism. The only thing to do is to tell the truth and to show it has nothing in common with Socialism’. [5]
In 1949 the railways took him home to Crewe and his job on the local paper. It was a wasteland for the revolutionary left. When Haston came North that year he was able to introduce him to just three contacts – only one, Ted Alcock, an old SLPer, was in any way sympathetic to Trotskyism. The RCP collapsed. Ray joined ‘the Club’, the reorganized section of the Fourth International. Led by Gerry Healy and John Lawrence, it pursued ‘deep entry’ in the Labour Party. The experience was bitter and brief. He found the organisation’s adaptation to reformism and Stalinism in its paper Socialist Outlook hard to swallow. He chafed at its intolerance of dissent. When the Korean War broke out in June 1950 he refused to back North or South, the USSR or the USA. ‘The Club’ provided not very critical, or effective, support to what it perceived as the workers’ states in their anti-imperialist struggle. [6] In the summer of 1950 he received a letter from Healy: it congratulated him on his efforts in establishing the Labour League of Youth in Crewe. Weeks later he was informed by his friend and fellow state capitalist, Duncan Hallas, that he had been expelled from ‘the Club’ at a meeting of its Manchester branch which he had been unable to attend.
He was a founding member of the SRG which was launched in London in September 1950 with all of thirty-three members. He endorsed its stand against defencism. But he harboured reservations about its rather quixotic decision to seek affiliation to the Fourth International. The solitary difference he had with Cliff, he reflected, was that he saw the new thinking as transcending Trotskyism. Cliff viewed himself as an orthodox Trotskyist who differed with the International over Russia. [7] Ray became a member of the three-man editorial board of the initially intermittent and duplicated Socialist Review which appeared in November 1950. The following year he secured a printer, Oliver Amey, who produced it at almost cost price in Lune Lane, Preston. He found this fitting. Lune Lane, he recalled, was ‘the road where the military shot the Chartist demonstrators during the general strike of 1842. At the bottom of the street bullet-holes still scarred the bricks’. [8]
1952 was a significant year in his life. He became a student at the University College of North Staffordshire, later Keele University. He was joined there by his sister Joan, somewhat ironically a subsequent recruit to the CP. He studied for a degree in economics and politics. More importantly, he met his future wife at a Labour League of Youth meeting. Mabel Brough was an eighteen-year old bank clerk from Etruria near Stoke. In the way of her new family she became a primary school teacher. They married in 1957 and their son Russell was born in 1962. It was a happy marriage. It endured until his death. It gave him new moorings and provided him with the security shattered in his early life, with solidarity and with a necessary element of organization. He formed another partnership in 1952, this time with Stan Newens, a young socialist from Bethnal Green by way of University College London, where he had become aware of the RCP and then the SRG. He was doing a stint in the North Staffordshire mines as a substitute for national service. Most Saturdays during the next four years saw the pair traversing Northern England and the Midlands on Stan’s motor-cycle selling Socialist Review and seeking adherents to its politics. It was another friendship forged in what George MacKay Brown called ‘the good comrade-time of youth’ that lasted a lifetime. He maintained his editorial involvement until his final exams loomed in 1956 when he handed over to Bernard Dix who worked on the TUC magazine Labour. For a short time Socialist Review was edited from Congress House. [9]
The group was distinguished by its state capitalist analysis, the conviction that the future lay with ‘neither Washington nor Moscow’, the belief that capitalism had stabilised itself through arms expenditure and the need for patience and ‘the perspective of the long haul’. It moved some distance from the Fourth International. In comparison with its competitors and its successors, it was unassuming and creative, open and eclectic: its members tried to develop new ideas in order to explain a changing world, not catechize old ones which obfuscated reality. At different times a diverse array of talented socialists worked in or around the SRG: Sid Bidwell, Ken Coates, Henry Collins, Bernard Dix, Eric Heffer, Harry McShane, Stan Newens, Peter Sedgwick and James D. Young. There were also visiting Americans associated with Shachtman’s Independent Socialist League, notably Justin and Jackie Grossman, Shirley Lerner and Donna and Seymour Papert. A mixture of ideas – rediscovered Luxemburgism, bureaucratic collectivism the autonomisms of C.L.R. James, Raya Dunavskaya and Cornelius Castoriadis swirled around the organization. Cliff, its major figure – although from 1955, Michael Kidron played a key role – was receptive to rethinking but remained anchored in a Leninist mentality. [10]
He was on the libertarian wing. He recollected the excitements of the time. He remembered the donkey work, the uphill struggle to secure and produce articles for Socialist Review and publish Cliff’s, Russia: A Marxist Analysis in 1955 and Rosa Luxemburg in 1959. Through the decade he contributed analysis, history and reviews to the journal. [11] Things improved after 1956 although Healy’s group was the main beneficiary. He corresponded with Edward Thompson whom he recalled meeting in the early 1950s and whom he came to admire as a human being as well as a historian. He attempted to educate Thompson in Trotskyism and lent him some of the Old Man’s writings. On his side, Thompson was enduringly friendly. In a letter to his fellow editor of The Reasoner, John Saville, in 1957 he commended Ray’s writing. He dubbed him, perhaps in relation to their mutual antipathy to the Healyites, ‘a Trot of the milder persuasion’. [12] Ray spoke at the conference at Wortley Hall, Yorkshire, in April 1957, convened to regroup refugees from the CP with the Labour and far left which launched the Left Clubs. He called for dialogue and unity in action: ‘The question was how best they could influence members of the working class. They must have some publication which reflected their common views. Only through an interchange of ideas could they hope to break down the barriers which past sectarianism had raised’. [13]
He was active in the New Left. As an elected member of the Labour Advisory Committee of CND he argued, under the slogan ‘Black the Bomb! Black the Bases!’, that, rather than relying on the state, trade unionists should take direct action and boycott all nuclear weapons. He criticized the vacillations of the campaign’s leadership and the tergiversations of the CP. [14] The SRG was an entrist organisation and the struggle in the Labour Party his daily diet. In Newcastle-under-Lyme, adjacent to the five towns, he found a party with a suitable left-wing complexion. The seat had been Labour since 1922. There were right-wing activists such as the future MP, John Golding. Most reflected the ‘Keep Left’ and Bevanite stance of the sitting MP, Stephen Swingler. By the turn of the decade, he was a fixture in the constituency party, a stalwart of its executive committee and political education officer, as well as a member of Newcastle-under-Lyme Borough Council. There were, he concluded, limits to what isolated left-wingers could achieve in local government. In the absence of numerically stronger, more concentrated forces, the council chamber should be regarded as a platform for socialist ideas, rather than a vehicle for significant reforms. Even propaganda, if it was to be effective, demanded more left-wingers in local government. It required a national network of socialist councillors. [15]
After completing his degree at North Staffordshire he taught in a secondary modern school in the Potteries. In 1961, he was appointed as a lecturer in Government at Wigan Mining and Technical College, today part of the University of Wigan, and the family moved to nearby Hindley, once home to the young George Formby. The SRG had never been proscribed by the Labour Party: he made it on to the ‘B list’, the national panel of candidates deemed suitable to stand in general elections. In December 1961, he was selected as prospective parliamentary candidate for the small, affluent, constituency of Nantwich, five miles from Crewe. Famous for its salt and the Civil War battle in 1644, it remained predominantly a farming area which increasingly served as a dormitory town for commuters to Crewe, Chester, Liverpool and Manchester. In the 1959 general election the Conservative MP, Wing-Commander Grant-Ferris, piled-up a 6,000 majority over Labour. Given disillusion with the Macmillan government, Ray had high hopes. He claimed that the seat was winnable; he could, he considered, at least erode the Conservative majority in the election expected in 1964. [16] He did his best to stir things up in a sleepy market town which had changed little since before the war. Hardly a week went by in 1962 and 1963 without a hard-hitting letter from the Labour candidate disturbing the calm of the Nantwich Chronicle. They stimulated debate on the health service, rates, pensions, unemployment, the funding of political parties, the private interests of Conservative MPs, the 1945 Labour government and foreign policy. [17]
In relation to the arguments put forward for entrism – if it is not to be of the ‘deep’ sort and, thus, too accommodative of the reformist host, it should be used to explicitly propagate revolutionary ideas – the discourse, allowing for necessary adaptation, appears substantially that of party policy statements and the mainstream Labour left. He did participate energetically in campaigns to avert closure of Nantwich Railway Station and Tarporley hospital. He backed nuclear disarmament and withdrawal from NATO. This stimulated friction inside the party. It provided ammunition for the Conservatives who needled him about his membership of CND while advocating Labour’s contradictory position. [18] In a conservative constituency and Labour Party, matters were not helped by publicity attending an unsuccessful private prosecution for assault and battery he mounted against the police after being denied access to a meeting addressed by the Labour leader, Hugh Gaitskell. Difficulties were compounded when he made a formal statement to Crewe CND arguing that Britain should abandon nuclear weapons and join the non-aligned group of nations. [19]
He tried to play the game: he was reported paying tribute to Gaitskell, the bệte noire of the left, just after his death. [20] But he failed to survive to fight the election. In March 1964, with the contest little more than six months away, he stepped down. There was no explanation from either side, beyond statements that travelling forty miles from Wigan made for problems and that he had kept local officials insufficiently informed about his activities. Those who commented ‘call it incompatibility’ and those who remarked that ‘the Party’s chance at the election would be rosier with a candidate who stands more to the right’, [21] were probably not far wrong. The involvement in the denouement of Labour’s influential North-West Regional Organiser, Reg Wallis, an apparatchik well-practised in the art of excluding Trotskyists, suggested that the powers-that-be were better informed in 1964 than they had been in 1961. [22]
In the context of the conservative authority relations that obtained in the technical colleges of the period, the episode did him little good at Wigan. Arguments about his absences were exacerbated by his ‘fearlessness in conversation’, his reluctance to tolerate what he saw as unfairness and his frequent lack of organisation in what aspired to be a regimented regime. [23] Nil desperandum, he continued to crusade. In the early summer of 1965 Asian and black workers at the Courtauld’s plant in Preston struck against speed-up. They received little support from their fellow white workers; or the Transport and General Workers Union (TGWU). It was one of a series of strikes in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s which highlighted the embattled predicament of Britain’s black proletariat in the post-war years, as well as the limited sustenance it received from trade union officialdom. Ray knew Coketown. He now encountered divisive industrial conflict in a different Preston, with a different working class, more than a century later.
Where Dickens reported and imagined, he intervened. His involvement was popular with the strikers who were eventually forced back to work. Less so with the TGWU officials, latter day Slackbridges of Hard Times, whose stock in trade was rhetoric; or with some black activists such as the Race Today Collective. They saw only a white Labour Party politician on the make. Yet he played an exemplary part with considerable sensitivity. He used his position on the executive of Westhoughton Labour Party to muster support and funds in the local labour movement and as far away as Oxford and London. His vigour in constructing solidarity ensured that he was co-opted on to the Action Committee which raised problems with TGWU general-secretary, Frank Cousins, then a minister in the first Wilson government. Crucially, courageously and successfully he opposed attempts to start a breakaway black union. Strike committee meetings commenced with prayers from each denomination present. A confirmed atheist, he recited the Lord’s Prayer. [24]
Things were looking up for the group. After the launch of its new journal in 1960 it gradually became known eponymously as ‘the International Socialism Group’. This morphed into ‘the International Socialists’. Socialist Review disappeared in 1962. The space was filled by Labour Worker and, as IS gradually pulled out of the Labour Party from 1965, by Socialist Worker. At the end of 1968, the group had 1,000 members. It had benefitted from its efforts in the Labour Party Young Socialists, then from the stirrings of industrial and student militancy, finally from the agitation around Vietnam and May 1968 in France. [25] He remained active. That year he was prominent in support of a rent strike in Skelmersdale. He was a member of the editorial board of International Socialism and contributed frequently to both the journal and Socialist Worker.
His interest in labour history and his desire and determination to undertake research into it intensified. He came from mining stock and, although intriguingly there was no explicit connection, he was particularly interested in mining trade unionism. But unlike many contemporary labour historians he was on the fringes of academia. He was not employed in the more favourable climate of a university. The students he taught in further education – in the mid 1960s he moved on to Harris College in Preston (later part of Preston Polytechnic and later still the University of Central Lancashire), and, in 1968, to Bolton Institute of Technology, now part of Bolton University – were often working-class. Most university lecturers in the 1960s would have quailed at the lecturing load and blanched at its range. At different times he was teaching economics and politics as well as history, at a variety of levels and on a range of courses from the Higher National Certificate and Diploma to external University of London degrees. Research was unusual and time allotted for it rare. His political activity remained a time-consuming pre-occupation. But he gradually created space in which to develop his inquiries into nineteenth-century miners. One catalyst was the upsurge of interest in labour history from the early 1960s and his membership of the SSLH. His fellow student of the miners, Robert Colls, paid tribute to the role that the Society and the History Workshop movement played in making labour historians: in those years they were ‘the apprenticeship guilds’ [26] of aspiring practitioners. Ray joined the Society in 1964. He was encouraged by engagement with a community of fellow historians. He acknowledged the inspiration provided in different ways by Royden Harrison, Raphael Samuel and Edward Thompson as well as other scholars he had encountered in the New Left and listened to and discussed with at Society meetings. [27]
Another spur was serendipitous. One day in 1965 he was working in Wigan Public Library with his collaborator and colleague at Wigan, Brian Ripley. They came across a neglected collection of documents on strikes in the formative period of mining trade unionism. It provided purpose and it yielded valuable material. [28] Formal study and the discipline it required constituted a further factor. Seeking recognition and enhanced academic mobility he registered for a PhD at Lancaster University. Harold Perkin, another outspoken outsider from Stoke keenly and iconoclastically interested in working-class history, had been appointed to a chair there in 1967. He proceeded to establish a Centre for Social History and a doctoral programme which attracted talented, innovative young historians such as Carol Dyhouse and John Walton. [29] Ray submitted his thesis, Trade Unionism in the Coal Industry until 1900, with particular reference to Lancashire in 1970. Newly credentialed, he pursued academic vacancies which would facilitate further research work. They included an unsuccessful application for a post at the Centre for the Study of Social History at the University of Warwick, then at the cutting edge of British labour history. In the autumn of 1971 he was appointed to a senior lectureship in history at Newcastle-upon-Tyne Polytechnic. The family set up home in the small seaside town of Whitley Bay: ‘132 Claremont Road’ became a familiar address to many on the left and almost everybody seriously interested in labour history.
The three texts that stemmed from his labours in those years were published between 1967 and 1972. [30] The existing historiography of trade unionism in coal had been assessed by Jim Williams a few years earlier. Williams was critical of the absence of detailed studies of key periods and issues, insufficiently rigorous probing of trade union development, inadequate contextualisation, some tendency to essentialism and over-emphasis on teleological tales of Homeric struggle epitomized by the work of Robin Page Arnot. [31] In that context these texts filled a gap and were well-received. Alexander MacDonald was pronounced ‘a contribution of very great significance – certain to influence all future work on that matter’. [32] The Miners’ Association was deemed ‘a pioneering history … the first serious study of the first effective national union’. [33] John Lovell found The Lancashire and Cheshire Miners ‘a very readable account of nineteenth-century trade unionism. The author has related his account to the special characteristics and problems – economic, technical and social – of the Lancashire coalfield and has not simply told a traditional trade union story’. [34] Raphael Samuel observed of the same book: ‘Raymond Challinor is a devoted historian. He has a fine knack of rescuing vanished organizations from oblivion. His accounts of strategy and tactics are convincing and unforced. He lets his facts speak for themselves and the reader is free to put his own construction on them’. [35]
As with most good history this work provoked controversy, extension and amendment. Earlier analysis by Arthur Taylor and Eric Hobsbawm had minimised the impact of Chartism on miners and their unions. The Miners’ Association demonstrated that at its formation and throughout its brief life it was closely connected with Chartism, although attachments varied in origin, extent and intensity among officials and particularly among the rank and file. The book insisted that it was important to take account of the climate of repression, which required caution in declaring allegiances, as well as the identification of miners with Chartist ideas as a means of fighting economic deprivation. These conclusions were questioned – and supported – with reference to the Midlands and developed further in regard to the North-East. [36] Argument smouldered on into the 1990s. Authoritative summation has recently affirmed the substance of the Challinor-Ripley revision, emphasising that, given the circumstances of the time, formal measures such as mass membership of the Charter Association are insufficient. There was substantial support for Chartism although attitudes among ordinary miners remained diverse and ambivalent. [37]
He also revised existing estimations of MacDonald. The latter had been positively portrayed by the Webbs and by Clegg, Fox and Thompson as the herald of economic realism and the architect of mining trade unionism, with Page Arnot lending further credence to the latter verdict. In contrast, Ray stressed MacDonald’s collaboration with capital, his shares in mining companies and his agency in creating a trade unionism which managed and manipulated miners in the mineowners’ interest. MacDonald’s career was bound up with the growth of labour aristocracies and the birth of bureaucracy in the unions. [38] These points were developed by later historians. For example, they recognised and built on the significance of his critical reassessment of the role of the checkweighmen, legally protected after 1860, which had been noted briefly and benignly by the Webbs. John Foster argued that this layer formed part of a new authority structure in coal; if not aristocratic in the full sense of the word, it contributed in some places to increased conservatism among colliers. [39] Alan Campbell depicted checkweighers in more ambiguous terms. A focus for pressure from both mineowners and miners, which was not invariably resolved in favour of the former, they constituted the lowest rung on the ladder of the emerging trade union bureaucracy. [40]
A more complex narrative emerged when Ray’s version of MacDonaldism was addressed through the lens of the new mining history of the 1970s, associated particularly with Campbell, Royden Harrison and Fred Reid. Relating ‘MacDonaldism’ to a greater degree to its context and base made for greater explanatory power. MacDonald rested on and reflected the perceived interests of ‘the independent collier’ – an ideal type which emphasised strains of individualism, artisanship and respectability. Such miners aspired to aristocracy, assertion of skill and advocacy of collaboration with the owners to organise markets, restrict output and restrain entry to ‘the trade’. Failure was rooted in the difference between mining and engineering or printing, the prevalence of a supply of ‘green’ labour with different interests and the pervasive possibility of dilution. Moreover, Ray’s dichotomy between MacDonald’s union, cast as moderate, and the Amalgamated Association, cast as militant, was overdrawn. Halliday, the leader of the latter emulated much of MacDonald’s political economy. He shared his belief in conciliation, arbitration and legislation as an alternative to strikes. MacDonald’s policies worked for some miners for a period. They achieved wage increases in the good times. With changing markets they floundered – and by the 1870s they stimulated rank-and-file revolt – on the rock of employer intransigence over reductions which did not halt at a living wage. [41] If MacDonald put miners’ organisation before miners, this has been a perennial dilemma, not a unique or treacherous predilection.
He remained active in IS. He never worked out an alternative to it, but he was always ambivalent about democratic centralism. When Cliff turned to one variant of it in 1968, he spoke against its adoption. Nonetheless, he held aloof from the ephemeral eruption of internal groupings that the new turn occasioned, although he was quoted in support of the platform of the Libertarian Marxist Faction. [42] Nor did his differences compromise his allegiance: he served on the National Committee of the remoulded group. Against the background of militancy, the organisation grew to 2,500 members in the early 1970s. Together with Logie Barrow, Sheila Blackburn, Alan Campbell, Richard Croucher, James Hinton, Richard Hyman, Merfyn Jones and Lawrence Marlow, to name only a few, he was a member of the short-lived IS History Group. With his balding hair, tweed sports jackets, corduroy trousers, well-polished shoes and deliberate, schoolmasterly manner, Ray seemed to some younger adherents an unlikely member of IS. Any doubts were laid to rest by his erudition, optimism about the future and taste for disputation, eccentricity and beer.
He never shirked an argument and he started a few. Yet he took little part in the factionalism that emerged in IS during the early 1970s. The deterioration of political prospects for the left after 1974; the leadership’s over-estimation of the potential for progress under the Wilson government; prolonged internal wrangling; the defection of experienced members; and, among all this, the group’s projected transformation into a party, formed the background to his gradual exit. [43] Other preoccupations doubtless exercised a pull. After twenty-five years he drifted out of the organisation he had helped create. He was never a member of the Socialist Workers Party (SWP) established in 1977. He was never hostile to it. He still contributed to its press and attended its annual ‘Marxism’ event. In later decades he criticized Cliff’s manoeuvring and ruthlessness in political infighting: ‘it stems from his view of the Bolshevik model of the party … But the problems which face us in Britain are not the same as those which confronted Lenin in Russia, capitalism has changed … Lenin’s old formula cannot be applied mechanically.’ [44]
He continued to wrestle with injustice. He supported Eddie Milne, the Labour MP for Blyth, an old ILPer, deselected in 1974 because of his campaign against corruption in the North-East, who briefly retained his seat as an ‘Independent’. In January 1976, Liddle Towers, an electrician and amateur boxer, died in a Newcastle hospital after being transferred from Gateshead Police Station where he had been held after an incident in a Birtley night club. Ray was a prominent and articulate member of the committee which campaigned for a proper investigation of the affair which sparked a small but memorable wave of protest over the next two years. [45] He took an active but critical part during the late 1970s in campaigning for workers’ plans for alternative production. He became a well-known figure in the North East. He felt at home there and forged long-lasting friendships. [46]
He remained immersed in labour history. He developed it at the Polytechnic and he took it into the local community. His long and varied experience had made him an effective and respected teacher. In 1974, he was elected to the SSLH executive. He had been the first in the Society to raise the issue of restrictions on access to Home Office papers of later than 1850s’ vintage. Pointing to the devastating use made of such material by Professor Aspinall, the Hammonds and Thompson, he argued that what was operating was not a thirty but a 129 year rule. His initiative stimulated a long-lasting campaign to liberalise release. [47] For his part he had little doubt that state-secrecy shielded ‘sinister things’. Full and proper disclosure of dusty but sometimes devastating documents would compromise the state’s occupancy of the moral high ground. It would expose the arsenal of unscrupulous methods it had applied in order to derail, defeat or domesticate working-class movements. The responsibility of historians was to reveal to readers where their research had been impeded by restricted access to relevant records. [48]
He was active throughout the 1970s in the NELHS. It was a buoyant body: it attracted both professional and lay historians and those simply determined to find out more about the history of labour in their region. The Society had been founded in 1966 and it maintained fairly close links with the SSLH. Succeeding a more conservative scholar, Norman McCord of Newcastle University, Ray served as its chair between 1974 and 1977. He was now fully into his stride as a historian; he haunted the archives, and he indulged his passion for the hidden, the obscure and the neglected. A colleague recorded around this time: ‘… he has been a hard-working labour historian, initially writing extensively on the miners … In more recent years he has turned his attention to the collection and analysis of material relating to political movements of the sort in which he has been personally involved’. [49]
Writing this kind of history has potential advantages in maximising understanding and empathy. Activism in the labour movement can enrich comprehension of its history – and vice-versa. It has its hazards, in terms of over-identification and conceptual presuppositions. Both benefits and hazards apply across the political spectrum. In Ray’s case researching his antecedents fused his professional and political preoccupations in a new and fruitful post-organisational practice. Meeting him in these years was to be treated to detailed disquisition on the Ernest Jones’ papers, his attempts to trace the descendants of W.P. Roberts, his pursuit of Peter Petrov, Theodore Rothstein, the Crewe suffragette, Ada Nield Chew, Arthur MacManus and Irish Republicanism or C.A. Smith’s journey to Zionism. He would expound, dramatically and at length, on the latest additions to his ever-expanding and enviable library, his annexation of the collections of former NCLC organisers, Stan Rees and Tom Sweeney, the valuable material on Trotskyism beginning to trickle into the Warwick archives, or the cornucopia that existed in the papers of the Tait family of Edinburgh which stretched back to the SLP and which were later housed in Stirling University.
Much of this was bound up with the work that went into his book on the SLP which was published in 1977. [50] The militancy of the 1960s and 1970s impelled labour historians searching for useable pasts to look at the years between 1910 and 1926 which witnessed a growth in class combativity and consciousness and intensifying conflict with the state. The Origins of British Bolshevism filled a gap left by earlier work, notably Walter Kendall’s The Revolutionary Movement in Britain and James Hinton’s First Shop Stewards’ Movement. These books discussed the tiny Manichean SLP and its role in the unrest. British Bolshevism’s unquestionable achievement was to present a fully-fledged, meticulously-researched history of the party, its policies and practice, from its formation in 1903 to its split over the creation of the CP and its decomposition in the 1920s. Its significance was acknowledged even by those who felt labour history devoted too much time to revolutionary marginalia. [51]
The problems stemmed from its under-development of its central thesis: that SLP members were British Bolsheviks. Russian Bolshevism was a phenomenon both the SLP and even British historians of the 1970s knew too little about. Hinton had insisted that what was primary in the trajectory of the shop stewards’ movement was not so much the issues of war and internationalism as the interaction between socialist groups and industrial militancy. Distilled in the arguments of J.T. Murphy prioritising workers’ councils, and personified in his enrolment in the SLP, this led key stewards towards sovietism. British Bolshevism’s expansion on the SLP’s determination to smash the state, its ‘democratic centralism’, its stress on Marxist education and opposition to the war did not satisfactorily establish with sufficient specificity that the SLP had developed on Bolshevik lines. As distinct from embracing 1917 and, on the part of some, a Russian model. Far from fully internalising Bolshevism, many SLP members recoiled from it as it was then understood when they were faced with the practical consequences in the form of the CP.
The SLP’s economic reductionism and what Ray described elsewhere as its ‘dull and fatalistic Marxism’ [52] arguably had more in common with the Second International than the infant Third. His conclusion that Lenin was less than infallible about British labour was justified. On the key question of the Labour Party, his criticism of Lenin’s stance was contentious. The assertion of an SLP Bolshevism which flowed into the CP, only to be sidelined by ‘bureaucracy’ and then Stalinism, was under-argued. Some former SLPers, notably MacManus and Murphy, espoused, and others such as William Paul accepted, most of the changes in the CP’s line through the 1920s. The political path of most of them is difficult to distinguish from that of many comrades who joined the CP from the British Socialist Party or the ILP. The conclusion that the SLP was a model for revolutionaries was questionable. Pondering the past is necessary and educational. It improves understanding; it discloses possibilities and choices, their complexities and their consequences. It rarely provides operational parallels or neat lessons directly applicable to different presents and their complicated dilemmas. In that context Ray’s thoughts on consistent work in the unions, independent working-class education and a revolutionary party were general and commonplace on the contemporary left. His brief, uneven but memorable, biography of the forgotten John S. Clarke which traced his journey from the SLP to the Labour back benches, Glasgow City Council and the Scottish Daily Express, amidst much else more exotic, came out the same year. It provided a delightful coda to his research in the 1970s. [53]
In 1979 he had a stroke. There were complications but he made a 90 per cent recovery. There was an abatement of vigour. He compensated by concentration of effort. In 1985 he took early retirement at Newcastle Polytechnic. He had done good work there and was by then Principal Lecturer in History. His exertions on other fronts continued undiminished. He had been elected vice-chair of the SSLH in 1982. Two years later he succeeded John Saville as chair. The financial alarums of a few years earlier had subsided. The Society had secured charitable status and in consequence its objectives had been amended to make specific its purpose to educate the public in labour history. Nothing of significance, the occasional conference on museums or archives aside, was done to realise this. It was treated as a formal change with responsibility discharged by the fact that membership and conferences were open to all-comers. [54]
In the past he had spoken of the importance of popularizing the subject, particularly among trade unionists. As chair he urged no initiatives. He was supportive of the move to Labour History Review (LHR) in 1990 and pleased that it preserved the essential character of the Society’s long-running Bulletin which it absorbed. Discussion about fundamental innovation in the form of a conventional academic journal – LHR Mark II was launched in 1996 – was only beginning when he stepped down in 1994. In later years he regretted the demise of the ‘news and notes’, conference reports, letters and debate which, it was understood, would be maintained within the new format. [55] The potential for dialogue between members and a wider readership was reduced; the LHR’s relationship to its audience became similar to that of most other academic journals. A colleague on the executive from 1982 reflected: ‘Like some, but not all, chairs, he did not consider himself the leader of the Society. He saw his main job as chairing meetings to elicit consensus – or as near to it as we could get. He was not in the business of giving a strong lead. But then as I recall much of the business was relatively routine.’ [56]
The SSLH did not exhaust his still formidable energies. In 1987, he became president of the NELHS. Over the years he contributed regularly to its journal, North East Labour History. He wrote reviews and articles on diverse topics from T. Dan Smith, to the memories of the veteran militant Jack Parks, to gun-running on the North-East coast. He was a collaborator in the society’s production of four volumes of essays on regional history from 1977. [57] In 1990, together with Mabel and the historian of boxing and Konni Zilliacus, Archie Potts, he established Bewick Press, named in honour of the Northumberland engraver. Its catalogue was rich and regional: it covered Cast-Iron Casey, ‘the Sunderland Assassin’, Child Birth in Newcastle 1760–1990 and the history of the South Shields Labour Party. But it occasionally published excellent work from further afield. It brought out books by, inter alia, Owen Ashton, Maureen Callcott, Bill Lancaster, Archie Potts and Stan Shipley, as well as reissuing The Miners’ Association in the aftermath of the 1984–5 strike.
Throughout the 1980s, 1990s and into the new century his work appeared in the pages of socialist periodicals such as Critique, ILP News, What Next?, Workers’ Liberty and Workers’ Press. The last of many contributions to the SWP’s Socialist Review, aptly entitled The Red Mole of History, was published in 2001. His final extended work was A Radical Lawyer in Victorian England. It is a marvellous essay in excavation and restoration and my favourite among his books. A text whose wide canvas belies its title, this life and times of ‘the Pitmen’s Attorney-General’, W.P. Roberts, the battler against the Bond, the solicitor Engels termed ‘a terror to the mineowners’, justified the twenty-five years research that went into it. [58] The volume was recognised by scholars as an ‘extraordinarily well-grounded piece of research which provides insights inaccessible to mere theorists and lazy historians … a tremendously valuable contribution to the understanding of an important aspect of Victorian English society’. [59] One commentator touched on the difference between the independence, dedication and stamina of labour historians of the old school and their successors in more timorous times whose practice is frequently constrained by the demands of careerism. ‘Work of this sort,’ he observed, ‘can only be conducted [today] with an army of research assistants or at a pace likely to leave the scholar well-behind in the race for academic appointment, tenure, or promotion’. [60]
Roberts left no personal papers. The man had to be revived through archival alchemy. Some felt this produced an inadequate portrait deficient in personality and motivation. [61] Others, more convincingly, pronounced the volume ‘a fine biography’. [62] Roberts is recuperated as a frockcoated crusader imbued with the values of early Victorian, Christian humanism, a fervent belief in the rule of law and awareness of the need for vigilance against its corruption. The text anatomizes a lifelong endeavour to better the world and the working class. It teems with detail and illustration. It is illuminated by anecdote, vignette and verse as well as its author’s only occasionally ahistorical commentary. In the course of a chronicle of Herculean struggle, more than a little of the character of this fascinating Chartist, friend of Mazzini, defender of the Manchester Martyrs and legal adviser to Marx, is revealed.
The book captures the drama of Roberts’ battles inside and outside the courtroom, the class basis of the law, its mobilization to undermine resistance to exploitation and oppression, the deployment of spies, informers and provocateurs, as well as the manoeuvres of the military and the police. It raises questions of historical and contemporary pertinence concerning trade union strategy. In the light of developments since the 1870s, but particularly since the 1970s, had labour’s espousal of legal abstention and the ultimately spurious security of voluntarism, or collective laisser-faire, combined with resistance to attempts to restrict the limited protections it offered, constituted the best road? Or was there a need for more positive engagement with the law? He was particularly pleased with the reception the volume received from lawyers. [63] The Struggle for Hearts and Minds which appeared in 1995 was an irreverent, incisive and witty tour of several Second World War ideological battle-fields. A readable collection of essays, it enjoyed, as its predecessors had, an audience beyond the university lecture theatre. [64] His entries on John S. Clarke, the miners’ leader Martin Jude and Roberts in the 2004 Oxford Dictionary of National Biography were his final published contributions to scholarship.
In 2001, he suffered an attack of hydracephalitis. Health problems dogged him until his death, ten years later. He was a driven, at times difficult, essentially decent man. He took pleasure in family life and appreciated classical music and good novels. He was a loyal friend who at the extreme stuck by Dan Smith through thick and thin. He loved drinking, discussion and disputation with comrades and fellow historians. Ray was a communist and a contrarian. Like Marx, he doubted many things but not the need to supersede capitalism. He wrote good history. He did so outside the universities. He combined exemplary scholarship with a life of struggle. As doughty a battler in contemporary causes as any of his friend Archie Potts’ pugilists, he was equally and existentially engaged with the conflicts and dramatis personae of the past. He was blessed, some might say afflicted, with the archival itch. Like Jules Michelet, the more he breathed on the dust of the documents the more he restored the dead to life. He knew Alexander MacDonald and disliked him. He understood and loved William Prowting Roberts beyond the image he nodded to on the Monkwearmouth Miners’ Lodge banner. The past and its struggles remained; they remained to be continued in the present. He dedicated A Radical Lawyer to his son and daughter-in-law, Russell and Rebecca: ‘They are fighting injustice in present-day society with all the determination that W.P. Roberts showed in Victorian times’. [65]
He was in every sense of the term a socialist scholar. His life represented a unity between past and present, between writing history and agitating for social change. In 1951, he pitted against both American-dominated capitalism and ‘Soviet totalitarianism no whit better’, [66] the third camp of international socialist transformation. Fifty years later he reiterated that faith. [67] It informed all his work. As a communist and a labour historian of the old school he aspired to make that work accessible to those who make labour history, because he believed with George Lukács that they could, and would, see that history deeply affected their daily lives and was thus of immediate concern to them. That purpose has been abraded by changes in capital and class, in society, education and labour history. [68] Those who want to restore the vital sense that our existence is historically conditioned and may be beneficially transformed through collective agency, those who wish to radically repair the academization, fragmentation and decline of labour history have more than a little to learn from the example of Raymond Challinor.

Acknowledgements
I am indebted to Ian Birchall, Alan Campbell, John Charlton, Stan Newens and Brian Ripley for information and comments.

Notes
1. Raymond Challinor, The Origins of British Bolshevism (London: Croom Helm, 1977), p. 275. Where unreferenced this appreciation is based on conversations with Ray from the 1970s to 2004 and tapes recorded in April 1996 and May 2002.
2. Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick, Maitland-Sara collection, MSS15B/M/3/IL/I/40-69. The background was unity discussions between the SRG and the ILP – see Ian Birchall, Tony Cliff: A Marxist For His Time (London: Bookmarks, 2011), p. 145. I am grateful to Ian for letting me have sight of the proofs of Chapter IV.
3. Raymond Challinor, Tony Cliff’s Early Years in Britain, Revolutionary History, 7.4 (2000), p. 185.
4. The story is told in Sam Bornstein and Al Richardson, War and the International: A History of the Trotskyist Movement in Britain, 1937–1949 (London: Socialist Platform, 1986), pp. 182–85.
5. Raymond Challinor, State Capitalism – A New Order, Left, June 1948, pp. 131–41 (pp. 139, 141).
6. John McIlroy, The Revolutionary Odyssey of John Lawrence, Revolutionary History, 9.2 (2006), pp. 105–93 (pp. 120–30); idem, Healy, Thomas Gerard (Gerry) 1913–89, in Dictionary of Labour Biography (DLB), p. xii, ed. by Keith Gildart and David Howell (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010), pp. 136–46.
7. Raymond Challinor, The Perspective of the Long Haul, Workers’ Liberty, May 1995, pp. 27–28.
8. Challinor, ‘Tony Cliff’s Early Years’, p. 86.
9. Raymond Challinor, Letter, Revolutionary History, 6.2–3 (1996), p. 304; Robert H. Fryer and Stephen Williams, Dix, Bernard Hubert 1925–1995 in DLB, xiii, ed. by Keith Gildart and David Howell (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010), p. 92.
10. For a detailed account of the SRG, see Birchall, Tony Cliff. For reminiscence, see James D. Young, Making Trouble: Autobiographical Explorations and Socialism (Glasgow: Clydeside Press 1987); Stan Newens, Cliff Never Really Understood the British Labour Movement, Workers’ Liberty, February 1995, p. 31; Ken Tarbuck, Ever Hopeful – Never Sure, chapters 6–8, <http://www.revolutionaryhistory.co.uk/ken-tarbuck/autobiography> [accessed 17 February 2011.
11. Before Ray’s death Einde O’Callaghan compiled an incomplete list of his articles in Socialist Review and International Socialism – see <http://www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/challinor/index.htm> [accessed 22 February 2011].
12. Reply to the SWP and Paul Blackledge by Edward Palmer Thompson, <http://myspace.com/makingworkingclasshistory/blog/339305859> [accessed 22 February 2011].
13. Quoted in Peter Fryer, The Wortley Hall Conference, excerpted in The Left in Britain 1956–1968, ed. by David Widgery (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1976), pp. 78–85 (p. 84).
14. Birchall, Tony Cliff, pp. 146, 152; Raymond Challinor, Zig-Zag: The Communist Party and the Bomb, International Socialism (Winter 1960–1), pp. 6–11.
15. Raymond Challinor, ‘Remembering Lansbury’, Socialist Review, May 1957; idem, Socialism at the Parish Pump, International Socialism, (Winter 1962).
16. Nantwich Chronicle, 4 August 1962, 4 April 1964.
17. Based on files of the Nantwich Chronicle, 1962–64, Cheshire Record Office, Chester.
18. See, for example, Nantwich Chronicle, 21 July 1962, 13 April, 17 August 1963.
19. Nantwich Chronicle, 1 December 1962, 21 December 1963.
20. Nantwich Chronicle, 9 February 1963.
21. Nantwich Chronicle, 21 March 1964.
22. Wallis was au fait with Trotskyist entrism, although the only case featuring Socialist Review noted in the most authoritative survey occurred in the East Islington constituency in 1959 – see Eric Shaw, Discipline and Discord in the Labour Party: The Politics of Management Control (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988), pp. 71–73. However, by 1964 the group was more visible in the Labour Party Young Socialists than it had been three years earlier.
23. Brian Ripley in conversation with the author, March 2011.
24. Ian Birchall, Ray Challinor and the 1965 Courtauld Strike, Newsletter of London Socialist Historians (Summer 2011); Ray Challinor, Danger – Racial Split in Union, Labour Worker, mid-June 1965.
25. Jim Higgins, More Years for the Locust: The Origins of the SWP (London: IS Group 1997), pp. 55–77.
26. Robert Colls, The Pitmen of the Northern Coalfields: Work, Culture and Protest. 1790–1850 (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1987), p. xii.
27. See, for example, Raymond Challinor and Brian Ripley, The Miners’ Association: A Trade Union in the Age of the Chartists, Foreword, no pagination. In later work he acknowledged debts to a variety of historians including Dorothy Thompson, R.S. Neale and the Frows; and in the North East, Bill and Maureen Callcott, Norman McCord and Archie Potts.
28. Challinor and Ripley, The Miners’ Association.
29. Harold Perkin, The Making of a Social Historian (Twickenham: Athena Press, 2002), pp. 161–64.
30. Raymond Challinor, Alexander MacDonald and the Miners (London: History Group of the Communist Party, 1967); Challinor and Ripley, Miners’ Association; Raymond Challinor, The Lancashire and Cheshire Miners (Newcastle: Frank Graham, 1972).
31. J.E. Williams, Labour in the Coalfields: A Critical Bibliography, Bulletin of the Society for the Study of Labour History (BSSLH), 4 (1962), pp. 23–62.
32. Unsigned review (the reviewer is probably Royden Harrison), BSSLH, 16 (1968), p. 47.
33. J.E. Williams, Politics in the Coalfields, BSSLH, 19 (1969), pp. 39–42, (p. 40); Colin Griffin, review of reissue by Bewick Press 1990, Labour History Review (LHR) 57.2 (1992), pp. 53–54.
34. John Lovell, review, Economic History Review, new series, 26.3 (1973), pp. 536–37.
35. Raphael Samuel, The Pit Set, New Society, December 1972.
36. For example, Raymond Challinor, Letter, BSSLH, 20 (1970), pp. 24–25; C.P. Griffin, Letter, BSSLH, 22 (1971), pp. 21–25; George Barnsby, Letter, BSSLH, 23 (1971), pp. 33–35; Raymond Challinor, Letter, BSSLH, 24 (1972), p. 37; Colin Griffin, review of reissue of Miners Association, LHR, 52.2 (1992), pp. 53–54; Raymond Challinor, Letter, LHR, 58.1 (1993), p. 6; Roy Church, Chartism and the Miners: A Reinterpretation, LHR, 56.3 (1997), pp. 23–36.
37. Malcolm Chase, Chartism: A New History (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2007), pp. 243–45.
38. Challinor, MacDonald, passim; idem, Lancashire and Cheshire Miners, Chapters 5–8; idem, The Rise of the Bureaucracy’, International Socialism (June–July 1971), pp. 16–18.
39. John Foster, Class Struggle and the Industrial Revolution: Early Industrial Capitalism in Three English Towns (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1974) pp. 234–36, 33, n.7.
40. Alan Campbell, The Scottish Miners 1874–1939, vol. 2: Trade Unions and Politics (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000), pp. 49–51.
41. See the essays in Independent Collier: The Coal Miner as Archetypal Proletarian Reconsidered, ed. by Royden Harrison (Hassocks: Harvester, 197–1874 (Edinburgh: John Donald, 1979), particularly chapter 10. See also, Gordon M. Wilson, Alexander McDonald, Leader of the Miners (Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press, 1982), pp. 208–11.
42. Higgins, More Years for the Locust, p. 82.
43. For background see John McIlroy, Always Outnumbered, Always Outgunned: The Trotskyists and the Trade Unions, in The High Tide of British Trade Unionism: Trade Unions and Industrial Politics 1964–1979, ed. by John McIlroy, Nina Fishman and Alan Campbell (2nd ed, Monmouth: Merlin Press, 2007), pp. 259–96, (pp. 270–285).
44. Challinor, Perspective of the Long Haul, p. 28.
45. And songs from The Jam, The Crux and the Tom Robinson Band.
46. Andrew Glover, ‘Death of a Passionate Historian and Lecturer’, Evening Chronicle (Newcastle), 4 February 2011.
47. Challinor, ‘Letter’, BSSLH, 18 (1969), p. 27; ‘Editorial’, ibid., pp. 2–3. I have written about this in John McIlroy, The Society for the Study of Labour History, 1956–1985: Its Origins and Its Heyday, in Making History: Organizations of Labour Historians in Britain since 1960, Labour History Review Fiftieth Anniversary Supplement, April 2010, ed. by John McIlroy, Alan Campbell, John Halstead and David Martin, pp. 19–112, (pp. 59–60).
48. Raymond Challinor A Radical Lawyer in Victorian England: W.P. Roberts and the Struggle for Workers’ Rights (London: I.B Tauris, 1990), p. viii.
49. Geoff Brown, ‘British Bolshevism’s Origins’, BSSLH, 38 (1979), p. 55.
50. Challinor, Origins of British Bolshevism.
51. Royden Harrison in conversation with the author; Stuart Macintyre, review, Historical Journal, 22.3 (1979), pp. 721–30 (p. 721).
52. Raymond Challinor, John S. Clarke: Parliamentarian, Poet, Lion-Tamer (London: Pluto Press, 1977), p. 81.
53. Challinor, John. S. Clarke.
54. ‘Editorial’, BSSLH, 48 (1984), pp. 4–5.
55. ‘Editorial’, LHR, 62.1 (1997), pp. 1–3, (p. 2); ‘Editorial’, LHR, 64.1 (1999), p. ii.
56. Alan Campbell, email to author, 30 March 2011.
57. The NELHS website carries much valuable material including an index of articles in North East Labour History and a history of the Society by Archie Potts: www.nelh.org.
58. Challinor, Radical Lawyer.
59. Wesley Pue, review, Victorian Review, 17 (1991), pp. 256–59; Mike Radford, review, Modern Law Review, 54.1 (1991), pp. 167–69.
60. Pue, review, 257.
61. David J. Moss, review, Albion, 23.4 (1991), pp. 772–74.
62. Pue, review, 257.
63. Radford, review; Pue, review. Ray’s original intention was to collaborate on the book with the talented, left-wing, legal scholar, Geoffrey de N. Clark, whom he had met through the SSLH. This was thwarted by the University College London academic’s early death in 1972.
64. Raymond Challinor, The Struggle for Hearts and Minds: Essays on the Second World War (Whitley Bay: Bewick Press, 1995).
65. Challinor, Radical Lawyer, p. ix.
66. Raymond Challinor, The Balance Sheet of the Labour Government, Socialist Review, March 1951 [accessed 19 March 2011].
67. Raymond Challinor, The Red Mole of History [accessed 19 February 2011].
68. See Neville Kirk, ‘Challenge, Crisis and Renewal? Themes in the Labour History of Britain, 1960–2010’, LHR, 75.2 (August 2010), 162–80.
 

ond Challinor: State Capitalism - A New Order (June 1948)



Raymond Challinor Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Raymond Challinor
“State Capitalism – a New Order”
(June 1948)

From Left, No. 140, June 1948.
Transcribed by Christian Hogsbjerg for Marxists.org 2007.

The recent timely discussion conducted in the columns of Left on recent developments of Russia, both internally and in relation to the other Great Powers, call for a re-analysis and clarification of position on the part of most socialists. The fact that this has led to some divergence of opinion is almost inevitable, since we are witnessing a hitherto inexperienced historic phenomena, namely, how the first Workers’ State, founded in an economically backward country, has reacted to the pressure of hostile Capitalism.
In such a re-evaluation three possible alternatives almost automatically come to the fore:


That the conquests of October, although slightly marred, remain intact. Those who maintain this traditional position, such as Comrade Coyler and Co., unconsciously place themselves in the position of defending Stalin’s Nationalistic Theory of “Socialism in One Country,” and of proving that Lenin’s thesis, i.e., “We do not merely live in a State but in a system of States and the existence of the Soviet side by side with imperialist states for any length of time is inconceivable” (Vol. 16, p. 102) is no longer valid. This none of them has done.
 
The second alternative is mainly resorted to by eclectics who have abandoned Marxism and rely almost on the crimes and manoeuvres of the Kremlin bureaucracy as their empiricalist yardstick. These people rightly consider the nationalisation of al1 the means of production the most ruthless form of exploitation, when not operated under Workers’ Control, and therefore term Russia State Capitalist. In so doing, it may be argued, they attribute to Capitalism a resiliency and adaptability which it does not seem to warrant.
 
The third alternative, that Russia is a new form of exploitative society, strangely enough, has not been raised by anybody during the discussion. Briefly it is this: the economic system cannot be characterised as Capitalism or Socialism in the ordinary sense of the terms, and so it must be something else. Some consider a bureaucratic collectivist state, the result of an historical accident, a bastard social formation due to the enmeshing of trends and influences unlikely to be seen again by this world.


The bureaucratic collectivists in denying that “the bourgeois relations of production are the last antagonistic form of the social process of production” (Marx), make a mistake much akin to that of Bernstein in his revision of Marxism two generations ago, which may help to throw some light on the Russian question.
In Das Kapital, Marx set himself the task of defining what Capitalism is, showing how the inner contradictions would ultimately lead to its downfall, and forecasting how it would develop till then. Bernstein saw that Capitalism was not developing entirely in the same way as Marx had envisaged, e.g., the emergence of joint stock companies. From the fact that Marx’s prognosis was wrong, Bernstein logically deduced his diagnosis was also wrong, and Capitalism was gradually eliminating its contradictions. This was not true: as Lenin ably demonstrated in his booklet on Imperialism, although Capitalism had acquired certain new features due to certain quantitative factors causing qualitative changes, the inner contradiction of Capitalism far from diminishing had greatly increased.
Now, reverting to the question of Russia, it does not follow that the theory that Russia is State Capitalist is invalidated by the fact that certain characteristics of Monopoly Capitalism are not present. The fact that a bureaucratic collectivist denies that Russia is either Socialist or Capitalist means that he denies Marx’s prognosis, and if he had the courage of his convictions, he would also deny Marx’s diagnosis.
But for those amongst us who have not abandoned Scientific Socialism for hysteria, it is important for us to see who controls the productive forces. Is it the workers or the bureaucracy? The workers to exert any effective influence over the means of production must have organs of expression – a political party, a trade union, or a factory committee, which are not in existence in Russia. Instead, the workers have to resort to riots, sabotage, absenteeism and slowing down work, that can hardly be described as weapons of a victorious proletariat.
Kravachenko, in his book, I Chose Freedom, vividly describes the conditions of the Russian workers, whom he divides into two groups: (i) the workers who remain nominally free and are under the same compulsions as in a capitalist economy, only their standard of living is relatively lower, and, with a ruling class on their backs living in greater comparative luxury then their British or American equivalents; (ii) a slave army of 10 to 15 million who are destined to meet a slow and gruesome death, many because they have fought this criminal regime on behalf of their class. These conditions of abject misery, exploitation and degradation are called by some Socialism. Colyer chooses Socialism; I choose Freedom.
These crude forms of exploitation are the economic consequences of Soviet isolation and its inevitable subordination to the economic laws of surrounding World Capitalism. But, due to the low productivity of the Russian worker, Russian Capitalism had to take a far more ruthless form than its Western European counterparts: it had to remain in the hands of the State – world conditions did not permit anything else other than State Capitalism.
Even Lenin acknowledged that State Capitalism existed within the framework of the Workers’ State since the theory of value, which is the theory of the world market continues to operate. Only if the worker intervenes in the process of production through workers’ control could effective blows be delivered at the theory of value.
However, with the revolution in the more advanced countries failing, this theory began to reassert its dominance again. Stalinists recognised this fact: in 1943 Leontiev, author of Outline of Political Economy, asserted that the theory of value, which inevitably means to a Marxist the existence of an exploitative class, functioned in Russia. Either the comrades who maintain that Russia is Socialist must dispute the facts admitted by Leontiev, and the Marxist conclusions he had already drawn in his hook, or they must break with the fundamentals of Marxism. Comrades, what is it to be?
We must assume they have adopted the latter course since in their haste to defend the Soviet Union they have carelessly discarded the very concepts of Marxist thought. To show this it will he necessary to state briefly the Marxist conceptions of society, Socialist, Capitalist and the transitional state.
Marx based his analysis on the activity of men engaged in the process of labour, so, when he came to deal with Capitalism his principal criticism lay in the fact that man’s labours were not fulfilling their proper purpose, the advancement of man, but were alienated and used for exactly the opposite purpose – the increased subjugation of man, which, in turn, led to the increased rebelliousness of man.
“Modern industry,” says Marx, “compels society under penalty of death to replace the detail worker of today crippled by lifelong repetition of one and the same trivial operation, and thus reduced to a mere fragment of man, by the fully developed individual, fit for a variety of labours, and to whom different social functions he performs are but so many modes of giving free scope to his own natural and acquired powers.” (Marx, Capital I, p. 534.) So it is a matter of life and death for society – Marx never used these words lightly – that man should be given the opportunity to develop into a human being. Now, making allowances for the backwardness of the Russian worker, can any evidence be produced to prove that he is being given more scope “to his own natural and acquired powers” in the Soviet Union? No – from the cradle to the grave he is intensely exploited.
He is probably born into a large family (abortion is no longer sanctioned as in Lenin’s day), he is then used as cheap labour by the exploiters in the evening, whilst in the daytime, unless his father is in a position to pay the exorbitant fees to send him to the Russian equivalent of Eton or Harrow, he receives a class education designed to keep him in the class where he was born. Kravachenko’s account of his adult life has already been given; he has to work exceedingly hard, unless his rich uncle has left him the family fortunes in the form of tax-exempt Soviet bonds.
I submit: the life of an average Russian worker shows there is no fundamental difference between the Russian economy and that of any other capitalist country, the only difference at all being that certain features of classical Capitalism cannot grow in an economically backward country warped to compete with other great powers.
“If the crises revealed the incapacity of the bourgeoisie any longer to control modern productive forces (as it did in Russia in 1917 – R.C.), the conversion of the great organisations for production and communication into joint stock companies and state property show that for this purpose the bourgeoisie can be dispensed with. All the social functions of the capitalists are now carried out by salaried employees (the Stalinist bureaucracy in Russia – R.C.).” (Engels, Anti-Duhring, p. 304.)
The transformation of private property into state property does not deprive the economy of its capitalist character. Indeed, the modern state is essentially a capitalist machine: for it means government of the capitalist, by the capitalist and for the capitalist. The more productive forces it takes over, the more citizens it exploits. The worker remains a wage slave, and the capitalist relationship is not abolished: it is rather pushed to the extreme.
The ruthlessness of Russian State Capitalism can be seen most markedly in the foreign policy he pursues, that flows from the inner needs and contradictions of the economy. As Russia is the most highly developed and hideous form of Capitalism, “the general contradiction of Capitalism” which as Marx says, is the falling of surplus value in relation to total capital, has reached its most advanced state of decline. To even retain the profit rate at a ridiculously low level it is necessary to plunder the means of production and labour power everywhere and in every conceivable way. It has plunged Russia into an expansionist policy that can only be described as bureaucratic imperialism.
The fact that it is not accompanied by the export of finance presents no difficulties. For with the decline of Capitalism a new trend in imperialism becomes discernible. Lenin noticed it over thirty years ago. Nations began to seize land from various political, economic or strategic motives, even that of merely preventing others from gaining it, and not necessarily for the exportation of capital.
Bureaucratic imperialism manifests itself in five ways:


The acquisition of land. The Russian Empire gained 275,000 square miles of territory inhabited by 25 million people as well as extending its influence over the whole of Eastern Europe. (At this point, we may inquire what is the nature of the economy of the Eastern European countries, Socialist or Capitalist? If the latter, how do the “apologists” explain away the existence of three capitalist countries, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, within the Soviet Union?)
 
Reparations are demanded from the Italian and German workers even greater than those demanded by the other capitalist powers, for the crimes of Fascism. Contrast this with Lenin’s attitude to imperialist demands at the end of the First World War.
 
Slave labour. The dependence of Russia on slave labour is shown up by the use of the best German and Japanese workers, sadly needed at home, in unknown quantities. The Soviet economy is the first economy since Roman times which is based on slave labour.
 
Trade agreements, bearing remarkable resemblance to those of Germany before the war with the Eastern European countries, have been made. These usually are dictated by Russia.
 
The wholesale looting of Eastern Europe and Manchuria, depriving the workers of these countries of their tools and increasing the possibilities of starvation.


I therefore submit: from the above evidence it is criminal to call Russia Socialist. This harms not only the cause of the Russian worker but also that of Revolutionary Socialism. The only thing to do is to tell the truth about Russia and to show it has nothing in common with Socialism.
I am of the opinion that Socialism can only be achieved on world scale. After the conquest of power the principal task, that of changing the productive relationships, still remains. That task, as the leaders of October so often stressed, cannot be achieved within the confines of one State. If it is not achieved, as it was not achieved in Russia, the result is a monstrosity.
 



Dear Editor
Al Richardson’s obituary of Frank Maitland was favourable and correct, but it did not, I think, mention some vital facets of his life. Frank was one of the greatest orators I have ever heard, exceptionally effective when addressing mass meetings. With careless abandon, he would fling out his arrows of socialist wisdom and vituperation. The political temperature was always higher when he sat down than when he stood up.
Yet at the same time, he was widely and well read. It is not surprising that one of the best, perhaps the best, collections of left-wing literature in Britain is the Maitland–Sara collection housed in the Modern Records Centre at Warwick University.
Frank had a genuine love of books. Reference should therefore be made to his own publishing venture. Strange to relate, this was named the Porcupine Press. It produced a number of books, including a study of the revolution of 1848, edited by George Woodcock, the leading anarchist, and, in my opinion, the best autobiography of a typical manual worker, describing his life in the first half of the twentieth century — Ifan Edwards’ No Gold on my Shovel, published in 1952. A neglected historical classic, it deserves to be reprinted.
Occasionally, Frank’s own writings have been republished. The Wildcat Group got out an assortment of articles from Solidarity, the Clydeside syndicalist journal. Entitled Class War on the Home Front, it contains material on revolutionary opposition to the Second World War. Among other things, Frank wades in on the issue of the relationship between party and class. Interestingly, while the Workers International League, Revolutionary Communist Party and similar organisations sought to use the wartime Arctic convoys as a means of re-establishing links with the Left Opposition in the Soviet Union and lost comrades in the icy waters as a consequence, Solidarity published With the Arctic Convoys by an American comrade. Though I have no proof, I suspect the writer may have been in the American Workers Party, and that Frank may have encouraged him to write it.
Though most revolutionaries in the post-Second World War period thought that when the working class moved leftwards it would be through the Labour Party, Frank thought it might be possible to win over the Independent Labour Party and use it as the weapon. Among other Marxists adopting the same position were Tom Colyer, Hugo Dewar, F.A. Ridley and Alex Auld. As a result, those studying Trotskyist history have failed to consult properly material that appeared in ILP publications.
To end with a personal note, Frank Maitland was one of the four individuals who influenced my socialist development. The other three were F.A. Ridley, Tony Cliff and Harry McShane.
On an entirely separate issue, in Al Richardson’s review of Barry Lee Woolley’s book Adherents of Permanent Revolution, Al wrongly attacks the author over Ted Grant. This is a reference to an American socialist with that name prominent in the 1930s and 1940s. His picture appears in Alan Wald’s study of James T. Farrell. He is not to be confused with our own Ted Grant whom we love and cherish so much.
Raymond Challinor


Al Richardson replies:
Please check your facts, Raymond, before rushing to print! Since Woolley describes this Ted Grant as representing England (p. 40), it is plain that he thinks it is our Ted Grant. Actually, there have been three Edward Grants in the Trotskyist movement — another was a comrade of yours in the early 1950s in the Socialist Review Group. His papers are deposited in Nuffield College, Oxford.
 



Nationalisation in British Politics
E. Eldon Barry
Cape, 45s
The nationalisation issue is the great divide of politics. Traditionally, socialists favour nationalisation; Tories oppose it. Yet, imperceptibly, things have changed. Private enterprise has become less private, less enterprising. Instead of the image of the self-confident businessman, owning his own factory, we now have the giant, impersonal monopolies, reliant on State contracts or subsidies. Likewise on the other side of the equation: nationalisation no longer arouses the same responses, the old socialist fervour. Nobody today believes that, thanks to British Rail, we will reach the New Jerusalem.
Most people stand, on this issue, in a state of confusion. Barry’s book, an excellent historical survey of the variety of reasons for advocating nationalisation, helps to show why this is. In the past, with the iniquities of private ownership so glaringly apparent, the emphasis of critics has been centred on getting rid of the boss. In a lazy way, and with not touch thought, nationalisation has been equated with Socialism.
But this will just not do. Throughout the world there is a general tendency for increasing state intervention. If we are going to say that nationalisation equals Socialism, then Stalin’s Russia was the promised land, with countries like South Africa and Israel, where there is a substantial amount of public ownership, not far behind. The way out of this morass of confusion, in my opinion, depends on understanding Marx’s analysis of the tendency for the rate of profit to decline. This, has meant that – to take Britain, for example, some, sectors of the economy have been insufficiently lucrative to attract private investors. Consequently, over the years, they become increasingly inefficient and antiquated. The money for modernisation could come from nowhere but the public coffers. This was the raison d’être for the nationalisation measures of the Labour Government 1945-51: the recovery of the whole economy would have been endangered without cheap transport and fuel.
So the form of ownership is not the decisive question; what matters are the interests in which industry is being run. When considered from this angle, the Attlee Administration’s nationalisation measures are seen to be steps essential to preserve the well-being of capitalism. Hence in 13 years’ Tory rule nothing was done to de-nationalise the mines, railways, electricity, gas. That the Tories learnt to live with nationalisation is not surprising since they were the party to bring the first nationalisation bill before Parliament. In his extremely fine and detailed historical account, Barry unfortunately omits to mention that Lord Palmerston nationalised the Indian railways. The mutiny of 1857 revealed the necessity, from a military standpoint, of moving troops quickly from one place to another. This was hampered by different gauge tracks and lack of centralised coordination. Lord Palmerston’s reason for introducing nationalisation, therefore, was not to run cheap seaside excursions but to exploit the Indian masses more ruthlessly.
Obviously, simple state ownership does not mean socialism. A cursory inspection of the army and prisons prove mis point. What is necessary, the essential additive, is workers’ control, industrial democracy, call it what you will. Without it, we merely have a trend towards state capitalism, a new despotism that might be worse for the workers than the status quo.
Barry realises the dangers. The value of his book, which embodies tremendous research, is that future controversy on this important topic will take place with a clearer historical understanding. It is well worth reading.



John Hughes does not consider the crucial issue. Can a Labour Government, working within the capitalist system, operate a socialist incomes policy? If it can, then it remains to be proven. If it can’t, then John Hughes has based his economic policies on a myth. It is no answer for him to point to this or that socialist idea he has incorporated within this fallacious framework. Indeed, the fact that his position contains progressive features within a generally unprogressive stance only makes matters worse. A Pied Piper with attractive tunes is the most dangerous. John Hughes accuses me of misrepresentation. He denies giving succour to the Right-wing and challenges me to furnish quotations to prove it. But the charge is not based upon any particular passage. It comes from a consideration of the objective role played by advocates of incomes policies. Since the idea was first mooted, their general effect on the Labour Movement has been debilitating. In the early ‘fifties, the main debate was about public ownership. The Left contended it was an essential and integral part of any socialist programme, that society could only be transformed after the commanding heights had been wrested from the capitalist class. But the Right regarded this as an old-fashioned, fundamentalist approach. Socialism was, to them, a question of equality; ownership remained irrelevant. [1] It was in this political context that Alexander and Hughes wrote their wages plan pamphlet, thus making it possible for the faint-hearted, weary of putting the case for public ownership to unreceptive audiences, to espouse the same ideals as Crosland, while doing nothing to challenge capitalist society.
Subsequently, the Left supporters of an incomes policy – they might be termed the Tribune school of economists – gave the impression that the great day would dawn when Harold Wilson entered Number 10. One can scour the pre-1964 writings of Hughes and the others without finding a single warning that a Labour Government’s incomes policy might make trade unionists its main target. Their efforts were, in part, responsible for creating a favourable climate for the Government, where workers accepted measures far more damaging than those of Selwyn Lloyd.
Whereas International Socialism advocates the creation of shop stewards’ defence committees to counter the policies of the Labour Government, Hughes is proud to sit on a Labour committee formulating policy. His recent Fabian pamphlet, An Economic Strategy for Labour, reads as if it was specially written for the Chancellor of the Exchequer as an alternative to the brief he received from the Treasury. This is sound, practical work – given one assumption: that the crisis of British capitalism is superficial. In which case, it may be resolved by a brilliant bit of furniture-moving. But if it is thoroughgoing then it will require more than a few bright moves by the boys at the top. A tremendous struggle, the mobilisation of class forces, will be necessary before the garbage can be swept away.
All Hughes’s writings show, he has no conception of what this will involve. In his current article, he talks about the need to extend workers’ rights by statute – that is, by the capitalist State! Most workers are painfully aware that rights are only acquired through struggle, the chief adversary now being the capitalist State. Then, he mentions that the Labour Party study group, of which he was a member, recommends ‘a measure of workers’ participation.’ A measure? Either the workers control or they don’t. If they don’t control, to sit on the board of management can only involve them in administering capitalist industrial relations – sackings, speed-ups, etc. – over which they have no effective control. This type of industrial set-up, similar to co-determination in conservative Western Germany, has nothing in common with Socialism. It is simply an astute move to embroil trade-union leaders in the working of capitalism and thus divorce them even further from their rank and file. If this can be done under the guise of industrial democracy, then this is just a further dividend.
What is painfully apparent from all Hughes’s writings is that he does not understand the role of many of the present leaders of the Labour movement. No more the heroic days when they led in class struggles, now they are there to keep their membership quiet. In industrial strife, they help to restore normal capitalist relations. Remarks which workers would not tolerate from employers’ representatives can be made acceptable by these ‘labour lieutenants of the capitalist class.’ The present trend is towards State capitalism. The State increasingly regulates, controls and supervises the economy. It strives to centralize decision-making, to strip shop stewards of whatever power they possess. Workers’ initiative – a threat to the system – is inhibited by long-term contracts, which regulate wages and production. All this may appear progressive to those nurtured on Stalinism or the Fabian Society where State control means Socialism. Yet, in reality, these moves strengthen the status quo: Socialism must be democratic, the energy and direction must come from below. By contrast, these moves are, at best, democratic in form only: workers are manipulated, things are supposed to be done on their behalf, whereas in fact the whole exercise is to preserve the rule of a few. Hughes raises the question of whether big business would resist a Labour government’s steps towards Socialism. The whole question is too hypothetical: you don’t fall out with your shadow. The two have become so close to one another, organisationally through joint boards of government and industry, and politically through a common perspective of ‘growth without radical reform,’ that serious disagreement is conceivable. As for expecting the Labour leaders to introduce Socialism, there is a greater chance of them all being converted to Seventh Day Adventism.
The situation in the steel industry clearly illustrates the change wrought in the relations between social democracy and capital in recent years. In his admirable pamphlet Hughes describes the resistance, tantamount to industrial sabotage, used against the Labour Government’s nationalisation bill from 1949 to 1951. But the same thing has not happened again. Why? Lord Melchett, a steel baron, symbolises the difference. Instead of sabotaging the industry, this time he controls it. He is chairman of the National Steel Corporation. On 21 January, the Sunday Express reported that he was actually dictating the salaries to be received by himself and other members of the board. The following week Tribune made anguished noises about this application of the Government’s incomes policy. All in vain! The Tribunite MPs were powerless to do anything about it. For, as The Observer (29 January 1967) stated, ‘during all the long hours devoted to the Steel Bill, MPs never once discussed how the steel industry is going to be run under State ownership. This, in the view of many MPs, quite crucial issue was not being discussed in the House of Commons, but by Lord Melchett’s re-organisation committee meeting among the splendours of Lord Bearsted’s Upton House in Oxfordshire.’ There was no resistance from the steel barons this time because, on the whole structure of the organisation and its method of working, the Wilson Administration accepted their demands. As for the rest of capitalist industry, it stands to benefit from a rationalisation of steel production, the economies of scale, that might help to push up profit margins. For John Hughes, there are personal lessons in current steel nationalisation: instead of talking to the Scunthorpe lads about the Labour Government’s plans for extending industrial democracy, he would be better advised to discuss the whittling away of parliamentary democracy by the Labour Government. John Hughes challenges me to say how I would recommend steelworkers to deal with the problems confronting them. Without a detailed knowledge of the industry, it is impertinent of me to make concrete proposals but I would lay down three guidelines:


First, State capitalism’s control of the industry will not make it any less ugly than it is under monopoly capitalism. Indeed, the direct intervention of the government in its affairs will increase workers’ difficulties.
 
Second, all types of incomes policy must be opposed in the absence of a transformation of society. Likewise with long-term contracts. At best such agreements reflect the class relationship of forces at a given moment in time. If we live in a period of growing class consciousness, a better bargain could be struck in the future. So why restrict manoeuvrability? This is better than increases on the instalment plan, which are almost sure to be stopped somewhere along the line by Selwyn Lloyd and Harold Wilson freezes.
 
Third, the crucial aim is to build strong rank-and-file organisation. There are likely to be clashes between the trade union bureaucracy and unofficial committees and unofficial strikers. But such organisation undoubtedly pays off. Here I would refer them to an excellent analysis by Hughes of the effects of militant activity in the coal-mines in the 1950s. I do not know how he reconciles this article with his support for an hierarchically-run incomes policy. Nevertheless, here are Hughes’ conclusions: ‘Comparing 1959 with 1951, four strike-prone coalfields showed the biggest percentage increase in real earnings per shift (Scotland +31 per cent; North-east +26 per cent; North-west +25 per cent; South-west +23 per cent).’


After showing that these increases bore no relationship to profitability or greater productivity, both of which were higher in other coalfields, Hughes correctly draws the conclusion: ‘in the 1950s local and unofficial strikes, wrested improved earnings that the machinery of conciliation and arbitration was unlikely to have conceded without such pressure.’ [2] Historically, the mines provide another useful lesson: a healthy and vigorous working-class organisation cannot exist without struggle. In the 1870s, after the collapse of a hard-fought strike, the coalowners imposed on the Welsh miners a sliding scale. This related wages to the price of coal. It also bore a certain resemblance to present-day incomes policy: decisions were automatically taken at the top by the leaders of both sides of industry; the ordinary collier was given no scope for initiative. As a result, the union leaders ‘became very largely a servant of two masters,’ as Professor Jevons observed. [3] Moreover, union organisation, since it had no function, began to atrophy. Page Arnot, the NUM official historian, comments, ‘Under these conditions effective trade unionism in South Wales disappeared.’ [4] So the miners provide us with both sides of the coin: struggle is good; absence of struggle is bad. The well-being of the class depends on self activity and self expression. As it grows in power, it becomes more confident and develops a healthy contempt for the Jones’, both Aubrey and Jack.

Footnotes
1. Strange as it may now seem, in those days Anthony Crosland was an arch-advocate of equality. See his Future of Socialism, where he says that equality is ‘the most characteristic feature of socialist thought today’ (p.77).
2. J. Hughes, The Rise of the Militants, Trade Union Affairs, Winter 1960-61, pp.54-55.
3. H.S. Jevons, The British Coal Industry, p.364.
4. R. Page Arnot, The Miners, Vol.1, p.61.
 



Troubled Giant
F.S. Northedge
LSE/Bell, 84s
Dr Northedge analyses British foreign policy from 1916 to 1939. With a wealth of factual material, he contends successive governments failed to adjust themselves to changed world conditions. Imbued with conservatism, they tried to preserve the trappings of grandeur when Britain had slipped from being a first-class power.
We have a bi-partisan foreign policy at present. Dr Northedge’s study clearly shows a historical continuity extends from Lloyd George to Neville Chamberlain and – we might add – to Harold Wilson today. The world has changed while British policy remains the same – especially East of Suez. Dr Northedge’s book is obviously the fruit of painstaking research. He has assembled data not readily available elsewhere. For a long time, his work is sure to be regarded as a standard reference book.
 



From Yalta to Vietnam
David Horowitz
Penguin, 10s6d
The Cold War as History
Louis J. Halle
Chatto & Windus, 50s
The United States, with 6 per cent of the world’s population, owns 60 per cent of its wealth. Since this vast inequality was not God-created, it must have been man-made and man-maintained. Indeed, after reading Mr Horowitz’s exciting book, one reaches the inescapable conclusion that American foreign policy is designed to preserve the vast wealth accruing to US businessmen from the exploitation of others. Cause of the world’s troubles is primarily the United States.
Mr Horowitz shows the communist bogy is often used by the State Department as camouflage, a useful cover under which to intervene militarily in other countries’ affairs and to install its own stooges. He also shows how America’s aggressive foreign policy dovetails with its domestic requirements. The allocation of gigantic sums to military expenditure – rising by a staggering 46 per cent in the six years 1960 to 1966 – has been a factor in stabilising the American economy.
Mr Horowitz’s book is well-written, well-documented, and will be a valuable asset to people in the struggle for peace. Every reader of this journal should definitely have a copy.
But, alas, I cannot speak so highly for Mr Halle’s efforts. He attempts to write a Thucydides-like account of the cold war. But instead of the cool, impartial view from Mount Olympus, what emerges is a picture of how things appear from the top of Capitol Hill. The American leaders have ‘the highest endowments of humankind’ with not a trace of napalm on their fingers. Since 1945, they have repeatedly saved ‘the honor of mankind.’
Before anybody suggest Mr Halle should stop writing and revert to his previous occupation, let me inform them he was a policy planner in the US State Department.







FOREWORD
We are delighted to be publishing once again work by someone who is not a member of the Communist Party History Group; we hope to receive more such manuscripts. Mr. Challinor challenges the interpretations of a key period in trade union history which have been made by authors of very different viewpoints. His study should interest active trade unionists as well as historians of the Labour Movement, for he is concerned with the origins of ‘the tension between the leadership and the rank-and-file’. At a time when the history of the working-class movement has achieved complete academic respectability, it is important that the unorthodox view should be published.





PART ONE: MINERS’ TRADE UNIONISM 1862–5
In the 1860’s, the miners faced the problem of how to build a national organisation. There existed, at the time, a number of local and county unions. Periodically they would meet, discuss common problems, and endeavour to formulate a common policy. But usually they failed. The powerful pull of local separatism condemned them to impotence. Yet, if somehow unity was to be achieved, it raised the questions: In what way? For what purpose? Most people possessing confused and conflicting conceptions, were unable to give a clear answer. It took the activities and arguments of almost 30 years before the issue was finally resolved, with the formation of the Miners’ Federation in 1889. 
The British Miners’ Benefit Society
The first milestone along this lengthy and tortuous road was the British Miners’ Benefit Society. This was not so much a trade union as an attempt, by performing some of the functions customarily associated with trade unions, to render the formation of an organisation on a specifically working class basis unnecessary. The Society’s three declared aims were (I) to promote the application of science to mining, a means of lessening accidents and improving efficiency; (II) to improve the standard of education, thereby giving miners enlightenment, a spur to self-betterment that might make them strive to lessen the squalor and degradation for which mining communities were notorious; and (III) to provide an insurance scheme so that the provident could take precautions against possible injury and death. The Society’s sponsors could not envisage any responsible person, whether employer or workman, disagreeing with its worthy aims. Led by members of the aristocracy, it expected to be regarded as a noble example of philanthropy. Besides improving the miners’ lot, it was intended to foster social and industrial harmony.
The rules of the British Miners’ Benefit Society were first published in November 1862. [1] Control of the Society was to be in the hands of the Council, a body selected entirely from honorary members, who paid 10 shillings annually or £5 for life membership. Rule 9 stipulated the Council would meet monthly, with a quorum of only three. Obviously, ordinary working miners would have no say in the running. So that it could never drift in the direction of industrial strife, command of the Council was securely placed in the hands of Lord Raynham, Lord Kingsdale, General Zaba and other distinguished persons. All this, it was thought, would have another advantage: led by people of such high standing, the miners, who were to be benefit members, could be confident their money would be safe. They could pay their 3s.5d a week assured that in the event of injury, they would get l0d a day for six months or, if they were killed that their widows would get 4s a week for the rest of their lives.
The Society regarded itself as being superior to other schemes. Many local relief societies were actually unsound. Some were run by inexperienced and incompetent officials. Administrative costs tended to be high, and there were instances of officials absconding with the funds. Moreover, because of their small scale of operation, a sudden catastrophe, resulting in a large call on funds, often overstrained resources. When local societies went bankrupt, not only did it cause hardship but also created a climate of uncertainty that made workers reluctant to save. That highly esteemed virtue of thrift was consequently damaged.
With the constitution finalised, Lord Raynham and his entourage toured the coalfields to explain the advantages of his Society. He received an enthusiastic reception in South Staffs, the North-east and Lancashire. A typical meeting was that at Wigan on December 14, 1862. Miners journeyed from miles around to hear him. They started off from Chorley at five in the morning, led by a band that awoke the whole township, “almost every door was open, much resembling Brussels on the morning of the battle of Waterloo.” [2] In Wigan, the Mayor, who was also a coal-owner, presided, while the town clerk and magistrates sat on the platform. In the audience were 15,000 colliers. They listened attentively to Lord Raynham when he denounced drinking and gambling as evil pastimes. They applauded when he pleaded for improved conditions. They all agreed with his lordship when he called for greater safety, not only for the miners’ sake but to protect the owners’ property.
The cordiality of the immediate response to his message did not prepare Lord Raynham for the hostility that was to follow. The Colliery Guardian, an influential trade journal, sneered at “the philanthropic lawyers, patriotic noblemen and such-like ornaments of society” wandering around the coalfields. [3] At best, they were well-meaning interlopers, meddling in an industry when they had no special knowledge. It was feared their enthusiasm would wane as quickly as it was awakened. Their departure might leave the British Miners’ Benefit Society to develop into a fully fledged trade union. Some coal-owners also objected because it competed with their own sickness and benefit clubs. These were means of lessening labour mobility, since a man would lose all the money he had contributed to the scheme if he left the particular colliery, as well as being a way of augmenting profits. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that miners were sometimes dismissed when they joined the British Miners’ Benefit Society instead of remaining in their masters’ clubs.
Objections on the same grounds came from the men. Just like the employers, workers had their own benefit clubs, which often functioned as trade unions. They viewed Lord Raynham’s as a rival scheme, a competitor for members. In the North-east, where the Northumberland and Durham Permanent Benefit Society also started in 1862, its officials boycotted Lord Raynham’s meetings. In Lancashire, diplomatic union leaders did appear on His Lordship’s platform, paying lip-service to his scheme, but they kept the funds of their local societies securely under their own control. From bitter experience, Lord Raynham learnt it was easier to get colliers to take their hands out of their pockets to clap than to pay 3.5d a week.
Relations between the British Miners’ Benefit and local unions rapidly deteriorated. One of the Society’s spokesmen declared, “if the concentration of the whole strength and resources of the miners of England under the most able, influential and economical management should happen, perchance, to deprive a few local agitators of their power of living off the labour of others, then it would not be a bad thing.” [4] Its advocates argued that the national scheme would have benefits which transcended any a local society could provide. With three M.P.s as supporters – Lord Raynham, Col. Townley and Col. Stuart – the British Miners’ Benefit could bring colliers’ problems to the attention of the highest authorities in the land. It would thereby be able to secure improved safety regulations. Thus, the Society would combine prevention with cure; lessening the number of accidents while, at the same time, relieving victims of accidents that nevertheless did happen. Since this was something local societies could not accomplish they were contemptuously referred to as, “The Pitmen’s Grave and Coffin Clubs”.
But local unions insisted that they too were concerned with safety. To dispel misgivings on this score, many inserted a clause to this effect in their statement of aims. Moreover, against the pretensions of the British Miners’ Benefit, they contended “that there cannot be better preventive measures taken by the London Council or by the seat of science than giving the miners power to choose their own inspectors out of themselves.” [5] The local unions had intimate, day-to-day contact with colliers. At grass-roots level, they had the machinery to collect subscriptions which Lord Raynham’s Society lacked. He discovered with chagrin that colliers were loath to remit monies to a far-distant and unknown organisation. This reluctance was strengthened by a feeling that the British Miners’ Benefit was not their property. “They objected to the ship,” a Durham miner explained “because they could not have full command of it”. [6]
The British Miners’ Benefit never prospered. In March 1863, its secretary called for 5,000 members to get it on a secure footing. Whether it achieved this target or not, there can be no doubt that a Northumbrian leader was right in describing it as “a name without an existence.” [7]
 
The British Miner and its Editor
All this came as a bitter disappointment to John Towers, editor of The British Miner. For he had hoped that the Society and the paper would jointly prosper. They had the same outlook and the same problems. They both suffered from antagonism, born of competition. In the case of The British Miner, its rival was The Beehive, a weekly journal after the same working class readership.
The Beehive devoted a long leading article to attacking The British Miner after it had published only one issue. In his first editorial, Towers had maintained that a natural harmony of interest existed between masters and men. Labour was dependent on capital. Hence, if there was a greater amount of capital, the volume of employment would also be greater. The capitalist’s profits and the workman’s wages increased proportionally. John Hales, for The Beehive, disputed this view. In the past 50 years, he argued, the pace at which profits advanced far outstripped wages. He said Towers was wrong to condemn all strikes; many had been successful. Indeed, it was only through limiting the supply of labour, either by restricting entry to an occupation or by strikes, that workers’ incomes could be advanced. Hales concluded by mentioning the dubious people, with lavish expense accounts, associated with The British Miner. [8]
A month later, The Beehive made a second onslaught. It challenged Towers to say whether he thought the miners were getting a fair day’s pay for a fair day’s work. If so, Towers should say so. If not, he should say why his paper was doing nothing about it. The Beehive darkly hinted that its competitor was run by a paid stooge of the masters and favoured the industrial status quo. [9]
John Towers was certainly in a highly vulnerable position. He had never worked at a colliery. In these circumstances miners, who are generally a very clannish lot, would regard him with suspicion. The Beehive’s attacks merely served to confirm their misgivings, heightening Towers’ sense of isolation and failure. In an editorial, on May 2, 1863, he expressed his despondency: “the Miner was established to protect the interests of the pitmen and miners of this country specially; but as they would not seem, generally, to desire an organ … We resolve to devote ourselves, in future, to interests of the working class as a whole.” [10]
But Towers did not carry out his resolve. In the following few months the fortunes of The British Miner changed dramatically. Paradoxically, Towers’ isolation from colliers created the conditions for his success. The need to secure readers and writers for his journal propelled him along a path he would not otherwise have taken. With so few contacts in the coalfields he could not afford to offend any of them. Everybody who sent in a contribution was sure that it would appear. So, gradually, pitmen began to see that The British Miner could become, for them, a means of expression. An impressive column of correspondence, averaging 50 letters a week by spring 1864, came from all parts of Britain, the authentic voice of the colliers, expressing their manifold grievances, many in angry and tortured tones. No attempt was made to edit or restrain correspondents. While Towers felt free to advance his own opinions in the editorial columns, the rest of the paper was written, almost entirely, by men with coal dust on their faces.
The transformation of The British Miner into being a genuine miners’ journal was assisted by prevailing conditions. It coincided with an upswing in the coalfields with local unions being formed and discontent widespread. Miners felt they needed a journal of their own. The Beehive could not fill this requirement. Its pages were open to all trades. For want of something better, The British Miner became the most widely read paper in mining communities.
John Towers versus Alexander MacDonald – two views of the New Union
It was through its correspondence columns that the proposal to form – or, rather re-form – a national organisation was initially mooted. In Lancashire, trade union activity had been expanding rapidly. The Wigan union first made itself viable, then helped build local unions in St. Helens, Worsley, Famworth and Kearsley. There was a greater membership and degree of cohesion than had existed in the county since the 1840s. Better organisation led to higher wages. Realising this, Lancashire miners thought even more benefits would accrue if they could achieve the same unity nationally as they had achieved locally. They had been sending collections to the men locked out in Scotland. So, through The British Miner, they proposed that links between the Scottish and Lancashire miners should be put on a more lasting basis; that the colliers from other coalfields be encouraged to co-operate with them; and that their ultimate objective should be to call a general conference. [11] Immediately, this aroused discussion. A month later, in June 1863, the South Yorkshire Miners’ Society proposed a national conference be held. As a preliminary, leaders addressed meetings on amalgamation in Yorkshire, Lancashire and other places. Letters on the subject regularly appeared in The British Miner. And on November 9, 1863, delegates assembled at Leeds for the inaugural conference of the Miners’ National Association.
At the Leeds conference, in a confused way, two conflicting views on the role of the new organisation began to emerge. One school of thought harked back nostalgically to the 1840s. Then, the Miners’ Association, led by men like Jude and W.P. Roberts, had been a powerful force throughout the land. It had strived to develop a centralised leadership, a high command to lead struggles for better pay and conditions. Its general stance had been one of open conflict with the owners. Significantly, most delegates at the Leeds conference thought they were merely reviving the old Miners’ Association, not forming a fresh organisation. They continued to use the old name; only a dozen years later did a new title gain general acceptance. [12] The second school of thought, led by Alexander MacDonald, considered it imperative not to return to the ‘forties but to learn lessons from them. The Miners’ Association had been smashed by superior might. The same would occur in the ‘sixties if they sought open confrontation. Indeed, MacDonald had journeyed to Leeds from Scotland, where the union had largely been destroyed in the lock out. [13] Therefore, said MacDonald, industrial disputes must be avoided. The full weight of union authority had got to be brought down on the side of preserving peace. Arbitration and conciliation should be used to settle differences. As an alternative way forward to the illusory one of strike action, MacDonald counter-posed the need for improved legislation.
The two strategies necessarily involved differing tactics. If class war were to be fought, it ideally required high subscriptions, a pooling of resources, a large membership. If legislation were to be the objective, then membership; subscriptions and unity could be far less. More important was to acquire friends in Parliament. To do this, an appearance of ultra-respectability had to be cultivated. They had to disassociate themselves completely from the violent excesses to which miners were prone since these were liable to alienate public sympathy. Moreover, when legislation was the aim, it was easier and more convenient to have a small clique to speak on behalf of the membership, whose role, except for signing petitions and attending the occasional meeting, remained passive.
At the Leeds conference MacDonald won. He became President, and all the Association’s national council were his supporters. To add to his success, the constitution was largely modelled along MacDonaldite lines. Yet, as so often happens, conference decisions are not the last word.
John Towers, if anything, stood to the right of the union leaders. He opposed strikes (just as MacDonald did), but he also objected to trying to get fresh legislation. He argued that it was futile to get more Acts of Parliament when existing legislation, on such things as truck and checkweighman, was not being enforced. Formally, Towers’ stance appeared to be ultra-conservative. In reality, the logic of events pushed him into a position where he constituted a serious challenge to MacDonald’s policy of moderation.
The origin of their quarrel appears to have been personal. Towers did much of the preparatory work for the Leeds conference. He acted as secretary during the proceedings. Being an ambitious man, when it came to election of officers, he was not content with the secretaryship. He stood for president, and this seems to have been his undoing. MacDonald defeated him 44 votes to 3. Then, one of MacDonald’s followers ousted Towers from the secretaryship by 25 votes to 4. Towers left Leeds with no standing in the organisation he had helped to create. But MacDonald’s objections to Towers were not entirely personal. He disagreed with The British Miner’s policy of publishing all letters. These frequently attacked the coal-owners or criticised union leaders; written in immoderate language, they were likely to lead to industrial strife – it was precisely this type of rank-and-file expression that MacDonald deemed to be the danger. He supported the much more restrained approach of The Beehive in preference to that of The British Miner.
 
W.P. Roberts and Blaina
In January 1864, the quarrel reached new dimensions, as a result of a law case in South Wales. The workers at Blaina colliery felt aggrieved. They were not paid all their wages in coins of the realm. Moreover, they claimed they were being robbed: 30 to 35 cwts. of coal had to be hewn before the company paid them the wages for a ton. A deputation visited the manager and asked, as they were entitled under the 1860 Act, for the right to appoint a checkweighman. The manager refused, and so the men were still more angry. They decided to have a one-day protest strike. This led to sackings and arrests. In the middle of the night men were dragged from their beds, handcuffed, and taken 9 miles, through the snow, to Tredegar. There they were charged, under the Master and Servants Act, with breach of contract.
The South Wales local union approached W.P. Roberts to conduct the defence. In reply to the charge of breach of contract, Roberts argued, first, that there was no contract; second, if there were a contract, when wages should have been paid in full; and third, that in the circumstances the men were justified in the course they took. He placed great emphasis on the owner’s violation of the Truck Act and the Mines Regulation Act 1860: “I say, as a matter of law, that where the law gives protection to a contract, and one party refuses to grant that protection, the contract is broken.” The presiding magistrate; however, ruled that the case was being tried under the Master and Servant Act; whether there were any other violations of this law was irrelevant to the matter at hand. But Roberts was undaunted. Time and time again, much to the anger of the Magistrate, he continued to bring up the issues of truck.
Roberts had many years experience of lighting such cases. His usual way was to indulge in a war of attrition. Large numbers of witnesses were called to make almost the same points. At Thornley, in 1843, in another case involving breach of contract, he was prepared to put 400 workmen in the witness-box. The advantage of this tactic is that, since owners discover prosecution involves wasting inordinate amounts of time and energy, they think carefully before they prosecute their workmen again. It also gives workers an opportunity to describe sufferings, elicit public sympathy, and use the court-room to expose the employers’ iniquities.
In the Tredegar trial where the presiding magistrate was a friend and neighbour of the coal-owner, Roberts realised he was in a hostile court. There were frequent angry scenes. The magistrate accused him, on several occasions, of insulting the bench. Once he adjourned the case for, he said, self-protection. But then Roberts, in full fury, was a formidable foe. He told the court that “the present struggle was for the existence and continuation of that mighty domestic institution, the truck system. They called slavery in America ‘the domestic Institution’, and he heard the truck system had a similar title in South Wales.” One of his witnesses, an orphan girl, Janet James, caused a sensation, when she said she had worked pushing coal-tubs around the pit-brow for more than two years:
“My wages have been 5s. 6d. and 6s. a week. During the whole time, I did not receive any money. I never received a farthing in money, but all the goods at the shop. The whole of my wages were swallowed up in shop bills for bread and tea, on which I lived”. [14]
The truck shop held her responsible for her father’s debts. Since she had no money, she had no prospect of repaying them. After a four-day hearing, the magistrate found the accused guilty, and sentenced them to a day’s imprisonments. As they had already spent a much greater time in prison, this meant immediate release. In triumph, they returned to Blaina. Roberts was the hero of the day. He advised the union to go over to the offensive, to sue Messrs. Levick & Simpson for wrongful dismissal and also for Janet James’ wages for the past two years. He told them that, not to go on with the case would be “the grossest folly you could possibly commit. The combination of circumstances in the present truck cases is most favourable to your attacks.” [15]
Undoubtedly, Roberts was correct. The revelations of Janet James’ testimony aroused widespread indignation. Newspapers were loud in their criticism. Even the Lord Chancellor felt obliged to write to Roberts and ask him for a list of coal-owners in South Wales who were both magistrates and broke the Truck Act. [16] When the miners’ national council met at Leeds in February they took a different view of the Blaina case. “The Council should be careful not to give encouragement to men to leave work without notice”, said one member. The general opinion was that the Blaina men had behaved illegally and with lack of cautions they did not want the Council associated with them in any way. Richard Mitchell, the secretary, wrote to the South Wales Union:
“The cast ought never to have been defended; it was one of those cases that cannot be defended successfully, because there is no defence. Two wrongs do not make a right; and if A violates the Truck Act, B is not justified in trampling the Master & Servants Act under his feet.” [17]
But John Towers, on the other hand, supported the South Wales miners completely. He thought they should fight to get their legal rights. When the Council refused assistance, The Miners’ and Workmen’s Advocate opened a public subscription. Concerts were held to raise money, street and public house collections made. W.P. Roberts published a pamphlet on the Blaina case at his own expense. It contained a transcript of the court proceedings. In a preface, Roberts explained what was at stake. He estimated Levick and Simpson’s truck shop had 2,500 “customers” and gave the company a 9 percent profit on wages – the equivalent of £10,000 a year.
MacDonald’s second ploy was to accuse Roberts of being motivated by monetary gain. He called him “a legal cormorant”, “a greedy Manchester lawyer”. This, too, was without foundation. Roberts had a genuine desire to help miners, even when it involved personal financial sacrifices. This is shown by his letter to the South Wales miners over the Tredegar trial:
“I am myself perfectly willing to fight the case out for you, if you can find the money necessary for counsel’s fees, court fees, journeys and witnesses. These will amount to from £70 to £100. As to myself, I require nothing. My reward will be the pleasure of serving you.” [18]
MacDonald’s third, and most important charge was that Roberts, through disregarding conferences and council decisions, was undermining the organisation. In reply, Roberts said he regarded MacDonald & Co. as unrepresentative. He openly preached rebellion against them: “Let these gentlemen be quick or I will jog them again. Public opinion is urging them on. Let them answer to the lash, or somebody will take the business out of their hands.” [19]
Roberts personified everything of the 1840s union that MacDonald detested. His advocacy of strikes; his furious denunciations of coal-owners; his melodramatic court scenes; his Chartist background – all failed to blend with the image of respectability which MacDonald sedulously strived to cultivate. Roberts’ appeal was always to the rank-and-file over the heads to the leadership. It was not only likely to lead to anarchy, thought MacDonald, but also disaster. He had to be stopped.
 
The New Union splits
The quarrel over W.P. Roberts and the Blaina case aggravated relationships within the union. Between the Leeds conference of November 1863 and the Manchester conference of November 1864, two rival camps emerged and the organisation split.
First move in this direction came at the national council meeting in February 1864. Besides refusing to support Roberts at the Tredegar trial, the MacDonaldites took steps to prevent him representing miners in other cases. Furthermore, Holmes (the treasurer) sought to get The Beehive adopted as the union’s official organ. He said they could control what appeared in The Beehive whereas The British Miner published a mass of letters that catalogue men’s grievances. He thought that this was the wrong thing to do; the man’s reports were biased and most coal-owners were good employers. Holmes’ move was blocked by delegates who said they had no mandate on the question. Nevertheless, it served as a notice to Towers that the council were seeking to undermine his influence and that of his journal.
Towers’ response was to toughen his criticism of the council. He supported strikes against the wishes of the executive. He refused to publish a letter from MacDonald. As the half-yearly conference approached, his editorials emphasised the need for the appointment of strong delegations. At the previous Leeds conference, 13 delegates had come from Yorkshire compared with only five from Lancashire and four from Durham. As a result, four Yorkshiremen sat on the council and the forthcoming conference was again to be held in
Leeds. Discreetly, Towers omitted to mention that Yorkshire was solidly behind MacDonald. He also campaigned for W.P. Roberts to be invited to the conference.
At the Leeds conference, May 9–13, MacDonald again won. All the setbacks of the past six months were attributed to Towers. MacDonald claimed the attacks of the Miners & Workmen’s Advocate had been slanderous and unjust. At the climax of his emotive speech, he said the paper was making the council’s position untenable and its members offered to resign en bloc. Perhaps it was an astute tactical move: immediately conference rejected them en bloc. On the W.P. Roberts’ issue, an attempt from South Wales to get him appointed as the union’s legal adviser was defeated 39 votes to 2, amid loud cheering.
Undoubtedly, the second Leeds conference was a mighty defeat for Towers. He reacted by urging members to stop paying their subscriptions. The council was controlled by non-miners; they were friends of the masters; and should be overthrown by the rank-and-file. “Select from among yourselves to fill the offices that are to be filled.” [20]
The large anti-Roberts vote can be explained by the way MacDonald manipulated the conference. In his history, The Miners of Northumberland and Durham, Richard Fynes writes:
“Towers and his party, who had been the means of establishing the National Association and the National Conference, were now prohibited from going into the conference room and from taking any part in the deliberations.” (p. 239)
From then on, there was open warfare between the two camps. Each sent emissaries into districts controlled by the other side to foment disaffection. Vituperation attained fresh heights. A Towers’ supporter, out to cause trouble in Yorkshire, was called “a lying troglodyte” while MacDonald was referred to as Sandy M’Doodle.
The July meeting of the national council expressed the fear that internal strife would wreck the union. After consulting the London committee, a body of well-wishers under the chairmanship of the Marquis of Townsend, it resolved to hold a special conference in September to determine which faction enjoyed the support of the mining community. It was an astute move for MacDonald. He could pose as a peace-maker, concerned with ending inner-union struggle. At the same time, a conference held in the near future was almost certain, because of his better organisation, to lead to his side’s victory.
Towers’ faction replied by holding its own special meeting at Leeds in August. It issued a declaration that disagreed with the calling of a special conference in September. Since, in the ordinary way, the half-yearly meeting would take place in November, to hold two conferences within such a short space of time would waste money. It also held out the olive branch to MacDonald, suggesting that with a long period before the conference, it would give a better opportunity to the national council and the Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate to settle their differences amicably. Nevertheless, it still persisted in its criticisms of the MacDonaldites. The council was a self-elected body without a single working miner on it. The London committee was not properly constituted, and the Marquis of Townsend was reported as presiding at meetings he did not attend. [21]
Events were pushing Towers to a more thorough-going critique of MacDonald’s strategy. His insistence on gaining legislative improvements, cultivating friends in high places, appeared to Towers as wrong and wasteful. The council, he told the miners, “were squandering your money and laughing at your credulity – today amusing you with a grand petition, tomorrow with a Royal Commission, the next with an account of interviews with My Lord This and Mr. Esquire the Other. The men who met last week at Leeds belong to you, and know the grievances under which you groan.” [22] Towers, like Roberts, was coming round to the opinion that the vital thing that differentiated their approach from that of MacDonald was their attitude to the rank-and-file and class activity.
Clearly, Roberts saw this as the reason why he was not appointed legal adviser.
“They want a lawyer appointed by themselves – whom they may terrify and cajole, whom they can dismiss as they please rather than he should gain the hearts of the colliers – of the real men, the workers in the pits”. [23]
It was to the ordinary miner that, quite unequivocally, Towers’ journal addressed itself. It called upon them to boycott both the special conference in Manchester on September 20th and the council’s petition to Parliaments No money should be sent to the national treasurer. And they should wait till the November conference to decide the points at issue.
To a large extent, its message met with success. The Staffordshire miners stated their intention of boycotting the special conference. Quickly others followed their lead. MacDonald and his council arrived at Manchester to discover virtually no delegates there. News of the cancellation of the special conference was greeted with jubilation. In Wigan, colliers’ wives and daughters had a celebration song, whose chorus was:



“The National Council has fallen,
The rule of the clique is o’er?
Their petition – a vile deception –
Well, we’ll have such rubbish no more.”



Everything now depended on the Manchester half-yearly conference, opening on November 8, 1864. Right from the start, there were stormy scenes. The Beehive said:
“The meeting, having opened by singing and prayer, a very long discussion ensued, mingled with a great deal of personality, as to the right of Mr. MacDonald to preside over the meeting. Several delegates appeared determined to summarily eject the President and Council, without even receiving their report or hearing what they had to say in defence of the charges which had been weekly circulated against them by the Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate.” [24]
Stephenson, the Yorkshire representative of the Council, objected to the resolution to move MacDonald from the chair. He said business could only commence once delegates’ credentials had been checked. Cheesman, of Durham; mover of the motion, said that was precisely why MacDonald should not be in the chair – his credentials were not in order.
Actually, MacDonald was on extremely shaky ground. He came as a delegate from Scotland. Yet, only one lodge in the whole of Scotland – the Hope Lodge of Linlithgow – had contributed to the union’s funds. Other supporters of his had very tenuous connections with the mining industry. [25] Stephenson was a chemist, Miller a doctor from Dudley, Hickman a cobbler from Kidsgrove, and Holmes a tallyman from Leeds. In these circumstances, it is hardly surprising that a large amount of time was taken disputing credentials. The most hotly contested was Dr. Miller’s. The South Staff’s miners made it plain that he did not represent them, and North Staffs delegates threatened to leave the conference if he remained. Eventually, MacDonald got delegates to agree that he remain, although in what capacity was not clear, because it was important to press on with the next item on the agenda, a report by H.L. Beales, of the London committee.
Many delegates thought this a manoeuvre by McDonald to side-step the issue, and showed their disapproval by interrupting Beales. They suspected the London committee was pro-MacDonald.
It appears MacDonald played for time, leaving the crucial question of the conference, the election of officers, until the fourth day. By then, things were more favourable for him. The hostile South Wales delegates had stormed out. They had objected to attacks being made on the Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate as well as the decision to disassociate the union from W.P. Roberts’ legal work in South Wales. MacDonald had said, “Let us hear no more of the Janet James, the Blaina truck case. The very name Blaina stinks in the mind of every collier in England.” [26]
At the same time as the opposition forces weakened, through South Wales defection, MacDonald was able to strengthen his own. It seems that he wrote to the Cleveland district and asked them by return to give him written authorisation to appoint a delegate on their behalf. When it became obvious he was using this subterfuge to gain voting rights for Dr. Miller, representing miners whom he had never seen, there was uproar. The Beehive reported, “almost half the delegates rose to their feet and, amidst the greatest confusion, prepared to leave the room, urging that Dr. Miller, not being a practical miner, had no right to represent the Cleveland district … One or two of the same party also endeavoured to close the conference by singing a hymn.” But a MacDonaldite, George Brown, of Yorkshire, apparently used to hymn singing, was able to drown the others. Order was temporarily restored.
Normansell was appointed chairman during the election of officers. Election of president came first. The two proposed were MacDonald and Kimberley. The result: 19 votes each. Whereupon Normansell gave his casting vote for MacDonald.
“This was the signal for a great uproar, accompanied by bellicose demonstrations, such as shaking of fists by some of the more excited, and it was suggested that the police should be called in, but not carried out. A number of delegates at once left the room, and it was not until after a considerable period had elapsed that order was restored. It subsequently transpired that a number of delegates had instructions from their districts to secede from the conference if Mr. MacDonald were re-elected.” [27]
The anti-MacDonald delegates went en bloc to the Swan Inn, Shudehill, where they drew up and approved the rules of the Practical Miners’ Association, an entirely new organisation. Then, after two days’ deliberations, they ended their business with a celebration at W.P. Roberts’ house.
The rump remained with MacDonald. He had, at the most, delegates representing 14,321 members. These consisted of Yorkshire 3,624, Wigan 4,258, Kaarsley 2,500, Tipton 400, North Staffs 700, Scotland, 2,000, and Shropshire 4,339. In considering these figures, it should be noted that in some places (e.g. Scotland) no subscriptions had been paid and that in other places (e.g. Wigan and Tipton) delegates of the breakaway body contested the right of those who stayed to represent the membership. Truly, Towers could jubilantly announce: “Honesty, Zeal and Sincerity have signally triumphed over Slander, Calumny and Falsehood.” [28]
Besides seceding with the majority of members, the Practical Miners also took a remarkable proportion of the veterans. Joseph Linney, of South Staffs, had an exceptional record of struggles a miners’ leader in the general strike of 1852, a delegate to the Chartist convention of 1848, politically active in the. 1850s, he still remained a leader in the ’sixties. Likewise Topping (St. Helens), J. Scott (Durham), D.R. Thomas and W. Williams (South Wales) were all prominent in the Miners’ Association of the 1840s. The MacDonaldites had no such fund of experience. Only MacDonald himself and William Pickard, vice-president could claim to have distinguished themselves in the earlier union.
 
Localism and the collapse of the Practical Miners
Both national organisations appear to have been severely weakened by the factional war. The scurrilous stories, flung around by each side, had produced an effect. It stimulated the distrust with both unions; members tended to keep funds in their local coffers rather than send it to a national body. Localism and centrifugal tendencies were also furthered by the need to preserve unity, if possible, in the lodges. As many had supporters of both the Practical Miners and the Miners’ National Association, the most diplomatic course, the line least likely to arouse dissension within the ranks, was to steer a course of strict neutrality, supporting neither national body.
Another reason for not tearing themselves apart over the relative merits of MacDonald and the Practical Miners was that, in their enfeebled state, they could do little or nothing to assist a local organisation. It appeared to a large number that much could be lost when a local union became ensnared into playing the national game.
The Practical Miners were handicapped further by a prolonged and disastrous strike in South Staffordshire, one of their strongholds. It began in June 1864. The owners in Dudley and Wolverhampton decided to impose a wage cut: the workers resolved to resist. As there was still, at that time, a unified organisation, at least in theory, an approach was made to the Miners’ National Association for help. But only a rebuff was received. Meanwhile, the strike spread to North Staffs and then, by September, to Oldbury. With a growing number on strike in the county, fewer remained at work to contribute to the special levies. Strike pay was only 2s. 6d a week. Many augmented this meagre sum by nightly poaching. Two attempts were made to negotiate a settlement. At the second, Lord Leigh called back the strike leaders individually after the meeting had failed to reach agreement. He offered each in turn £10 if they would try and get the men to return to work. None accepted. Lord Leigh called them “fools, fanatics and madmen.” In reply; the union issued a declaration: “The miners have suffered, and are prepared to suffer, and, whatever the consequences, they are determined to resist even to the death.” [29]
The strike was still in progress when the Manchester conference, where the split occurred, was converted. Indeed, the bitterness of the Staffordshire men over Dr. Miller’s credentials largely arose because he claimed to represent them while disassociating himself from their strike. The general attitude of the MacDonaldites towards industrial disputes constituted a major reason for the split. As the Practical Miners said in their first statement they wanted a strong centralised body, where the full weight of organisation could be thrown behind men in dispute: “We consider that the duty of a National Council embraces an inquiry into all cases of oppression, and not only render advice, but assistance. The late Council repudiate such an idea.” [30] Referring to the Staffordshire strike, they continued: “Twenty-five thousand men out of work; but the late Council would not interfere! Even sympathy, which would have cost nothing, was with-held!”
Kimberley, president of the Practical Miners, came from Oldbury. After assuming office, his first task was to journey to London, where he asked the London Trades Council for help. He received a cool reception. Delegates generally disapproved of the attacks at the Manchester conference on Beales and MacDonald, although Odger thought MacDonald had been unwise to remain as president with such a small majority. Nevertheless, the Trades Council decided to help. Ninety pounds was collected. But MacDonald persuaded them not to send it. He claimed it would not go to relieve distress: all of it would go into the pockets of that “greedy Manchester lawyer.”
By December 1864, the Staffordshire strike was collapsing. Funds had virtually run out. Men, desperate with hunger, were drifting back to work. Those who still remained out expressed their anguish by rioting and blowing up mine installations. As a result, the authorities were resorting to mass arrests, and W.P. Roberts was doing what he could to defend the men.
Shortly after the Staffordshire debacle, the Practical Miners held their first conference at Chesterfield Market Hall, on December 26–28. Only 13 attended, and an appeal was issued To the Miners of the United Kingdom. [31] It appears to have met with little response. At the next conference – Durham, June 5–8 – only seven delegates attended. Exhaustion and depletion of funds crippled the Practical Miners from birth.
To MacDonald, the moral was quite clear. At the National Association’s Wigan conference in January 1865, he pointed out how disastrous the Staffordshire strike had been. A great association now lay in ruins, and the lesson was obvious: “He denounced strikes because they could accomplish all they wanted by legal and constitutional means.” [32] The trend away from industrial conflict had become even more pronounced by the next half-yearly conference. “The miners’ conference at Bloomfield,” reported The Beehive, “was not occupied with strikes or any other matter directly affecting wages.” [33]
The actual fate of the Practical Miners remains somewhat a mystery. As its influence declined, so did the circulation of the Miners’ and Workmen’s Advocate. To save the paper, approaches were made to the First International. As a result, in September 1865 ownership, editorship and content of the paper changed overnight. It was re-christened the Workmen’s Advocate, devoted most of its space to reporting news from industries other than mining, and it had a new board of directors, which included Karl Marx. [34] As organ of the First International, the Workmen’s Advocate continued until its name was again changed to Commonwealth.
What this meant was that there was no journal that dealt specifically with mining matters, and therefore it is impossible to chart the decline of the Practical Miners. Apparently, it was still in existence in November 1865. For when the Miners’ National Association held a conference at Newcastle-on-Tyne, all the officials resigned because “many divisions had arisen of late in consequence of there being two societies in existence”. Some delegates favoured amalgamation, others the status quo. George Brown, of Yorkshire, said miners had been seeking, since 1863, to form a unified national organisation, but for three years they had been courting without a wedding. To which MacDonald replied that it was better than “to marry in haste and repent at leisure.”
Conflicting conceptions continued to remain. In 1868, the strikes in Lancashire plainly showed that small, local unions, with very limited financial resources, were no match for the large coal companies that were beginning to emerge. So MacDonald’s idea of a loose federation of local unions, only coming together to promote legislation, was challenged for a second time. The Amalgamated Association of Miners, led by Thomas Halliday, was formed in 1869. It aimed at creating a centralised leadership and large funds that could be used in strikes. Significantly, both these aims had been held by its forerunner, the Practical Miners.
And it may be no accident that their support came from the same coalfields.

***

PART TWO: AN ANALYSIS OF MACDONALDISM
Historians have, generally, written about Alexander MacDonald in a highly favourable way. Mr. Page Arnot calls him “the outstanding leader of the Scottish and afterwards of the British Miners.” [35] The Webbs spoke of him even more highly: “The main source of his effectiveness lay, however, neither in his oratory nor in his powers of organisation, but in his exact appreciation of the particular changes that would remedy the miners’ grievances, and in the tactical skill with which he embodied these changes in legislative form.” In the Webb’s view, it was to MacDonald’s “lifelong devotion” that “the miners owe their present position in the trade union world.” [36]
It is my opinion that MacDonald’s role, and the beneficial effects of his policies, have been greatly exaggerated. He is credited by Page Arnot and the Webbs with being the main force behind organising the Leeds conference and the formation of the Miners’ National Association. [37] But there is little evidence in contemporary journals to substantiate this claim. At the time, MacDonald was deeply involved in a trade dispute in Scotland. The owners, wishing the smash the union, locked the men out. While MacDonald usually cringed from any form of class conflict, in this instance preservation of the union and his position forced him to devote his energies to the struggle, and he appears to have had no time for organising the inaugural conference. He seems to have attended none of the preparatory discussions; most of the work was done by John Towers. It was only in March 1865, seventeen months after the national union had begun, that the Scottish miners paid their first subscription. [38] Had MacDonald really been such an active force in the formation of the national body he would have seen to it that the Scottish miners, for whom he was general secretary, affiliated before such a long period had elapsed.
 
Arbitration and class harmony
Nevertheless, there is no disputing that MacDonald, even if not prime mover in its formation, did have a considerable impact on its subsequent development. His policies became the dominant influence in mining unions throughout the ‘sixties and ‘seventies. The whole emphasis of his message was on achieving class harmony; to go on strike was the original sin. For strikes were wasteful, costly, involved suffering and social strife, endangered the well-being of the union, and were likely to alienate influential friends who could assist in getting legislation through Parliament. MacDonald told a Royal Commission in 1873, “I look upon strikes as the barbaric relic of a period of unfortunate relations between labour and capital.” [39] In a more enlightened age, differences between capitalists and workers could be settled amicably by arbitration and conciliation. Men would benefit from being able to work without interruption through strikes, although their wage-rates might consequently be less.
Speaking of a recent arbitration settlement he was involved in making in South Wales, MacDonald told the Commissioners: “I believe that if they had had the ordinary means at Command, that is, going on strike, or going into dispute with the employer, they might have commanded a higher rate than they now have.” [40] Despite the financial loss, MacDonald still approved of the settlement: “I only wished that I could accomplish the same thing in every mining district in the United Kingdoms.” [41]
Arbitration boards usually consisted of an equal number of employers’ and workers’ representatives with an independent chairman. They gave the appearance of being quasi-judicial bodies, making decisions impartially on the merits of each case. Unpalatable decisions were thereby made more acceptable to workers. Even so, severe tensions could arise, especially when leaders had been a party to unpopular decisions. A Northumbrian coal-owner stated that when Normansell, the union official, had to adjudicate in arbitration cases, “19 out of 20 he had to decide against his own men.” [42]
The philosophy underlining this approach was enunciated by Thomas Burt, M.P., when he said the Northumberland Miners’ Association “all believe that the burdens that press upon the coal trade could be removed by cooperation rather than contention. With this in view, they supported every reasonable proposition of the coal-owners, however unpopular this might make them with the men”. [43] Burt went on to say that four of the five recent decisions went against the men.
What this had meant was that the Northumbrian miners had been subjected to a series of wage reductions. Their faith, both in arbitration and their leaders, was becoming very strained. It must have been even more galling when MacDonald reminded them that the elaborate machinery, so efficient in its reduction of their wages, was actually costing them money to maintain:
“The miners of Northumberland had spent thousands of pounds in supporting the principle of arbitration; and, if they followed the wise advice of their leaders, instead of smokeless chimneys and desolate homes, there would have been a continuation of the happy “state of things which have existed between employers and employed in Northumberland for the past 12 or 13 years.” [44]
MacDonald was speaking at the 1877 Durham conference. It was held at a time when discontent rumbled through the Northumberland coalfield and thousands of men stopped work against an arbitration decision.
At the Durham conference, Burt made a highly significant statement, showing the new relationship growing up between the leadership and the membership. Two busts of pioneers of the movement – Hepburn and Jude – were being presented. Burt seized the opportunity to contrast the situation in the 1830s and 1840s with the present days.
“At the period of Hepburn and Jude, it was more difficult than it has been since. The leaders had to face oppression and contumely, a hostile public opinion and a hostile press; but perhaps Jude and Hepburn had one encouragement which the leaders of the working class did not possess in so great a degree, they had not the hostility of the men they took the lead of.” [45] (My emphasis – RC)
Many instances of such enmity can be given. For example, William Brown, a union official in North Staffordshire, advised his men to accept a long-term contract. But they refused. They went on strike – and gained twice the amount. “I suffered a great deal of abuse,” Brown confessed to the Select Committee. [46]
Likewise in Lancashire: J. Evans, owner of Haydock and Edge Green colliery, told the 1868 Royal Commission on Trade Unions how William Pickard had approached him in an attempt to devise an acceptable formula to get the men back to work. He asked, “Will you yield half an hour or anything to show signs of giving in?” I said, “Mr. Pickard, if you were in my place, would you do so?” Pickard admitted he would not; I said that was my answer, too. So empty-handed, Pickard “went out of our office and went to the men and tried to induce them to go to work. I believe that they abused him very much, and told him that he had been bribed by me.” [47]
Whether bribery did take place or not there can be little doubt employers began to realise the benefits to be gained from having this type of trade union official. So, once employers had come to concede the right of workers to be organised, then it became of the utmost importance to have a MacDonald at the helm rather than a W.P. Roberts. Wage claims would be more moderate; the chance of conflict less. In the coal industry, seasonal factors and trade conditions caused considerable fluctuations in demand and hence in the price of coal. Since wages amounted to about 60 percent of total cost, any appreciable drop in coal prices had to be passed on to the miners. From experience, owners discovered that colliers more readily accepted the case for wage cuts when it came from one of their own officials instead of from the employer himself.
But it was not simply in settling disputes over pay that employers began to realise the value of union co-operation. Assistance was sought when owners wished to introduce new working arrangements. For instance, George Elliott told the Select Committee he had collieries of the same size in Durham and South Wales. One produced 2,000 tons to only 1,000 tons at the other. He attributed this to the Welshmen’s objections to double-shift working. In his Glamorgan colliery, he had the expense of pumping and maintenance for a mere 50 hours labour a week. “I would rather look” he said, “to the influence of men like Mr. MacDonald and those who are representatives of the men in overcoming the prejudice, because it is very strong prejudice in South Wales against this system.” [48]
The men’s objection was partly based on the disruption to family life that two-shift working would involve. They also thought it would increase the hazards of mining; the second shift would arrive to find the air befouled by the activities of the first. Since in those days ventilation was often primitive, there was some substance in the men’s fears. Yet the owners expected union officials to re-assure the men. This did not apply simply in this particular case but generally. Especially after serious accidents, when miners’ morale was low, owners found union leaders help invaluable. William Pickard said, “I may say that some of the employers wished me to go to their collieries to see the position of their workings, in order that I might create confidence in the men, and that they might go there for employment.” [49]
Furthermore, union leaders strived to inculcate a new general attitude in the workers, one that was an asset to employers, who suffered from the irregularity and unreliability of their workmen. Miners were told by their officials to be thrifty and temperate. They were told to stop the prevalent practice of being absent from work after each pay-day. Their leaders told them they must no longer indulge in “unauthorised Saints’ Days” – Saint Monday, Saint Tuesday and Saint Wednesday – as collieries remained idle, with capital equipment unused. Such practices were unfair to their employers, who lost money because of the indolence of the men.
Hearing such remarks, coal-owners could not fail to be impressed. Granted they would probably rather have workers without any organisation whatsoever. But in most coalfields, hard-fought battles over many years had shown it was impossible to wipe out trade unionism, A stage of industrial development had been reached where it became virtually certain that men would be organised. So trade unions had to be accepted as a fact of life, a detente made with them, the best made of a bad job. The value of MacDonaldism was that it showed employers, once they had become reconciled to the existence of trade unions, that everything was not on the debit side. Tangible benefits; in the form of higher profits, could be derived from the co-operation of Capital and Labour. MacDonalism did not push wages up; it preserved industrial peace.
In a frank and perceptive letter, the M.N.A.’s national executive warned employers of the dire consequences of upsetting; existing relationships;
“Before they reject arbitration, however, we ask them to believe what ought to be a lesson of experience, viz., that the defeat of a great Union – assuming any attack made was successful – would not necessarily be destructive of fighting power in the men. It is our experience, and it ought to be remembered as a portion of theirs, that some of the bitterest, the most prolonged and the most damaging struggles between employers and employed have been carried out in England by workmen not in the Union beyond such Union as was improvised for the occasion…In fact, the employers’ triumph would simply break up into a large number of smaller bodies what was previously one large general body. Local officers would thus become heads of separate divisions of the army of labour. The most serious responsibilities would disappear, and a kind of guerilla warfare would be carried on – now here, now there – far more hurtful to the employers, and it may be said more seriously injurious to the industrial interests of the country, than any difference that can arise in connection with organisations on a large scale.” [50]
Here is the basic rationale of MacDonald’s appeal to the employers. “Have me,” he is saying, “or the consequences will be far worse for you.”
 
The Real Position of Checkweighmen
When it is realised that the official trade union attitude was one of co-operation with capital, fresh light is shed on otherwise perplexing events. For instance, take the question of checkweighmen. The traditional view, first expounded by the Webbs, was that the workers were aggrieved. In many places deliberately inaccurate weighing machines were used to rob men of part of their wages. They were not fully paid for the amount of coal hewn. Often this led to strikes. In 1859, the whole West Yorkshire coalfield was paralysed by a dispute over weighing. The following year Parliament passed the Mines Regulation Act. A clause empowering colliers to appoint checkweighmen was deleted by the House of Lords. When the bill returned to the House of Commons, after a tremendous battle it was re-inserted in Section 29. For the first time, miners could appoint and pay their own checkweighmen. The significance of this, according to the Webbs, was that it gave each miners’ lodge a full-time official.
“The checkweigher has to be a man of character insensible to the bullying and blandishments of manager or employers. He must be of strictly regular habits, accurate and businesslike in mind, and quick at figures. The ranks of the checkweighers serve thus as an admirable recruiting ground from which a practically inexhaustible supply of efficient Trade Union secretaries or labour representatives can be drawn.” [51]
There was some, but not the entire, truth in the Webbs’ version. It left too many questions unanswered. How is it that a Parliament, where aristocratic and business interests predominated, passed this clause if it would do so much to strengthen the power of organised labour? Why did colliery owners not campaign for its repeal? A generation before Lord Londonderry and other North-eastern coal-owners had gone to extraordinary lengths to persecute the leaders of the Miners’ Association, some of whom died of starvation. Why were they so much more tolerant in the 1860s? And then why, if having a checkweighman was tantamount to having a union organiser at each colliery, was the miners’ union membership so low in 1860, 20 years after the passing of the clause? It was probably less than in 1863.
The mystery thickens when one considers the Mines Regulation Act of 1872, which strengthened the powers of checkweighmen. Far from resisting this move, Members of Parliament who were coal-owners actually supported the measure. John Lancaster, M.P., vice-president of the Mining Association, the employers’ national organisation, declared that he would move it, but eventually R. Fothergill, M.P., the chairman of the South Wales Coal-owners’ Association was responsible. Now there were few more vehement opponents of trade unionism than Fothergill. Three years later, in 1875, he bankrupted himself smashing the Amalgamated Association of Miners in South Wales. Likewise with Lancaster, a director of Wigan Coal & Iron Company, he was not renowned for his love of trade unions. In 1865, he threw a checkweighman off the pit-brow at Kirkless Hall. Brandishing a piece of wood, he tore the weighmen’s clothes and shouted, “I will hang thee here if I can’t get thee off.” [52] At a colliery at Whelley Lancaster had another checkweighman carried off the pit-bank by the police, put in jail, and then arraigned before the magistrates.
At first glance, it may seem Lancaster’s conduct was at variance with his support of the checkweigh clause in 1872. In fact, it was quite consistent. The reason why Lancaster behaved so wildly at Kirkless Hall was precisely because he attached such importance to the post of checkweighmen. It was important to see that the wrong type of man did not get the post.
Owners realised that mining, by its very nature; was a dispute-prone industry. Besides fluctuations in demand and pricey working conditions – the amount of dirt in the coal, the slope of the seams, the degree of difficulty in hewing – all were constantly changing and continually sources of potential friction. Since disputes were bound to arise, employers had to ask themselves: is it better, in times of trouble, for the men to be led by embittered extremists or by a checkweighman, whose moderation came from day-to-day contact with the management?
Many safeguards existed under the Act to see that coalowners had a tight rein over whether a checkweighman should be appointed and, if so, who. First, if it were deemed impractical or uneconomical to introduce weighing, owners could continue to pay by measure. Colliers who wanted a checkweighman had to indicate so clearly. This left employers free to influence the men’s decision, threatening them with the sack should they decide wrongly. In this way, the management of Burnley collieries prevented the appointment of checkweighmen until the turn of the century. [53] It could always send a petition to the Home Secretary, signed by all its workmen (on pain of dismissal) showing that, they did not want one.
But this was not the attitude of most employers. They understood that as production at their collieries became larger and more complicated, definite advantages accrued from having regular contact with a spokesman for the men. Of course they wanted a spokesman who was, in their eyes, reasonable and responsible. The Mines Regulation Acts gave them this opportunity. It stated that site checkweighman had to be selected from among the workers at the pit. Therefore if anybody who the owner through undesirable looked like being elected, no had only to be sacked before the elections took place.
Once elected, checkweighmen were subjected to a lot of pressure. In the overwhelming majority of instances, if the employer refused to grant him facilities to do his job, the courts would side with the employer. [54] So the ultimate sanction of the coal-owner – the right to dismiss – on which the maintenance of industrial discipline depends, applied in practice to checkweighmen. Their whole outlook was coloured by this fact. Far from being, as the Webbs say, “insensible to the bullying or blandishments” of employers, checkweighmen’s own self-interest pushed them into a highly conciliatory position. They had to preserve industrial peace; otherwise their own jobs were in jeopardy. For if men struck, they were deemed to have terminated their contract. Once the dispute ended, a checkweighman would have to be appointed from among whosoever the owner decided to re-engage. And, if the previous checkweighman had played a prominent part in the strike or antagonized the master prior to it, his chances of getting employment were remote.
Need to keep on good terms with the master vitiated the checkweighman’s other preoccupations. As the law provided that, once it was decided to appoint a checkweighman, all the men at a colliery were compelled to pay into a special fund for his wages, he was under no compunction to increase union membership. Automatically, his wages were paid. If he bothered himself swelling the union’s ranks, he was likely to compound his personal troubles. Members would probably question him and interfere with the way he operated. Also, the master annoyed if he saw workers gaining organised strength, might be tempted to sack him. Far better let the union remain a small body, controlled by an elite of checkweighmen, than let it venture, under rank-and-file control, into the stormy seas of industrial conflict.
The introduction of checkweighmen had a, tremendous impact on the development of mining trade unionism. It took away the cutting edge, the militancy, from the established machinery. Instead of having leaders who truly reflected the opinions of the members; the reflection became that of a distorting mirror. At local level, checkweighmen helped to lay the foundations for the policies MacDonald was pursuing nationally.
 
Differentiation within the working-class: The division between leaders and led
What was happening was that, instead of head-on class conflict which would be so damaging to the industry, owners had come to realise the value of a polarisation within the working class, a differentiation that resulted in miners’ anger often being expressed against union leaders rather than the employers. In the industrial sphere, it was an application of the principle of divide and rule, a principle that had become so useful in the empire-building in which Britain was at that time engaged.
The cleavage between leaders and rank-and-file expressed itself materially, financially and socially. At the top of the pyramid was MacDonald, a friend of Lord Elcho, one of Scotland’s biggest coal-owners. When he became an M.P., MacDonald was in the habit of sitting next to Lord Elcho in the House of Commons, and frequently he was invited to champagne breakfasts and other social functions with His Lordship. [55] He told the 1868 Royal Commissions “I think that there is not a body of 600 men in which more kind-hearted men are to be found than are to be found in the House of Commons.” [56]
MacDonald liked moving in exalted circles, although he came from a humble background. Starting in a Lanark pit at the age of 8, he began to work at 1 or 2 a.m., only to finish at between 5 and 6 p.m. In the first mine where he worked, MacDonald recalled “there were some 20 or more boys besides myself, and I am not aware at this moment that one is alive except myself.” [57] At his second pit there were 20 to 30 boys and girls employed and, to the best of his knowledge, only one survived. “They died as miners. Not one of them rose from the grade of miner that I am aware.”
This makes MacDonald’s own development even more remarkable. For while his fellow workers were dying in misery and poverty, MacDonald was able, in some mysterious way, to make a modest fortune through business speculation. When it is remembered that his trade union activity made tremendous calls on his time and energy – by 1868 he claimed to have addressed 1,600 meetings, answered 17,000 letters and travelled 230,000 miles – that he was able to amass a private fortune seems all the more surprising.
Equally strange is how William Pickard, vice-president of the M.N.A. acquired his money. In 1862 he was a working miner, without enough money to support his wife and family. [58] Yet, a year later, he was boasting that he was working for the union – it was then in financial difficulties – for nothing since he was a property-owner. [59]
Whether MacDonald and Pickard gained their fortunes through personal thrift, as payment for services rendered to the employers, or through the death of some rich relative, it is only possible to speculate. But whatever the source, its effect was to give them a different outlook to the men they were supposed to represent. For when they acquired shares in coal-mining companies they inevitably aroused the hostility of miners.
“His interests are not ours” said a handbill distributed in Wigan about Pickard. “How can he be furthering our interests by becoming a large shareholder and a director of a colliery in North Wales, receiving as such 3 guineas for each attendance and getting good pay from us at the same time. Look also at his position. A director of a colliery. A shareholder in one of the largest collieries in this neighbourhood. The possessor of a handsome and costly pile of building called ‘Park View’, but which should be named ‘Colliers’ Folly’.” [60]
Lower down the union ladder, the same process was in evidence. Local leaders and checkweighmen were more affluent than the average collier. Their incomes were higher and less subject to fluctuations resulting from wage cuts or bouts of unemployment. Many of them augmented their salaries by being small shopkeepers. And from their relatively privileged position, they developed an. outlook different from, and sometimes opposed to, the men they were supposed to represent.
The growing gulf between union leaders and the workers can be most vividly seen during strikes, such as the dispute in Lancashire in 1681. Then, the leaders did not dare to venture forth to meet the men they “represented”. The union headquarters was invaded by angry strikers, out to denounce traitorous officials. Attempts by checkweighmen to speak at strike meetings were greeted with “Purr him off the cart” and “Thou’rt sweetened by the masters”. [61]
At a typical strike meeting, the chairman complained:
“There had been several delegate meetings called together, but he thought that those who had attended had not represented the true heart of the men. (A voice: “They have not”) They had been self-elected delegates, pick-sharpeners, checkweighmen and shopkeepers. (Hear, hear and laughter)”
Then the next speaker, Noah Stringfellow, grumbled because the time of delegate meetings and what transpired at them was kept a secret.
“Had their delegates ever given notice at what time they would meet them, and given them the choice of selecting a delegate of their own choosing, and had they ever asked them what their opinion was that they might represent them in honesty at their next delegate meeting? (“No, No”, “They never have”, “Never”) Had they after their return held meetings and informed them regarding particulars of the business transacted? (“No, No”) Very well, then, he moved a vote of censure be passed upon the delegates for not complying with the duties of representatives”. [62]
The Lancashire strike of 1881; which reverberated around the coalfield for three months and involved 50,000, was unofficial. It was as much directed against the union leadership as the coal-owners. The men complained that, while the union had a little over 1,000 members, no attempt was made to recruit new members; that the union did not represent their feelings; and that Pickard, “the miners’ agent”, was in the pay of the masters. In fact, the strike was a rank-and-file response to 20 years of MacDonaldism in the county.
It has been pointed out that the introduction of conciliation and arbitration in British industry was accompanied by a new phenomenon – the unofficial strike. [63] When union spokesmen reached agreement with employers, it was frequently at the expense of disagreement with its own membership, who felt impelled to resort to self-activity in an endeavour to further its interests.
Probably it is fruitless to ask when was the first unofficial strike? But what, perhaps, can be said is that in a conflict-ridden industry like coal-mining, the tendency towards unofficial activity seems to have been more pronounced than in most other industries. The plethora of strikes and lock outs posed class issues more acutely. Hence it became possible to see, earlier than in most other occupations, the different responses to conflict situations. The divergence of interests between leaders and led became apparent in coal-mining sooner than elsewhere.
For a variety of reasons, historians have tended to disregard or play down the role of unofficial movements and strikes. Many writers, like the Webbs, have no ideological sympathy with men who challenge established union hierarchy. To them, such men are dangerous. They are part of the trade union underworld, whose deeds are best interred with their bones. Circumstances themselves assist in this burial work. Unofficial movements sprout up hither and thither; their records are fragmentary; they are less likely to be preserved. It is far more easy for the historian to go to official records than to delve in the nether regions. Most trade union histories are official histories. They are financed and supported by the official trade union machine; otherwise it is doubtful whether they would be published. [64]
Yet, at least in studying the coalminers, the tension between the leadership and the rank-and-file is one of the most vital factors in reaching an understanding of how the movement develops, MacDonald and the militants – the lap-dog or the lion? Did one get a lump of sugar through begging like a well-trained poodle or a hunk of meat by showing the lion’s fangs and being prepared for bloody struggles? That was the question.

Footnotes
1. The British Miner and General Newsman, November 22, 1862.
2. The British Miner, December 20 1862.
3. Colliery Guardian, May 9, 1863.
4. The British Miner, December 27, 1862.
5. The British Miner, January 31, 1863.
6. Ibid., January 24, 1863.
7. Ibid., February 7, 1863.
8. The British Miner, September 13, 1862 and The Beehive, October 11, 1862. The British Miner changes its name to The Miner’s and Workmen’s Advocate on June 13, 1863, and to Workmen’s Advocate on June 17. 1865.
9. The Beehive, November 22, 1862.
10. The British Miner, May 2, 1863.
11. The British Miner, May 2, 1863.
12. R. Page Arnot, The Miners, Vol. 1, p. 45.
13. R. Page Arnot, The Scottish Miners, p. 46.
14. The Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate, January 30, 1864.
15. The Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate, March 12, 1864.
16. Ibid., March 26, 1864.
17. Ibid., February 20, 1864. The Lord Chancellor did nothing with the information supplied by Roberts. See Roberts’ testimony to Select Committee on Master & Servant Act (1866) Q 1/11.
18. The Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate, February 27, 1864.
19. The Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate, March 19, 1864.
20. The Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate, July 16, 1864.
21. The Beehive, August 13, 1864. The Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate, August 20, 1864
22. The Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate, August 27, 1864.
23. The Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate, August 20, 1864.
24. The Beehive, November 12, 1864.
25. “The Cursed Triumvirate”, as the The Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate described them, who ran the union were MacDonald, Holmes and Dr. Miller.
26. The Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate, November 19, 1864.
27. The Beehive, November 12, 1864
28. At the next two half-yearly conferences, the M.N.A. only had delegates from Lancashire and Yorkshire.
29. Staffordshire Advertiser, October 8, 1864.
30. The Miners’ & Workmen’s Advocate, November 19, 1864.
31. See Appendix 1. [Not included here – CH]
32. Wigan Observer, January 13, 1865.
33. The Beehive, June 17, 1865.
34. H. Collins and C. Abramsky, Karl Marx and the British Labour Movement, p. 65; H. Collins, The International and the British Labour Movement, Bulletin of the Society for the Study of Labour History, Autumn 1964; Workmen’s Advocate, September 18, 1865.
35. R. Page Arnot, The Scottish Miners, p. 30.
36. S. & B. Webb, History of Trade Unionism, pp. 300–1. Frederick Engels had a somewhat different opinion of MacDonald’s legislative achievements. Referring to the Mines Regulation Act 1872, Engels wrote, “MacDonald, however, betrayed the workers of his own trade when, during the negotiations on the last mining law, which he attended as the representative of his trade, he sanctioned an amendment which was so grossly in the interests of the capitalists that even the government had not dared to include it in the draft.” (Marx-Engels on Britain, p. 469). Marx also talks scathingly of the parliamentary conduct of “the miserable MacDonald”. (Marx-Engels Selected Correspondence, p. 356)
37. R. Page Arnot, The Scottish Miners, p. 47; S. & B. Webb, History of Trade
Unionism, p. 302.
38. The Beehive, March 18, 1865. The Scottish miners’ first monthly payment was £12.5.6 This represented a membership of 2,756 at a penny a member.
39. Report of the Select Committee on the Scarcity and Dearness of Coal, 1873. Q. 4915.
40. Report of the Select Committee on the Scarcity and Dearness of Coal, 1873. Q. 4915.
41. Ibid., Q. 4923.
42. Ibid., Q. 7561.
43. T. Burt, Letter to Wigan Observer, December 28, 1877.
44. Wigan Observer, June 1,1877.
45. Wigan Observer, June 1,1877.
46. Report of the Select Committee, 1873. Q. 7542.
47. Royal Commission on Trade Unions, 1868. Q. 15225.
48. Report of the Select Committee, 1873 Q. 7542.
49. Ibid., Q. 4062.
50. Address to the Coal-owners by the Executive Committee of the Miners’ National Union, March 31, 1877.
51. S. & B. Webb, op. cit., p. 06.
52. Wigan Observer, May 6, 1865.
53. T. Ashton, Three Great Strikes in the Coal Industry, Vol. 2, pp. 248–9. The Burnley dispute over weighing was finally resolved in 1902.
54. Normansell v. Platt is one of the few cases in which the court upheld the checkweighman.
55. Earl of Wemyss and March, Memories 1818–1912, cited by R. Harrison Before the Socialists, p. 119. The Liberal politician, A.J. Mundella described MacDonald as “this bad fellow who is Elcho’s Limited”. (W.H.G. Armytage, A.J. Mundella, p. 69.)
56. Royal Commission on Trade Unions, 1868. Q. 15,431.
57. Ibid. Q. 15,264.
58. Pickard’s recollection in Wigan Observer, October 22, 1864.
59. Ibid., October 10, 1863.
60. A handbill published March 27, 1880. Wigan Broadside Collection, Vol. 1.
61. “Purr” is a Lancashire term meaning to kick.
62. Wigan Observer, February 5, 1881.
63. V.L. Allen, The Origins of Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration, International Review of Social History, Vol. 9 (1964), p. 250:
“Conciliation worked only where the union leaders were willing to endorse the wage reductions suggested by employers and then it was only operative at the top negotiating level. William Crawford, who accepted a wage reduction of 10% for the Durham miners in May, 1874, had to contend with unofficial strikes by colliery mechanics. When, early in 1874 the Scottish coal-owners demanded a 20% wage reduction, Alexander MacDonald advised the miners to accept it. There were vociferous protests. Unofficial strikes were frequently called against adverse arbitration awards; indeed this period saw the beginning of unofficial strike action.”
64. Phillip Unwin, of Allen & Unwins:
“I can only tell you, however, that we probably have more experience in the publication of Trade Union histories than any other firm and I cannot at the moment think of a single one which would have covered its expenses if we had been dependent upon the general sale through normal book trade channels.” Letter to R. Challinor, December 10, 1965.
 



Influencing Voters
Richard Rose
Faber, 42s
Amazingly, a British general election, measured on a per capita basis, costs more than an American presidential election. This is, to a large extent, because big business has increasingly sought to influence voters. It conducts independently, through organisations like Aims of Industry, campaigns against nationalisation and for private enterprise. On top of this, big business provides about £800,000 of the Conservative Central Office’s £1,250,000 annual income. The class nature of British politics is further revealed by considering the Labour Party. Trade unions provide 55 per cent of its finance, constituency parties 34 per cent, Co-ops 9 per cent, Transport House 2 per cent. Overwhelmingly, Labour gets its money from the working class.
The above facts are gleaned from Professor Rose’s interesting and informative book. He does not simply tell how the political parties acquire their finance, but also the often crazy way they spend it. For instance, in June 1963 Labour and Conservative pre-election advertising began. But only 26 per cent of persons interviewed by NOP claimed to have seen a party advert. Of these, two thirds could not remember any of the party messages. In January-April 1964 the Tories spent £440,000 in half-page newspaper ads to popularise their leader, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, and pollsters reported the public’s satisfaction with him dropped from 58 to 48 per cent. Not to be out-done, the Labour Party had a publicity campaign for Harold Wilson. At the conclusion of the twelve-month effort on behalf of the Leader, the level of approval had fallen to 63 per cent. And now International Socialism is thinking of having its own campaign for Harold Wilson. All contributions should be sent to the Editor.
 



South Wales Miners
R. Page Arnot
Allen & Unwin, 60s
It took the struggles of fifty years before trade unionism became firmly established in the South Wales coal industry. First, in the 1830s, there was ‘Scotch cattle,’ so named because of the symbol left behind by hooded miners who destroyed pits and the homes of blacklegs. Then, in 1839, colliers predominated in Frost’s ill-fated armed uprising at Newport. The 1840s saw the Miners’ Association, the first national union, gain a foothold in the Welsh valleys before being smashed. The same sad story was repeated in the 1860s and 1870s: wages poor, unions wrecked, victimisation.
Mr Page Arnot does not dwell on these violent and heroic early days. Nevertheless, he clearly shows they left their imprint on subsequent developments. Welsh miners understood the need for militancy. Only by being prepared to fight could they secure their objectives.
It is interesting to note that, once the owners grudgingly conceded the right to organise, they sought to castrate unions with a type of incomes policy. The sliding scale agreements geared wages to the price of coal. This meant that there could be no re-distribution of income from profits to wages; that all initiative over pay was taken from the collier at the coal-face, since decisions were taken by both sides of industry at top level; and that the main duty of union leaders became to restrain their own membership, chafing at unjust and exploitive agreements. The gliding-scale agreements geared wages to the price of derelict pit-shaft before a strong, healthy Miners’ Federation could be built.
This is the finest history Mr Arnot has so far written. It is without the arid academic approach that mars many mining histories by other authors. In vivid terms, he tells the turbulent tales. His account of the Cambrian Combine strike of 1910, when clashes with the authorities led to a semi-insurrectionary situation, is most moving.



Philip Snowden
Colin Cross
Barrie & Rockliff, 50s
With all its twists and turns, Philip Snowden’s life resembled a scenic railway. His early political position was indistinguishable from Liberalism. Later, he adopted a.brand of Utopian Socialism. The class war was anathema to him. Ancient slavery and feudalism had disappeared because owners had seen that free labour was better. Likewise Socialism would arrive through growing enlightenment. The socialist revolution would, be ‘the revolution in men’s heads.
In the First World War, Snowden went through his most left-wing phase. He denounced arms expenditure. Although under pressure in his constituency of Blackburn, he refused to back recruiting drives. In 1917, he even chaired the famous Leeds conference, which expressed solidarity with the victorious Russian revolution. Yet Snowden was not a revolutionary. While he never concealed his anti-war attitude, he never went out of his way to express it. He was content to use the existing machinery of government in an attempt to gain minor ameliorations.
How wedded he was to the social order became clear when he was a minister in the first minority Labour Government. MacDonald was embarrassed by his display of chauvinism at an international conference, where he frankly admitted:
‘I have been a pacifist, I am an internationalist, but, somehow or other, whenever I see that flag in a foreign country, I become incredibly imperialist.’
Snowden is perhaps best remembered as Chancellor of the Exchequer in MacDonald’s second ministry. The economic situation was very similar to the present day. The country had a balance of payments crisis. The government was faced with a clamour from British and foreign bankers to attack the working class. Snowden kindly obliged. He put up the bank rate, reduced unemployment benefit, and overnight became the darling of the City.
After the 1931 debacle Snowden, with MacDonald, resigned from the Labour Party to form the National Government. He described the Labour opposition as ‘Bolshevism run mad.’
Snowden’s wife remained his active political partner throughout. After his death, she continued the rightward trend. She went to the Nuremburg rally and criticised those British guests who refused to give the Nazi salute: She found Hitler was ‘a simple man of great personal integrity.’ Her last political act was to support the candidature of ‘a tried man of progressive outlook’ – Cyril Black, Tory MP for Wimbledon!
Reading this well-written and informative biography of Snowden had a startling, unexpected effect upon me: it made me realise the Labour Party could have a worse leader than Harold Wilson.



The Age of Containment
David Rees
The Approach of War
Christopher Thome
The Framework of Economic Activity
Anthony Harrison
Macmillan, 25s Paperback 12s 6d each
Macmillan are publishing a new series of books, The Making of the Twentieth Century, designed to give a concise and lucid interpretation of recent historical events. Thirty books are in preparation, and it is easy to predict, from the specialist authors and their topics, that readers of this journal are certain to find some of them indispensable.
Nevertheless, I have misgivings. Reading the first three books, I am afraid the series may be tilted toward an orthodox Establishment view of events. Mr Rees interprets the Cold War from a Western standpoint: on the one side you have the democratic and freedom-loving Americans and on the other the Russians, who, until recently, were hell-bent on expansion. Hurrah for NATO, SEATO, BLOTO and all! No serious attempt is made to consider the thesis that the United States was primarily responsible for the Cold War. The powerful indictment of Pentagon policy by C. Wright Mills, Fleming and others is simply disregarded, and the book ends with a stirring quotation from President Kennedy on the need to defend liberty – presumably in Vietnam, not in the Negro ghettoes.
Mr Thome, who edits the series, has written on the appeasement period. It is a counterblast to what, in my opinion, is a much more correct analysis, than in A.J.P. Taylor’s Origins of the Second World War. Mr Thome sees the men of Munich in a much more kindly light; whereas for him socialists ‘were second to none in ensuring Britain’s weakness when the crisis came.’ He places responsibility for the War squarely on the Nazis. The close and intimate links between Hitler and the Tories, their admiration for his anti-communism and smashing of trade unions, are discreetly forgotten.
The best of the trio is Mr Harrison’s book. He gives a clear account of international economic affairs throughout the 20th century. He shows that the state’s role in the economy has not only increased in Britain but everywhere else in the world. Whatever the political ideologies of the countries, the dissatisfaction with the performance of private enterprise has led to a great centralisation of decision-making. The lesson for us as socialists, although Mr Harrison does not make it, is that all our compass readings will be wrong if we equate state control with socialism.
 



Atomic Diplomacy: Hiroshima and Potsdam
Gar Alperovitz
Secker & Warburg, 35s
The first atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima but aimed at Moscow. That is Mr Alperovitz’s main point: the advent of nuclear weapons altered the world balance of power and the United States was quick to seize the favourable opportunities it gave her. Marshalling his facts, showing quite clearly how America sought to assert her new-found superiority, Mr Alperovitz quickly disposes of the view, held by political innocents in this country, that the American Government is peace-loving while the dirty communists are hell-bent on aggression.
It is a sign of the value and worth of Mr Alperovitz’s book that no man of average intelligence could read it and still be in favour of Britain remaining in NATO.
 



Let readers go to their local war memorials to inspect the names of those killed in the First and Second World Wars. Then they will realise that Chris Lyneham (June SR) was writing nonsense on stilts when he says, ‘Death and injury rates for those actually fighting in the two world wars were very similar, and the experience of the campaigns in Normandy, North Africa and the Pacific was every bit as traumatic as Passchendaele and the Somme.’
In fact, the British general staff realised the British people would not tolerate Haig madness again, the squandering of human life on a limitless scale as had happened in the First World War.
Consequently, military tactics were modified accordingly. Whereas in 1916 on the first day of the battle of the Somme the British forces sustained 60,000 casualties, in 1942 at El Alamein, Britain’s most costly encounter in the Second World War, there were 15,000 casualties suffered over a fortnight’s fighting.
But, when considering casualties, two points are usually overlooked. The first is the arithmetic is done along imperialist and racist lines. As Professor John Dower states in his superb book, War Without Mercy, Orientals, Africans, and others are regarded as being not truly human.
And, second, whatever the figures given for war casualties, they have an air of unreality about them. The reason is that it is really impossible to disentangle the deaths caused by the fighting from those caused by accompanying phenomena. The four horsemen of the Apocalypse ride together: war is joined by fire, famine and the destruction of the social fabric. Together they spread death.
In China, for example, the Japanese wanted to flush out Chinese guerillas from the Kwangtung province. Therefore, they cut off their food supply. But, as a result of this Japanese pacification programme, ten million civilians died of starvation as well. Peasants became so desperate that women sold their new born babies to the butchers to be eaten as meat.
Likewise in India: the harvests in 1942–3 were better than average, yet two or three million people died of starvation. Why? Because the British authorities commandeered the transport customarily used to carry grain for military purposes. British imperialists were more concerned with the struggle against the Japanese – the protection of the jewel in the crown – than they were about the lives of the Indian people.
At that time, I remember seeing a cartoon in the New Leader, an anti-war socialist paper. It depicted an irate editor, angry because one of his staff had made a slip up. To illustrate an article about the horrors of the German concentration camps, instead of the photo showing the death and starving camp inmates, the hapless journalist had inserted one where the dead and starving were Indians instead. Unwittingly, British, not Nazi, oppression had been highlighted!
Concentration camp victims (six million Jews, probably the same number of Slavs and others, as well as the Chinese, Indians and the rest who died through starvation and neglect) are not included in world war casualty figures. Were they, it would show deaths were overwhelmingly civilians who were workers or peasants.
 



NOTHING MORE CLEARLY reveals the relationship between the state and organised labour than the postage stamp of the Queen and the TUC. Today, the knights of the General Council belong to the Establishment.
They are necessary for the smooth running of the system. They act as a transmission belt, bringing capitalist ideology into the working-class movement.
Unpalatable proposals, ones that would be quite unacceptable had they simply come from the bosses, are agreed to because of them.
They occasionally voice workers’ discontents, but these would gain expression anyway. Far better, for the ruling class, that the spokesmen should be trade union leaders, speaking in moderate tones, than rank-and-file agitators. Protests are channelled into harmless, institutionalised forms. By helping to preserve the stability of society, union leaders are, to use Daniel De Leon’s apt phrase “the labour lieutenants of capitalism.”
But has this always been so? Last month saw the centenary of the formation of the TUC. A lot of claptrap was spoken. Speeches idolised the pioneers of the movement.
Most contributors came from the Webbsian School of Falsification. For instance, when they spoke of Applegarth, Allan & Co., a group of highly influential union leaders, they called them “the Junta,” the term first coined by Sidney and Beatrice Webb in their trade union history.
They did not mention that, to many workers in the 1860s, they were better known as “the dirty pack.” A discreet silence is preserved about the cavortings of these union leaders in high society, their sedulous cultivation of bourgeois respectability, and how they frequently sold their members down the river.
Most closely-guarded secret of all, the fact that gives revolutionary socialists the right to rejoice, is that we can celebrate the centenary of the unofficial strike. Workers, in defiance of their employers and union leaders, resorted to self-activity to defend their interests.
 
Commission
In 1868, the Lancashire miners struck against a 15 per cent wage reduction. After failing to get the men to return to work, the union leaders journeyed to London where Alexander MacDonald testified before a Royal Commission on Trade Unions (yes, they had them too a 100 years ago) that when he found every delegate had come to the meeting with a written order from his pit to strike, he persuaded them to reconsider.
But at a second meeting – against his advice – the miners reaffirmed their decision. “It was not the leaders of the union they consulted,” he told the Royal Commission.
Subsequently, MacDonald made it clear he favoured industrial harmony: “I look upon strikes as the barbaric relic of a period of unfortunate relations between labour and capital.”
He confessed, on another occasion, that he was glad, he averted an industrial dispute although he conceded that, had the men gone on strike, “they might have commanded a higher rate than they now have.”
MacDonald, later to become one of the first working class MPs, had a high regard for Parliament. He told the Royal Commission : “I think that there is not a body of 600 men in which more kind-hearted men are to be found in the House of Commons.” While he favoured workers gaining their ends through legislative, not class, action, he nevertheless opposed a clause that would have given teeth to the Mines Regulation Act (1872).
This meant, as Engels explained:
“ MacDonald betrayed the workers ... he sanctioned an amendment which was so grossly in the interests of the capitalists that even the government had not dared include it in the draft.” (Marx-Engels on Britain, p. 469).
MacDonald was widely known as “Lord Elcho Limited,” the implication being quite clear that he had been bought by, and was part of the property of, the large Scottish coal owner of that name.
Macdonald represented an important trend among union leaders. As Dr. Royden Harrison points out, in his book Before the Socialists (p. 38):
“Special relationships grew up between particular employer-politicians and trade union politicians. For example, such relationships existed between A.J. Mundella and Robert Applegarth; Lord Elcho and Alexander MacDonald; Samuel Morley and George Howell; Crawshay, the ironmaster, and John Kane.”
Therefore, in the celebrations of the TUC centenary, we should be quite clear what the Establishment is happy about. Harold Wilson, opposed to working-class unity today, is not rejoicing because the TUC’s formation represented an addition to working-class strength a hundred years ago. No, the significance of the creation of the TUC was that it marked an important stage in the integration of the union bureaucracy within the capitalist system.
 
Failure
From this standpoint, as a judgement on a hundred years of industrial activity conducted in the overwhelming majority of instances by leaders who fervently believed in class collaboration, the balance-sheet of the past 100 years needs drawing up. The failure to increase the share of the national income going to the working class; the failure to gain, through official channels, greater working-class power at the point of production; the failure to secure appreciable reduction in working hours – all these are an indictment of a certain methodology. With historical continuity, the line stretches from the MacDonalds to the General Council men, both right and left, of today.
Of course, there are differences. Whereas British capitalism of 1860 had not reached the height of its power, now it is in decline. Weakened, it is less able to withstand attacks from the shop-floor. A dockers’ or seamen’s strike severely strains the country’s balance of payments. The complexity of the economy, the mutual interdependence of its various parts, means that a stoppage in one industry has damaging repercussions elsewhere.
Consequently, the state, as the guardian of capitalist interests, cannot afford to allow large-scale disputes to develop. So any big strike becomes, automatically, a contest between the workers and the government, a struggle in which the workers must either capitulate or smash the state.
As the leaders are not revolutionary socialists, have no vision that stretches beyond bourgeois democracy, they display the white rather than red flag.
For this reason, it is vital that the rank-and-file, with no vested interests in the present system, throw up their own leadership. Only through self-activity of the most thorough-going kind can the working class finally banish exploitation.
In this struggle we can perhaps learn from the spate of unofficial strikes that occurred in the 1860s and 1870s. They were fought with a vigour and a violence that alarmed the authorities. Sometimes employers granted concessions to quieten things so that customary relations could be re-established with the moderate union leaders.
But more often the unofficial strikes ended in defeat. And the reason – one that is still with us – is that they were partial strikes, limited to one factory or area.
Employers, isolating the men, could thereby defeat them. The need, therefore, is the widest possible links at rank-and-file level, coupled with a determination to overthrow the ruling class.
Then there might be something entirely different to celebrate a hundred years from now.
 



THE LABOUR GOVERNMENT tries to justify its sale of arms to Nigeria by saying that it provides a lever with which Britain can bring pressure to bear on the Nigerian Federal Government to moderate its policy. But so far it appears to have been highly unsuccessful in achieving this. The millions of starving people, whose food supplies are blockaded by British weapons, and the piles of corpses testify to what “Made in Britain” means to the Biafrans.
The Nigerian general Adekunle – “the Black Scorpion” – does not know the meaning of “moderation”. It is about as sensible to supply him with arms in hope that he will be less brutal to the Biafrans as it would have been to have supplied Adolf Hitler with poison gas in the fond belief this might make him more tolerant towards the Jews.
If the British government was sincere, if it genuinely believed that by supplying weapons it could moderate the Nigerian government’s policy, then it should be consistent and apply the principle universally.
Why does it not send tanks to the Red Army to moderate Russia’s policy in Czechoslovakia?
 
Desire
And why isn’t Britain sending much-needed arms to the National Liberation Front in Vietnam if this would make the NLF more moderate, more likely to accept the American terms?
British policy has been based on the desire to preserve the unity of Nigeria. Originally, that part of West Africa consisted of a number of tribes with little in common. They were forcibly brought together, the British colony of Nigeria was created, merely to serve colonial convenience.
Today Britain wishes to see unity preserved to make it more easy for British financial interests to exploit the region. For that reason, secessionist Biafra, with its oil fields, must be crushed.
So Harold Wilson becomes an accomplice to mass murder to defend the interests of capitalism in that part of West Africa. As Biafrans fall at the front, the British arms manufacturers’ profits rise here at home.
 



Socialist Register, 1968
Merlin Press
Anybody who suffers from insomnia and does not want to resort to drugs should take The Socialist Register. It is definitely sleep-inducing but non-addictive. The book creates its soporific effect by combining the bad features of the ‘old’ – that is to say, 1956 vintage – New Left: academic sterility; detachment from the class struggle and a concern about expressing the simplest concepts in the most convoluted way.
This is not to maintain that all The Socialist Register is bad. Just as previous editions contained the occasional good article – Edward Thompson on British history and Hamza Alavi on the peasantry immediately spring to mind – so this year’s is not completely sterile. The piece by Dr V.L. Allen on the TUC’s centenary is extremely valuable. He shows quite clearly that, right from the start, the trade union leaders sought to confine their activities within the capitalist framework. But Dr Allen’s article is the only one in the volume that directly relates to Britain. Yet, if The Socialist Register were to make an important theoretical contribution, then necessarily a lot of what it had to say would be about this country. Revolutionary socialists here need help with numerous problems. Such assistance, however, can only come from writers who not only deal with the struggle in Britain but also take a deeply committed part in it.



Raymond Challinor writes: Tenants of Skelmersdale New Town Development Corporation went on rent strike for two months against proposed increases ranging from 2s 8d to 6s 4d a week. It was the authorities’ decision to take legal proceedings against between 150 and 200 tenants that finally brought the strike to an end. But, for some time before this appeared, the strike was losing momentum. More and more people were quietly deciding to pay.
For the Tenants’ Action Committee this was the big problem –communication, keeping up morale. Without a firmly established grass-roots organisation, this proved to be insuperable. In the initial stages, it had been possible to arouse much enthusiasm. In a novel way, the issue of rents was linked with broader industrial issues. The slogan was ‘Rents are too high, Wages too low.’ A token stoppage at local factories, and a march on the Development Corporation headquarters began the strike with a flourish.
The Skelmersdale Local Labour Party officially supported the strike, Labour activists being the backbone of the Action Committee. But this also created difficulties. For the strike took place against the background of a general election for the newly constituted Skelmersdale-with-Upholland Urban District, and many of the strike leaders were standing as Labour candidates. This resulted in a diffusion of strength, although it did also embarrass the Development Corporation. The Labour Party’s platform had, as its main plank, opposition to the Development Corporation, a non-elective body, appointed by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government. These mandarins of Whitehall had aroused considerable hostility, not merely by putting up the rents, but also by placing the industrialists’ interests before those of the public. They are creating a new town for profit-making, not for the people. And the lack of amenities and places for recreation are sources of universal discontent. In the four-hour meeting with officials of the Development Corporation at the termination of the strike, the Action Committee wrung a number of important concessions. Originally, it had been intended that the rent increase would be followed by a further one next year – this second one was now scrubbed. Also, tenants’ complaints were, in future, to be entered in a special book. This was to replace the existing procedure where, once reported, they were quickly forgotten. An important step forward was the Development Corporation’s undertaking to establish an open market. Undoubtedly, this will reduce the cost of living appreciably, since it will end the quasi-monopoly position enjoyed by a handful of Skelmersdale shopkeepers. Either you bought in ‘Skem’ or had an expensive journey back to Liverpool to shop. Another concession, important to large families living in high-density dwellings, was the provision of allotments so that, by food-producing, the hardship could be lessened.
Regular meetings have been arranged between the Action Committee and the Development Corporation. The impression gained by the strike leaders was that the officials of the Development Corporation were shaken men. They had not expected they would be confronted with a protest by tenants of such magnitude and duration. Consequently, in future they will obviously try, as far as is possible within the existing system, to meet the wishes of the tenants.
 



Chartism has been Britain’s biggest and most significant mass revolutionary movement to date. In the 1830s and 1840s it mobilised millions of workers. Peter Murray McDouall remained a Chartist leader throughout these turbulent years. Furthermore in every major battle – 1839, 1842, 1848 – he consistently advocated the same policies. McDouall was the foremost exponent of physical force. He did not waiver in his belief that the ruling class would never capitulate without a fight. It would not melt out of existence because it heard appeals for a new society based upon higher moral principles. Rather it would need superior might to effect the transformation. In arguing for this, he adopted a different approach to the other supporters of physical force. They tended to hark back to the French Revolution for guidance and inspiration – whereas McDouall, though acutely aware that lessons could be learnt from the Jacobins, nevertheless saw the world had changed since 1789. The emergence of an industrialised society created a working class; McDouall’s unique contribution was his endeavour to harness this fresh force in the struggle. He envisaged the use of industrial militancy for political ends: “The Trades are equal to the middle class in talent, far more powerful in means and much more united in action.” Chartism required organised labour as an essential component. Equally, to be successful it required a new kind of political structure. Here, in some respects, McDouall favoured a type of organisation that appears to closely resemble the Bolshevik’s democratic centralism – a tightly-knit, disciplined group of revolutionaries. He warned his followers: “Centralization and organisation are weapons of the government, and until you can successfully imitate their tactics, you never can reduce their power.” [1] Increasingly, Chartists came to realise the correctness of this view.
Nothing in his early years presaged McDouall’s later development. Born at Newton Stewart in Wigtownshire he qualified in medicine at Edinburgh University, became a prosperous surgeon and acquired property in the locality. But like John Taylor, another physical force Chartist leader who, by remarkable coincidence, was also a surgeon and came from the same part of Scotland, he was drawn into the political whirlpool. Both men, according to W.E. Adams, also had similar picturesque appearances: Dr McDouall “had a long cloak and general style of a hero of melodrama ... (he) was a man of taste and culture.” [2] According to R.G. Gammage “McDouall was rather short, but possessed a straight and well-erect frame … The Doctor was of an ardent fiery temperament, and though naturally possessing strong reflective powers, was impulsive to the last degree, and by no means deficient in the quality of courage.” [3]
McDouall’s introduction to Chartism came when he moved to Lancashire. He opened up his surgery in the small town of Ramsbottom, situated between Bury and Accrington. There he encountered some of the appalling conditions that were to shock Frederick Engels a few years later. Their first reactions were very similar – to investigate the situation thoroughly and then to announce their findings. In 1838 McDouall gave a paper to the British Association. It was based upon his own research in places like Preston. He described the millworkers receiving a pitiful weekly wage of 3s 6d or 4s and families of seven living in a single room. Clearly, he sympathised with the suffering masses. In order to do something tangible to help, he addressed public meetings to denounce the iniquities of the new Poor Law Amendment Act. It became obvious, however, that this, by itself, was not enough; much more sweeping changes were necessary if society’s ills were to be cured. When his colleague, Dr. Mathew Fletcher, proposed they should attend a Chartist meeting in Bury, McDouall readily agreed – and both of them joined the Movement that evening. The conversion did not change everything immediately: McDouall still retained the belief that enlightened people in exalted positions could do more good than the masses could by themselves. Much to W.J. Linton’s chagrin, he wrote a poem to Queen Victoria, requesting Her Royal Highness to alleviate some of the hardships experienced by some of her less fortunate subjects. [4] Admittedly, he mentioned her part in contributing to this suffering:



“That jewelled crown upon thy youthful head
Was chased and wrought by men who pine for bread.
The flowery lace, the silk, the satin traces
Were wove by hands all cramped by cold and pain.
Consumptive death rests on that needle-point,
And that small pin disturbs the infant’s joints.”



Even so, he still thought she had it within her power to put an end to this distress, and therefore considered it worthwhile to make such an appeal to the Queen.
McDouall’s outlook underwent a drastic alteration once he became closely associated with Ashton-under-Lyme in the spring of 1839. A town outside Manchester, Ashton had some of the biggest factories, with the most modern machinery, anywhere in the country. Rapid economic expansion led to an equally rapid influx of labour. These were mainly young men, sometimes Irish, first generation factory fodder, who submitted resentfully to the harsh industrial discipline. Ashton-under-Lyme produced immense wealth and immense poverty. Its greatest production, however, appears to have been the wrath of its workers. In their anger, they looked around for a way of retaliating: Chartism became the means and McDouall their leader. Together they articulated workers’ grievances to an unprecedented extent, as well as forging in struggle a unity and cohesion that had never before existed.
This, for McDouall, was the real significance of the Movement. “The agitation for the Charter has afforded one of the greatest examples in modern history of the real might of the labourers. In the conflict millions have appeared on the stage and the mind of the masses has burst from its shell and begun to flourish and expand.” [5] The Chartist Movement did not merely foster and encourage expression by the workers as a class, it also nurtured the talents of countless individuals, making them capable of attainments they otherwise would not even have dreamt of. McDouall himself exemplified this phenomenon: hidden powers blossomed under the exigencies of battle. He learnt the skills of a journalist, writing numerous articles in a clear and forceful manner. He became an editor of the Chartist and Republican Journal, one of the best publications of the Movement. He acquired the astuteness and tricks of a politician, useful in Chartism’s internal faction fights as well as dealing with devious class enemies. Above all, McDouall developed as a first-class orator – the little man, stuttering and nervous, punctuating his speeches with embarrassing pauses, developed into one of the most powerful and pungent spokesmen the Movement possessed. Popular throughout the country at public meetings, he emerged as one of Chartism’s great leaders.
The Ashton-under-Lyme area intended to have the Rev. J.R. Stephens as their delegate to the Chartist Convention. On 27 December 1838, however, the police arrested Stephens for an inflammatory speech he had made at an illegal meeting the previous month. Although released on bail, he declined to serve as a delegate, and proposed McDouall should take his place at the Convention. From the standpoint of Ashton Chartists, the change seemed eminently reasonable. Both men appeared to have similar policies, advocating workers should arm and be prepared to fight for their rights.
Many parts of the country were in turmoil by 4 February 1839, when the Chartist Convention began its deliberation in London. Demonstrations, marches, arming and drilling, all taking place on an unprecedented scale, constituted a threat to the established order. McDouall did not want to lose the initiative, the momentum must be maintained, and, to do this, the Convention had to make a call to people throughout Britain for an immediate insurrection. Unless such a lead was given, he threatened to withdraw from the Convention. [6] But McDouall was misjudging the character of the Chartist Convention. Undoubtedly, it was an historic gathering. It can be seen as an important landmark in the making of the working class, its first entry as a significant force into the arena of national politics. However, seeing that it was a class still in its infancy, not surprisingly the Convention lacked cohesion and coherence. A wide variety of diverse political ideologies were held by the 53 delegates. The predominant mood was one of caution. To most of the representatives, it remained uncertain how the government would react. Confronted by a campaign of unparalleled magnitude, what would the authorities do? Would they concede to the workers democratic rights? Most delegates thought that at least before contemplating the leap into revolution favoured by McDouall, a thorough investigation should be made to see whether the issue could be resolved peacefully. This meant waiting until all the signatures to the petition had been collected and Parliament given time to reach a decision. As a consequence, the Convention’s proceedings dragged on with a dwindling attendance and enthusiasm. Only in July did the House of Commons consider the Charter, rejecting it by 235 votes to 46; by then, when the delegates did turn to a serious consideration of ’ulterior measures’, the Convention had lost much of its credibility. It found itself unable to mount a serious challenge.
The authorities, on the other hand, used the delay to strengthen their defences. Had the uprising occurred on 6 May, as originally planned, it would have created great difficulties. An historian who has examined the government’s ability to cope with an insurrection at that time reached the conclusion that the “defences were in a parlous state of disorganisation – the troops scattered in small detachments, the reinforcements from Ireland not yet arrived; the magistrates inert either from fear or indifference and the propertied inhabitants afraid to come forward as special constables to defend themselves.” [7] But, thanks to the Chartists’ indecision, the authorities secured overwhelming superiority. General Napier reinforced his forces, concentrating his forces at four or five strategic points, and expressed confidence he would be able to deal with any eventuality. [8] At the same time, the police force was increased in size, as well as being augmented by the recruitment of special constables, mainly from the middle classes. By August, the authorities felt the situation was firmly under control. Sufficiently strong, they resolved to go over to the offensive. Having bided their time, they made a large number of arrests, beheading the Movement. The Chartist Convention had met intermittently between February and September 1839, at four different venues in London and Birmingham. [9] Well before it reached the end of its protracted proceedings, the Convention had become discredited, a body without a strategy or a function.
Dr. McDouall could have claimed to have foreseen the debacle; equally he could have claimed to have done all that lay in his power to avoid it happening. After his call for an immediate insurrection had been defeated in February, he did not carry out his threat to leave the Convention. Instead he remained as a delegate, putting forward his views. He belonged to an influential group there – it included Peter Bussey, Julian Harney and Dr. John Taylor – who were advocates of physical force. Other delegates may not entirely have agreed with his opinions, nevertheless they respected him as an individual. Hence they chose him as one of the leaders who, on 25 May 1839, presented the monster petition to Parliament. Later, he vividly described the experience:
“Previous to the appointed day, roll after roll arrived and were added to the parent sheet. There seemed to prevail a universal enthusiasm throughout the nation, and when the numbers were proclaimed, 1,300,000 signatures, on the morning of the 25th, the cheers resounded, through the Old Bailey, and rolled away in its granite recesses. Eighteen stone-masons, principally from the New Houses of Lords and Commons, volunteered to carry the mass down, and preparatory to the march a meeting was held in an adjoining tavern. The men were in high spirits, and on eight names being called out they filed out like soldiers, and capital ones they would have made. Our little room, 55, Old Bailey, was crowded to suffocation, and the street blocked up. With some difficulty, the eight masons, attired in clean white fustian jackets, got admission, and the place being cleared of strangers, a large frame was brought in, composed of two long beams of wood, supporting a cup like socket the size of the immense roll. It was like the end of a tun sawed off, into which the equally tun-like petition was placed, then completing the resemblance. At quarter past three we got under way, the members of the Convention marched three abreast in front, and a vast procession in the rear ...
“The spectacle attracted great attention, from the ragged street sweeper to the duchess with the golden eye glass. The city police behaved very favourably, but the metropolitan blues were very indifferent. The omnibus drivers were very rough and violent. We marched down, slow marched, through Fleet Street, the Strand, past Charing Cross, the Horse Guards, and to Parliament House. The windows of the public offices were particularly crowded, and great curiosity seemed to prevail. The door of the House was finally reached, and around it there was an immense crowd awaiting. Then but not until then, did the cheering commence. It began in front and rolled back along the line, and swelled louder and louder, until the thunder reached the inner House. Horses pranced and galloped off, carriages clanked together in confusion, and the astonished police ran together to defend the entrance to the House ...
“A message arrived for the petition to be carried into the lobby, and consequently the fustian jackets moved up the matted stairs, and along the entrance, through a line of strangers and Members of Parliament. In the lobby the usual order was upset and a great crowd besieged the door of the House itself, the great petition seeming like the head of a battering ram against the green base doorway. Presently Mr Duncombe appeared, and the mass being lowered and turned on its side, it was rolled on to the floor of the House like a mighty snowball, bearing the good wishes of all around, and 1,300,000 people’s blessings.” [10]
After delivering the petition, the Chartist leaders turned their minds to the question of how they could bring pressure to bear on Parliament. The Convention agreed on a number of ulterior measures. These included withdrawing savings from the banks, boycotting hostile newspapers and exclusive dealing – that is, the purchase of goods only from shopkeepers who supported The Charter. Though backing these measures, McDouall regarded them as woefully inadequate. They would have to challenge authority much more directly if they were to succeed; July, he declared, was “a celebrated month for revolutions”. Along with Dr Taylor, he urged the Movement to call a general strike. This idea gained considerable support. One William Benbow had for many years been an advocate of using the general strike as a weapon to redress workers’ wrongs. He had even written a pamphlet The Grand National Holiday, published in 1832, to explain the plan. Many Chartists were convinced by him, and the Convention agreed to have “the sacred month”, when all work throughout the land would cease.
McDouall strived to make “the sacred month” more effective. He put three proposals to the organising committee. First, that it should liaise with trade unions, leaving the implementation to them. Second, that it should encourage unemployed labourers to hold meetings on the first day of the strike for requesting relief from all rates and greater financial assistance from the wealthy. And third, that it should urge all people throughout the United Kingdom to demonstrate on the first day to protest against the government and to show their adherence to The Charter. [11]
From the outset, preparations for “the sacred month” encountered problems. The eight-man committee appointed to liaise with trade unions discovered organised labour was reluctant to cooperate. Most unions had few members and little money. Not able to defend the existing unsatisfactory levels of wages, they were reluctant to squander funds, carefully garnered for industrial purposes, on some hastily thought out political scheme. With unorganised labour – the vast majority – the greater poverty and unemployment made the committee’s task still more daunting. They did not possess the resources to remain on strike for any period. Benbow’s answer to their predicament was alarmingly simple: “the cattle upon a thousand hills” should be regarded as their strike fund. But to other delegates, however, this simply served to heighten misgivings about the whole project. If “the sacred month” was to be accompanied by a nationwide orgy of looting and stealing, the authorities could not be expected to stand idly by. Troops would shoot demonstrators, and the authorities would be provided with a pretext for employing still more repressive measures. In the Northern Star, Feargus O’Connor placed his considerable influence on the side of those wanting to abort “the sacred month”; he said it would only lead to catastrophe and defeat. But what turned out to be more decisive were the unfavourable reports from Chartists throughout Britain. With the exception of the North East, in almost all districts the response was expected to be poor. Even Manchester and Hyde – McDouall’s stomping ground – came out against the strike call. As a result of the overall situation, the Chartist Convention resolved to rescind its previous decision: “the sacred month” was called off on July 22.
As one of the foremost advocates of “the sacred month”, McDouall received much of the blame for the fiasco. Yet, in a sense, delegates’ condemnation of him had little consequence; the Chartist Convention itself had become discredited. Over the months of its protracted proceedings, strength had drained away from the Convention. The vote to call off “the sacred month” on July 22 had been carried by 12 votes to six, with seven abstentions. In other words, less than half of its 53 delegates had taken part in this important decision.
Despite its long deliberations, the Convention had little or nothing to show for its efforts. Its biggest demonstration had been its own failure: its failure to persuade Parliament to grant The Charter peacefully; its failure to organise a national uprising; and, finally, its failure to arrange a general strike. Among Chartists in most parts of Britain, a sense of disillusionment prevailed not only with the Convention but also existing organisational arrangements.
Well before he left the Convention on July 25, McDouall had discerned this mood and had argued for new constitutional arrangements – greater centralisation, more discipline, closer ties with the trade unions. In his opinion, only if this happened could Chartism develop the necessary cohesion to become effective. [12]
Meanwhile, McDouall had to prepare for an impending court case. For several months, the authorities had been determined to get him. As a pretext, they used a meeting that had taken place on April 22nd, when he had spoken to 3,000 people, half of whom belonged to the Hyde Female Radical Association. He faced charges of sedition and illegal assembly, and McDouall was determined to make a fight of it. Courageously, he proclaimed his Chartist principles in court. The crux of the prosecution’s case was that McDouall’s “object was to overthrow laws by force, and to incite the people to bloody revolution”. It alleged that, along with several accomplices, he had purchased muskets and bayonets from George Thompson, a Birmingham gunsmith, besides placing orders for more. At the Hyde meeting on April 22nd, it was claimed he had told his audience that 50 determined people could capture the country: all that was necessary was to seize the arms at the Tower of London and distribute the weapons to 200,000 Londoners. [13]
In reply, McDouall denied the Hyde meeting had been illegal. No violence had been used or contemplated: “the people merely met together for the purpose of considering the expediency of adopting the People’s Charter.” He did not deny, however, advocating the possession of weapons. Ever since Anglo-Saxon times, he said, people had a right to carry arms for their own defence; it was a bulwark against tyranny, curbing the repressive powers of the state. [14]
In retrospect, it is difficult to disentangle the conflicting accounts. Definitely, McDouall was exceedingly indiscreet if he spoke at a crowded public meeting about seizing the Tower of London. But even if the authorities did concoct the story, there is nevertheless independent evidence he toyed with using this kind of tactic. Alexander Somerville, author of The Autobiography of a Working Man, recalls having a conversation with McDouall when he spoke about plans to capture Woolwich arsenal and distribute the arms among his fellow Chartists. According to Somerville, a secret committee of war existed in 1839, with McDouall as commander in chief. So fearful was Somerville of the prospect of a bloodbath occurring, he wrote an article entitled Dissuasive Warnings. In this, he described from personal experience the horrors of war and counselled the disgruntled to be cautious. [15] Some contemporary observers said his Dissuasive Warnings, which was widely circulated, played a big part in averting an uprising.
Clearly, it would have been hard for McDouall to claim that he did not advocate the possession of weapons. Four Chartists from Ashton-Stockport area had been caught with a large quantity of firearms in their possession. They also appeared before the same Chester Assizes, and were sentenced to 18 months each. [16] Where McDouall made a much stronger case was in his rebuttal of the prosecution’s slur that his “great atrocity” had been to stir up discontent for self-aggrandizement and monetary gain. His answer was to point to the pitiful conditions that prevailed. He cited the case of Thomas Ashton, of Hyde, who had to keep a family of nine on 11 shillings and seven pence, and others who were so overcrowded that they slept seven to a bed. “If people were comfortable, there would be no agitation,” he argued, “but if real misery and distress exists, then agitation was the mere effect and their suffering the cause of the agitation.” Then he reaffirmed his belief that the wrongs which people had to endure could only be ended once they had a say in the government of the country. [17]
Later, after the trial, Thomas Dunning witnessed a curious spectacle:
“I called at the Bull’s Head Tavern, Northgate Street, an old inn frequented by many persons connected with the Cathedral, and among the assembled company I found a party of special constables, who had just received their wages for defending the city against the Chartists, who didn’t come to take the city and rescue the prisoners. The specials were ordering jugs of ale and drinking the health of Doctor McDouall, whose speech in defence had converted them to Chartism.” [18]
But McDouall himself never had any illusion that his eloquence would affect the course of the trial. He knew the authorities were determined to get him. The judge sentenced him to a year’s imprisonment. He was also bound over to keep the peace for five years, himself for £500 and two sureties of £100 each. His one consolation must have been, as he entered prison, that his passionate and lucid defence of Chartism in the courtroom had made him one of the Movement’s most prominent leaders. [19]
His 12 months in prison did not pass uneventfully. Like fellow Chartist James Williams, he proved romance can flourish in the most unlikely places – they both acquired wives first met during their incarceration. In the case of the North Eastern leader, she was a wealthy young lady who, as part of her charitable work, acted as a prison visitor. With her financial assistance, Williams opened a printing business, and, later, the Sunderland Herald. McDouall’s spouse, on the other hand, had less to offer, at least in monetary terms. She was the daughter of one of the warders. When he was released, McDouall took Anne to Glasgow, and married her according to Scottish law. [20]
Though he remained convinced of ultimate victory, he realised the need to avoid riots and premature uprisings, fights with the authorities culminating in demoralisation and defeat. For this reason he was highly critical of the Newport uprising that occurred in November 1839. In a letter from prison, he acknowledged its leader – John Frost – as a personal friend, but argues it had been an “ill-managed, foolish and quixotic adventure”. Such setbacks interfered with the Movement slowly garnering its strength, creating the powerful organisation which would be required when, as he was quite certain, the final crisis erupted. “The financial disarrangement, the foreign difficulties, the domestic insurrection, will all merge in the end into a grand revolutionary out break. No power on earth can prevent it.” [21]
But, within a few moments of leaving prison, McDouall discovered for himself how difficult it could be, in a changed political atmosphere, to implement his stricture to avoid riots. His supporters in Chester, still enthusiastic about his speech from the dock, wished to celebrate his release and hear his sparkling oratory again. The young doctor had hardly begun his speech when the magistrates declared it an illegal assembly and ordered the police to break up the meeting. McDouall, however, had many fervent followers among the soldiers stationed in Chester barracks. “Although we are soldiers, we have the feelings of working men”, they told him. “We will not let the bloody police disperse your meeting.” McDouall, fearing a conflict might escalate into a serious confrontation and provide the authorities with a pretext for his immediate re-arrest, decided to abandon the meeting. The inhabitants of Chester appreciated his reasons for prudence; it only served to heighten their hostility towards the magistracy, the suppressors of free speech. Shopkeepers, and, remarkably, even some of the police, disgusted by the role they had been called upon to perform, declared their support for Chartism. Referring to the incident later, McDouall said that the Secretary of State could no longer rely on the undivided loyalty of either the police or the army; he boasted about having spies in both organisations. [22]
Leaving Chester, McDouall began a tour of the country. His first stop was the Queen’s Theatre, Liverpool, where “one of the largest meetings which had ever taken place in the town” was held. [23] But this, and the numerous other meetings, were puny in comparison to the massive demonstration which awaited him when he triumphantly returned to his home city of Manchester on August 15. For weeks the town had been plastered with placards and posters, announcing his return. On the great day, a mammoth procession set off from Manchester’s Stevenson Square to march two miles to meet his train when it arrived at Cross Lane station, Salford. The marchers included an impressive number of trade unionists, radicals and female associations. At the front, immediately after two marshals on horseback, came a portrait of Dr. McDouall, surmounted by the inscription “The Tyrant’s Foe”. Among the other banners such slogans could be read as “The Prosperity of the Working Classes is the Foundation of the National Greatness”, “Labour, the Source of all Wealth”, “Massacre of Peterloo: Murder demands Justice”, and “Tremble! Tyrants, Tremble!”.
Eventually, some of the demonstrators managed to squeeze into the Carpenters’ Hall. There, after hearing a speech of welcome, McDouall revealed imprisonment had quenched none of his ardour for the cause. He made a long speech, frequently punctuated by cheers and laughter from the audience, as this typical extract shows:
“The first thing a thinking man thought about was his dinner – (laughter) – and if he could not get it he complained until he was satisfied on that score. He then began to look out for clothing, and his other physical wants; and when these were satisfied, he looked to the cultivation of the minds of his children. When they had got all this, the people of this country would still complain; and why should they not? They would do right always to complain till they received the full wages due to their labour. (Cheers)
“Let them look at the situation of the agricultural and factory populations of this country. See the peasantry in rags and misery and distress – and then look at the broad and fertile valleys covered with waving corn and luxuriant pastures, and the palace of the tyrant rising among the trees. (Loud cheering) Then let them turn to the town, and point out one trade that was not over-stocked and over-peopled. (Cries of ‘Not one’) Let them look to the factory people, where death presented itself under a hundred different forms, and where thousands were sinking with disease and misery into a premature grave, the victims of tyranny and murder combined. (Cheers) ... But who was the cause of the poverty? The Government – the oppressors who robbed them. (Tremendous cheering)”
In the next two years he conducted tour after tour, usually addressing packed meetings, sometimes taking the Chartist message to parts of Britain where it had never been heard before. Poor attendances and wintry weather did not discourage him. Despite blizzards, in January 1842 he walked through Midlands towns and villages, cheerfully accepting the discomforture involved. In the small Northamptonshire village of Pitchford, he found himself lecturing in a barn to a small gathering that included two policemen and two pigs:
“The pigs grunted, the police grumbled, and the people were satisfied. The police were sent for by an old lady, who either imagined that we were going to storm her house, or steal the pigs. The pigs remained unmolested to digest the first Chartist lecture ever addressed to the swinish multitude, and the police, like all watchful guardians on a frosty night, repaired to the public house, for the purpose of drinking the old lady’s health, at her especial expense.” [24]
The following night McDouall addressed a second meeting at Pitchford, held in the town hall, full to overflowing. Successes followed in various other parts of the Midlands. Before long, his reputation was such that he was asked to stand for Northampton as the Chartist candidate in the 1841 general election. This was largely a propaganda exercise because most working people were disenfranchised; it never the less gave an opportunity to harangue the crowd, mainly of non-voters, at the hustings. The doctor secured 170 votes whereas the two winning Whig candidates gained 981 and 979 votes respectively. [25]
In Scotland, McDouall held some extremely well-attended meetings. The 1839 debacle primarily had effected England and Wales, where in the aftermath, there had been a dip in the level of activity; in Scotland, by contrast, the Movement had been weak and uninvolved in the events of 1839. In the post-1839 period, Scottish Chartism received a great accretion of strength, with McDouall playing a leading part in building the Movement. [26] The highlight of the tour came in Glasgow. An estimated 200,000 people assembled to hear speeches from White, Collins and McDouall. A huge procession marched on to Glasgow Green, with 30 bands and 100 banners. Workers walked in their trade groups – masons, smiths, shoemakers, cabinetmakers, dyers, dressers, boilermakers and so on. Female chartists had their own contingent on the march. When they all arrived on the Green, a representative of the women read out addresses to the three leaders, presenting each of them with a commemorative medal. But for Glaswegians themselves the demonstration also had a commemorative significance: as the Scots Times claimed “the old radical spirit” had been revived. “The demonstration on Monday exceeded that held when the Earl of Durham visited Glasgow, and was scarcely equalled by that of O’Connell. Chartism is supreme in Glasgow – Monday has settled that”. [27] McDouall spoke at other meetings in Airdrie, Aloa, Coatbridge, Dalkeith, Dumfries, Dumbarton, Dumferline, Edinburgh, Forfar, Kilmarnock, Linlithgow, Markinch, Montrose, Stirling, St. Ninians, the Vale of Leven and several other places.
The massive demonstrations, often resulting in expressions of democratic sentiment on an unparalleled scale, revealed the existence among working people of a common aim and purpose. Precisely for this reason the question of what was the next step forward, was posed with greater urgency; and it was on this issue that Chartists were so deeply divided. In places like Dunfermline, supporters of moral force refused to sponsor McDouall’s meeting and organised a rival attraction. This did not deter the Doctor’s supporters, most of whom were miners, from going ahead with their demonstration, where McDouall combined an exposition of Chartist principles with a denunciation of the moderates who clamoured for an alliance with the middle class. The young Doctor still remained the idol of the extremists.
Even so, an examination of McDouall’s speeches after his release from prison in 1840 indicates that his attitude to physical force had been modified. In part, this may have been merely circumspection, the fact that he had been bound over for five years to keep the peace. But also, as he made clear at the giant Manchester meeting held to celebrate his release, he no longer favoured drilling and the display of weapons in public; as a means of demonstrating Chartist strength and intimidating enemies, these had entirely failed. [28] Also, he no longer believed in making impassioned speeches urging the use of force. Wild revolutionary utterances and led to rash acts of impetuosity in England and Wales, with disastrous consequences, largely avoided in Scotland. As he told Edinburgh Chartists: “We gave our passions the rein; but you have been more cautious, you have suffered less – you gave the reins to reason.” This did not mean that he had renounced the use of force: at the same Edinburgh meeting, he had prefaced his remarks by expressing pride in his grandfather, who had fought against British troops alongside George Washington in the American War of Independence. [29] What he now appeared to advocate was the possession of weapons for defensive purposes. If the authorities resorted to violence in an attempt to crush Chartism, he thought the moral force men would be the first to run away.
The physical force versus moral force debate was only one of the many issues dividing Chartists. Definitely, the need to secure more coherence and unity required a new organisational form. Delegates to the 1839 Chartist Convention had generally been elected by mass meetings that anyone, whatever their views or degree of commitment, could attend. By 1840, a feeling had emerged that a more structured organisation was required; the loose form of pressure group politics had been found wanting in the events of the previous year. So, on July 20 1840, a conference was held at Manchester that led to the creation of the National Chartist Association, a body with clearly defined membership and rules.
From the outset, McDouall played a prominent part in the new organisation. He was one of the twelve signatories to the document calling the special convention. Of the delegates attending the founding gathering, McDouall was one of the two – Pitkeithly was the other – who had been delegates to the 1839 Convention. [30] The large turnover in leading personnel can be attributed to a variety of factors – the demoralisation of certain individuals as a result of the defeats of 1839, the enforced absence of O’Connor, Frost and some others due to imprisonment or transportation, and, not least, to the point, implicit in the creation of the new organisation, that many of the old political ways would have to be altered.
By his stirring defence at his trial and his well-attended speaking tour, “the young doctor”, as he was often called, had emerged as a popular and nationally known leader. It is not surprising therefore, that when the National Charter Association held elections in March 1841 to elect its executive committee, McDouall topped the poll: P.M. McDouall 3,795, J Leach 3,664, John Campbell (secretary) 2,219, Morgan Williams 2,045, George Binns 1,879, R.K. Philip 1,130. That his popularity persisted can be seen from the following year’s election results, where again he came top: P.M. McDouall 11,221, J. Leach 10,830, J. Campbell 9,712, M. Williams 4,410, J. Bairstow 4,611. The appreciably higher numbers in the second election was an indication of the NCA’s growth: by 1842 it claimed to have branches in 400 localities. Though this may sound impressive, the reality seems to have been less so. There is reason to believe, as the Leeds Times said, branches in many localities consisted merely of two or three individuals who met together on a quarterly basis. [31] Moreover, in Scotland and part of the Midlands, no NCA organisation existed, because people were suspicious of its power, its professionalism and legality. Indeed, even where branches did exist, there is good reason to believe that the vast majority of Chartists remained outside its ranks. This can be shown by looking at the position in 1842. Almost certainly, O’Connor was exaggerating when he declared: “We are 4,000,000, aye, and more”; yet probably there would be more than a million people who would describe themselves as Chartists, whereas, at the same time, the paid up membership of the NCA was probably in the region of 20,000. [32]
The significance of this is that it would have been virtually impossible for the NCA’s small membership to provide coherence and direction to Chartism; the various other competing political tendencies as well as the comparatively immense size of Chartism’s amorphous support made the NCA’s task really daunting. What made it still more formidable was the very considerable local variations, as revealed in such studies as that of Asa Briggs: the local political scene had an immediacy, an urgency about it, whereas the NCA’s activities nationally appeared remote and often of less relevance. [33] But to make matters worse, far from the NCA speaking with an a united voice, the differences within the broader movement found reflection inside the top echelons. O’Connor, now out of prison, thought the most pressing task was to transform the Northern Star from a weekly into a daily paper. Then Chartism would have a powerful voice, one that could not be overlooked. Bronterre O’Brien disagreed: he considered the movement’s energies should be concentrated on electoral politics; in this manner Chartism would secure the maximum impact. Still another opinion came from Collins and Lovatt, who maintained workers could secure lasting improvements only when they possessed greater knowledge – education should be priority Number One. But William Benbow had different ideas and argued for them in a closely-written, 28-page document. In the midst of this confusion and plethora of proposals, however, this document appears to have been neither published nor considered.
McDouall’s suggestions fared better than those of Benbow. This was largely because he by this time possessed his own journal – the Chartist and Republican Journal – where he could express his views. Repeatedly, he wrote articles emphasising how vital it was to build strong organisation at local level throughout the country. Past defeats he judged, could all be attributed to this cause: “Our associations were hastily got up, composed of prodigious numbers, a false idea of strength was wrought up to the highest pitch, thence originated a sense of security which subsequent events proved to be false, and why? because no real union existed at the bottom.” [34]
McDouall’s answer to the problem was to turn to the newly-forming working class; only it had the necessary potential strength. He believed Chartists should be active in the trade unions, win them over for the cause and use them as a basis for Chartist agitation. Where workers did not belong to a trade union, he still thought that they should be organised in occupational groups in furtherance of their political interests. In this way, labour would become exceedingly powerful. Concurrently with any future Chartist convention, the labour movement could demonstrate its determination by strikes and other forms of activity. As a result, the state would be too frightened to arrest Convention delegates. Also, faced with such organised might, it would be more likely to accede to Chartist demands.
The response to McDouall’s proposals was patchy, with large parts of the country indifferent to it. Most support came from London and the Manchester area, where occupational branches were created. In Yorkshire too, interest was shown. Nevertheless, what turned out to be insuperable obstacles soon appeared. One difficulty was that some Chartists saw the trade unions not as possible allies but as rivals. Strange to say, as the Leeds Times reported, many Yorkshire Chartist branches had a rule that members should take part “in no agitation but for The Charter.” [35]They regarded union activity as a diversion, side-tracking people from the real struggle. Sometimes this suspicion was reciprocated. In North East England for example, some trade unionists had actually struck at the beginning of “the sacred month”. Since it had turned out to be such a fiasco, some of them had severed their Chartist connections. A much greater influence, conditioning workers’ attitude to McDouall’s proposal, was the worsening economic situation. As the British economy slid into what Hobsbawm describes as the worst slump of the century, workers became preoccupied with the problems of wage reductions and unemployment, not to mention the survival of their small union organisations; they had no time to spare to explore the possibilities of establishing links between the unions and Chartism. [36]
Not only McDouall’s proposals but also Chartist and Republican Journal fell victim to the darkening economic climate. Both can be seen as failures. Yet, this would be to make a superficial analysis: seeds had been sown that were soon to flourish. It is almost certainly no coincidence that when the General Strike of 1842 broke out, it was precisely in those areas where McDouall’s influence had been greatest where the struggle was most vigorously fought, with the profoundest political insight. In his speeches as well as his writings, McDouall had put forward his own views, winning a large number over to his position.
Typical of his approach was the consideration of moral and physical force that appeared in his journal in the form of a discussion between a Chartist and a Whig politician. [37] Though the latter expressed his belief in slow and peaceful change here in Britain, the Chartist had no difficulty in getting his opponent to state he supported wars overseas. Indeed, the physical force Chartist is shocked by the Whig’s lack of humanity, his “slaughtering liberality” for imperialist purposes. In reply, the politician asked the Chartist whether he would not be prepared to fight if our Indian possessions were attacked by the Russians or our trade with Mexico threatened by the French? If he was not prepared to fight for these, what cause was the Chartist to take up arms over?
The Whig received a blunt, forthright answer to his question about India:
“Let all who have possessions in India, or all who profit by what you call ‘our Indian possessions’ be off to India, and fight a thousand battles for them is they like. Let the proprietors of the East India Stock, let the owners of East India merchantmen, let those English and Irish merchants and brokers, and writers and underwriters, and governors and judges, and naval and military officers, and liver-coloured nabobs, and all such other aristocrats and commercial speculators as have either wrung or are now wringing, fortunes out of Hindoo sweat and misery – let all such persons go and fight for our ‘Indian possessions’, but let them not mock our degradation by asking us, working people to fight alongside them, either for our ‘possessions’ in India, or anywhere else, seeing that we do not possess a single acre of ground, or any other description of property in our own country, much less colonies, or ‘possessions’ in any other, having been robbed of everything we ever earned by the middle and upper classes.”
After making it quite plain working people had nothing to gain from Britain’s continued domination of India, Chartist and Republican Journal went on to state a position that savours of revolutionary defeatism: “On the contrary, we have an interest in prospective loss or ruin of all such ‘possessions’, seeing they are but instruments of power in the hands of our domestic oppressors. Yes, yes, by all means, let Russia seize them, if she can, and we shall but thank God and Russia for the seizure.”
Yet, McDouall was no pacifist. Well aware of the horrors of war, he made it plain that he nevertheless advocated physical force since there was no alternative:
“I have so inveterate and mortal an antipathy to war (regarding it as but another name for murder and robbery on a large scale), that only the direst necessity could induce me to be, under any circumstances, its advocate; yet there is one great barbarous Power in Europe against which I would gladly see a war got up even this very day.”
Mystified, the Whig politican asked whether he meant Russia, but the Chartist made it clear he was referring to “a power more barbarous and barbarising than all living despotism put together, that of Russia included”. To emphasise the point, he handed his bemused companion a copy of the previous week’s Northern Liberator. This told workers never to shed their blood for the present tyrannical system. “Henceforth, if you go to war, it shall be to fight for yourselves.”
These remarks had a prophetic ring. A few months later, goaded by mounting poverty and starvation, people turned to violence. The wave of strikes, starting among Midland miners in the summer of 1842, spread to Lancashire and Yorkshire. There gaunt and desperate crowds roamed from town to town demanding – and persuading with force when necessary – everyone to stop work. In textile mills, production halted abruptly when the steam engines were immobilised by the simple expedient of removing the plugs to the boilers and so in Lancashire the disturbances became called “the Plug Plot Riots”. In the Potteries, the homes of unpopular employers and magistrates were pillaged. At Stockport, the workhouse was attacked and bread stolen. Elsewhere, the people were so hungry that they dug up and ate the carcases of diseased animals. [38]
Confronted by this grave challenge to law and order, the authorities resorted to repression on an extensive scale. Police and troops attacked demonstrators. They arrested many strikers. Soldiers in Preston fired into a crowd, killing two and seriously wounding seven people. [39] Such stern measures, however, generally did not cower the workers; it served to make them more resolute. Conferences of strikers formulated lists of demands, which included no wage reductions, a repeal of anti-working class legislation and the enactment of The Charter.
In these circumstances, McDouall believed the Chartist Movement could make an important intervention, transforming what was primarily an economic struggle into a political one. Leadership needed to be provided. As it happened, the NCA anyway had planned to hold its regular meeting in Manchester. Delegates arrived there to find the city silent and smokeless, all the factories had closed. What were they to do? McDouall had no doubts. He moved a resolution committing the Association’s members to support the strike, attempting to spread it to those parts of the country not involved and urging all workers to remain out until the Charter became law. Despite some misgivings from Feargus O’Connor, the editor of the Northern Star and a few others, conference overwhelmingly passed the motion.
Then delegates asked the young doctor to write a manifesto, explaining why people everywhere should support the strike. He produced a rousing clarion call, a fiery denunciation of the present system. Addressing the “white slaves of England”, he wrote:
“labour must no longer be the common prey of masters and rulers. Intelligence has beamed upon the mind of the bondsman, and he has been convinced that all wealth, comfort and produce, everything valuable, useful and elegant, have sprung from the palms of his hands; he feels that his back thinly clad, his children breadless, himself hopeless, his mind harassed, and his body punished, that undue riches, luxury and gorgeous plenty might be heaped on the places of the taskmasters, and flooded in the granaries of the oppressor. Nature, God and reason have condemned this inequality, and in the thunder of the people’s voice it must perish together.”
The manifesto went on to suggest English workers would not battle on alone much longer. Chartists would bring their organisation to assist them. Once the whole working class had been mobilised, the position would be completely changed because the forces of repression were incapable of crushing an entire people in revolt:
“Englishmen! the blood of your brothers reddens the streets of Preston and Blackburn, and the murderers thirst for more. Be firm, be courageous, be men. Peace, law and order have prevailed on our side – let them be revered until your brethren in Scotland, Wales and Ireland are informed ...”
The problem was that, except in a few parts of Scotland, the strike did not spread. Even in a stronghold like Lancashire, the unity forged at the outset of the struggle appeared fragile, liable to crack. Many workers, hungry and tired, were anxious to reach local settlements. Where an employer withdrew a threatened wage cut, particularly if he had conceded a slight increase into the bargain, workers usually seized the opportunity to return to work – and forgot all about The Charter.
But the 1842 General Strike was far from being a disaster. As a recent full-length study has pointed out, it demonstrated impressive class strength and solidarity; in terms of duration and numbers of workers participating it exceeded all General Strikes throughout the world in the 19th Century. [40] It was moreover, more successful than its only successor in Britain: the 1926 General Strike left wage cuts and weakened organisations in its wake whereas the years that followed 1842 witnessed new trade unions springing up and wage rises won.
Yet for the Chartists themselves the events of 1842 signalled a defeat. Many rued the Movement’s involvement. Leaders like McDouall, hopeful a bread-and-butter struggle could successfully be given a revolutionary dimension had been proved wrong. They had misjudged the level of consciousness, the degree of development of British workers. Instead of securing solidarity action from Scottish, Welsh and Irish workers, the Chartists had displayed their own inability to gain a response. Worse still, in the aftermath of the General Strike politicians and the press readily seized on Chartism as a scapegoat, claiming it was responsible for all the trouble. As if to corroborate this theory, Chartist leaders figured prominently among the 1,500 arrested by the authorities.
In their anguish, many Chartists also looked for a scapegoat – and found one in McDouall. He, more than anyone, had been responsible for the Movement committing itself to the Strike; therefore, he should shoulder the major responsibility for the ensuing agony, the Northern Star referred to the Doctor’s “wild strain of recklessness”. Feargus O’Connor blamed McDouall for his arrest, and subsequently opposed collections for McDouall in exile.
The Doctor’s need for political asylum came from his being at the top of the authorities’ wanted list. They had opened his correspondence for some time as well as having him under surveillance. [41] They knew the Doctor had written both the manifesto addressed to the British people and a letter to Chartists throughout the country, dispatched by the Chartist conference at the height of the strike. The authorities wished to get their hands on him. He would have been a prime prisoner, to be tried alongside O’Connor and 57 others at Lancaster in March 1843.
But McDouall had other ideas: he had no intention, if he could help it, of having a second sojourn in one of Her Majesty’s rest centres. For several months he was on the run, at times coming perilously close to arrest. What made matters worse was that in the previous two years he had been so much in the public eye. In May 1842 for instance, he rode on a white horse at the head of the procession which had presented the second Chartist petition to Parliament. Millions of friends and foes alike had heard him speak and seen his picture. He was in danger of detection at any time, anywhere. Consequently, political colleagues recommended he flee abroad. With skilful planning, he sailed secretly to France, remaining in exile there for two years.
McDouall does not appear to have remained idle while on the Continent. He seems to have established contact with people holding kindred radical views, in particular with Etienne Cabet, the man responsible for bringing the term “communism” into extensive usage. [42] His main work, in which he expounds his political philosophy, was The Voyage of Icarus, which McDouall translated into English under its original title of The Adventure of Lord William Covindale in Icaria. [43] Cabet acquired much of his inspiration for his left-wing opinions in England. Disillusioned by the reign of Louis-Philippe, in 1831 he began denouncing the “bourgeois” monarchy and publishing Le Populaire, a journal written specially for working people. Not surprisingly, the French government banned Le Populaire, and Cabet was forced to spend the next few years in England. [44] In this period he developed new ideas. Taking himself to the British Museum, he studied works by political thinkers. At the same time he witnessed the industrial struggles occurring in Britain and discussed their significance with Owenite socialists. In 1839, back in France, he wrote his famous book, followed two years later by Credo Communiste. These became very popular with French workers: Heine, the German writer, noted that most of the workmen with whom he talked in the proletarian quarters of Paris in the early 1840s called themselves communists. [45] Subsequently, Marx and Engels chose to call their pamphlet The Communist Manifesto – not The Socialist Manifesto – because, according to G.D.H. Cole, the word communist “carried with it more than ‘socialist’ the idea of revolutionary struggle, and had, at the same time, a clearer connection with the notion of common ownership and enjoyment. It was, Engels has explained, less ‘Utopian’; it lent itself better to association with the idea of the class struggle and with the Materialist Conception of History.” [46]
By translating The Voyage of Icarus, McDouall simply added a further contribution to the already extensive traffic in ideas that influenced Chartism. The French Revolution provided inspiration and guidance. Bronterre O’Brien translated Buonarroti’s History of Babeuf’s Conspiracy for Equality, an account of how a left-wing sect vainly tried to turn the revolution in a socialist direction. The numerous émigrés who fled to Britain, men like Carl Schapper, Wilhelm Weitling, and Louis Oborski, helped to supply the Movement with a cosmopolitan flavour. Then, of course, there were Marx and Engels, who knew many of the leaders and contributed to Chartist journals.
But, whatever its sources of inspiration, Chartism experienced a lean period. Following the 1842 devastation, an upswing came, bringing greater wealth to all sections of society. In the clamour to make money, workers tended to forget the demands for sweeping political changes they had campaigned for so vehemently a couple of years before. The authorities, anxious to improve still further the political climate, wished to dispel causes for lingering bitterness, they hinted, therefore, that that McDouall would not be prosecuted if he returned to Britain.
No mass meetings, as there had been in 1839, took place to celebrate the young Doctor’s homecoming. Support had shrunk: no English branch now possessed a membership of more than 200. In each locality, the hardcore of activists remaining were prone to indulge in mutual recriminations, wrongly blaming each other for the Movement’s misfortunes. Only a revival would restore unity, restoring a fighting spirit in the Movement. For that reason McDouall went to campaign in Scotland, where the organisation was displaying greater liveliness than in England. Yet, even in Scotland, he encountered deep dissensions. Many Chartists harboured a personal dislike for O’Connor and regarded the National Charter Association as an inefficient body, not providing proper leadership. A separate Scottish organisation, they believed, would be more responsive, less remote than the NCA to problems north of the border. When McDouall arrived in Glasgow, he found two rival branches, the smaller one having English affiliation. To create greater effectiveness, he recommended that they merge and strive to build a strong Scottish Chartist Association before worrying about relations with the English one.
His proposal aroused a howl of protest from the English leaders, who judged it to be a devious move by McDouall to build an alternative power-base for himself. [47] It seemed particularly reprehensible that, sent to Scotland under the auspices of the NCA, he should suggest disaffiliation from that body. The executive issued a statement: “Dr. McDouall is lecturing exclusively on his own account; and, as far as we know, is not lecturing for the Chartist cause.”
McDouall tried to justify his action, relating it to the parlous condition of the Movement:
“The cause of failure does not lie with the plan of organisation, or with the leaders. It rests with the people who had sunk into a deep sleep of apathy, from which nothing seems capable of arousing them. I simply suggested that, as all had apparently failed in Scotland, the best plan would be to appeal to her nationality.” [48]
This explanation failed to quell the quarrel; indeed, it only served to open old sores. Some remembered the money for his subsistence while he lived in France; they resented that such a scarce commodity had been squandered in this way. In reply, McDouall had criticised Feargus O’Connor’s role in the 1842 General Strike. This brought O’Connor into the fray. He wanted the Manchester Chartist Council to appoint a tribunal to investigate the disagreements between himself and the Doctor. McDouall retorted that the Manchester Chartist Council was not an appropriate body to consider the case. In the meanwhile, O’Connor had swung the Northern Star, with considerable influence, behind him. [49]
McDouall was virtually compelled to end his association with the NCA. He contented himself with addressing groups, up and down the country, who invited him to speak. Time gradually mellowed the hostility between himself and the supporters of O’Connor; increasingly his talent became again recognised, and it was appreciated that the Movement was the loser if he continued to be kept outside the leadership primarily because of what had happened in 1842. So in August 1846, a reconciliation occurred: he became a NCA lecturer once more and his activities were favourably reported in the Northern Star. [50] However, the NCA’s lack of finance curbed his activities on its behalf. Sent on a lecturing tour of the North East, McDouall was taken off the Association’s payroll. Despite appeals from Martin Jude and Jane Sibbett on behalf of the Newcastle Chartists, the NCA refused to relent. The Doctor then suggested that he should do a course on agricultural chemistry, but the lectures were badly attended, and Newcastle Chartists, having bought equipment for the course, were left with a £3 debt. [51]
Even so, McDouall’s knowledge of agriculture, combined with his oratorical skill, made him an eminently suitable advocate for O’Connor’s Land Plan. Industrial workers in many towns, painfully aware of their drab lives, expressed enthusiasm for the Plan. The prospect of having a small holding, situated in an idyllic rural setting, had great appeal. No wonder McDouall was so well received when he spoke at Preston. He contrasted the advantage of living in a low-rented Chartist cottage, with land attached, to a high-rented Lancashire slum, with no land. What must have made it still more appealing, he told the meeting an unskilled labourer could learn agricultural methods better than a farmer. [52]
Actually, O’Connor’s Land Plan contained a fatal flaw. Smallholdings could not compete with the big farmers, employing the most up-to-date machinery and scientific methods. An attempt to turn the clock back, the Plan was doomed not to succeed. Whether McDouall realised this is unclear; it may be he joined the Land Company because it gave him a regular income and provided him with a platform from which he could expound his views of more general matters. Some time in the winter of 1847-8 he resigned, claiming he could no longer add to the membership or capital of the Land Company. [53]
More pressing issues had arisen. Again, Britain had entered a trade depression. Hunger and unemployment stalked the country. Chartism started to revive, as agitation began to present a third petition. From the government’s standpoint, this unwelcome renewal of activity happened in a period of deep anxiety. Having suffered from the potato famine, Ireland was experiencing violent unrest. For the first time, Irish nationalists had expressed a willingness to join forces with the Chartists to fight the common enemy. Doubtless, they would be encouraged in their seditious activities by the success of similar struggles elsewhere – for 1848 was the Year of Revolutions, the overthrowal of despotic regimes from one end of Europe to the other.
In these circumstances, McDouall threw himself into the campaign. Not sparing himself, he spoke at rally after rally, rekindling the revolutionary fervour, and spurring masses of people into self-activity. After he spoke at Glasgow in March a riot occurred, followed by another in Edinburgh, where there were shouts of “Vive la Republique” and “Bread and Revolution”. Although McDouall’s presence in the neighbourhood led the authorities to link him with the disturbances, it seems that those responsible were destitute Irish and unemployed Scots. [54] Returning to England once he had completed a tour of Scotland, the Doctor stopped in Carlisle immediately he ascertained a parliamentary by-election was taking place. Nominated as a Chartist candidate, he gave a rousing speech at the hustings and was elected by a large show of hands. However, when the ballot was held, he lost by 55 votes to 414. [55] Undeterred, McDouall rushed on to the Midlands, where, as well as other meetings, he addressed 10,0000 people at Nottingham. [56]
The Chartist Convention opened in London on 4 April. Each delegate reported on the prevailing mood in the region he represented. Soon it became obvious that the general feeling would brook no delay or compromise. Chartists had grown tired of petitioning: The Charter had to be won by moral force if possible, by physical force if necessary. The Convention resolved to hold a mass demonstration at Kensington Common on 10 April, followed by a procession to Parliament to present the petition. If MPs rejected it, a National Assembly would be convened to consider other forms of action.
McDouall was not a delegate to the Chartist Convention. Since he played a leading part in the preceding agitation, this may at first seem rather strange. But almost certainly he was deeply involved in the debate about the adoption of ulterior measures. As Thomas Cooper remarked, “Plotters and planners were as plentiful as blackberries in 1848.” [57] Eventually, in these intense, heated discussions, the proposals appeared to have been whittled down to two – the British government would be toppled either on 12 June or 15 August.
Naturally, Her Majesty’s Government did not wish to witness its own demise. Elaborate counter measures were taken. New laws were enacted, special constables enrolled, and London was turned into an armed camp. Then, in a tense atmosphere, cabinet ministers waited to see what Chartist reactions would be to banning of their proposed march on Parliament. It turned out to be very much an anti-climax. Overawed by superior military force, the march on Parliament was abandoned. When the Chartist petition was examined in detail, it was found not to have 5,700,000 signatures, but only 1,975,496. Much relieved, politicians felt they could laugh at the Chartists.
Following Parliament’s dismissal of The Charter, members of the National Assembly gathered in London on 1 May. They came with reports of widespread anger in the Provinces. In some localities, large numbers of workers were arming, drilling, forming paramilitary organisations. The big question was: What was to be done? McDouall advanced two propositions. The first, which they rejected, sought to give the Movement wider appeal through the acceptance of economic, political and social policies that furthered working class interests. His second suggestion – the adoption of a centralised, disciplined structure for Chartism – secured the National Assembly’s assent. Under an executive of five, they appointed 10 commissioners for the various regions. Their duties were to control the district brigades, also consisting often members, and these in turn would have classes – perhaps today we would say cells – operating at grassroots level. Significantly, this organisational form was similar to that of the United Irishmen, and may be taken as a sign of their influence. It gave the advantage of quick mobilisation as well as greater security from State repression.
It is instructive to examine who were elected to the provisional executive committee. It included Ernest Jones, who had been the foremost advocate of physical force at the Chartist Convention. [58] Then there was James Leach, responsible for the delicate negotiations with the Irish confederates. The Irish paper The Nation had proclaimed “whenever the people of both countries were united, the oppressors of both would fall.” Elaborate plans for simultaneous uprising of the British and Irish people were agreed; James Leach would command the struggle in Britain. [59] A third member, Samuel Kidd, had concentrated on improving liaison with the trade unions, while a fourth – J. McCrae – came from Scotland, where Chartists had created armed National Guards. Dr. Peter Murray McDouall sat as the fifth member of the executive.
Understandably, cabinet ministers, who had been laughing at the farce at Kensington Common in April, became increasingly apprehensive. In his private diary, Sir Charles Greville conceded “the government are now getting uneasy about the Chartists.” During the past few weeks, he discerned “a great change for the worse among the people, an increasing spirit of discontent and disaffection, and many who on 10 April went out as special constables declare they would not do so again.” [60] What worried the Earl of Arundel was the presence in the country of so many French and Germans with seditious and socialist designs. For the government, Lord Lansdowne admitted the threat from foreign revolutionaries: “There are 40,000 or 50,000 persons not only prepared but desirous to seize the opportunity of taking part in overturning the government.” [61] When The Times which had estimated 15,000 attended the Kensington Common demonstration, reported on 29 May that 80,000 working people had assembled without warning and marched in paramilitary fashion to Finsbury Park, it must have sent a shiver down many an upper class spine.
It is difficult to discern exactly what were the tactics of the physical force Chartists in this period. Functioning in a semi-clandestine manner, they naturally did not want their plans known to the authorities. But clearly they wished to avoid a premature uprising, one where the military could deliver a devastating blow, demoralising their supporters before full armed strength could be achieved. Another Newport tragedy could occur either because of Chartist over-exuberance or provocation from the authorities. It seems just such an eventuality resulted in McDouall being sent to Bradford on 28 May by the executive. [62] Thousands marched into the town from Halifax, Keighley, Bingley and surrounding places, brandishing their pikes and assorted weapons. They heard McDouall call on them to continue arming, but also to keep the peace and avoid any premature outbreak. Even so, the day did not pass without incident: Chartists fought with dragoons and special constables, who made 18 arrests, although in the city itself the predominance of the rebels was so overwhelming that it became a no-go area for troops and police. [63]
From Bradford, McDouall travelled back to London, where he addressed a meeting on Clerkenwell Green the next day. The sentencing of the Irish leader Mitchell to 14 years transportation added further venom to the protests. Along with calls for democracy, McDouall and others demanded Irish independence and the freeing of Mitchell. After the meeting, a procession formed. It marched along several roads until it encountered the police in Redcross Street and a fight ensued. The following night the police drove the crowd from the Green without allowing the meeting to take place. The same pattern was repeated elsewhere. On 4 June, the authorities broke up a mass meeting, arresting Ernest Jones.
It was the intention of one Chartist, Thomas Ford Frost, which he had discussed with McDouall, to hold a diversionary meeting on the outskirts of London to make the authorities divide their forces. Meanwhile, back in London McDouall strove to de-fuse the situation and prevent an armed clash with the military. Riding to Bishop Bonner’s Field in a cab and finding it ringed with troops, the Doctor succeeded in persuading supporters not to assemble there. [64] A number of things may have prompted McDouall’s decision. All evidence pointed to the government retaining, albeit with one or two notable exceptions, the loyalty of he police and military. In these circumstances, in any blood-letting the authorities would emerge victorious. Moreover, the arming of the people remained at a primitive stage: in most places the process had hardly begun, in those where it had, the weapons usually consisted of pikes – really not a match for a modern, well-disciplined army. Then McDouall probably took into consideration the arrest of his colleague, Ernest Jones, who along with himself was the most influential member of the executive. To make matters worse, the receipt of money by the headquarters dried up; on 15 June the executive committee’s secretary reported that it would have to suspend activities unless funds were forthcoming. While this could be taken as an indication of dwindling support, another explanation is that the authorities deliberately interfered with the post in order to sabotage the Chartists’ efforts. F.C. Mather for instance claims: “The opening of private correspondence by the Post Office was never more widely practised”. [65]
But the struggle was not over. McDouall journeyed to the industrial North, where the links with the Irish had grown strongest. The revolutionary fervour reached its highest pitch, as the Doctor found out when he addressed meetings, in Lancashire and Yorkshire. The menace thus constituted to the established order necessitated a pre-emptive strike, beheading the conspiracy, before 15th August, the proposed date for the uprising. The forces of law and order, therefore, arrested the ringleaders, including McDouall, who had been under surveillance for some time. [66]
It happened at his old stronghold of Ashton-under-Lyme. A thousand people heard him speak at the Charleston meeting house. The Chief constable of Ashton, Robert Newton, tried to secure entry, but the chairman, Richard Pilling, denied him access. Once the meeting ended, a crowd of 500 to 600 escorted the Doctor to his sleeping quarters at the Oddfellows Arms. In response to cheering from outside the public house, he addressed the multitude from a window for about 20 minutes. Scattered among the crowd were policemen, whose ears “all opened and closed at the same moment, and took in exactly the same.”
Later, they alleged in court that the Doctor had told his audience discontent existed throughout society; it was not confined to the unemployed. Even in the army there was disgruntlement. At Woolwich barracks the soldiers had mutinied while the Horse Guards elected a committee to redress their grievances. He urged his listeners to continue drilling and training. They should also ask the disaffected soldiers to supply them with weapons. Probably only about 10,000 troops remained loyal to the government – “What are they to five million people?” he is alleged to have asked. [67]
The police arrested the Doctor, charging him with sedition, illegal assembly and riot. They placed him in solitary confinement for 23 hours a day. Hot water pipes ran through his cell, making it excessively hot. He removed his coat, waistcoat and finally trousers rather than complain, which “would be regarded as a triumph for the enemy”. His case came before the Liverpool Assizes on 17 August. The hearing took place in an atmosphere unfavourable to the defence when the sensational events of the past few days must have been uppermost in most people’s minds.
On 14 August some Ashton Chartists encountered two policemen in Bentinck Street. They shot PC James Bright dead; his companion ran off, hiding in an unlit cottage. The Ashton affair, resulting in 22 arrests, was merely one of several such incidents. In Manchester Chartists and Irish Confederates tried to seize the city, marching in from 100 directions. At Bradford, led by ‘Wat Tyler’ and Lightowler, Chartists planned to blow up the gasworks and so put out the street lighting. In the confusion that followed, they wanted to take local magistrates hostage and capture the city centre. In London, the insurrection, led by William Cuffay, a coloured man, intended to assemble in four places – Clerkenwell Green, Tower Hamlets, Broadway West and Seven Dials – by 9.20 p.m., and then move off, causing fires as a diversion while they secured control of the seats of government.
In these, and other, schemes, they were defeated by the government. The authorities usually had foreknowledge from their spies who had infiltrated the various organisations. They had superior communications – including the recently invented telegraph – and therefore could deploy their force to better advantage. They were also far better trained and equipped. In all instances they succeeded in capturing the main plotters, in the case of Cuffay & Co., just as they were about to embark on their enterprise.
Beneath these relatively superficial reasons for failure lay the deeper, underlying reason analysed by Karl Marx. In his writing during 1848, he dealt comparatively briefly with Britain. This was because he believed that Britain’s relationship with the rest of the world meant a revolution was just not on:
“Those who correctly assess England and the role she plays in modern history were not surprised that the continental revolutions passed over her without leaving a trace for the time being. England is a country which, through her industry and commerce, dominates all the revolutionary nations of the Continent and nevertheless remains relatively independent of her customers because she dominates the Asian, American and Australian markets.” [68]
The growth of the British economy, the immense accretion of wealth not only increased the power and confidence of the ruling class but also provided lower echelons with a stake in society, the prospect of social mobility as development increased the number of professional and supervisory jobs going. In a sense, Kensington Common, for example, was more impressive as a counter-demonstration than as a demonstration – the fact that 150,000 businessmen, traders and others showed their loyalty to the system. The failure of the uprising and the arrest of conspirators involved provided a backcloth against which McDouall’s trial took place. He only received a two-year sentence whereas Cuffay and many of his colleagues were transported to Australia. The relatively lenient treatment of the Doctor can, at least partly, be attributed to the labours of W.P. Roberts, his tireless lawyer. Even so, his treatment in prison gave cause for alarm among his friends, who feared he would not survive the ordeal, the poor food and lack of exercise. [69] Papers like the Liverpool Journal, however, expressed pleasure because McDouall was being treated as a common criminal, not a political prisoner. Some warders insulted Chartist inmates, deliberately making their conditions as bad as possible. But this does not appear to have unduly worried McDouall, who spent his time writing poetry and a work on Agricultural Chemistry. [70]
His main concern was the fate of his wife Anne and four small children. They had no source of income and no financial reserves. As the Northern Star pointed out: “When he came among you he had good property in Scotland, a profession and a practice, which realised him several hundred pounds annually, besides a large sum of accumulated money in the bank. All of which has been spent long ago in the advocacy of the rights of the people.” [71]
At Mrs McDouall’s suggestion, a fund was set up, with Andrew McFee, of 6 Augustine Street, St. Martins, Liverpool, as treasurer, to acquire a small shop for her, so providing an independent income. This was done: she moved from Front Portland Street, Liverpool, to a small business selling newspapers and general goods. The shop failed because it was dependent of the custom of 1,600 at Berry’s foundry, Liverpool, where a protracted industrial dispute occurred. By February 1850, Mrs. McDouall and her family were suffering “actual starvation”. With the passing months, the situation did not improve. In June 1850, James Sedlif visited Mrs. McDouall and discovered her eldest child, a 10-year old girl, had just died: “the mother sat, the large tears dropping on the dead body, not a sixpence in the house or a mouthful of food.” [72] Little, if any, improvement in their condition happened before August 1850, when her husband was released from prison.
Together they returned to Ashton-under-Lyme. The Red Republican reported he had returned to medical practice in Park Parade: “we trust he will meet with popular, permanent and paying support.” [73] Mr. Aitken, an Ashton schoolmaster, began a subscription intended to assist in the purchase of necessary medical equipment. But this initial effort does not seem to have succeeded, for two years later the People’s Paper reported the formation of a committee, with Thomas Fildes, of Manchester, as chairman, to re-establish him in medical practice. [74] It remains equally doubtful whether this second attempt succeeded: in 1854 he decided to emigrate to Australia. Aboard The President, he drowned off the Australian coast when the vessel was shipwrecked. Helped by some charitable people, his widow and her children returned to England. For a while they lived in a workhouse at Everton, but a nationwide appeal, organised by Nottingham Chartists, successfully established her in a stationery business at No. 9 Tradesmen’s Mart, Nottingham. [75] That is the last we hear of her.

***

IN ATTEMPTING to make an evaluation of Peter Murray McDouall, it must be remembered that the British working class was still in an early stage of development. Chartism can be regarded as its first organised expression, sustained on a nationwide basis for a number of years, that actually required serious consideration from the established order. Significantly, from the outset the Movement was riven by a division between supporters of physical force and those who believed in moral force; in fact, the two camps – revolutionaries and reformists – continue in working-class politics right down to the present-day.
McDouall was the most well known and consistent representative of the revolutionary tendency. As such, his life illuminates many principles that have been painfully accumulated over the ages. He saw the need for stern and resolute action; the revolutionary who vacillates is lost. “Courage, courage, and still more courage” could as easily have been his motto as it has been that of Danton. But he realised the need, which no French revolutionary discerned, that any threat to the existing system, to be effective, would have to come from the working class, spearheaded by a small group of disciplined revolutionaries. His translation of Cabet’s important work can be seen as an indication of his willingness to learn from the experiences abroad and to see the struggle in an international context. He also appears to have played a leading role in the formation of the Fraternal Democrats, the precursor of the First International, by chairing the preliminary meeting and taking on the responsibility of bringing together delegates from the various groups of foreign émigrés. [76]
In the changed climate after 1848, McDouall became very much “a superfluous man”; like the intelligentsia in mid-19th century Tsarist Russia, social development left him out of tune with the age, an individual with no part to play. His emigration to Australia may have been prompted, at least in part, by a feeling of unease. He did not fit into a period of social harmony, a time when labour leaders became advocates of small deeds and humble virtues, of a thousand tiny reforms rather than one big revolution. For more than half a century it looked as if he belonged to a species that had become extinct. Then along came another Scot with the same revolutionary temperament and hatred for the ruling class: John McLean was politically the grandchild of P.M. McDouall.

Footnotes
1. Chartist and Republican Journal, 24 April 1841.
2. W.E. Adams, Memoirs of a Social Atom, p. 211.
3. R.G. Gammage, History of the Chartist Movement, p. 66.
4. F.B. Smith, Radical Artisan: W.J. Linton, p. 35.
5. Chartist and Republican Journal.
6. Mark Hovell, The Chartist Movement, p. 125.
7. F.C. Mather, The Government and the Chartists in Chartist Studies, ed. by Asa Briggs, p. 380.
8. The Life and Opinions of General Sir Charles Napier, pp.283–4.
9. T.M. Kemnitz, The Chartist Convention of 1839, Albion, vol. 10 part 2, pp. 152–70, for the most detailed analysis.
10. Chartist and Republican Journal.
11. Northern Star, 27 July 1839.
12. Chartist and Republican Journal, 17 April 1841.
13. Northern Liberator, 24 August 1839.
14. This argument was frequently used by Chartists. It had highly dubious historical validity.
15. Alexander Somerville, Autobiography of a Working Man, pp. 423–9, 441–3.
16. Northern Star, 29 August 1839.
17. Reference missing in original – CH.
18. The Reminiscences of Thomas Dunning, Testaments of Radicalism, edited by David Vincent, pp. 139–140.
19. Thomas Dunning describes his defence as “second only to that of Robert Emmett”.
20. People’s Paper, 23 August 1856, contains a statement about Dr. McDouall’s death, issued at the behest of his widow, which mentions this fact.
21. Northern Liberator, 27 December 1839.
22. Northern Star, 22 August 1840.
23. Ibid.
24. Chartist and Republican Journal.
25. Ibid., 17 July 1841.
26. True Scotsman, 24 September 1840.
27. Scots Times, quoted by Alexander Wilson, The Chartist Movement in Scotland, p. 120.
28. Northern Star, 22 August 1840.
29. True Scotsman, 19 September 1840.
30. Julius West. A History of the Chartist Movement, p. 164.
31. Leeds Times, 15 and 22 January 1842.
32. Julius West, op. cit., p. 167, and Northern Star, 21 May 1842.
33. Chartist Studies, edited by Asa Briggs, passim.
34. Chartist and Republican Journal, 3 April 1841.
35. Leeds Times, 22 January 1842, and English Chartist Circular, vol. 1, pp. 57–8.
36. Eric Hobsbawm, Labouring Men, p. 74.
37. Chartist and Republican Journal, 21 and 28 July 1841.
38. William Beesley’s testimony at The Trial of Fergus O’Connor and 58 Others, tried at Lancaster, 1843, p. 264.
39. Mick Jenkins, The General Strike of 1842, pp. 95–99.
40. John Foster’s Introduction to Mick Jenkins, ibid., pp. 13–4.
41. Warrant dated 19 August 1839. H.O. 79/4.
42. G.D.H. Cole, A History of Socialist Thought, vol. 1, p. 8.
43. The book was published by Hetherington and Watson in pamphlet form as from May 1845. An advert for it appears in The Movement, 2 April 1845.
44. Cabet resumed publication of Le Populaire in the 1840s. While in exile McDouall contributed to it. One of his articles, which appeared in that journal on 19 August 1843, reviewed political developments in Britain. Somewhat inaccurately, it claimed “the principles of Socialism and Communism have been already adopted” by the Chartists.
45. H. Heine, Lutezia: appendix Kommunismus, Philosophie und Kleriserei. In Sämtliche Werke, vol. 9, quoted D.O. Evans, Social Romanticism in France 1830–1848, p. 55.
46. G.D.H. Cole, op. cit., vol. 1, pp. 7–8.
47. Alexander Wilson, op. cit., pp. 209–10, and L.C. Wright, op. cit., p. 172.
48. Northern Star, 9 December 1846.
49. R. Gammage, from personal experience, gives an account of censorship and falsification by the Northern Star, op. cit., pp. 258–9.
50. Northern Star, 1 and 8 August 1846.
51. Ibid., 9 March 1850.
52. Preston Guardian, 16 January 1847, cited by Alice Mary Hatfield, The Chartist Land Company, p. 36.
53. Northern Star, 4 November 1848.
54. L.C. Wright, op. cit., p. 183.
55. R. Gammage, op. cit., p. 296.
56. Peter Wyncoll, Nottingham Chartism, p. 44.
57. The Life of Thomas Cooper, p. 303.
58. John Saville, Ernest Jones, pp. 97–9; Northern Star, 1 April 1848.
59. Rachel O’Higgins, Ireland and Chartism (Dublin University M.A. thesis, 1959), p. 224.
60. Greville Memoirs, vol. 3, pp 158–9.
61. Hansard, XCVIII, pp. 136–7.
62. The Times, 30 May 1848; Annual Register (Chr.) 1848, p. 73.
63. Reference missing in the original – CH
64. R. Gammage, op. cit., p.334.
65. F.C. Mather, op. cit., in Asa Briggs’s Chartist Studies, p. 391.
66. Three of the five executive members (Jones, Leach, McDouall) were arrested.
67. Northern Star, 2 September 1848.
68. Karl Marx, The Revolutionary Movement in Italy, Marx-Engels Collected Works, vol. 8, p. 101.
69. Letter from George White, Kirkdale jail, published in the Northern Star, 21 October 1848; also statement of the editor of the Northern Star, 4 November 1848.
70. Editor’s report, Northern Star, 10 March 1849.
71. Ibid., 29 June 1848.
72. Ibid., 12 January and 16 February 1850. Also, Reynolds Weekly Newspaper, 9 June 1850.
73. Red Republican, 3 August 1850.
74. People’s Paper, 2 October 1852.
75. Ibid., 23 August 1856. This is the statement referred to in Note 20. It was issued to establish beyond doubt that he had died.
76. The Movement, 2 and 16 October 1844. McDouall chaired a meeting attended by foreign émigrés at Highbury Barn, such as Weitling and Moll. The second entry, under the heading The Late Fraternal Meeting reports McDouall has agreed to approach the various national sections and to organise a general conference.
 



The Origins of the Labour Party
Henry Pelling
Oxford, 35s
The re-publication of Henry Pelling’s work is a welcome event. Since its first appearance in 1954, a veritable industry has grown up around the study of Labour history. Nevertheless, his book remains an important contribution, well worth reading for anyone wishing to gain an insight into how the Labour Party came into being.
It is possible, of course, to question Pelling’s analysis. In my opinion, he places too much emphasis on the role of the small socialist sects, giving insufficient consideration to the dynamic factors that led the working class as a whole to take the plunge and form its own party, independent of the Tories and Liberals. For, right from its inception, the Labour Party has primarily been the political wing of the trade-union movement; within its ranks, socialists have remained a permanent minority, only exercising a fleeting influence on policy decisions. It was Britain’s diminishing importance in the world, the size and economic position of the working class that helped to wrench the proletariat away from the Liberals’ apron-strings.
Even so, let me recommend Pelling’s book: eminently readable, a work of considerable scholarship, it is one that all serious socialists should read.



Constituency Politics
F. Bealey, J. Blondel, W.P. McCann
Faber, 63s
Socialists are prone to speak in terms of abstractions, saying that the Labour Party should do this or that when they have only the haziest notion of what is meant by the ‘Labour Party’ – the myriad members of councils, committees and party organisations, the wide divergencies of outlook and interests, each of which helps to make the Labour Party a highly complex organism.
One of the virtues of Constituency Politics, a book on decision-making in Newcastle-under-Lyme, is that it helps to clarify our conception of party organisation at grass-roots level. Newcastle Labour Party has a left-wing reputation – ‘Bevanite or even left of that’, say the authors. It is accustomed to having quarrels with Transport House. Indeed, the two men who have, since the last war, represented the constituency in Parliament – Johnny Mack (1945-51) and Stephen Swingler (1951 onwards) – were both signatories of the Nenni telegram and in frequent danger of being disciplined. The Party was accustomed to sending Conference resolutions calling for nationalisation, arms reductions and even, in 1949, the affiliation of the Communist Party to the Labour Party. For many years, North Staffs’ most prominent communist sat on the borough’s aldermanic bench, thanks to support from Labour members. And when the authors conducted a recent survey, they discovered that only 8 per cent of ordinary Labour members wanted Clause Four dropped and that 59 per cent regarded America as the biggest obstacle to world peace.
The authors say the Newcastle Labour Party is, in comparison, genuinely working class. But its actual membership is extremely low – only 342 people. This does not prevent it from returning Swingler with a 10,000 majority and having the third highest turn-out in the Midlands at the General Election. Nevertheless, being run by a small group of activists does have its disadvantages. They become hardened by routine, set in their ways, and unable to adapt themselves when mass pressure comes from the working class, as it did in the council rent strikes of 1955 and 1962. Then, irrespective of the advanced views they avow, they exhibit the worst traits of Stalinists and right-wingers combined. What impertinence that the working class should try and do something without asking our permission first!
The authors, alas, fail to analyse the dialectics of dissent, the factional fights that produce progress. From reading this book, you would not know that Catholicism exerts an influence disproportionate to its numerical strength. This is especially true in the borough council, but also Labour’s right-wing is centred round Catholic councillors. Counterbalancing this to a certain extent is a group, originally quite close to the Communist Party. And in between these contending factions is an amorphous left which, while not appearing especially successful on particular issues, probably gives the Party its general orientation. The authors omit anecdotes, vivid incidents, and fail to give ‘the feel of the place’. Their book bulges with statistical tables interspersed with drab sociological writing. But Newcastle politics is not dull! I have known a Labour Party meeting end in fisticuffs, with the MP trying to separate the pugilists. On another occasion the police were called in when a private Audley Labour Party meeting developed into a riot, with the majority of party members out to lynch the council chairman. Then there was the time the borough party chairman was successfully moved from the chair at three successive meetings. Ah, those were the days! But from this book you would never really realise they were.
The book is accurate, useful, informative – and lifeless!



The Conference at Sheffield called by the Institute for Workers’ Control failed to even discuss the crucial question of whether the organisation was going to have a revolutionary orientation or not. Yet, on the answer to this all else depends. No effective struggle against the existing order can take place except on the basis of a revolutionary Marxist position. It is not us but the development of capitalism that has decreed this.
Industrial concerns, growing bigger in size and smaller in number, have now become intertwined with the State. The State, by its purchases, subsidies, loans and countless other means, underwrites capitalist industry. The State’s welfare – the so-called national interest – has become inextricably linked to that of big business. Gone are the days when groups of workers could wage their private feuds against an isolated employer or employers in a single industry; right from the start of a conflict, the State is there, battling away on the side of the employers. Consequently, trade unionists’ attitude to the State is of vital importance. Reformist unions, even when they indulge in left phraseology, must ultimately capitulate. For they accept the fundamental basis of society, the same as their capitalist opponents, and hence are unable to fight effectively. Eventually, they are compelled to succumb, becoming transformed through productivity agreements and other compromises, into instruments for speed up and disciplining the worker.
Leon Trotsky saw this clearly in 1940, when he wrote:
‘In other words, the trade unions in the present epoch cannot simply be the organs of democracy as they were in the epoch of free capitalism and they cannot any longer remain politically neutral, that is, limit themselves to serving the daily needs of the working class. They cannot any longer be anarchistic, i.e., ignore the decisive influence of the State on the life of people and classes. They can no longer be reformists, because the objective conditions leave no room for any serious and lasting reforms. The trade unions of our time can either serve as secondary instruments of imperialist capitalism for the subordination and disciplining of workers and for obstructing the revolution, or, on the contrary, the trade unions can become the instruments of the revolutionary movement of the proletariat.’ [1]
The organisers of the Sheffield conference – people like Coates, Kendall and Topham – are aware, at least in theory, of the validity of Trotsky’s position. But they are also confronted with a new phenomenon. Opposition inside the trade-union movement, mass discontent with the Government’s incomes policy, has resulted in the emergence of left reformism (Jones, Scanlon, etc.) as an important trend within the union bureaucracy.
It is to gain friends and influence people – people who are on the General Council of the TUC – that Coates & Co. indulge in ideological backslidings. They have to back pedal on their political views: Scanlon would be scandalised were he to be told that the most urgent current need is the creation of a revolutionary movement in Britain, and so Coates & Co. remain quiet on this point.
But their silence does not end there. They also have to keep quiet about the betrayals of the left bureaucrats. Coates has not uttered one word, for instance, about their shabby behaviour during both the busmen’s and dockers’ strikes on Merseyside, disputes in which the men courageously battled on without any help from the Transport & General Workers’ Union. Indeed, on one memorable occasion, the workers were so angry with the unprincipled conduct of their union official – to wit, Jack Jones – that they would have thrown him in the River Mersey. It was only prompt action by the capitalist state (in the form of the police) that prevented this watery version of workers’ control.
Similarly, Danny McGarvey, of the Boilermakers’, is a darling of the Institute of Workers’ Control. He wrote an article for the special Sheffield Conference bulletin. He is the same gentleman who made the agreement at Fairfields’ shipyard, Glasgow, signing away the traditional rights of men. Likewise, he sat on the Cameron Commission, the enquiry into the Barbican building workers strike, whose notorious report came down entirely on the side of the employers. It would be interesting to hear, from the Institute’s spokesman, how they think McGarvey helps in the struggle. By publishing his left-wing speeches while not criticising his right-wing actions, the Institute helps to camouflage McGarvey’s devious conduct.
And then there is Hugh Scanlon. Whenever any criticism is levelled at him, Coates & Co. reply by referring to his tenuous position on the AEF national committee. The assumption is that, once a bigger majority has been won, a more militant policy will be adopted. It is worthwhile noting, in passing, that this argument has a family resemblance to that used about Wilson during the 1964 to 1966 period, when he only had a majority of three or four in Parliament. ‘Wait until he has a workable majority,’ some people said, ‘And then we’ll see.’ We have!
But allegations of Scanlon’s supposed powerlessness to act does not – as Coates & Co. seem to believe – make criticism of him less justified. Indeed, it makes it more so. For, if Scanlon is in a minority, then this is even more reason why he should open his mouth. There is a long tradition in the AEF for union officials, such as Ernie Roberts, speaking in their personal capacity. So, if Hugh Scanlon believes in workers’ control, then let him argue openly and publicly for it. Let him spell out what it means for the membership to control their unions – the right to recall officials, officials to have the average pay in the industry, all strikes to be automatically official. Yet, on these points, points which are essential to any introduction of workers’ democracy within the unions, Hugh Scanlon has remained strangely silent.
Coates & Co. realise the vulnerable position of their left reformist friends. Consequently, they indulged at Sheffield in the most undemocratic, unprincipled example of conference-rigging. The conference arrangements committee, acting in a way Sara Barker could hope to achieve in her giddiest dreams, only accepted resolutions from a carefully selected people. Of the twenty it accepted, it only bothered to print four of them. Of these four, it admitted making ‘various improvements of wording’. But its bureaucratic handling did not end there: because it saw the conference as a staged affair, dominated by few prima donnas, to be given limitless time, the rank and file found their time limited to an hour. Labour Party conferences are less bureaucratically run. Indeed, one of the slogans that should now be raised on the left is: ‘Democratic control of workers’ control conferences’!
Coates & Co., it must be realised, do not behave in this way out of spite. Their conduct arises from their political views – that of being centrists, hovering somewhere between a reformist and revolutionary position. They are essentially eclectics, living on a hand-to-mouth ideological basis, always careful to stigmatise as ‘sectarian’ any criticism of their unprincipled conduct. In an attempt to answer left critics, Coates claimed the resolutions passed at Sheffield were ‘reformist in form, revolutionary in content’. In fact, as the whole history of the Workers’ Control movement shows, the most left-wing it gets is its reformist form; its content is reactionary.
The first Workers’ Control conference was held in the spring of 1964 and sponsored by Labour’s Voice, a journal published by left reformist MPs, who saw nothing incongruous in mouthing a few phrases in favour of industrial democracy while they got down to the main job in Parliament – namely, voting for Wilson. Along with these wishy-washy parliamentarians went a number of academic economists, like John Hughes and Barratt-Brown. These Visionaries’ heralded the Wilson administration’s incomes policy as a great socialist advance. In Tribune‘s columns they played a pernicious role, using left phrases to support the most reactionary parts of the government’s policy. [2] Had it not been for the confusion caused by these gentlemen, opposition to the incomes policy would have emerged more strongly and more swiftly.
The Institute for Workers’ Control, in its own flat-footed way, supported John Hughes and its weaker brethren. At its Nottingham conference (25-26th April 1964), only the two IS members present, Paul Foot and Ray Challinor, favoured all-out opposition to the incomes policy. The majority line has been accurately described by one of its advocates as the ‘Cousin thesis’. [3] (Six months later, Cousin applied his thesis by joining Wilson’s administration.)
In New Left Review, Tony Topham explained why the Institute for Workers’ Control disagreed with the position of IS comrades:
‘absolute opposition to an incomes policy, although presented as being the most concerned for the unions’ autonomy and the most combative, in fact risks being proved to be ineffective, to the extent that it offers no perspective for the solution of those problems which in recent years have seized the British socio-economic system.’ [4]
It is perfectly true that we did not visualise the rejection of the incomes policy as solving Britain’s problems. We regarded these problems of British capitalism as far too intractable to be solved by acceptance of an incomes policy. Indeed, it was through mobilisation of opposition to an incomes policy that IS saw the way forward, a change in the structure of society which could only be come as a result of a change in the relationship of class forces.
But people like Coates and Topham, with the Institute of Workers’ Control behind them, saw things a different way. When the preliminary discussions were taking place between the government and trade unionists, which led to the Declaration of Intent, Coates characterised the situation in the following:
‘The current negotiations with Mr. Brown are fraught with peril for the unions, and for the Labour Government itself ... The unions have been caught in a dilemma. If they said no to Mr. Brown, they might be responsible for the fall of the Government. No responsible trade unionists could will that.’
Coates, so concerned about the fate of the Labour government, counsels these confused tactics:
‘Say neither no, nor yes. Say, instead, that we will begin talks when we know the facts: we will negotiate our policy after the books have been opened, and all can know what is the real position. Such a response does not imperil the government.’ [5]
‘Open the books’ is a reasonable slogan. Obviously it should be supported. But it is not the answer to the challenge of Wilson’s incomes policy. For, suppose the books were open and we discovered that ICI’s profits for last year were £154 million, not £153 million – as we previously thought – would this have made a profound difference to our attitude? And, in any case, should our attitude be cabin’d cribbed, confin’d by fears of bringing the Labour Government down as apparently Ken Coates was? The Institute for Workers’ Control represents an amalgam of three groups – left reformist trade union leaders, for whom it provides a useful platform; centrists, who control the apparatus of the Institute and issue the bulletins; and, finally, a growing number of workers, disgusted by the Labour government and looking for an answer.
It is because of this third group that revolutionaries must take an active interest in the Institute for Workers’ Control. It is important that we bring workers an alternative to the Coates-Jones alliance, which leads down a dead-end. To do this, we must be act in a tougher, more organised way than we did at the Sheffield conference.

Notes
1. L. Trotsky, Trade Unions in the Epoch of Imperialist Decay, p.8.
2. For my critique of these economists, see R. Challinor, Incomes Policy and the Left, International Socialism, Winter 1966/7. Also John Hughes, International Socialism, Summer 1967, with my reply.
3. Tony Topham, New Left Review, No. 25, May-June 1964.
4. Ibid.
5. Ken Coates, International Socialist Journal, April 1965.
 



LEYLAND, Tuesday:– As 12 representatives from the British Leyland strike committee journey to York for talks to end the month-old strike of 8500 workers at the five Lancashire plants, the management must be ruefully considering their predicament.
The determination of the workers to fight for a decent wage has been a great shock to them. Added to that determination are hard financial facts.
The effects of the strike are starting to hurt.
British Leyland is losing £1,200,000 a week and the shortage of spare parts produced in Lancashire is growing worse and hitting their customers.
Albion Motors in Glasgow is losing £450,000 a week and Jaguar in, the Midlands £320,000.
The money is starting to roll into the strike fund. Contributions are coming from all sections of the community, ranging from old age pensioners to even the company’s foremen.
But the most important contribution is from the other workers in the British Leyland combine who are giving an hour’s pay each week.
 
Demands
As the strike enters its fifth week no one has attempted to cross the picket line.
They are determined to win their demands of £24 a week for skilled piece workers, parity of bonus for women and £18 10s for new starters. The present flat rate is £14 for a skilled man.
At the last mass meeting, strikers’ morale was high. The vote to stay out was unanimous. At the same time there were shouts of ‘Bring them all out’ – meaning the rest of the 200,000 workers in the British Leyland combine.
 
Parity
And the demand for parity with the Midlands appears to be growing. Colin Fishwick, a leading shop steward, chaired the meeting and put a resolution on parity.
It was carried almost unanimously.
Len Brindle, the convenor, said, ‘Our position is strengthening. We go to York determined to make no concessions.’
Another steward said: ‘The toughest battle will be at 9.30 a.m. at York on Wednesday when we meet the full-time officials. The fight with the management is secondary.’
 



I HAVE NO DESIRE to vilify Sid Bidwell (January 25). My aim is to make a political – not a personal – point.
So far he has failed to answer my question. Does Sid Bidwell support the government’s policy imposing restrictions on coloured immigration?
Or does he still accept the position he advanced in his Socialist Review article, namely, that workers should be free to leave or enter Britain at will?
Internationalism is an essential part of socialist principles. Workers, as Marx said, have no fatherland.
We have to translate the slogan ‘Workers of the world unite’, into a reality.
But how can MPs who support restrictions introduced by the capitalist state possibly assist towards this end?
You can’t sincerely sing, ‘So comrades, come rally, the last fight let us face’ when you believe some comrades should be kept at arms length – indeed, out of the country.



 


Raymond Challinor
Wigan



 




IN THE FIFTIES, when Labour right-wingers were advancing their theories, they attacked the idea that socialism was a question of taking the ownership and control of industry out of capitalist hands. They argued that socialism was simply about equality. This objective, said Anthony Crosland and others, could be achieved by monetary policy. Subsequently, into this framework they also placed the incomes policy.
It is one of those cruel paradoxes of history that those who talked of the need for equality have, when they achieved office, actually increased inequality. And, what is more, one of their spokesmen has openly admitted this. Harold Walker, Parliamentary Secretary at the Department of Employment and Productivity, was questioned about it in the House of Commons:
Mr Younger: How can the hon. Gentleman defend the idea that the government’s prices and incomes policy is intended to favour the lower-paid workers when agricultural workers get far less than the Ford workers and when the whole lot get less than the heads of the nationalised industries?
Mr Walker: It is not a primary function of the government’s prices and incomes policy to redistribute incomes.
At that point, one of the main arguments used by apologists for the incomes policy – remember the lower-paid workers, such as the nurses – vanished in a puff of smoke.
*

HAROLD WILSON has decided to abandon legislation to ‘reform’ the House of Lords. The parliamentary time thus saved will be used on his bill clobbering the trade unions.
Yet perhaps we should spare a thought for the aristocracy. Some while ago, the Sunday Telegraph did an analysis of the Upper House. It discovered that 40 per cent of their lordships had never worked in their lives. Another 40 per cent could only claim to be company directors, attending the occasional board meeting which, I am sure readers of this journal will agree, does not constitute full-time gainful employment.
One has only to visit the House of Lords to witness a pitiful spectacle. Many of its members have obviously given up all hope of ever finding a job. They lounge about utterly demoralised. The only time their lordships appear to evince any enthusiasm is when they are talking about the need for others to work harder and increase productivity. Yet they never set an example themselves.
Isn’t it a further injustice about Barbara Castle’s unjust bill that the House of Lords, which epitomises idleness, will pass this measure that will render hard-worked – indeed, frequently over-worked – trade unionists liable to stiff penalties if ever they stop their labours without permission? 

Arms madness
WHILE THE GOVERNMENT makes its much-publicised cuts in the arms bill and yet, at the same time, military expenditure continues to rise, it is interesting to read some statistics provided by Robert Sheldon MP. He stated that spending on arms was 6.82 per cent of the gross national product in 1944 and 6.97 per cent last year.
Could there be any more striking indication of the government’s insanity than the fact that it is now spending proportionately more on the military than Churchill’s government did at the height of the Second World War?




SHOP STEWARDS AND CONVENORS representing 200,000 workers in the giant British Leyland car plants have called for a strike throughout the combine on the day the government’s anti-union legislation becomes law.
The unanimous strike decision was taken at a meeting of the Leyland combine committee. Present were stewards and convenors from the mid-Lancashire plants which are now in the second week of their strike for equal pay with the rest of the group.
All five factories, with 8,500 workers, are at a total standstill.
The strike is so solid that there is no need for pickets after nine o’clock in the morning. The workers are determined to stay out until their demand for £24 a week for skilled men is met.
The dispute  –  the first at the mid-Lancs plants for more than 40 years  –  is likely to affect other sections of the motor industry this week. Leyland supply cylinder blocks to Jaguar, Rolls-Royce, Albion and AEC.
 
Stokes stunned
Jaguar will be the first to be hit and may start laying off workers at the end of the week.
Lord Stokes, £45,000 a year chairman of the Leyland group, has been stunned by the strike and the militant determination of the workers to stick out for victory.
He wandered forlornly through the empty works last week before leaving for a holiday in Spain  –  where Franco has been recently rounding up and jailing trade unionists. Perhaps Stokes is on a fact-finding mission for Barbara Castle.
The management has also been staggered by the support of women workers for the strike. They are demanding the same increases as the men to bring them up to the rate for the rest of the group.
Forty per cent of the workers stand to gain nothing from the strike. They are not piece workers, but they are determined to stick by their mates.
 
Bad conditions
Convenor of shop stewards Len Brindle said this week: ‘If the White Paper In Place of Strife is correct then these works, which have been trouble free for so long, should have the highest pay and best conditions.’
But the opposite is the case. The management have abused good labour relations and the workers have bad pay and conditions.
Even if they win their demand for £24 a week they will still be as much as £10 a week behind Midlands car workers.
Stewards say the management has pursued a tough policy towards piece workers. National agreements have been broken and the normal channels of management-union procedure ignored.
If the strike continues next week, the stewards plan to stage a mass rally, with support from other factories [phrase illegible]
[paragraph illegible]
 
Leyland Laughter
LEYLAND strikers say the reason why their skilled workers are £5 a week below the rates for lavatory attendants at Pressed Steel is because the latter are on ‘time and a turd’.
IT IS CLAIMED that when Lord Stokes received his knighthood the Queen said ‘Arise, Sir Donald’, to which he replied, ‘Never!’
THE BISHOP of Blackburn said this week he is praying about the strike. He claimed authority to speak on the strike as a ‘fully blown up member of the gas workers division’ of the General and Municipal Workers’ Union.
 




THE UNDERLYING REASON for the giant GEC/English Electric merger was to lower labour costs so that profits could be increased. While the company told workers redundancy was inevitable, painting a bleak picture of trade prospects, it gave shareholders an entirely different idea; ‘With prospective rationalisation measures margins should improve.’
There was talk of pre-tax profits rising from the current figure of £60 million to something like £100m within the next few years.
Arnold Weinstock and his fellow directors seem determined, irrespective of the social hardships it causes, to pursue profits to the utmost. They expect profits from diesel engine production to rise from four to seven million pounds during the next three years.
Nevertheless, they intend to sack 1,100 workers who make these engines at the historic Vulcan works, Newton-le-Willows, a factory founded by George Stephenson to make the first locos for the Manchester-Liverpool line.
A small town, called Vulcan, has grown up around the workers. If Weinstock continues with his plans, the town is likely to be reduced to a ghost town, the Jarrow of the Sixties.
*

IT IS IMPORTANT that workers understand the role of the Wilson government. It has created the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation, with Leslie Cannon of the ETU as one of its board members. This corporation aims at promoting mergers by providing public funds to facilitate them. So when workers become unemployed after a take-over and the inevitable sackings follow, they should find it even more distressing since it is their own money (i.e. public money) which is helping to get them dismissed.
The Wilson government also aids employers in another way, Barbara Castle’s Department of Employment and Productivity has recently set up a special section to give expert advice to the bosses on such problems as dealing with a militant shop stewards’ committee or implementing a dismissals policy with the minimum opposition.
 

How to beat militants
WHAT THE EMPLOYERS want are tame unions. This is clearly indicated by a private document that miraculously fell into my lap this week. It was BTR Industries A Short Guide to Industrial Relations, a confidential manual intended as a guide to its own management.
The company’s aim is to have the fullest collaboration with the Municipal and General Workers’ Union. The firm will ‘encourage membership of the union and assist the union to maintain and increase their membership.’ This is done, the manual declares, ‘in the interests of good management/labour relations.’
There is, however, a second reason for the company endeavouring to assist the MGW to maintain its membership – ‘the danger of infiltration’ by a more militant organisation;
‘If the official union’s membership declined to such an extent, or disappeared altogether, a rival union which, for many reasons, was an undesirable union from management’s point of view might well quietly recruit sufficient members among our employees to far outnumber the official union, justifying an approach by the infiltrating union for official status and negotiating rights.’
So, if BTR Industries’ attitude is any indication, the British capitalists’ motto seems to be: ‘Back the Municipal and General.’
 




NOBODY COULD DESCRIBE the journal The Economist as an organ of revolutionary sedition. So when it calls the Italian paper La Nazione ‘rabidly right wing’, one must assume that it errs on the side of understatement. Nevertheless, it is interesting to read what Signor Enrico Mattei, the editor of La Nazione, writes.
In a letter to The Economist (May 10), Signor Mattei outlined his paper’s policy:
‘Even considering the unrest and disorder which today disturb Italian public life, it has never thought of advocating as severe a law as the British one against persons who attack the police; nor of approving as harsh a law to regulate strikes as the one proposed by Mrs Barbara Castle.’
So here, in a nutshell, we have it: the Labour government is even more conservative than a ‘rabidly right wing’ paper. As one poster on an anti-trade union legislation demonstration put it: ‘Hitler is alive and well and living at Number Ten.’
And Eva Braun appears to be round the corner at the Department of Employment and Productivity.
 

Action, not words
THE MOST EFFECTIVE answer to those who talk about ‘going through the official, constitutional channels’ is that usually it achieves nothing. It was George Woodcock who talked at the 1963 TUC congress of moving from Trafalgar Square into Whitehall, from the demonstrations to the corridors of power.
But in the same year’s General Council report he showed how powerless the TUC was in influencing ministries. It mentioned the repeated attempts to get the government to provide specially adapted motor cars instead of a motor-tricycle for those who have lost both legs. ‘The TUC has pointed out tricycles are less reliable than cars,’ the report continued, ‘and in cases of breakdown disabled men have been stranded for long periods.’
But the government remained unmoved. ‘Despite the injustice and hardship caused ... and the trifling cost involved, the representations of the TUC have had no effect.’ Nor have the sweet words of the General Council had any effect on this issue right down to the present day.
A more recent case, illustrating the same principle, comes from the Fire Service. If any man is killed on a fire-call, then his wife and dependents receive a pension. On other emergency calls, however, they are not protected. A few months ago, a Bolton fireman was killed while trying to rescue two children trapped in a disused coalmine. So his next-of-kin receive nothing.
The Fire Brigades Union have had repeated talks with Jim Callaghan, the Home Secretary. They have pointed out how anomalous the position is. They have shown that to extend existing protection for those killed in fires to other cases would involve the government in spending a trifling sum of money. But Callaghan adamantly refuses to budge.
Terry Parry, the FBU’s general secretary, is an exceptionally talented gentleman. He is the only trade union leader I know who has a British Empire Medal and at the same time defends Mao Tse-tung in the columns of Tribune! So if he can’t persuade Callaghan, who can?
The answer is less talk and more action. Only if the firemen down tools will the Home Office listen to their argument seriously.
 



THE FIRST STRIKE for more than 40 years is taking place at British Leyland motor factories in mid-Lancashire. All five works with 8,500 men are out.
Convenor Len Brindle said, ‘You could hear the swish of hands going up when we put the resolution.’ The men’s demand is for parity of earnings with the rest of the group.
They call for £24 a week for a skilled man – £10 less than many are getting in Midlands’ car factories.
One striker pointed out ‘This is the Hong Kong of the British Leyland group. Judas sold himself for 30 pieces of silver. He would only get 10 here.’
Another brought out a newspaper cutting showing that lavatory attendants at Pressed Steel were receiving £5 a week more than skilled men at Leylands.
The management have enjoyed a prolonged period of ‘good labour relations’. For many years the trade unions, with right-wing leadership, have been pliable and docile. As a result there has been hard work and low pay.
 
Contempt
But the management has shown it has not appreciated this co-operative attitude. In the present negotiations it has shown nothing except contempt for the joint shop stewards’ committee.
‘All we want,’ says Len Brindle, ‘is parity of earnings – dignity for those on piecework.’
British Leyland claim that to grant the men’s demands would cost the company £600,000. The strikers think this, is an exaggeration but say that if it were true the is peanuts compared with the giant combine’s profits.
And if the figure of £600,000 is correct, it only shows how much below £24 a week skilled men at Leyland are getting.
 
Contrast
Vin Murphy, vice-chairman of the stewards’ committee, contrasted the shabby treatment they were receiving with the directors’ rake-off.
‘Top management has devised a scheme that gives them thousands of pounds extra for each one of them,’ he said. ‘The productivity schemes that have been suggested to us have not been half so generous.’
There are signs that British Leyland is digging in its heels. The feeling is that it may be a long struggle, but the solidarity of the men is tremendous.
Messages of support to: Len Brindle, 8 Somerset Avenue, Chorley, Lancs.
 




FOR THE PAST TWO YEARS, a debate has smouldered on about the prospects of Labour winning the next general election. Those who have thought this a possibility have argued that, in the immediate pre-election period, Wilson would reflate the economy, an air of affluence would be created – and Labour would be able to float back to power on it.
I have never subscribed to this theory. The sickness of British capitalism makes it unlikely, in my opinion, that economic recovery could be sustained for sufficiently long to have an impact on the electorate’s attitudes. Moreover, the frail state of the economy makes it accident-prone, easily knocked off course, and therefore delicate campaign calculations can easily go awry.
Another factor is the demoralisation of Labour’s rank and file. Most constituency party meetings resemble the geriatric ward at Ely Hospital. Although CLPs are certainly less crowded than Ely, attendance at them involves a similar experience. It seems highly unlikely that Transport House will be able to repair the ravages that the last five years have done to the organisation. The leaders’ only hope of arousing enthusiasm in the ranks would be to devise a scheme that provided free burials for old party stalwarts.
If anything, Labour’s position is worse financially than organisationally. Have you ever stopped to think what is the most unpopular thing you can ever do? The answer is to ask people to subscribe to Labour Party funds.
Yet this has got to be done – and done successfully – if there is to be the least prospect of winning at the hustings.
As party treasurer, Jim Callaghan must have had intimate, first-hand experience of attempting to get trade unionists, whose wage increases have been blocked under the incomes policy, to contribute to Labour coffers. The hopelessness of his task may well have been partly responsible for his vacillations over Barbara Castle’s anti-working class legislation.

*
IT IS NOT MERELY Jesus Christ who was resurrected. Many old comrades are now coming back from the dead. For years they had ceased to exist – been ‘unpersons’ – who, because of alleged deviations, could never be mentioned by a communist historian in any history he wrote.
But times are a-changing. It is good to see James Klugmann, in his history of the Communist Party of Great Britain, acknowledging that in 1921 ‘John MacLean and Harry’ McShane were leading the unemployed into action.’ Likewise he mentions that I.P. Hughes was appointed CP Merseyside District organiser in December 1922, the fourth full-time organiser the party had.
Today, of course, Harry McShane is still active. His Glasgow Marxist-Humanist group recently published a pamphlet on Czechoslovakia, in which it attributes the crisis to Russia’s imperialist policy. Similarly, I.P. Hughes is still active. A member of Merseyside IS, he is very valuable because of his vast fund of experience.
 

Just good friends
IN HIS PLAY Man and Superman, Bernard Shaw has a scene in which a millionaire called Tanner is held up on a remote mountain path by an armed bandit. The thief introduces himself: ‘I am a robber. I live by robbing the rich.’ Tanner replies: ‘I am a capitalist. I live by robbing the poor.’ The two men shake hands affectionately.
Elsewhere Bernard Shaw elaborates on the kinship of capitalism and crime:
‘The thief who is in prison is not necessarily more dishonest than his fellows at large, but only one who, through ignorance or stupidity, steals in a way that is not customary. He snatches a loaf from the baker’s counter and is promptly run into jail. Another man snatches bread from the tables of hundreds of widows and orphans and simple credulous souls who do not know the ways of company promoters; and, as likely as not, he is run into parliament.’
For simple souls, it’s extremely difficult to tell the difference between the capitalist and the criminal. The Grampian Chemicals Company, for example, wants £22m of public money for its refinery; the mail train robbers only wanted £2m of public money.
 




Down, boy, down ...
WHY IS BRITAIN the most loyal and devoted ally of American capitalism? Behind political subservience lies economic dependence.
Recently Fred Catherwood, director of the National Economic Development Council, talked about US capital’s penetration of the British economy: ‘United States controlled companies account for 13 per cent of industry capital expenditure, with the highest proportion in cars, petroleum, computers and office machines. By contrast, US investment in other Western European countries accounts for only 4 to 5 per cent of capital investment in those countries.’
In a recent PEP pamphlet, Professor Dunning suggests that this process is likely to continue at an increasing tempo. He estimates that by 1981 a quarter of the British economy will be controlled by American capital.
Obviously, this type of thing must influence the Foreign Office response to de Gaulle’s plea for Britain to adopt a more independent stance on world affairs.
With so much belonging to American capitalists around, it does not pay to do anything that might antagonise them. Better behave as Uncle Sam’s obedient poodle.
 

Which college did you escape from?
WHAT WITH BARS TO the windows at Hornsey College of Art and iron gates at LSE, it seems as if the penitentiary-look is the contemporary style for places of higher learning. Doubtless Dartmoor will provide the architectural inspiration for university buildings of the future.
But it would be interesting to know if the authorities in their enthusiasm for bars – and not the kind in which I take an intense personal interest – had bothered to consult the fire prevention officers first.
For example, are the governors of Hornsey aware that 22 people recently perished in Glasgow because they were unable to make a quick exit through the windows?
 

The dialectics of having your nookie
PETER SEDGWICK of IS has recently attacked the theories of Herbert Marcuse, the philosopher of student revolt. One of the most fascinating questions to arise is: Where is the best place to have sexual intercourse?
In his book One-Dimensional Man, Marcuse suggests that the environment of capitalism and its technology militate against sexual fulfilment. He compares the prospect of making love in a car or on a Manhattan street with doing it in a meadow or near a lovers’ walk.
In the former, capitalist technology intrudes whereas with the latter, place and purpose harmonise.
But Peter argues that Marcuse has made a false comparison. Had Marcuse compared ‘a damp, cold, bug-ridden meadow’ with the erotic environment usually provided by capitalist technology – namely, a bed – then ‘nature’s advantages might have been less apparent.’
From my own practical experiments on this interesting theoretical problem I am inclined to come down on the side of spring mattresses.
*

SEDGWICK’S critique of Marcuse on the whole range of current political and philosophical issues is, I think, correct.
It would be a pity, however, if Marcuse’s mistakes on contemporary problems should lead us to forget his exposition of marxism which is the finest, clearest yet written. His book Reason and Revolution has been my constant companion since 1955.
New it has been re-issued by Routledge & Kegan Paul as a paperback. Let me recommend it to all readers.
 




Man of few words
CAPITALISM APPEARS to be speeding up everything, with the exception of wage negotiations. These are usually marooned for months amid muddy procedures – arbitration, conciliation, courts of inquiry, and other damn things – all carefully calculated to delay the worker a rise as long as possible.
Militants, fretful about such delays, should re-tell the story of the late Herbert Smith, the old Yorkshire miners’ leader. He was the Speedy Gonzales of pay claims. His fastest negotiation was conducted as follows:
Herbert Smith (putting his head round the comer of the boss’s door): ‘Owt?’
Boss: ‘Nowt!’
Herbert Smith: ‘We’re out.’
The strike was won. Herbert Smith proudly recounted this episode to union officials whom he believed were insufficiently belligerent towards the bosses.
 

Explosive reaction
AS YOU SEND your contribution to the Socialist Worker Fighting Fund, you may be interested to hear about the response to a previous call for financial assistance.
The author, Wilfred Scawen Blunt, wrote in his diary for February 19, 1905: ‘George Meredith has been appealing for funds to help the revolution in Russia, and I have subscribed £10.’
Then Blunt added: ‘Yesterday came news that the Grand Duke Serge has been blown up with a bomb, so I am subscribing again.’
Alas, Socialist Worker cannot claim to have instigated the bumping off of any grand dukes – they are so hard to come by these days – but, nevertheless, I am sure it will use all contributions to the utmost effect.
 

A dangerous game
THE INSTITUTE for Workers Control bulletin, specially issued for the recent Sheffield conference, contains a contribution from Danny McGarvey of the Boilermakers’ Union.
It would be interesting to hear from the Institute precisely how it considers Mr McGarvey is furthering the cause of workers’ control.
Did the agreement he reached at Fairfield shipyard on the Clyde, where he signed away many precious rights of the men, promote the cause of workers control?
Or could he be said to be advancing the interests of the rank and file when he sat on the notorious Cameron inquiry, which knifed the shop stewards’ organisation at the Barbican building site in London?
*

By publishing the left-wing phrases of trade union bureaucrats like McGarvey, while doing nothing to criticise their right-wing deeds, the Institute for Workers’ Control is playing a dangerous game.
Its role could easily become similar to the Anglo-Russian trade union committees of 1925, a body that gave a tinge of red to the TUC and so made its betrayal of the general strike in the following year all the more easy to carry out.
 




IN 1968, capital gains reached an all-time record: an expansion of £7,000 million in a year. Shareholders, without lifting a finger, saw their fortunes grow enormously. They could eat their cake and still have it, spend their money and still have more at the end than at the beginning.
Thus the rich could enjoy themselves in luxurious idleness, turning day into night, night into day, gadding around in fast cars, without a thought about where the money was coming from.
But there are sometimes exceptions. The Times mentioned the sad case of a former managing director of Bowmaker Ltd., the industrial bankers, who was staying in Her Majesty’s rest centre at Wormwood Scrubs. He had been found guilty of some financial irregularities. Nevertheless the breeze of the rising stock market gently wafted through the prison bars, and The Times reported:
‘A prisoner serving a sentence of seven years’ imprisonment at Wormwood Scrubs has repaid £200,000 to the people he defrauded and has had his sentence reduced by two years ... The value of the shares held by nominees (for the prisoner) during his prison sentence had increased to such an extent that he has been able to repay the money.’
Doubtless, the former managing director must have been very happy. But what about the poor bloke in the next cell? Might he not, by comparison, consider himself to be an honest thief since, at least he has worked for ‘his money?
*

KARL MARX believed that within the framework of capitalist society criminals make a contribution which bourgeois respectability is loath to acknowledge. In his Theories of Surplus Value, he argues that the criminal breaks the monotony of capitalist life, arousing moral and aesthetic sentiments. Without violations of the law as the theme, much of great literature could not have been produced.
Also, Marx argues, the criminal helps to advance technological innovation:
‘Would the locksmith’s trade have attained its present perfection if there had been no thieves? Would the manufacture of banknotes have arrived at its present excellence if there has been no counterfeiters? Would the microscope have entered ordinary commercial life had there been no forgers? Is not the development of applied chemistry as much due to the adulteration of wares, and the attempts to discover it, as to honest productive effort? Crime, by its ceaseless development of new means of attacking property, calls into existence new measures of defence,and its productive efforts are as great as those strikes in stimulating the invention of machines.’
Marx contended that criminals also helped to increase the number of jobs available. Without their activities, there would be no need for judges, policemen, jailers, probation officers, professors of criminology and countless other occupations.
If all these people were to suddenly lose their jobs, think of the chaos there would be. Judges, now getting £14,000 a year, would not merely be unemployed but unemployable. What a pitiful spectacle it would be to see Lord Justice Parker signing on at the Labour Exchange.
 

Dangerous man
LET ME ISSUE a serious warning to IS branches in the London area. They are liable to be visited by a dangerous wrecker. He is described in a leaflet as:
‘Mr R. Tearse, a third-rate inefficient shop steward from London, who heads the Militant Workers’ Federation – the Trotskyist strike-promoting organisation. There is probably no one less qualified to lead a strike anywhere.’
I am quoting from an article by J.R. Campbell in the Daily Worker of April 10, 1944, which was reprinted as a leaflet for free distribution so the masses could be aware of Tearse’s nefarious activities.
At that time, the Communist Party was supporting Conservative candidates in parliamentary by-elections and strike-breaking in industrial disputes. Campbell’s complaint about Tearse was that he was inflaming relationships between workers and employers, advising trade unionists to disregard the negotiating machinery for remedying grievances, and being abusive to the official leadership.
A quarter of a century later, Roy Tearse is still doing the same things. Will the man never learn?
 



IT IS EXTREMELY gracious of Mr. Sid Bidwell MP to explain that Mrs. Renee Short cannot be accurately described as ‘a Left-wing Labour MP’ (January 4). But the big question is: can Mr. Bidwell?
Before he writes to Socialist Worker about the Honourable Lady Member for Wolverhampton, I think he should explain some of his own racialist effusions.
Was the Sid Bidwell who voted for the Bill excluding Kenyan Asians from Britain solely on grounds of colour the same person, who wrote in Socialist Review of January 1956 arguing that people should be free to leave and enter Britain as they pleased?
In that article, he wrote: ‘There are some trade unionists who actually argue that there should be a difference between the attitude to be taken to the black worker who comes from the “Empire and Commonwealth” and the foreign worker. What kind of international trade union solidarity is this?’
Indeed, Mr. Bidwell! What ‘solidarity’ can you espouse today when you back the government’s immigration policy, a policy that is based precisely on making the distinction between those with white and black skins.



 


Raymond Challinor
Wigan



 




But whose hand on the steering wheel?
PONDER OVER these figures: the Ford strike cost the company £34m in lost production and the men £3½m in wages.
In other words, the workers – the producers of all the wealth – are only paid £3½m while, by their labours, they create £34m of cars.
What a phenomenal rate of exploitation!
 

High cost of green cheese
MOON-MANIA – or perhaps it should be called ‘astroenteritis’ – has so far cost the United States $25,000m. Assuming Russia’s expenditure has been of the same magnitude, then this reach for the stars has taken the equivalent of four per cent of the total world output of goods and services for a year.
As two-thirds of mankind suffer from poverty, the rulers of Washington and Moscow indulge in expensive firework displays.
Encapsulated within the nose-cone of their space programmes are all the contradictions of capitalism. It has been said that socialism is the language of priorities; neither the White House nor the Kremlin know how to talk it.
Instead they squander scarce human material and intellectual resources. When Thorstein Veblem wrote about conspicuous consumption, the desire of the rich to flaunt their wealth before the less fortunate, he had no example of ostentatious waste so vivid this.
Military minds – all of whom, far more than Morgan, are suitable cases for treatment – visualise the day when they will have rockets with atomic warheads orbiting the earth, able to descend at the touch of a button. It will be, like having a nuclear sword of Damocles continually whirring above our heads.
Added to its military and economic roles, its contribution to the arms race and the permanent war economy, the space programme also has its imperialist aspects.
Remember Cecil Rhodes, the great British coloniser. When, because other European powers were grabbing large tracts of Africa for themselves, he saw fewer and fewer parts of the continent where he could plant the Union Jack, Rhodes looked up at the night-sky and said, ‘I would annex the planets if I could.’
Now Cecil Rhodes’ dream may become a reality. But with a subtle difference: the 19th century colonisers made lush profits from exploiting natural resources and cheap labour; no such attractive prizes await the first space pioneers.
All they are likely to gain is lifeless and worthless moon-dust – an appropriate symbol for the age of imperialism.
 

A deathly hush
OF COURSE all socialists deplore the Russian government’s occupation of Czechoslovakia. The death of Jan Palach and the others who have subsequently incinerated themselves are a symptom of the desperate hopelessness, the intense feeling of frustration created by the Kremlin’s imperialist policy.
But the British press, while giving big coverage to Palach and the other Czechs, has failed to report other cases of self-immolation. Who, for example, knows about Mrs Alice Herz, aged 82, who set fire to herself as a protest against US aggression in Vietnam and died in Detroit Receiving Hospital?
Other Americans have behaved in the same way, including a father who set himself alight in the presence of his small son at the front of a United States Recruiting Centre.
Yet, these cases go unreported in the British press. To give information about them might arouse further opposition to American policy on Vietnam.
 




That liberal tradition at LSE
SINCE IT IS unlikely that large numbers of students are at this moment reading John Coatman’s book, Police (Oxford University Press, 7s 6d) let me mention a revealing incident it contains.
In 1934 the president of the students’ union at the London School of Economics was expelled. Being an American citizen, he was forthwith deported from the country.
His ‘offence’ was that he sold copies of a journal that contained an article on police spying. It stated ‘a retired Indian policeman’ kept colonial students at LSE under surveillance.
Sir William Beveridge, then director of LSE, showed what a great liberal he was not merely by expelling the president of the students’ union but also banning the journal from the college precincts.
 

The sad irony of Stephen Swingler
THE LIFE and death of Stephen Swingler, MP, former chairman of Victory for Socialism, exemplifies the futility of the Labour Left. Newspaper obituaries mention how, since 1964, he became an accomplished government spokesman. A capable and fluent speaker, Swingler deftly defended government measures in parliament.
This was particularly valuable in the 1964 to 1966 period, when Wilson clung on with a majority of three or four.
‘Night after night,’ says The Guardian (20.2.69.) ‘he was required to answer back-bench (and largely Tory) attacks on individual railway closures – based, ironically, on the policies of the previous government.’
In other words, Swingler’s task was to justify Conservative decisions to Conservative MPs, attempting to prove that Sir Alec Douglas Home’s policy on railway closures was correct.
Surely it is impossible to imagine a more glaring illustration of political bankruptcy, a clearer refutation of the mouthings of the parliamentary Left, than that supplied by one of its own leaders, Stephen Swingler, defending the transport policy of the Fourteenth Earl.
But matters did not end there. The Guardian reports that the strain of his nocturnal parliamentary activities ‘may well have physically weakened Mr Swingler.’
It would seem that advocating Tory policies is not only politically wrong, but can be very dangerous to the health.
Indeed, Stephen Swingler’s personal fate might well be that of the government as a whole. It might easily die as a result of its own efforts to implement Conservative policy.
*

ADVOCATES of the monarchy tell us that the royal family gives us something to look up to, a model which we should strive to copy.
In which case, the example of Prince Charles is one that workers should find instructive With a courageous disregard for the government’s talk about economic crises and the need to show restraint, his salary is increasing from a mere £30,000 to £200,000 a year.
And the appropriate Biblical quotation? ‘Go and do thou likewise.’
 

Leave those ga ... sorry, constable
THE DESTRUCTION of property – it was a hideous sight! There they were, smashing the gates,wrenching them away from the walls.
Before any of you jump to the conclusion that it was those wicked LSE students at it again, let me tell you at once it was the police.
These custodians of capitalist law were merely performing their sacred duty, namely, to help blacklegs to go to work.
Strikers at Warrington Gas works padlocked the gates. So the police broke them open again.
 




Wilson – marxism by default
WHENEVER Harold Wilson makes a swingeing attack on workers, he unwittingly exposes the falsity of his own position. The importance he attaches to curbing strikes merely shows how vital workers are to the health of the economy.
Wilson does not have to worry about businessmen and financiers. They can go in hordes to bask in Caribbean sunshine and thus avoid Britain’s wintry weather.
Their absence makes not one whit of difference. He does not have to make any speeches against them, accusing them of wrecking the economy.
Could there be any more conclusive proof of the truth of the labour theory of value? By his very concern over industrial disputes, Harold Wilson reveals that the working class is the creator of all wealth.
 

Highly profitable con game
STRIKERS from the Courtaulds Skelmersdale factory recently adopted the unusual procedure of journeying to Liverpool to picket the Labour Exchange. Their demonstration was against methods used by Ministry officials to inveigle them into working at Skem.
Said leading shop steward Tony Bryan: ‘Most of the men were conned into coming to the factory with a promise that wages would not fall below £25. However, none of us have been able to reach this figure, even with overtime and bonuses.’
Another striker, Peter McCoy, who left a £27 a week job in Liverpool to come to Courtaulds, said: ‘If they told the truth about the wages, they would get no one up here.’
From their accounts, it would appear as if the Department of Employment and Productivity is running a deception racket, a business lucrative only for shareholders. Of course, it may well be that it was the firm, rather than the Ministry which was responsible for the highly imaginative figures given.
In its struggle with workers at Skelmersdale, Courtaulds has been strengthened by an immense amount of public money. Out of the £7½m which it cost to build the factory, £3m came from the state.
Such a gigantic subsidy must have been one of the factors influencing Courtaulds in coming to the new town.
It has been closing plants outside development areas, where no state aid was forthcoming, and fresh factories in areas which do qualify for national assistance. Three mills at Bolton, employing 1,300 were closed and the Skelmersdale mill, which will ultimately employ 800, opened.
‘Less workers, higher profits’ – this seems to be the slogan throughout British industry today. And development grants facilitate this process, bringing the capitalist state and big business into a closer, more intimate association.
Workers on strike at Skem would do well to take heed. Courtaulds itself shows what happens.
Its directors include such Tory ex-cabinet ministers as R.A. Butler, Eccles, Horsburgh, and Watkinson, while the company also employs ex-deputy prime minister George Brown and Douglas Jay, formerly President of the Board of Trade, from Labour’s ranks.
Surely, this is a veritable high-powered political coalition out to maximise profits at the workers expense.
 

Lick that!
TALKING about sacking, let me give you the best get-your-own-back story I’ve beard this week. A worker, dismissed by a sweet factory, showed his annoyance by putting four-letter words in half a mile of Blackpool rock!
 



I have no desire to become involved in a personal slanging match with Messrs. Coates and Topham. It would be a waste of time and space. Instead of indulging in such a negative exercise, I am concerned about debating the deep, underlying theoretical disagreements between us. Also I am concerned with seeing that future conferences on workers’ control are better than that held at Sheffield.
It is gratifying to hear that Messrs. Coates and Co. are in favour of democracy. In which case, let them and the other organisers see that a few elementary principles of democracy are applied at future workers’ control conferences:

First, that the conference arrangement committee is elected by the delegates;
Second, that all resolutions submitted are accepted, not modified without their authors’ consent, and appear on the conference agenda;
Third, that platform speakers to be limited to, say, 20 per cent of the time in plenary sessions – the rest being for the rank and file.

Writing about the Sheffield conference, Coates says the conference arrangements committee ‘could not find time to discuss a motion submitted by Challinor on what he was pleased to term “Ford’s Sell-Out”.’ One might well ask whether such a committee could be as fair-minded as Coates claims if it even failed to discuss a motion submitted to it?
In fact, the resolution came from the International Socialism Group, which had about 35 delegates. It did not refer to Fords’ directly, but dealt with the question of penal clauses in industrial contracts. We thought these curtailed workers’ freedom and set a dangerous precedent. Now, conceivably, our view may be wrong. But, surely, the issue was sufficiently weighty to be considered by conference. Yet, IS comrades had the galling experience of being discriminated against, seeing other people’s resolutions accepted by conference arrangement committee while it could not even ‘find time to discuss’ our motion.
Speaking to members of other revolutionary socialist groupings, I discovered there was considerable feeling about the way things were being managed – or should I say manipulated? It was felt that strenuous efforts were being made to prevent all discussion of issues where there might be criticism of union leaders like Jones and Scanlon. Now I don’t expect Coates and Co. to accept this observation of mine about the widespread discontent: let them fail to apply the democratic principles already mentioned and they can be assured of a first-class bust-up at the next conference. In this context, Coates’ overtures to IS to join in the activities of the Institute for Workers’ Control appears to me to be grotesque. While, obviously, I can’t speak for the IS Group, I would argue that there would be three prerequisites for active participation: internal democracy within the Institute; an equal right with others to publication of material under the Institute’s auspices; and a principled discussion of relevant issues.
Having dealt with the first prerequisite – internal democracy – let me turn to the second. As Coates is aware, there are quite a sizeable group of talented writers connected with International Socialism. Would IWC be prepared to publish their material on industrial questions, articles which are almost certain to be critical of union bureaucrats both left and right? If so, then perhaps IWC could start by running an edition of Tony Cliff’s new pamphlet on productivity deals. This, in a highly detailed and comprehensive way, shows the limitations of the Scanlon approach and thus, if the Institute wants to be fair to both sides, it should publish to promote thoughtful discussion about the speeches of Scanlon it has already issued.
On the third prerequisite, let me say that IS members are revolutionary socialists. In our opinion, the aim of workers’ control can only be attained as part of a revolutionary struggle. For, to be meaningfully discussed, workers’ control must be considered in terms of its opposite – capitalist control. And to talk about capitalist control necessarily involves discussing the main instrument of capitalist control, namely, the state. The uncompromising hostility of the state to all forms of workers’ self-activity can only be effectively countered by an equally uncompromising hostility to the state. In other words, the furthering of working-class interests requires a revolutionary struggle.
Trotsky made this point in a different way, when he said: ‘The trade unions of our time can either serve as secondary instruments of imperialist capitalism for the subordination and disciplining of workers and for obstructing the revolution, or, on the contrary, the trade unions can become the instruments of the revolutionary movement of the proletariat.’ In all our work, IS comrades endeavour to make it clear that these are the only alternatives open. Consequently, if we entered the IWC, it would be with the declared aim of trying to transform the Institute from a ragbag of oddments into an organisation with a definite revolutionary orientation.
This would not require, as Coates appears to believe, a witch-hunt but standing by one’s political principles and demanding that others do likewise. For instance, Scanlon says he believes in workers’ control. Excellent. Workers’ control, like charity, should begin at home. If is no use hoping for the workers to control industries if they don’t control their own unions. One of the most important reasons for their failure to do this is that the union leadership is privileged, much higher paid, and therefore has an outlook on life that is different to, and antagonistic to, those of the men it is supposed to represent. In the AEF, Jim Conway, the general secretary, has recently received money from the AEF and bought a £16,000 house while members of the AEF national committee are to have hefty wage increases. Can we have Comrade Scanlon denouncing these retrograde measures, steps away from workers’ control of the union?
Not only is the idea that workers’ representatives should receive the average pay of the men they represent intrinsic to the concept of industrial democracy, but it is equally important that they should be subject to recall. Can we ask another friend of Coates , Jack Jones – to advocate publicly that when the rank-and-file membership think its opinions have not been truly expressed by a full-time official, then it should have the right to dismiss him? The adoption of this procedure would, in a dramatic way, transform the position in the unions, placing power on the shopfloor.
Until leaders like Jones and Scanlon take such moves, I suggest their support for workers’ control remains merely formal. It is very much akin to that of the trade union leaders who, in 1925, to give themselves a revolutionary aura, joined the Anglo-Soviet Trade Union Committee. The following year their leftish reputations came in handy – it made it all the easier to betray the General Strike.
There are signs the movement for workers’ control is being used in a similar way. By providing bureaucrats with the opportunity to adopt a leftish pose, it makes it easier for them to deal with militants inside the union. Also, it enhances their value in the eyes of the Government. Barbara Castle would much rather have, say, a Danny McGarvey sitting on an official inquiry than a Les Cannon. It gives a better appearance, a semblance of impartiality, that is more likely to hoodwink trade unionists.
The IWC quotes McGarvey’s speeches with approval. Ken Coates says McGarvey deserves supporting for his attack on In Place of Strife. But Coates fails to mention that McGarvey’s opposition is not on a principled basis. Nor does he mention the large part played by McGarvey in the Fairfield shipyard sell-out or the Cameron inquiry into the Barbican, where he was an accomplice in the victimisation of militant building workers. And as I pen these lines. I hear on the television that McGarvey is on another Government inquiry, that at Port Talbot. It makes me think that Barbara Castle has a clearer understanding than Ken Coates: she knows who controls McGarvey and it’s certainly not the workers. She need have no fear that McGarvey will suddenly get up at the inquiry and shout,
’I know the answer to this industrial problem. Port Talbot for the Port Talbot workers’.
The fact is that McGarvey and the other ‘left’ leaders have compromised themselves up to the hilt. Without exception, they all backed the TUC plan for industrial peace. An editorial in the Socialist Worker (June 26, 1969) correctly said, this plan was designed ‘to curb the militants and the rank and file’. It went on to state:
’The TUC-Government agreement shows not only that the trade union leaders are opposed to any independent rank-and-file organisation, but that, when pushed, they are willing to be used against their own members.’
The TUC plan is the complete antithesis of the essence of workers’ control. Yet, unless I am mistaken, there has not been a squeak, a murmur of disapproval from the IWC. Nor has. it felt any need to reprove Jones, Scanlon and Co., who in theory believe in workers’ control while in practice doing the exact opposite. Instead spokesmen of the IWC have concentrated their attacks on people like myself, socialists consistent in their opposition to the TUC plan.
And the same was true when the Government first introduced its incomes policy. Coates and Co. did not criticise left Labour MP’s, the trade union leaders and Tribune for their highly equivocable attitude; rather censure was reserved for IS comrades, who called for an outright and total rejection of the incomes policy – a line which they characterised as negative and unconstructive.
In conclusion, I would point out that I cannot deal with the many minor points raised by Coates and Topham. If anybody thinks I have misquoted them, then let them turn to their writings, a serious consideration of which is likely to be to the discredit of its authors.
 



In 1908 G.K. Chesterton wrote a humorous novel. It is an account of the adventures of a group of anarchists. In the utmost secrecy these seven desperados plot to blow up Brighton Pier. To keep their identities from becoming known, each assumes the name of a day of the week. The story acquired its title from one of them – The Man who was Thursday. Alas, he turns out to be an agent provocateur. And as ridiculous incident follows ridiculous incident, it gradually emerges that all his six colleagues also belong to the police force.
Two years later life imitated art. In 1910 the Bolshevik organisation in Moscow had only eight members. To make matters worse, seven of them were Tsarist spies. Quickly they arranged for the odd man out to receive a prolonged ‘holiday’ somewhere in the remote vastness of Siberia. This episode illustrates Bolshevik weakness in those times. Trotsky said, ‘In 1910 in the whole of the country there were a few dozen people. Some were in Siberia, but they were not organised. The people whom Lenin could reach by correspondence or by an agent numbered about 30 or 40 at the most.’
Quite understandably, Lenin and his handful of followers did not merit a mention when Robert Michels wrote his classic text Political Parties, published in 1911. A former revolutionary socialist himself, Michels had experienced the degeneration of the German Social Democratic Party, the gradual fading of its vision of building a new society, and its incorporation into existing society’s political procedures. It led him to develop his theory about the iron law of oligarchy. Yet he still harboured a grudge against the German SPD – a denunciation by Michels of its transformation appeared in the Socialist, organ of the British SLP, in 1905. Behind this drift to the right lay practical politics, the desire to do something in the here and now. Also, life’s slow dull strain affected the working class movement, the almost inevitability of getting enmeshed in grubby compromises.
For those who refuse to walk along this path to conventional politics and continue to adhere to a Marxist analysis, another vital truth needs recognition. Revolutions are like earthquakes – it is easy to predict that they will occur, but the where and when remains a much more difficult procedure. Time and again the red mole of history comes up with unexpected surprises.
Throughout the 19th century, radicals regarded Russia as the bastion of reaction, an immovable roadblock on the road to progress. Even Marx never envisaged revolution there. He thought industrially developed countries would be in the vanguard. Yet in 1905 a demonstration in the capital, St Petersburg, sought to present a humble petition couched in the most servile language to the Tsar. Father Gapon, who later was discovered to be a police agent, led the procession. Things went terribly awry for the authorities when Cossacks, brandishing their sabres, charged into the demonstrators. Workers, enraged by this outrageous repression, swung into action. Class conflict escalated. A new weapon of struggle, workers’ councils – they were called soviets – were created. The 1905 Russian Revolution had begun.
However, search through all the documents relating to 1905 and it is impossible to find any evidence to show the Bolsheviks were responsible for creating the first soviets or starting the revolution. Subterranean class tensions, building up unseen in the lower depths of society, suddenly found violent expression. Those who marched to the St Petersburg Winter Palace must have possessed contradictory beliefs within their craniums – the dominant attitude of docility was rudely knocked out of their heads by the Cossacks’ sabres and immediately replaced by revolutionary wrath.
 
The experience of workers
The events of 1905 clearly show how the unexpected is likely to occur. In most instances one can confidently predict one thing about predictions – that the predictions will invariably be wrong! Lenin’s experiences before the February Revolution of 1917 testify to this fact. From his refuge from the Tsarist secret police in Zurich he told a meeting of young Swiss workers that he would not see the revolution come in his lifetime but he was certain that they would in theirs. Yet within a few weeks Lenin had packed his bags and mounted the famous sealed train to Petrograd so he could lead the struggle for all power to the soviets.
Life throws up surprises – none more so than in periods of revolution. The personal reminiscences of N.N. Sukhanov provide a good example of this. This intensely political man received a lesson in politics from menial clerks he regarded as having little or no political acumen. In his memoirs he described this event in the following manner:
‘Tuesday, 21 February 1917. I was sitting in my office in the Turkistan section. Behind the partition two typists were gossiping about food difficulties, rows in the shopping queues, unrest among the women, an attempt to smash into some warehouse. “D’you know,” suddenly declared one of these young ladies, “if you ask me, it’s the beginning of the revolution!”’
Initially Sukhanov did not agree with this absurd suggestion. But on reflection he revised his opinion: ‘I kept thinking and brooding about the inevitable revolution that was whirling down on us at full speed.’ Thus dawned the revolution of February 1917. Methodologically much more sound than Sukhanov, Lenin recalled sharing a railway compartment with a Russian peasant woman. It was after the 1917 July Days when a transitory wave of anti-Bolshevik feeling forced him to flee to Finland to secure temporary refuge. Lenin said the old woman, sitting in the same carriage, had an understanding of the situation. Speaking about the loaf of bread she cradled, she said the authorities would no longer dare to supply the same poor quality bread as they had done previously. Lenin appreciated that this meant she had a keen understanding of the present situation. The growing power of the masses, the existence of dual power in the Russian state and the enfeeblement of the traditional rulers meant the transition had been seen by a humble woman in terms of crumbs of bread.
The same point applies generally. It is the experience of the workers themselves, not the diatribes of this or that individual, which points them in an anti-capitalist direction. They have learnt their lessons untutored, save by collective experience.
Poor N.N. Sukhanov remained waiting for another dastardly experience. A Menshevik supporter of the February Revolution because it led to the downfall of Tsarism, nevertheless he opposed the October Revolution – the idea of all power going to the working class and peasantry. In his opinion, for an economically backward country like Russia where the proletariat was immature and small, this step would be premature. As an opponent of the October Revolution, Sukhanov was to discover his home had been used by his wife, a Bolshevik supporter, for political purposes. His book records the remarkable happenings that occurred there on 10 October 1917:
‘The Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party assembled in full strength ... This supreme and decisive meeting took place in my own house, still at Karpovka, but without my knowledge. As before, I would very often spend the night somewhere near the office or Smolny, that is eight versts from the Karpovka. This time special steps were taken to have me spend the night away from home ... Lenin appeared in a wig but without his beard. Zinoviev appeared with a beard but without his shock of hair. The meeting went on for about ten hours, until about five o’clock in the morning.’
After 1917 revolutions still continued to burst out unexpectedly. For example, in 1968 I recall hearing Colin Barker, now a doyen of the SWP, address a meeting in Manchester. He had just returned from Paris and told us that the plight of the revolutionary left in Britain was bad – but in France it was much worse. Weakness and demoralisation prevailed there. This opinion was echoed by Andre Gorz, who himself belonged to the Parisian left. In the 1968 Socialist Register he began his article,
‘The working class will neither unite politically nor man the barricades for a 10 percent rise in wages or 50,000 more council flats. In the foreseeable future there will be no crisis of European capitalism so dramatic as to drive the mass of workers to revolutionary general strike or armed insurrection in defence of their vital interests.’
By the time this article appeared in English, France had become engulfed in a turmoil much greater than Andre Gorz could ever have envisaged. In Paris and other major cities barricades had been flung up. Students and workers fought the riot police. The greatest general strike that France had ever known had broken out. And why? At Nanterre, a modern university built only a few years previously, a government minister, there to open a new swimming pool, was confronted by a large group of angry anarchists. They bitterly complained about the restrictions placed on contact between the sexes. The minister, Françoise Missoffe, jokingly replied that perhaps they should dampen their sexual ardour by jumping in the swimming pool. This provoked an irate ginger-haired student, the then unknown Daniel Cohn-Bendit – later known as ‘Dany the Red’ – to denounce him for making such a Nazi-like utterance. The confrontation provided the spark, a fuse that ignited the biggest explosion France had in the 20th century.
 
Anger and alienation
It remains easy to show that behind the seemingly invincible veneer of the existing system lurked the forces of destruction. Eight years after the French Revolution of 1848 Marx referred disparagingly to ‘the so called revolution of 1848’. He added, ‘Beneath the solid surface they betrayed oceans of liquid matter, only needing expansion to rend into fragments hard rock.’ But the system’s fragility was not merely discerned on the left – government ministers, police chiefs and many writers acknowledged the perils which may emerge from the lower depths.
For instance, here is what Charles Dickens, a man who did not shrink from examining less than polite society, had to say. His description of the situation in Victorian Britain may have some resonance with the current situation:
‘There is nothing in the present age at once so galling or so alarming to me as the alienation of the people from their own public affairs ... They have so little to do with the game through all these years of parliamentary reform that they have sullenly laid down their cards and taken to looking on. The players who are left at the table do not see beyond it, conceive that the gain or loss and all the interest in the play are in their hands, and never will be wiser until they and the table and the lights and the money are all overturned together. And I believe...that it is extremely like the general mind of France before the breaking out of the first revolution.’
The anger and alienation existing within society, any modern society, results in strife. This manifests itself in a variety of ways – multitudinous murmuring, protest meetings, demonstrations, strikes and, even, occasionally, revolutions. The problem is that socialists, involved in anti-capitalist activities, often expect a successful revolutionary culmination, an ending that rarely occurs. It reminds me of Shakespeare’s Henry IV, where Owen Glendower brags, ‘I can call the sprits from the vasty deep.’ To which Hotspur retorts, ‘Why, so can I, or so can any man, but will they come when you call them?’
But revolutionary socialists should not be disheartened. In circumstances of capitalist normality they can have a negligible impact on the course of events. The political temperature depends upon two things that remain virtually outside their control. First, there is the objective situation, the actual conditions under which people live. And second, there are the conditions under which they consider they are entitled to expect to live. If these two remain roughly the same there will be no mass protest movements. But once people make the links between the gap that exists between what life is and what it could be, then they move into action, show themselves able and willing to fight for a better world, and socialist ideas swing into their own. Not only are the organisation and ideas the distillation of centuries of working class struggle – they also acquire still greater power through the passage of time.
Let me illustrate this by taking as an example The Communist Manifesto. To the overwhelming majority of humanity living in 1848 it would seem quite meaningless. When Marx and Engels wrote, large parts of the world remained unknown, unexplored and economically undeveloped. Where in their writings was, for instance, any talk of Korea or Latin America? Their collected works never mention them. Even if they had, a modern, free enterprise economy did not then exist there. There was no industrial society, no division between capitalist and worker, hence no class struggle as we know it today. Workers of the world could not have united.
Yet nevertheless Marx and Engels were still correct. They were thinking dialectically, not formally, in terms of not merely being but becoming. Korea and Latin America may well have been, in 1848 terms, located in the dream clouds, but today they are enmeshed in the world capitalist system and the domination of giant multinational corporations. As a consequence we find our struggle intertwined with theirs in a way that could never have been envisaged in 1848. We are both equally victims of international capitalism. Workers of the world must unite.
This argument can be taken a stage further. In The Communist Manifesto the historical choice is starkly presented – either a new society is created or there is what was termed ‘the general ruin of the contending classes’ – in other words, either socialism or barbarism. At a meeting organised to celebrate the anniversary of the Chartist journal the People’s Paper, Marx elaborated on the significance of the choice before them:
‘There is one great fact characteristic of our 19th century, a fact which no party dares deny. On the one hand, there have started into life industrial and scientific forces which no epoch of former human history had ever suspected. In our days, everything seems pregnant with its contrary. Machinery gifted with the wonderful power of shortening and fructifying human labour, we behold starving and overworking it. The new-fangled sources of wealth, by some strange weird spell, are turned into the sources of want.’
When Marx uttered these words he could have no conception of how much more true they would become. He could not have imagined missiles orbiting the planet, undetectable Stealth bombers, nuclear weapons of hitherto undreamt of ferocity all creating the means for humanity’s destruction, let alone the advances in food technology, medicine, production techniques and the numerous other scientific applications creating the possibility, beyond Marx’s wildest dreams, of human happiness and fulfilment for all. But today’s reality leaves us with rich and poor, the well fed and the starving, those who can live happily while others remain mired in misery.
It is not merely the politically active who increasingly turn to Marx for the weapons to use in the struggle. The mass of working people unwittingly do the same. This is because the world is being transformed in ways which confirm his prophecies. Without being aware of it, the ruling class becomes the architect of its own destruction.
In our endeavour to speed up this process, besides advancing in the strongest fashion possible the lessons of past working class struggles, we must also possess the organisation that gives them the greatest impact. To outsiders, at times, this may make them doubt our sanity. But this must not deter us – it has always been one of the minor hazards facing revolutionaries. When Lenin arrived at the Finland station in the spring of 1917 and declared the soviets should seize power, many thought his mind had become unhinged. Likewise when Karl Liebknecht a few months earlier had told German workers ‘the enemy was at home’ – the German ruling class – doubts were expressed about his sanity. And when our own John Maclean used the court to denounce the crimes of British capitalism, respectable opinion questioned his mental health.
We should take heart from the fact that Lenin frequently used to refer to a man in a doorway. At first glance he appeared to be making wild gestures, a mad man possessed by private devils, but on closer inspection he was shown to be performing a perfectly sensible human task – sharpening a knife on a stone. And that is the function of revolutionaries today. By developing socialist theory and building socialist organisation, they are sharpening the knife with which to destroy the capitalist system.
 



IN HIS novel The Go-Between L.P. Hartley compares the past with the present: events in different periods have a different significance, and people behave in a strangely different manner. Oddly, it almost seems that one is visiting a foreign country. I had very much this feeling when I read the articles which mention the Labour Party in the last What Next? (No. 20). I felt contributors had little or no conception of the vast changes that have taken place.
I joined the Labour Party in 1946. This was after the Edge Hill by-election, where I worked my guts out for a month campaigning for David Gibson, the Independent Labour Party candidate. I had made a bet with Walter Padley, who subsequently became MP for Ogmore and leader of the shopworkers’ union. He had wagered that the ILP candidate would not get 500 votes. Actually, the figure was only 154 votes. I had to buy him a year’s subscription to the Socialist Appeal.
So, feeling that the ILP was finished, I joined the Crewe Constituency Labour Party.
A total of 47 individuals attended the monthly meeting of the North ward. The Crewe CLP was one of 13 parties in Lancashire and Cheshire region that had its own local edition of Labour’s Voice, a well-produced 12-page printed monthly journal. One member objected to a cartoon that appeared on the last page that was mildly critical of the monarchy. It made what at one time would have been called a Willie Hamilton-style point: it ridiculed the large sum of money being spent to convert HMS Vanguard, the last battleship Britain built, so that Princess Elizabeth and Princess Margaret could sail on her to South Africa. After speaker after speaker had risen to attack this vile slur on the royal family, I could contain myself no longer. I stood up and made what amounted to a pure and simple republican speech. Support came from Ted Alcock, an old socialist who had been in the British Socialist Party. Then it was put to the vote: we had lost by 43 votes to three.
From this it would be easy to conclude that the Labour Party is much more left today. Nobody would be now thrown out, or even be strongly reprimanded, for advocating republicanism, let alone making a critical reference to royal extravagance. But this misses the vital point: the meaning of the terms “left” and “right” have completely changed over the past half century. Those who many Blairites today would regard as right-wingers would not sit passively by and accept the numerous outrages emanating from Millbank Tower like the majority of Labour Party members now do. They believed in a welfare state that protected everybody from the cradle to the grave, full employment in a free society, and a comprehensive National Health Service, where the criterion was need, not the ability to pay.
Immediately this was threatened by cuts in the health budget and a wage freeze, accompanied by a government plea to employers not to declare higher profits, a mighty protest movement emerged. “The struggle in British politics today”, declared Aneurin Bevan, “is not between the Tories and the Labour Party. It is for the soul of the Labour Party.” Fifty-seven MPs defied the government and voted against the welfare cuts. At the 1951 general election they projected a different image from the party hacks. In Tribune Ian Mikardo stated that, if every Labour candidate had done as well as the Bevanites, then Labour would still be in power. What a contrast with the recent general election, when all Labour candidates appeared to be singing from the same hymn sheet.
Equally startling is the transformation in the composition of the party. Then there was credibility, roots in the class and local activities, all of which have now vanished. Today there is merely a miserable 310,000 individual members; in 1957 membership stood at 1,146,000. Several years previously the rank and file had dumped off all the reactionaries, such as Dalton and Morrison, from the constituency party section of the National Executive. I recall the first industrial action in the North Staffs coalfield since the General Strike of 1926. The miners demanded to inspect the Labour Party membership cards of the two leaders of the strike – Stan Newens and Ernest Scrivens – before they would allow them to speak. Such action is quite inconceivable today. Trade unionists no longer look to Labour in this fond way.
The beginning of the change came with the next great protest movement. Whereas Bevanism was a movement which began inside the labour movement, the struggle against nuclear weapons was started by a small group of direct actionists who ignited the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament outside Labour’s ranks. It was the Labour Advisory Committee of CND, of which I was a member along with Olive Gibbs and Peggy Duff, which sought to spread its influence inside Labour. Eventually, we won such extensive backing that a unilateralist resolution was adopted at the annual conference held at Scarborough in 1960. Hugh Gaitskell was forced to fight, fight and fight again before he was able to restore the right’s hegemony.
Since the early 1960s there have been numerous protest movements: over Vietnam, the Gulf, the right to work, etc. However, they have all had one thing in common – they have not, unlike CND, seen winning control of the Labour Party as central to their strategy. This has been, I think, for two reasons. First, because the Labour Party, like the Cheshire cat in Alice in Wonderland, has shrunk in power and influence. And while clearly Hitler had no say in the constitutional changes within the party, I do not think he could have bettered Blair’s moves to end democratic control, eliminating the influence of ordinary members on the decision-making process.
It seems to me likely that Labour will continue its slow, inglorious decline. Within the next decade some new source of socialist revolt will spring up, arousing a new generation of angry young people. Of course, life may prove me wrong. Perhaps somehow the Labour left will again be a force to be reckoned with in working class politics. If so, I would ask comrades to remember that there must be many around like myself. In no circumstances, as the party bosses have made plain to me, would they allow me back into the party.
Besides joining the Labour Party 55 years ago, I have served it in a number of different capacities: borough councillor, constituency party secretary, parliamentary candidate etc., as well as being vice-president of the Society for the Study of Labour History and writing five books on working class topics. Yet, all this is as naught. The reason? I refuse to remain silent on corruption.
My interest was first kindled by the case of John Poulson, the Yorkshire architect. When he, Cunningham and Smith were found guilty, Mr Justice Waller stated that there was a web of corruption that encompassed 23 local authorities and 300 individuals. I was the main supporting speaker for Eddie Milne MP. He wanted a full disclosure of all the financial facts surrounding the Poulson affair. He was thrown out of the Labour Party and won Blyth as an Independent Labour candidate.
A secret coalition between influential Tory and Labour leaders, members of the Establishment, sought to keep deeply embarrassing information from purview. Of the 300 tainted by corruption, 280 still remain unknown. I have good reason to believe these include cabinet ministers, important businessmen, leading policeman and numerous councillors. Britain’s entire political system would be thrown into disrepute if their names were to be revealed.
Of course, it does not end there. A trail of slime comes right down to the present day. A few months ago the World Bank issued a list of 54 companies which indulged in criminal and fraudulent practices. On this blacklist were the names of 35 British companies. I wrote to my local MP, Alan Campbell, to ask him what he thought should be done. Instead of stating his personal opinion, he merely forwarded my letter to the Board of Trade. It gave a crisp and curt reply, stating that the matter was in the hands of the law enforcement agencies. Yet, so far, they have done nothing. Naturally, I wrote to express my dissatisfaction to Alan Campbell but received no reply.
No membership, no reply to my letter. This would seem to me to symbolise the position of New – or should it be “Blue”? – Labour, as Tory Blair leads his lambs to the slaughter.
 



I’ve Lived Through It All
Emanuel Shinwell
Gollancz, £4.00
THIS BOOK COULD have been sub-titled: And I was responsible for quite a lot of the mess myself. Shinwell tells – or rather re-tells, for this is his second attempt at autobiography – how he attacked the Communist Party in 1921, supported the Second International against the Third, moved Ramsay MacDonald for the leadership of the Parliamentary Labour Party, helped as a junior minister in the first minority Labour government to avert a strike of miners, assisted in the organisation of the army to aid the American troops in Korea in 1951, favoured invading Iran when Mossadeq nationalised the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, and consistently supported Zionist aggression.
With a record like that, you might have thought Shinwell would have been well-advised to keep quiet. Not a bit of it! Shinwell is proud of what he has done.
 



Harold Wilson
Dudley Smith
Robert Hale, 21s.
Harold Wilson
Gerard Eyre Noel
Gollancz, 21s.
Purpose in Politics
Harold Wilson
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 30s.
The Relevance of British Socialism
Harold Wilson
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 16s.
Selected Speeches 1964
Harold Wilson
Penguin Books, 3s 6d.
Of these five books, the first two are biographies of Harold Wilson; the remainder are expositions of Labour policy by Harold Wilson himself. None of them are very profound. Yet, while not possessing any sparkling, original ideas, they may still be of value. It will be important to compare what Labour intended to do when gaining power with what it actually does. Moreover, Harold Wilson is a statesman who is likely to be with us for many years to come, and therefore we should know something about his activities so far. Mr Noel’s book contains much personal information about Wilson’s life – his family background, his university career, his marriage. Indeed, everything but a serious analysis of his political opinions. Dudley Smith, on the other hand, gives a balanced, readable and factual account of Wilson’s political development. Nevertheless it is a journalistic account, pitched at the general reader; no attempt is made to relate Wilson’s emergence to the present state of the Labour Party and condition of British capitalism. It is the present economic crisis which makes Wilson’s own books appear so dated. He seems to have unbounded – and unfounded – confidence in capitalism’s potentialities. Despite its past inability to sustain a 4 per cent rate of growth, he unquestioningly accepts that it will under his kindly guidance. He bases all Labour’s glorious plans for the New Britain on the achievement of this target. But, having slammed on the brakes, it looks unlikely that Labour will do so.
Wilson fails to example the fate of other Labour leaders, both in Britain and elsewhere, who have governed capitalism rather than abolished it. With the commanding heights in the hands of big business, his government remain in ‘power’ on sufferance. However dilatory it is about giving old-age pension increases, the Government will have to remain ever-vigilant to maintain the high level of profit necessary to maintain business confidence and induce private investment.
In these circumstances, the Labour Government’s reforms are likely to be few and its catastrophes many.
 



Patronage in British Government
Peter G. Richards
Allen & Unwin, 35s.
Patronage is one of the underworld regions of British politics. Often discussed perfunctorily, it is rarely written about: until his book appeared, there had been no serious study of the subject. Besides rectifying this omission. Mr Richards provides much useful information. For many years to come, his book is likely to be the standard work of reference.
In an interesting chapter on Honours, he discusses how they are used to fill party coffers. The practice started in 1891, and by 1911 the Liberal Party was netting £120,000 to £140,000 a year from this source, and, of course, this figure was doubtlessly exceeded in the heyday of Lloyd George and Maundy Gregory after the First World War. As for the present position, Mr. Richards makes an interesting speculation:
‘Conservative Honour Lists still contain baronetcies and knighthoods awarded “for political services” of an unspecified nature. No details are published about the sources of Conservative Party income ... The Party has a Central Board of Finance which is responsible to the chairman of the party organisation. According to McKenzie’s “reasonably informed speculation” this body is used to approach more wealthy supporters of the party for contributions of at least moderate size go direct to the central funds of the party. As the chairman of the Party organisation is well placed to recommend honours, suspicions may still remain.’
The basic criticism to be levelled at this book arises from the author’s basically uncritical approach. He sees that patronage is used to bolster the powers-that-be, he supports the present patronage system. Mr. Richards never considers the cast against hereditary rights and privileges. Yet, a growing section of political opinion is against retaining these trappings of Feudalism. I take it. for instance, that all readers of this journal would like to dump The Establishment and their Lordships in the Thames.
 

