

1. Skirmishing
The miners’ strike of 1972 was an event of great importance. It was the first official strike of miners since 1926 and the first break in the policy of co-operation at any price, followed by the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) since nationalisation. Above all it reasserted the power of rank-and-file miners after many years of passively accepting decisions of the leadership. The co-operation of other trade unionists was the most remarkable demonstration of workers’ solidarity seen for many generations. After a year of victories for the Tory government (defeat of the postmen and power workers), the balance of power between the classes was redressed, which was the precondition for the successful struggles of other workers in 1972. Finally, the manner in which government and NUM leadership were able to dictate terms after eight weeks of militant strike action, illustrated clearly the weakness of the leadership and the great need for a strong rank-and-file organisation.
The new mood among many miners was generated by the unofficial actions of 1969 and 1970. The NUM conference in July 1971 unanimously passed a resolution on wages which demanded pay increases of £5, £8, and £9, the largest claim ever submitted by miners. The National Coal Board (NCB) were incredulous. They offered £1.60, a sum so preposterous that even an experienced ‘sell-out merchant’ like Joe Gormley could not effect a compromise. After a special conference in October, the union imposed a ban on overtime and later held a national ballot of the membership. The members voted to reject the offer and for strike action.
The NCB subsequently made two further offers which came nowhere near to the demand. Nevertheless, two days after the strike had begun, Gormley said that the gap had not been wide: an offer in the region of £3 would have been acceptable. Indeed, Gormley’s attitude was so conciliatory throughout the negotiating period, that neither the Government, the NCB nor the Press actually believed a strike likely, nor – if there was one – that the union was strong enough to win it. On 5 January the Financial Times warned that the miners had no hope of victory since they no longer played a central role in the highly complicated modern economy; it ended:
‘The overall position of the miners is not good if they are hoping for a strike situation that will force a settlement on their terms.’
 
2. War
The strike began quietly on 9 January. No one could have predicted that it would last so long, or develop in the militant way it did, virtually bringing the Heath Government to its knees and actually achieve a cash settlement without precedent in the miners’ history. The root cause of these developments was undoubtedly the aggressive and determined attitude of the rank-and-file members, in contrast to the NUM leadership.
The first clash between members and leaders came on the question of allowing safety men to work during the strike. In the first week of the strike pitched battles took place at the pitheads between pickets and safety men backed by the police. Members of the National Executive (NEC) were adamant that safety work should be continued. Dai Francis, from South Wales said:
‘rebel lodges have gone against the decision ... (but) the situation is being dealt with immediately as it is in the best interests of our members to keep the pits safe’.
The NCB and the press made a great deal of this issue, attempting to intimidate the miners with the notion that many pits would never open again. Militants did not believe this and after only three days of the strike only 46 if the country’s 289 pits were fully manned by safety men. The rank-and-file were proved right since after the strike not one pit has been closed as a result of the miners’ stand on this question.
The second assertion of rank-and-file power – against the wishes of the NEC – was the determined efforts in every coalfield to close down the NCB offices. Miners have long nursed a grievance against clerical members of the union for their persistent tendency to vote against strike action. The 20 year old girls in the offices actually receive higher wages than surface workers. The most tense scenes were at Doncaster (Yorks.), Alloa (Clack.), Whitburn (North Durham) and Tondu, Bridgend (South Wales). Police were out in force to usher the clerks through picket lines. The press made a great deal of the fact that women were jostled by pickets.
The accusations increased daily as the Government, the NCB and the press tried to turn public attitudes against the miners. Yet the miners retained the support of workers throughout the strike, and the generous solidarity shown by so many workers certainly made life more difficult for the Tories. The question of the clerks became a central issue of the strike for a few days, and increasingly NCB offices in every area became something of a symbol for the enemy at large. In most cases the miners won, the clerks stayed away from work and many joined the picket lines – despite scabbing instructions from some of their union leaders.
 
3. The Flying Picket
However, the issue which provoked the greatest outcry was the flying mass picket, a tactic which was actually to win the strike. The authorities expected fairly passive pickets at each pithead, and this was proposed by many of the union leaders. In the week leading up to the strike the newspapers were full of confident predictions that pickets would be outmanoeuvred, that the power stations had at least three months of coal stocks and that really the miners should climb down before they suffered complete humiliation.
On the first day of the strike almost every power station on the coalfields was heavily picketed. Throughout January picketing became more and more effective. Trade unionists carrying essential supplies were refusing to cross picket lines. Even bread wagons were turned back! On 31 January the mass picket at Thorpe Marsh, near Doncaster finally strangled the station’s lifeline when it prevented the entry of liquid hydrogen. The elated pickets from the Doncaster Area then moved on to strengthen the picket at the giant power station at Keadby, near Scunthorpe.
It was here, on 4 February that a young miner from Dunscroft, Fred Matthews was killed when a scab lorry, encouraged by the police, smashed through the picket line. The anger of the miners at this point turned into fury. Thousands of miners from every coalfield were joined at the funeral by hundreds of other workers, including power men, building workers, engineers railwaymen and teachers.
Two days later at a mass rally in Trafalgar Square a letter from Fred Matthews’ mother was read from the platform. Mrs Matthews said:
‘I have always been an active member of the labour movement ... It is vital that you keep the unions free, because if you don’t, conditions will be returned back to the last century. My sons who are left will continue to be engaged in that fight just as Freddie would have done.’
The other big trial of strength involving power stations was in Scotland, at Longannet, in the centre of the Fife coalfield. Thousands of miners from all over Scotland descended on Longannet after several days in which pickets had been continually kicked around by a vastly superior force of police. The gates were closed but in the ensuing melee, 13 were arrested. The trial was deliberately postponed for three months yet the charges were laughed out of court by an overwhelmingly working class jury in Dunfermline in June.
 
4. Saltley
But of all the picketing that occurred in this strike, the picket at Saltiey Coke Works, Birmingham, will be most remembered. Pickets from the Barnsley area had been there for about 10 days. They were routed several times by the West Midlands police. Many were deliberately injured. On 9 February the Birmingham East District of the Engineers Union passed a resolution calling for an all out strike and demonstration on the following day. A young shop steward (AEUW) recalls the scene that morning:
‘The marchers seemed to be endless, and soon the space in front of the gates was crammed full of engineers and miners from Yorkshire, South Wales, Staffs and even Durham and Scotland. We were soon to learn that 40,000 engineers had responded to the strike call and 10,000 had joined the march and picket. For the first time in my life I had a practical demonstration of what workers’ solidarity meant. We all felt so powerful. We felt we could rule the world.’
The police had no alternative but to concede the day to the workers, and ask for the gates to be shut. Saltley was the pinnacle of solidarity but throughout the strike there were similar but mostly unrecorded acts. So far as is known, no unionised lorry driver crossed a picket line, no docker moved an ounce of coal. Seamen offered and gave full co-operation, as did the railwaymen. Thousands of shop stewards in factories laid off due to coal shortages, collected thousands of pounds for the strike fund. A factory in Ossett paid into the strikers’ hardship fund 50p per week per man. It was then working a three day week.
Not often referred to was the role of miners’ wives. On 7 February at Tondu, West Wales headquarters of the NCB, miners’ wives took over the picketing to free their men for work in the south west. They linked arms and prevented the clerks from entering. In Nottingham and a number of other places housewives formed committees which gave support to the miners – making collections spreading propaganda, and servicing the picket lines with food. Socials were also organised to keep morale up. This is very important, especially in a long strike, for it is often wives, isolated from the collective experience of the struggle and having to manage the economics of the home, who are open to the insinuations and lies of the media.
The strike also transformed the relationship of socialist students and workers. When the miners moved out from the coalfield areas to East Anglia, the south coast and the south west to picket power stations and ports they were often met and accommodated by students. In Essex, the College authorities took out an injunction to force miners to leave the university premises where they were living. In virtually every university and college collections were made.
Tory councillors protested indignantly when students at Swansea and York tried to pay substantial donations to the strike fund from the Student Union accounts. York overcame this problem by paying substantial speakers’ expenses to Yorkshire Miners who came to do ‘lecture’ courses. Miners have retained a warm and friendly attitude to students since the strike, contrasting 1972 with 1926, when students on the whole played a scabbing role.
 
5. The settlement
The Wilberforce Enquiry set up on 15 February made its report on the 18th, surely the shortest public enquiry on record. This was not unconnected with the fact that the miners were crippling the country’s economy – despite the fact that the authorities had declared this impossible in the first week of January. By mid-February the power stations were flickering to a halt, many factories were completely closed and most were on short time. A state of emergency had been declared on 9 February. The Government was desperate, the miners jubilant. The miners were in a position to insist on the full claim being awarded; had they done so, it would probably have brought down the Government. However, when the Wilberforce settlement was announced, the union leaders grasped at it hungrily.
It was a very mixed settlement. Rises of £4.50 to £6 were recommended for what the government and the press were describing as ‘The Special Case’. Many miners believed that they were only ‘special’ in that they had fought specially hard. The dangerous part of the settlement were the clauses which proposed the discussion of a future productivity bargain and the imposition of the agreement for 16 months. The first was bad because the miners had been ruined in the sixties by their leaders’ involvement in productivity bargaining and the second, because 16 months meant that the agreement would run out at the end of February, so that a spring-summer battle in 1973 would weaken the miners bargaining position in comparison to the winter struggle of 1972 (the precise point of the clause).
The Government, the NCB, the press, television, labour leaders and the leaders of the NUM combined to persuade the rank-and-file that the Wilberforce decision was a handsome settlement. The union hastily moved to a secret ballot on the complete package. Absolutely no discussion was encouraged or allowed. Members were advised to relax the pickets and coal supplies were immediately rushed to key points before the result was known. Faced by this one-sided situation the miners voted overwhelmingly for acceptance and a return to work.
 
After Wilberforce
The Wilberforce Settlement began a shameful retreat by the executive of the NUM which in 10 months has all but dissipated the fighting spirit generated by the members in the struggle. In May productivity talks began, and in the same month the NUM became the first trade union to appear before an Industrial Relations Tribunal under the Industrial Relations Act (IRA). The Union executive continued throughout the year to dissociate itself from the militant battle against the IRA – over the gaoling of the Pentonville Five and the Goad and Langston cases. It is also noteworthy that despite the involvement of thousands of miners in the fight against the Fair Rents Act, the union leaders collectively have had nothing whatever to say about the issue.
The annual conference in July 1972 came out clearly for a continuous struggle for decent living standards when it approved a motion calling for a pay increase of from £4.50 to £7. In the prevailing economic climate of late ‘72 early ‘73 it is obvious that to achieve such an increase would involve a tremendous battle with the government. In the face of persistent press propaganda such a battle would require members to be thoroughly prepared. No such preparation was even considered – let alone undertaken. In fact, from July the NUM leaders publicly ignored the fact that such a claim was imminent, suggesting that it was something called ‘an objective’ and not a demand.
In the Autumn, friendly co-operation with the NCB became almost a condition of life, as the leaders waited excitedly for the Tory government’s Coal Industry Bill, published in December. The union leaders joined in the universal cheers for the Government’s ‘good sense’ in recognising that coal had a future. They ignored the equally significant fact that Section Four of the Bill, on redundancy payments, assumed that over the next five years over 100,000 miners will lose their jobs and that mining in Scotland, the North East, Cumberland and substantial parts of South Wales will become no more than a memory. Coal may have a future but there appears to be none for the miners. The union remains silent.
Since May union leaders have been extremely busy talking productivity with the NCB. A number of confidential documents have come to light which indicate that the union is prepared to make startling concessions in methods of work and shift patterns. One of these is the nine day fortnight, with continental shifts, which would terminate the miners’ most jealously guarded week-end, and area financial incentive which would mean a return to the deeply divisive days of piece working.
The executive’s plan was to get negotiations on pay out of the way in February and move to a productivity package in June. A figure of about three pounds was mooted which Gormley believed he could sell to his members – with the promise of more money in June. The development of the Tories’ Phase Two provided some difficulties for the Gormley leadership. Any offer would be limited to about £2.30 and no further money could be conceded for a further 12 months – even if a productivity deal were agreed. Gormley’s initial let-out was agreement to recall the TUC which meant he could appeal for united action against the freeze whilst at the same time working frantically behind the scenes to avoid such action and to gain acceptance for a shabby package deal.
 
What Next?
The main problem facing the miners in this situation is the question of leadership. The Right wing can be expected to do anything in their power to effect a ‘sell out.’ Few miners have illusions in the Joe Gormleys, Len Martins and the Sid Schotields. But it gives no pleasure to record that the traditional Left wing in the NUM, made up largely of the Communist Party and Labour Party lefts, has played an extremely passive role since the strike. In the face of the determined assault of Gormley and his friends they have remained largely silent. Their real strength has never resided in the committee room but always in the rank-and-file committees on the coalfields.
Since last winter they have signally failed to rally the support of the membership, to tap the spring of fighting spirit created at Saltley and elsewhere. It has been a grievous failure, the consequences of which are not yet fully worked out. They are now paying for the false strategy of the past 10 years. In the late ‘50s, after the election to national office of Will Paynter, a Communist Party member who owed his prominence to the work of the South Wales miners’ unofficial committees, a bitter and ruthless campaign against the rank-and-file organisation was waged. Arguing that now the official union was open to Communist candidates at all levels, these committees were redundant, if not actively dangerous, every effort was made to brand them unconstitutional. The campaign was successful, the committees were smashed and ironically the first step was taken in the undermining of the Communist Party’s base.
Since that time the ‘Lefts’ on the executive have more often than not refused to publicly dissociate themselves from the reactionary policies of the Right. The result is that their own credibility is on the wane.
It remains to outline the development and strategy of the new rank-and-file organising round The Collier. After the strike last year a few members of the union got together and decided to publish a bi-monthly paper, The Collier. A programme was drawn up which had two central features: to tight for better wages, conditions and against the whole productivity bargaining philosophy, and for greater democracy in the union.
This Charter was approved by a conference of miners in March. The paper has now been published six times. Increasingly miners are writing for the paper and are taking on full responsibility for its circulation. It is now quite widely read on all coalfields and steps are being taken to form groups at pit and area level relating to the paper and organised to tight for policies in the union along the lines of the Charter.
In the early months of 1973 it has enjoyed quite spectacular success. It has built up a list of named sponsors in excess of 100 at over 80 collieries. It is slowly but surely beginning to fill the space left by earlier rank-and-file movements and promises to develop tremendous significance in the near future.
The aim of the paper and the organisation can be expressed as follows.


To make propaganda on all issues of concern to the mineworkers.
To agitate within the official channels of the union for the adoption of policies as agreed by democratically controlled conferences of supporters.
To overcome the problems of the isolated militant by linking together as far as possible the multitude of local struggles that take place daily.
To build the confidence in rank-and-file members of the union that they can collectively influence the course of events.


It has been a tremendous 12 months for the new paper and the organisation which has begun to develop around it. It promise to play an increasingly important part in the affairs of the miners’ union in the future.
 






The miners are facing a crisis. After the key battle they fought last year – a battle that forced a complete reversal in government policies and made possible the major victories of other groups of workers in 1972 – the union leadership is attempting to prevent a second equally decisive fight this year. John Charlton documents the background to the militancy of the miners in this article. Next month, he analyses the present crisis and indicates the way forward.





Nationalisation
Vesting day was 1 January 1947. Miners took a holiday against the wishes of the government. The red flag was run up over many pits and the clubs rang to choruses of the Red Flag and the Internationale. A branch secretary at a pit in the Barnsley area remembers it well:
It was our lifelong dream coming true. It was a utopia. We were for it 100 per cent. What celebrations there were! The industry which had broken generations of miners was ours at last.
The euphoria hardly lasted out the first winter. 1947 was the worst winter on record. Soon the miners were being subjected to a barrage of propaganda from Prime Minister Clement Attlee, the Minister of Fuel and Power, Emmanuel Shinwell, Labour MPs, miners’ union leaders like Jim Bowman, Will Lawther and Sam Watson; and, surprisingly, from members of the Communist Party executive; not to mention the Tory press. The message was simple: ‘There is a fuel crisis. Your party (Labour) is the government. Your industry is central to the recovery. You therefore have a duty to work hard, to make sacrifices. The nation looks to you.’ This was a recurring theme during the lifetime of the Labour government. Sometimes the authorities used the pleading moral tone; at others they hysterically attacked the miners’ alleged lack of gratitude.
The first problem the employers and government tackled was absenteeism. They were ably assisted by the leaders of the NUM. In 1948 union and coal board (NCB) reached an agreement on action which would ‘subject to disciplinary action men whose attendance does not improve’. The union leaders also took part in a massive campaign to encourage the workers to do an extra shift per week – on Saturdays.
A second, equally serious problem for the board was the rising strike rate. Tory newspapers stridently denounced miners who took strike action ‘at the drop of a hat’ as they described it.
The leader of the union. Sir William Lawther, speaking at the annual conference in 1949, bluntly argued that:
The developing tendency to ignore the economic facts is perilous. We either produce what we need to maintain the standards of life we now enjoy or we shall have to accept lesser standards. At the moment we are living on credit.
The board and the government had cause to worry. Mineworkers were enjoying their new-found power. There was a desperate shortage of labour (NCB-NUM teams roamed Europe to recruit Belgians, Italians and Yugoslavs). The number of strikes was remarkable. In Yorkshire in 1952 over 630 stoppages were recorded; 28 of them in one pit! In the same year there were 779 strikes in Scotland. The board were prepared to take very stern action. In 1950, a Lancashire miner called Horrocks was sent to jail for breach of contract in leading a strike at Sutton colliery. Sympathy strikes spread rapidly and he was released two days later. Committal orders on another 50 miners were dropped.
The truth is that the board and the government could not control the developing pit-level strength of the miners. Bribes, persuasion, exhortation, threats and even jail did not work. Perhaps the overriding characteristic of the late 1940s and the 1950s was the development of rank-and-file control at the pit. It certainly had its effect on wage rates and conditions. In the fifties the miners rose from a pre-war position of 84th to near the top in the league table of industrial workers’ wages. By 1960 faceworkers in the Barnsley area could take home more than 25 pounds per week – or nearly twice the national average wage. Just how remarkable this was is emphasised by the fact that throughout the fifties the NUM leadership never lodged a national pay claim for more than 25s, in some years lodged no pay claim at all, and when they did, made it patently clear that there would be no fight.
 
The counter-attack
However, successive governments – Tory and Labour_ – eventually found the answer. They gave the oil companies a virtual licence to print money. This generosity was later extended to the exploiters of natural gas. From 1955 the closure programme began. Between that year and 1970 the labour force fell from 700,000 to 270,000 and the number of pits from over 600 to 300. In the early stages of this rationalisation programme the majority of displaced miners could still find work quite easily, inside or outside the industry. As the rate of closures accelerated in the early sixties, however, a growing number found themselves unemployed for long periods and even permanently, particularly in areas of high unemployment such as Scotland, parts of South Wales and Northumberland and Durham.
The NUM leadership retreated in the face of this assault to the point where management could treat them with complete disdain. This applied as much to Will Paynter, general secretary and member of the Communist Party, as it did to the most extreme right-winger. In his recent book, Ten Year Stint, Lord Robens expresses his gratitude to Paynter in fulsome terms. He describes a speech Paynter made during the 1964 pay negotiations:
Only a man of deep conviction and complete integrity could have made that speech. His purpose was to lead men away from damaging the industry and away from the destructive influences that were challenging the official leadership. Paynter was still a communist, which made his speech all the more remarkable, but his devotion to the union and the men whose wellbeing was his responsibility, as always, came before his party affiliations. ... He told his hearers that he accepted that the board’s offer of 9/6 per week on the minimum was the most the industry could afford ... Paynter ... saved the day ... Harold Wilson was on the platform that day and congratulated Will Paynter on his courage.
The union membership, having lost its job security and, lacking vigorous leadership, lapsed into apathy and disillusionment.
But this was not the case everywhere. In some areas, which maintained the traditions built up in the post-war period, miners could still turn the piece-work system against the management. In areas where the threat of closure was less immediate – South Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire and even coastal Durham – strong organisation at pit level forced earnings up.
 
The productivity deal
Chiefly because of this factor, in the mid-sixties, the NCB undertook a sudden conversion from the piece-work system, a move they had hitherto resisted. The aim of the national power loading agreement (NPLA) was to end local bargaining on money and break pit-bottom organisation so that the process of mechanisation and automation could proceed with a minimum of obstruction.
The NCB’s progress in this direction was facilitated by the caution and apathy of the rank and file, who feared redundancy and the ‘scrap heap’. The union leaders, both left and right, acquiesced, their vanity flattered by what they described as ‘the destruction of the vicious piece-work system’. They offered the board full co-operation. Management felt they could look forward to a period of stability.
This is precisely what they got for a period of three or four years. The strike figures tell their own story:



Days lost on strike for
every 1,000 employees




1947–55


778




1956–67


225




1968


125



The effect of the NPLA on pay was dramatic. In 1966, the year the agreement came into operation, a face worker at Houghton Main, in the Barnsley area was getting up to 120s per shift. In 1970, under the NPLA, he got the national rate of 89s.10d. The deal was reaching its objectives with a vengeance. Mining must surely be the only British industry in the post-war period to have actually suffered a money wage cut! The union leadership said precisely nothing. One of the arguments used by the authors of the NPLA was that restraint among face workers would benefit lower-paid workers away from the coal face. When this suggestion was put to him in 1970, a Doncaster miner commented:
They must be kidding! My pay is £15 per week. It has risen by exactly £2 17s. 6d since 1965. In the previous five years before NPLA it rose by over £3.
Falls in earnings are easy to measure. More difficult to gauge, but in the long term much more dangerous to the worker’s life, are the other changes brought about by the productivity deal. Predominant in the NCB’s strategy was the question of control at pit level. The NPLA stated the position quite clearly:
The number of men who shall comprise a power loading team will be assessed by method study ... the union may have an observer ... the number of men will be assessed by management ... Power loading men are expected to work diligently and to co-operate in securing maximum utilisation of the machines.
This meant that in the vital areas of manning, flexibility and work intensity, all control was to be taken away from the men on the job. Before the NPLA the checker (‘chargeman’ in some areas) was a man elected by his mates to haggle over job prices with the deputy. With the bargaining job removed, the management were nevertheless anxious to maintain the checker, but as the lowest grade of supervisor, to be appointed by themselves. Other effects of the NPLA were also dangerous for the worker: speed-up of machines; fatigue and rising accident rates; an increase in anti-social three- or four-shift systems; and a rise in the incidence of chest diseases caused by inadequate dust control.
These effects of the productivity bargain were increasingly recognised after the first two or three years had passed. There was a gradual build-up of frustration among the rank and file. Acquiescence began to turn into anger as in a multitude of little ways management tried to assert their control. Typical was the comment of a Hatfield (South Yorkshire) miner to a Socialist Worker reporter in 1968:
There has been a breakdown of relationships because a manager arbitrarily ordered a shift back down the shaft when after working in wet conditions, they exercised their customary right to come to the top 10 minutes early. The manager told the men that as they had nothing in writing there was nothing to negotiate about. Conciliation was ignored.
The destruction of the labour force, the successive relative cuts in wages – now in conditions of rising inflation – and the total collapse of any serious opposition from the leadership of the NUM or the Communist Party, all amounted to a massive betrayal. Whole communities were being destroyed, without even nominal protest.
 
The 1970 strike
The groundswell of anger erupted into open defiance in the autumn of 1969. The union was involved in negotiations with the NCB for a claim of 27s. 6d., and a reduction in working hours. South Yorkshire miners castigated the leadership for the modesty of the claim, especially in the light of the recent victory of the dustmen, who had won £2 10s. Miners at Cadeby colliery, near Doncaster, came out; 10 days later every pit in Yorkshire stopped, followed by some pits in Scotland and South Wales. The strike lasted two weeks, despite the acceptance by the NCB of the union’s pay demand on the second day of the stoppage.
The national leadership, without exception, attempted to sabotage the strike, aided by press, television, MPs, and of course Lord Robens. The ‘left’ leaders argued that the time was not ripe and that preparations had to be made for the ‘real struggle’ in 1970. The militants, saw the attitude of Lawrence Daly as being particularly bad; it was only months since his election as general secretary, and he had campaigned on a very militant programme, including ‘guerrilla strikes’.
However the vigorous action of autumn 1969 was not lost on the members. The executive committee was defeated at conference on a crucial pay motion, and a claim was lodged in August 1970 for a £5 increase. On 15 September the NCB replied. The previous year’s militancy had not been lost on the board either. The offer of £2 10s was the highest they had ever made. Of course, in view of the rises achieved by other workers, of rapidly rising prices and of the treatment of the miners since the NPLA, it was a derisory offer. The union leaders were forced to do something. They decided to hold a secret ballot – which would require a two thirds majority for strike action.
Lawrence Daly was in no doubt as to the action that was necessary. At a rally called by militants following the executive meeting at which the result of the ballot was announced, he said:
... nothing but strike action can be called for ... we are now not only confronting the NCB. More important we are now confronting the Tory government:
In the crucial week of the ballot Daly spoke to mass meetings on every coalfield. At Doncaster he spoke of ‘the most critical struggle in the history of the union.’ He strongly advocated strike action and went oh to say that weakness shown at this time would have disastrous effects on the future of all negotiations with the NCB.
The Right, the press and television, aided by many demoralised miners, argued that there was no case for strike action and that the necessary majority would not be achieved. After all, there had been no official strike since 1926. Yet, after all the years of defeat, humiliation and disillusionment, 55 per cent of the miners voted for strike action.
The Lefts were paralysed by a constitution designed specifically to obstruct them. The union agreed to meet the NCB again. Lord Robens raised the offer by 10 shillings. The EC recommended acceptance by a narrow majority and called for a further secret ballot.
But the rank and file would wait for the leaders no longer. By the end of the week in which the executive made this decision, 3,000 miners in Scotland, Yorkshire and South Wales were on strike. The most militant area in the coalfield during the fifties and sixties was the Doncaster area. The rank-and-file delegate body, the Doncaster Panel, representing some of the strongest pits, met on Friday 30 September, and called all pits in the area out from Monday. Scotland and South Wales seemed likely to follow suit over the weekend. Yet Lawrence Daly, speaking after the executive meeting said:
In the interests of unity, and having achieved some success, we appeal to those branches on strike to return to normal working. (Financial Times, 29 October 1970)
This appeal was ignored. The Yorkshire council, a delegate body representing every pit in Yorkshire, met on Monday and ended in uproar when Sam Bullough refused to accept a strike motion. The meeting was disbanded, though it was reported that only nine branches out of 70-odd were in favour of accepting the board’s offer.
All the pits in the Doncaster area were closed on Monday, and it was from Doncaster that the tactic emerged which was reasonably successful in 1970, and was actually to win the 1972 strike. Roving pickets were part of the mineworkers’ tradition – they were used in Yorkshire at least as early as the great strike of 1893, but in the 1970 strike, with the availability of motor transport, the tactic took on new and exciting dimensions.
The pickets would meet at a central point early every morning and agree on pits to be visited. Tradition had taught them that each area has key pits which it is necessary to bring out. after which the rest of the area usually follows. On the first two days there were no problems since no resistance was offered. The first sign of trouble came at Glasshoughton, Castleford, one of the key pits. The secretary there, Bill O’Brien, a notorious right-winger, tried to disperse the pickets and eventually called on the police to assist him. His own members defied him; the following day the whole of the Pontefract and Castleford area came out. By the end of the first week some 50,000 out of 70,000 Yorkshire miners were out. The whole of South Wales decided to join in at the start of the second week. Stoppages were taking place in Scotland, Kent and Durham, and work-to-rules were imposed in Derbyshire, Durham and Lancashire.
That first weekend was crucial. What was vitally needed at that point was for the spontaneous outburst of militancy to be channelled and co-ordinated. This demanded the emergence of an authoritative national leadership. This could have brought about a total stoppage in Yorkshire and released the flying pickets for work on other coalfields. It could have toppled the Lancashire work-to-rule over into a strike; likewise those in Durham and Derbyshire. The only people capable of providing that leadership were the left-wing minority on the executive committee, in conjunction with prominent left-wingers in the coalfields.
Lawrence Daly had a special responsibility, in view of his background, his record and his position of authority. He had said in the previous month: ‘If the members themselves take action ... there would be no room for condemnation.’ This rhetoric was laid aside and replaced by: ‘We appeal to those branches on strike to return to normal working.’ The Communist Party members on the executive did no better. Three of them actually voted for acceptance of the board’s revised offer. With the exception of Dai Francis, of South Wales, no nationally-known member of the Communist Party played any kind of role in supporting the strike. The great indictment of the party was that each of their leading members was free to make up his own mind about his course of action. So a leadership did not emerge, and the success of the strike was placed in jeopardy.
 
Failure and lessons
The failure of a recognised militant leadership to emerge carried two severe handicaps for the militants. First the absence of clearly-understood and co-ordinated tactics opened the way for the right-wing leadership to retrieve the initiative. Second, it meant that no propaganda offensive could be mounted. This was to prove of great significance. From the start of the strike a press and television campaign was launched to isolate the militants. In the first week, the Yorkshire Post carried an editorial in which it drew the conclusion that ‘the first people likely to suffer are those who need heating most – old age pensioners or those on fixed incomes.’ In the same paper the front-page banner headline was calculated to send shivers down the spine: COAL FAMINE DESPERATE IF WILDCAT PIT STRIKES GO ON. The same day the Doncaster Evening Post warned its readers:
Evidence is emerging of the part being played by outside extremists in fostering the spread of the unofficial pit strikes in Yorkshire ... it is not of course the first time that such elements have made use of industrial strife to further their sinister political aims... there is already, it is claimed, a splinter group within the NUM dedicated to the spread of militancy, without regard for the consequences ... the rank and file should beware of the insidious and unscrupulous propaganda now being aimed their way.
This was the beginning of a campaign which was to last throughout the strike. Tory MP John Osborne said in Parliament that Yorkshire was being ‘invaded by mobile guerrilla movements’. Of course, he received widespread publicity, as did Robens when he told readers of the Yorkshire Post that ‘BRITAIN FACES TAKEOVER BY MOB LAW.
The Yorkshire Post carried the statement that those ‘interfering’ from the outside:
... call themselves International Socialists. They are a Trotskyite organisation and some people believe they have received financial assistance from Communist China. However absurd and hysterical the allegations of the press and television witchhunt were, they were effective in frightening off the less committed of the strikers, sapping the confidence of the militants, and strenthening the hands of the blacklegs. Perhaps most important was their success in shifting discussion away from the actual case of the strikers. This campaign was a foretaste of the even more successful action mounted a year later against the power workers.
At the beginning of the third week of the strike, an emergency meeting of the Yorkshire council was held. The four Yorkshire area panels had already met; all had voted for strike action, and it was therefore widely assumed that the council’s vote in favour was merely a formality. A small and good-humoured demonstration took place outside the council meeting. However, a number of delegates, under pressure from Sydney Schofield, the area secretary, reneged on their earlier decisions, and the vote for an all-out strike was only 43 to 33. After the vote Schofield advised the 33 delegates who had opposed further strike action to break the majority decision. This was the real turning point of the strike. Militants were forced to spend the following days attempting to reactivate pickets at Yorkshire pits instead of carrying out their plans to ‘invade’ the Midlands and Durham.
Two days later, the NEC refused to accept a call from Yorkshire and Scotland for a special conference. Instead they organised a national ballot. The strike, contracting daily, staggered through two more weeks till the result of the ballot was declared. The vote was overwhelmingly in favour of a return to work.
It must be emphasised that to organise an unofficial strike in over 300 individual workplaces against the firm opposition of the employers, government, union leadership and mass media was a most formidable task. It is remarkable that so much was achieved, that at its peak over 100,000 men in 140 pits were involved, and that, but for the undemocratic action of Schofield at the Yorkshire council, the strike could have spread to the Midlands and perhaps resulted in victory. But if the strike’s future hung on one man’s treachery, it was an essentially fragile achievement. The fragility can be seen in another feature of that council meeting. There were over 50,000 Yorkshire miners on strike that day. Only 300 turned up for the picket of the meeting, despite the fact that there had been a whole weekend to organise pickets.
A major reason for the militants’ weakness lay in the tactics they employed. The Yorkshire miners, particularly, had developed tremendous pit-level strength in the post-war era, especially in the struggles over piece rates and conditions. The organisation was very simple. The branch committee would make a decision and communicate it to the whole labour force in a matter of hours. This worked very well as a solution to local issues. It was useless as a means of organising a national unofficial strike.
First of all it was assumed that every miner was well informed of the issues at stake. This was not the case. The power and influence of the mass media were totally ignored. In most cases, at the mass meetings to decide strike action, no discussion took place after the committee made its recommendation.
A number of these meetings were very poorly attended. No attempt was made to communicate with members who were absent. At many pits in Yorkshire the only other mass meeting during the strike was over the first weekend, where the only information given concerned social security rights. At no time during the strike was there any discussion of tactics outside the closed panel meetings. No leaflets were published by the strike committees, and no meetings were called.
Meanwhile Lord Robens had access to every miner’s home through the television, and national and local papers. The overwhelming majority of miners spent the entire strike at home, or in the club, ignored by the militants.
Then there was no attempt at an on-going national link-up between the coalfields. This was especially important for the militants in areas like Lancashire, the Midlands and Durham, whose voices are so often drowned. Of course no machinery existed for making such contacts – but no attempt was made to forge it.
The unofficial strike of 1970 was an event of great significance for the mineworkers. It helped to revitalise the confidence in struggle that had lain dormant for so long. It tested out the important flying picket tactic. It laid the foundation for 1972.
 



Only a couple of months after the event the word ‘Seattle’ has acquired a new meaning. It is where ‘we’ kicked the system. The word pops up in India when power and port workers come out on mass strike against privatisation. ‘Is it the Seattle effect?’ asks a newspaper. The internet is replete with articles analysing its meaning.
I posted a questionnaire on the internet between November 1999 and January 2000. The responses I received, along with personal testimonies and articles, became the basis of this piece. [1]
That a turning point in the struggle against the excesses of world capitalism should take place in Seattle is not without its ironies. Seattle has been lauded as a hub of the burgeoning economies of the Pacific Rim. A boom town of the 20th century’s last quarter, ‘Seattle’ is almost a metaphor for high-tech consumption. It is the home of Boeing, of Microsoft, and those symbols of galloping consumerism, the Starbucks coffee shop empire and Nike, just down the road. A place to live in grace and comfort. All this explains why the Clinton administration wanted to take the World Trade Organisation to Seattle.
Yet there is a downside. In the liberalisation of the global economy US domination may have may have increased, but millions of American workers have been victims of the shrinkage of basic industry, its relocation and the intensification of exploitation in the workplace. For some time the cynical and corrupt leaders of the labour unions have been under pressure from their members to organise a fightback. They chose Seattle because their public profiles would be enhanced in the glare of the international media circus surrounding the WTO meeting.
There is another twist which should not be lost. The new millennium was being ushered in by the system’s leaders and its media on an extravagant tide of hype. Millions of new shopping opportunities were being heralded via the cyber-supermarket. But their party was ruined in the virtual home of e-commerce.
A fightback starting in Seattle has yet another lovely resonance. The city was the location of the only general strike in US history so far. In 1919, in the crisis following the end of the First World War with the US government attempting to smash the Russian Revolution, Seattle workers struck. Jeremy Brecher wrote: ‘Anger, hope and militance grew as in a pressure cooker. Nowhere did this radicalisation go further than in Seattle. The radical IWW and the AFL Metal Trades Council co-operated in sponsoring a Soldiers’, Sailors’ and Workingmen’s Council, taking the soviets of the recent Russian Revolution as their model.’ [2]
This forms a nice backcloth to the events of November and December 1999.
 
‘Think the WTO is bad? ... Wait till you hear about capitalism!’ – placard

Seattle hit the international media on Tuesday 30 November, but events were moving in the previous week. Mitchel C wrote, ‘No matter where you turn, rallies, teach-ins and other events are exploding out of the pavement. I went to the International Forum on Globalisation that occurred Friday and Saturday ... Tickets were sold by Ticketron. Around 2,500 people participated, the huge auditorium filled to capacity for two days, 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. ... Sunday, 1,500 people took to the streets in a wonderfully colourful and peaceful (if raucous) procession, hundreds of giant puppets and mass performance theatre against genetic engineering and the WTO, drummers beating on makeshift instruments, an army of genetically engineered corn, another “army of forested trees, fighting against the evil soldiers of the New World Order”.’
Damon, Pittsburgh: I got on a Greyhound bus in Pittsburgh at 3am the morning after Thanksgiving and travelled two and a half days to Seattle to join the protests against the World Trade Organisation. I arrived to see tens of thousands of activists from the widest range of causes I’ve ever seen in one place, united around a common concern – their desire to have a say in the decisions that affect their lives, otherwise known as democracy.
 
‘The senators who ratified the WTO treaty should be tried for treason’ – placard

Bill O., Chicago, Illinois: We were up at 5 a.m. on Tuesday 30 November. We had a big day planned. There were two main marches, one leaving from downtown and one from Capitol Hill. I was in the Capitol Hill march. We loaded up all the puppets into trucks and sent the larger ones up the road. On our side we had an Earth Mother puppet whose head was eight feet in diameter. Her head and each of her hands were mounted on a wheeled cart, and her fabric body stretched across the street. We also had a ten foot square rolling ‘pyramid of corporate power’. I was dressed in my full clown ensemble. I wore signs on my front and back that read, ‘WTO – who elected these clowns?’ I normally refrain from using ‘clown’ as a derogatory term, but I felt justified here somehow. I carried my diabolo with me.
Shawna, Jeff and Corey, Victoria, British Columbia: The Progressive Librarians’ Guild banner elicited quite a few comments. Most surprise – all positive. We were quite a novelty. People first looked at the banner, then looked again (just to make sure), and looked us up and down as if to assess what librarians look like outside a library. Finally they would look one of us in the eye, smile or pat us on the shoulder. A child asked his mother who we were and she explained, ‘These are the people who make sure Harry Potter stays inside the library.’ She looked at us, grinned and added, ‘Among other activities, I’m sure.’
Bill O: At 7.30 a.m., the march began and turned towards downtown. The rain beat down on us. As we reached key intersections we saw human chains, lockdowns and tripods start to emerge. The police forced us to turn several times. We wound our way about, around toward the Paramount Theatre, which was the location of that morning’s WTO opening ceremony. We found a way over the highway and there we were. The front of the Paramount Theatre was walled in with metro buses. Riot police stood on the other side. We had a tripod and a locked down human chain on the other side of the block. There was a bus blaring music down the block. Protesters got up on top of the bus barrier and yelled at the WTO delegates who made their way around the back of the theatre. For a while I thought that the protesters were going to go over the barrier and confront the relatively few police on the other side, but this did not happen. We set about making blockades so the delegates could not get through to attend the meeting.
 
‘Keep the sweatshop in the sauna’ – banner

Jake, Seattle: I found a great protester line to help barricade and actually exchanged with WTO delegates from South Africa (Afrikaner bastard), Egypt, Germany and France. Some delegates discussed the issues of child labour, genetically engineered food etc., in sympathy with our causes. Others were belligerent and got a good rash of chanting, blocking and deriding in mass numbers. The arrogance of some of these folks was unbelievable. They were very outnumbered but still tried to push through us. It was very satisfying to say ‘no’ to their faces, and there was not one damn thing they could do. The shoe was on the other foot. How does that feel? It wasn’t bricks that did it. It was massive peaceful protest after laborious turnout work. It was the most unbelievable feeling to rove the canyons of downtown corporate America completely free from state police authority. Tipped dumpsters blocked every intersection. All walks of life cruised the streets going from one line of police standoff to the next. Before the police gassing and macing rush at nightfall we felt completely safe in unity with the mass of humanity. If the bladder was full, pee on a Nordstrom Christmas display window next to a graffiti artist. Probably less human on human violent crime was committed downtown that day than any other day of the year.
David, Berkeley, California: Tens of thousands of union members marched downtown to join the protest. Having shut down all the ports along the Pacific coast from Alaska to San Diego, union members chanted and waved picket signs as their ranks filled the streets as far as the eye could see. Each union’s members marched together, each with its own colour jacket or T-shirt, each carrying banners and hundreds of signs printed for the occasion. Many of the morning’s young protestors were visibly impressed by the strength of the numbers and organisation. For Annie Decker, ‘The power and size of it made me feel joyful. I was proud that we were together, bringing the WTO into the public eye.’
 
‘Capitalism destroys all life’ – placard

Bill O.: A trickle of delegates was getting through, however, and teams were dispatched to plug the holes. All around the theatre were lines of riot police. At each of these lines protesters made human chains. The police were not going to let us in, but we were not going to let any delegates in either. Some of the delegates who came up on the line I was in were understanding, a few even had conversations with us. Many were very angry and violent, however. One screamed obscenities at us for ten minutes. We would not be provoked.



Ain’t no power
 Like the power of the people
And the power of the people
 Don’t stop!
Whose streets? Our streets!
Whose streets? Our streets! – street chant



Peter B.: The vanguard of the ‘big’ march arrived downtown about 1.30 p.m., occupying the whole street. Although it came in fits and starts, it flowed past my vantage point for 50 minutes before I found my Salem friends and joined them. We looped through a number of blocks of downtown, and then began to head out of downtown a block over from where the march came in. To my amazement, we could see a steady stream still coming in! It was 2.45 p.m. I Ieft the march and stood on the corner to view the rest of the march. By 3 p.m. the march’s end had passed the point at which I could see it entering downtown a block up the street. However, it was still another 20 minutes before the end passed my vantage point. This means that the march that often filled the entire street took about an hour and a half to pass one point. Could that be less than 50,000?
Bill O.: At this point the police were doing their best to be cordial and communicative. They talked to the spokespeople for the protesters. They tried to keep the tension down. This was good, but it did not last. As the afternoon wore on it became clear that we were winning. Most of the delegates were unable to make it to the opening of the meetings and they were cancelled. The bus barrier around the Paramount Theatre was removed.
 
‘Brush with direct action. Helps to prevent truth decay’ – placard

Peter B.: I saw signs for at least these unions: steelworkers, electrical workers, teachers, bricklayers, ILWU (longshoremen), painters, Stanford workers, service employees, Teamsters, sheet metal workers, marine engineers, transit workers, boilermakers, plumbers, steamfitters and refrigeration workers, public service workers of Canada, cement masons, pulp, paper and wood workers, nurses, Canadian Airlines workers, and carpenters.
Steve saw ‘United Steelworkers from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Chicago and Gary, United Autoworkers from the Midwest, International Longshore and Warehouse Union from right down the West Coast, Service Employees International Union from all over, Teamsters from all over, International Association of Machinists mainly from the North West, and many craft unions – carpenters, boilermakers and sheet metal workers, mainly from the North West.’
Doug Henwood: Togetherness was the theme of the labour rally – not only solidarity among workers of the world, but of organised labour with everyone else. There were incredible sights of Teamster president James Hoffa sharing a stage with student anti-sweatshop activists, of Earth Firsters marching with Sierra Clubbers, and a chain of bare-breasted BGH-free Lesbian Avengers weaving through a crowd of machinists. [3]



We don’t need no corporations
We don’t need no thought control
Lock the delegates in the bathroom
WTO has got to go
Hey, coppers! Leave those kids alone! – street chant, after Pink Floyd
 



Police riot, mass arrests
Steve, Seattle: There were around 1,000 Seattle Police with many coming in from outlying areas – King County Sheriffs and cops from other cities, perhaps as many as another 1,000. There were also 200 National Guards, who were mostly held in reserve. All the cops were in riot gear – padding, shields, with gas masks on or at the ready. The suppression of free speech and assembly was a conscious policy by the city, state and federal government. The pressure was intense from the Secret Service (since Clinton came to town on Wednesday 1 December) and specifically from Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Attorney General Janet Reno. Reno demanded that the National Guard be called out. Mayor Schell imposed a ‘no protest zone’ around the convention centre and hotels where the delegates were staying. There was a 7pm to 7am curfew through wider areas of downtown. The ‘state of emergency’ declared by Mayor Schell was endorsed by the city council with no effective opposition, and even support from the so called ‘progressives’ on the council. The police chief tried to claim that ‘excesses’ by the cops were few and understandable considering the strain they were under. In fact, the ‘excesses’ were the rule. The government decided to clear out the protesters and punish them for their success on 30 November. In doing so tear gas, pepper spray, rubber and wooden bullets, percussion grenades, clubs and arrests were all allowed and encouraged. Six hundred plus were arrested. The police chased protesters into a residential/business neighbourhood a mile out of downtown with no pretext of defending the convention centre area. This was not an ‘excess’. It could have been stopped at any time by city officials and wasn’t. It was clear policy.
Bill O.: The mood was jubilant, but our work was not finished. I hooked back up with the giant puppets. The organisers with radios were sending us to ‘trouble spots’ where there was tension brewing or small groups in need of support. We brought the puppets to each of the barriers and I entertained the locked down human chains. Our Earth Mother puppet was so large that its very presence changed the energy of every intersection we came to.
 
‘WTO = global injustice!’ – placard

Shawna, Jeff and Corey: The ‘legal’ AFL-CIO march in which we were participating had originally planned to merge with the direct action people on 5th Avenue before turning round and heading back to Seattle centre ... However, in a decision that we considered a betrayal of our frontline comrades, the AFL-CIO organisers detoured the march route ... a group of marshals stood in front of a street to block our path towards the direct action protesters. We decided to join the direct action group and continued straight through the line of marshals. We found ourselves in a war zone.
Bill O.: In the late afternoon we arrived at a major downtown intersection. The human chain there had already been gassed, but they were holding strong. We rolled up with the puppets and it was clear that there was an attack brewing. Behind the protesters was a police line. Behind them were two more lines in formation, gas masks on and ready. Behind them was a line of mounted police. They were in formation as well. It was clear that this mass of protesters was about to be gassed and sprayed. We brought the puppets in close. My companions started the crowd singing:



Step by step the longest march, can be won, can be won
Many stones may form an arch, singly none, singly none,
And with union what we will, can be accomplished still
Drops of water turn a mill, singly none, singly none.



Drummers and a trumpeter played along. I moved up to the police line and started to do my clown routine, making a spectacle out of myself. The human chain, whose faces had been set in grimaces of fear and apprehension, became relaxed and joyful. A carnival atmosphere quickly developed, attracting TV cameras. It was a surreal sight, the joy of the protesters and the grim, Stormtrooper visages of the police, tensing for attack.
 
‘Teamsters and turtles together at last’ – placard carried by Teamster

Bill O.: As it happened, however, no attack came. The police in the front started to relax their bodies. I heard one laugh at a bit of my slapstick. A whiff of tear gas from another confrontation floated past, making our eyes water. I waved my hand in front of my face. ‘Whoa, was that one of you guys?’ I asked the cops. Two broke out laughing. Behind the lines the ranking police officers were having a conference. They pointed in our direction and at the cameras. They ordered the horses and the reinforcements to stand down. They were willing to order their men to attack totally peaceful people but the clown and the puppets were too much for them.
By about five o’clock the protests were winding down. Groups were unlocking and dispersing on their own. People were making plans for the next day. It was dark, meetings were over, and we had succeeded. We were moving the puppets around downtown to bring them back for storage for the night. It was in this context that the ‘violence’ started. Be clear, the only violence that happened up until this point was from the police, directed at peaceful, non-violent protesters engaged in civil disobedience.
Jon: The police backlash that Tuesday and Wednesday night was atrocious. I witnessed it personally in the residential neighbourhood of Capitol Hill. Cops (on encouragement from Clinton’s Secret Service as reported in Seattle Post-Intelligencer, our own corporate media) aggressively chased and maced and gassed and clubbed and tackled innocent bystanders, as well as protesters, outside of the curfew police state zone. I was gassed but was too quick to be maced or clubbed. A moderate Republican county councilperson, a local CBS reporter, and a young innocent woman bystander were shoved and gassed, clubbed and arrested, and thrown face down on the concrete and her head stepped on while her arms were pulled back, respectively, in this residential neighbourhood. And yet the police could not maintain control.
 
‘Stop exploiting workers’ – steelworkers’ placard

Damon: Onlookers began yelling, ‘Get ready! They’re going to do it! Get ready!’ I heard the spray and people began screaming in pain. I was just expecting spray, so I was pretty surprised when I felt one of those big clubs land on the top of my head. The guy behind me took most of the force from the blow so I wasn’t hurt badly. I covered my head with my arm and covered my eyes with my hand. As the screams continued it became obvious – even though I couldn’t see anything from underneath my bandana – that the cops were not only spraying but beating the people as well. A police officer then grabbed my hand, pulled it away from my face and sprayed me in the eyes with a canister of pepper spray.
Dr Richard Andrea, New York City: The police were using percussion grenades. They were shooting tear gas canisters straight at protesters’ faces. They were using so called rubber bullets. These are actually hard plastic. Some of the damage I saw: these plastic bullets took off part of one person’s jaw, smashed teeth in other people’s mouths. I saw police arrest people who had their hands up in the air screaming, ‘We are peacefully protesting!’
Kent, Seattle: We were peacefully marching into downtown from the waterfront. The march was led by Bob Hasagawa, president of the 14,000-strong Teamsters Local 174. He attempted to make a speech at the steelworkers’ rally – but they cut him off. So he made a speech from a soapbox where he vowed that if anyone was going to be arrested he would be the first (although he wasn’t arrested). The march grew to nearly 1,000 people and it felt like we owned the streets of Seattle that feeling lasted about ten seconds. From out of nowhere, and from two different directions, the cops came in hard with tear gas and percussion grenades. They split the march into several pieces – one group of 300 and another group of 200. Neither group had broken any laws or even entered into the no-protest zone (although we were trying to take it there). Both were pinned downed by the cops and people were arrested. The cops put us on city buses to be processed. After they filled the fourth bus they ran out of room and let them go. It seems that everyone in the city knew who we were. People lined the streets to cheer us as our bus passed.
 
‘Monsanto: don’t eat it. Bite back – defeat it!’ – placard

Jon, Seattle: In custody most of the people I met had never been arrested before but were no less militant for it. I was stunned by the level of militancy. There was no question in most people’s minds that they were fiercely devoted to solidarity, and that they would do whatever it would take to remain in jail till all our demands were met.’
 
The following were fellow-detainees of Kent from Seattle

Teamster organiser: Young guy, early 30s. Progressive wing of the Teamsters and member of Teamsters for a Democratic Union (reform movement in the Teamsters).
 
Postal worker: early 30s, active when he was in college but had not been active for years. He got fed up with the world and protested against the WTO. His arrest was an education for him. He now wants to tear the head off the city, state, and country that had him beaten, tear gassed and arrested. He has become more active in his union as a result of being disciplined at work for being jailed.
 
Graduate student from University of Indiana: late 30s. Studying agricultural engineering. A native of India, he faces possible deportation six months before he earns his PhD.
 
Sheet metal worker: late 20s. She helped organise an entire workplace into the sheet metal workers’ union.
 
Environmental activist: early 20s, from Arcadia, a Californian city (heavily into Green politics). I talked to him a lot. He asked about the history of the Teamsters and where he could find out more about the labour movement. He wants to hold a meeting in Arcadia about the Battle in Seattle.
 
Direct Action Network leading activist: early 30s. Helped lead the jail solidarity action.
 
Amanda, student activist: early 20s. Was arrested with me and on my bus. She was active against the US in Kosovo and the bombing of Iraq.
 
Mike, graduate student from University of Washington: studying genetics. Mid-20s. His first demonstration ever.
 

Mobilisation and motives
It seems that between 60,000 [4] and 80,000 people participated in the events over the five days. [5] This raises two interesting points. Firstly, a total of some 30,000–40,000 people from one region is impressive enough, though not unprecedented. From the Seattle region it is remarkable when we realise its geographical location. The urban area is small and distant from other conurbations. By road, Vancouver is two hours to the north. Portland is three hours and the Bay Area 16 hours to the south. Minneapolis is 30 hours to the east. Organisers cannot rely on a vast influx from adjoining urban centres. Only very well prepared and financed contingents, plus highly motivated individuals, could drop in by air. All this makes a national demonstration in Seattle logistically difficult, and its success all the more startling. [6]
It is remarkable just how many came from far and wide. On a conservative estimate of numbers 20,000 people travelled a very long way. Over 3,000 came from Canada – the bulk from Vancouver, but there were even busloads from Ontario 2,000 miles away. Probably more than 10,000 travelled up the coast from Oregon and California. One respondent mentions a ‘caravan’ from California and another from eastern Canada. There were certainly contingents from, at least, Chicago, New York, Boston, Pittsburgh, Milwaukee, Fort Collins and Denver (Colorado), Hartford, Kent (Ohio), Bloomington, Knoxville (Tennessee), Nevada, Georgia, Louisiana, Arkansas and Iowa. It speaks of considerable organisation, and there is already plenty of evidence of that.
From January 1999 messages were appearing on the internet. Many, like Sam from the Bay Area, first saw it there: ‘Six months prior to the WTO meeting I became aware from the internet that a massive protest was in preparation.’ The Direct Action Network and the Anarchist Information Service were very active on the internet but also on the ground, informing and co-ordinating and training. Many people say they heard about Seattle in the summer, and from local sources. Geoff said, ‘I heard about it from anarchist circles in the Bay Area.’ ‘I got an anonymous flyer from some anarchists in Olympia, a small city near Washington,’ recorded Steven. ‘Postering and media reports,’ said Chris from Vancouver. Akio reported, ‘On the West Coast activist communities had been abreast of the plans for six months prior to the event. It was widely circulated knowledge that big plans were being drafted.’ Ann from Victoria, British Columbia, said, ‘I first heard about it in May when a Philippines solidarity activist in Victoria went to a preparatory meeting in Seattle.’ Tresa, a 30 year old Seattle teacher, said, ‘I was in charge of the Religious School ... We ended up having some great classes for the 7th, 8th and 9th graders. The 8th grade teacher in particular had been planning a Holocaust lesson and was wondering how to tie it in with Channukah. We talked about the Maccabees, then I got her to the WTO. The students came in early to class and we ate pizza together so we had a good chance to start conversations then. A number of them had been to demos before school.’
In the summer the Ruckus Society and the Rain Forest Action Network sponsored a training camp in northern Washington. According to Z Magazine 150 activists held workshops which ‘ranged from urban climbing and banner making to non-violence training and peacekeeping, scouting, technical lockdowns and blockades, media, website design, street theatre, legal tactics, even drumming.’ Throughout the autumn, ‘warehouses are being scouted as potential squats. Seattle Food Not Bombs is making preparations to feed the troops. A sophisticated media collective has formed to ensure that the good work of protesters is neither ignored nor marginalised. Low power “pirate” radio activists are communications for the masses, and a network of inconspicuous bike messengers will feed information from the streets to the clandestine transmitters’. [7]
Direct action activists brought an enormous amount to the success in Seattle, but the biggest story was the engagement of labour unions after decades of relative passivity and defeat. The leadership of the AFL-CIO was there in force. Against a background of a long term employer offensive and falling revenues the WTO was a great stage to make its presence felt. With a vulnerable Democrat president in a presidential year, pressure on the wannabes, Al Gore and Bill Bradley, would not be out of place. So they brought their mobilising facilities to bear in a fashion not experienced in recent memory. The AFL-CIO website records that ‘union activists, many arriving in more than 200 buses hired for the occasion, began gathering at Memorial Stadium two hours before a 10.30 a.m. rally. An estimated 30,000 to 50,000 participants overflowed the stadium and spilled into the adjoining park ... More than 50 unions, 25 states and 144 countries were [represented] among the activists.’ Many respondents to the questionnaire record that union funds were behind the mobilisation of their cohorts.
The success of the operation depended on grassroots rank and file organisation. Ron Judd, executive secretary of the King County Labor Council (Seattle), said, ‘We went into churches, community groups, neighbourhood organisations, environmental meetings, schools, high schools, colleges, universities and labour halls, even in people’s homes, to talk to them about the WTO and how it affects their lives.’ [8] Tina from Chicago said, ‘The first I heard was about the labour mobilisation at a labour organisers meeting in April.’ Kent from Seattle records, ‘In Seattle anti-WTO groups organised at colleges – and most unions had members organising their co-workers around the WTO. People started talking about the WTO nearly a year ago. The sting of NAFTA is still fresh in the minds of many – so the bitterness was already there.’ Jeff, an aerospace worker from Wilmington, Massachusetts, went with 15 members of the North Shore Boston Labour Council. His factory is being relocated to Mexico. ‘We were pissed. After seven or eight years working on trade issues in our local union it was not hard to sign up 11 people for the trip. Some great trade unionists in the council came along as well. All of us paid our own way and looked to have some fun as well as do some serious protesting,’ he said.
When we consider who the activists were, and what took them to Seattle, we uncover an immense variety of background and personal history. Like Annie from Santa Cruz, several talk of ‘a radical family background in terms of fighting capitalism and racism through labour movement organising and civil rights, both communist and anarchist’. Several others record radical, socialist or union family histories, whilst others have activist histories themselves. Sam from the Bay Area says he is ‘70 plus, a Second World War veteran with many years of participation in union and political activities’. Michelle, a socialist from Toronto, is 37. She has been a political and trade union activist for 20 years, ‘from protesting against Anita Bryant in the late 1970s to the Gulf War, the national student strike in 1995, the mass strikes in Ontario in 1995–1997, etc.’ Kent is a 29 year old socialist metal worker from Seattle, and six years a political and union activist. Annie is a 21 year old student. She has done ‘an AFL-CIO internship, civil disobedience for unions, started a student labour club on campus and done police brutality protests’. Bill O. is 24. He writes, ‘I have been in Art and Revolution for about a year and a half (in Chicago). I am a clown and an actor by trade.’ Anon, 47, is an ‘unemployed paralegal, left anarchist Jewish atheist’. Tina from Chicago is 46. She writes, ‘ [I have been] an activist for 30 years, women’s movement, anti-war, various (non-electoral) political movements, union for 20 years.’ Elizabeth, a student in her early 20s, ‘helped organise as a national leader in the North American Ad Hoc Student Coalition for Fair Trade’. Akio is a 24 year old college graduate from Eugene who says, ‘Seattle was my introduction to the culture of activism.’
Respondents indicated where they believed the pull to Seattle came from. ‘Among the rads and youth,’ wrote Akio, ‘the environment seemed to be the primary concern, followed pretty closely by human rights, especially sweatshop labour ... The AFL’s constituency was primarily concerned with labour rights and erecting international child labour laws, and also voiced a significant amount of concern for the environment. In my opinion though, more significant than the variety of issues comprising the protest was the general sentiment that democracy is being replaced by corporate oligarchy.’ Elizabeth from Vancouver put it down to the ‘threat to public services, including education, threat to democracy and the ability of governments to regulate and create standards, protect labour rights, and safety and environmental standards, more pressure to privatise and on the global South to give up completely on labour, health and environmental standards.’ Tina saw ‘the extraordinary development of the organised labour movement calling for action in the streets on economic and political issues – first time I remember it happening ever.’ An anonymous man from Vancouver simply wrote, ‘I hate capitalism.’
‘I want to tear down borders and democratise corporations. Looked like a good place to do it! Many people wanted to save trees. But most of all I think people are just sick as hell of corporate control. Here (in the States) elections are all bought and paid for by corporate money. Corporations are considered people, with freedom of speech, but are never given the death penalty for dumping millions of gallons of oil into the ocean, or for killing Indians at Bhopal, or whatever,’ wrote Steven. Tom’s view was this: ‘I think some people just want to fuck with the power structures because they resent their parents.’ Bill O. said he was ‘interested in fighting the enormous and growing influence of unaccountable transnational corporations and the human rights and environmental havoc that these monsters promulgate. The WTO is one part of a vast complicated system to recolonise the Third World. Almost any issue can be traced back to the systematised power of capital.’
 
Thinking Seattle
Surely the very first thing to register about the events in Seattle is their anarchic excitement – the sense, in the often almost breathless accounts, of people experiencing a birth of the new. Amber from Denver said, ‘I came here to protest the killing of turtles. I’m going home determined to turn the world upside down.’ ‘Best thing since ... wholewheat bread!’ says Tina. For Dean, ‘It changed the world and the movement.’ Jon says, ‘I am still trying to understand it all. I am proud to have been there and feel like we accomplished far more than we could have predicted.’ ‘I think it made me believe we can actually change things,’ writes Albert. And Steve just writes, ‘Yeh! Fuck shit up!’ ‘When can we have another one?’ asks Michelle. A locked-out Kaiser aluminium worker said, ‘A year ago I thought a redwood deck was the most beautiful thing in the world. Now I understand the importance of sustainability. I guess I’m an environmentalist now’. [9]
From the union bureaucrats paraphrasing Marx to the Lesbian Avenger proclaiming, ‘My nipples stand in solidarity with the steelworkers and Teamsters and all the labouring people,’ there is a sense of possibility of moving into a new politics with agendas not yet written.
Many demonstrations would throw up an activist profile similar to Seattle in its variety, especially among its organisers and certainly round the environmental issues which have characterised much radical action in the recent past. Yet the best lieutenants cannot build a mass demonstration by themselves. There must be an ‘army’ ready to respond. That there was speaks of an enormous depth of feeling – a raised consciousness across a significant swathe of society. There have been numerous courageous actions by environmental activists, and a rising level of interest in the issues they constantly raise. A whole generation of high school and college students have been touched, so to speak, by dolphins, giant redwoods, the rain forests, the greenhouse effect and urban pollution. And there are no face masks strong enough to block the stench of corruption at the top.
For workers across the Western world the past quarter of a century has been an experience of retreat and retrenchment, faced with declining wages, rising prices and severe discipline in the workplace. Joe B. from Portland expresses it well: ‘You go out to work – if you’re lucky. Some trumped up bastard tells you the time of day. Your wages go up – but not at the rate of cabbages at WalMart. Then the plant shuts down.’ It is this cry that is being heard more and more, but it is still largely hesitant – if angry. The mobilisation for Seattle is the great example, so far, of a shift from awareness and attitude to action.
In one important respect this movement’s composition is different from the movement of the 1960s when, by and large, the working class and its labour unions were not involved. In Seattle it is quite clear that the largest contingents were from that constituency. By the end of the event sections of it were in a close and apparently harmonious relationship with the ‘natural’ constituency of demonstrators: students, environmentalists of several stripes, 1968 veterans and their children.
Much of the media evinced surprise, as if a sort of Berlin Wall existed between the constituencies. This ignores important changes which have taken place over the last 30 years. The working class has not disappeared; its composition has altered. There are new occupations, and old ones have changed. The skilled have been deskilled and whole areas of formerly ‘middle class’ labour have been subordinated to ‘factory-style’ routine, discipline and insecurity. At the same time the expansion of education has tipped masses of college graduates, often overqualified, into such jobs. The steadily falling vote in US presidential elections has been one register of the growth of an enormous chunk of the population with a rightly cynical attitude to the official political process. This does not make them conscious revolutionaries overnight. Nevertheless, there are fresh tensions and anxieties to add to permanent ones. Seattle is an example of a popular upsurge, a reaction to such tensions. They are quite thrilling in their capacity to break moulds.
Most people, from all campaigns and groups, went to Seattle with only the vague goal of demonstrating effectively against the disparate excesses of the WTO. The scale of the mobilisation surprised many of them. The crude violence of the law and order machine shocked everyone. Enormous warmth was expressed for the birth of new alliances. Ideas were in the crucible. Labour bureaucrats arriving with a nationalist-protectionist agenda felt the pressure from their audience to mute such positions in favour of an internationalist stance. Jeff, the aerospace worker from Massachusetts, wrote, ‘There could be no mistake that this was not a Pat Buchanan crew. This makes building alliances easier, both within the US and across the borders. We’ve come a long way from thinking that the answer is just to “Buy American”.’
David, from Berkeley, California has the last word:
Those who marched or stood or sat in the streets of Seattle this week made history, and they knew it. And like the great marches against the Vietnam War, or the first sit-ins in the South in the late 1950s, it was not always easy to see just what history was being made, especially for those closest to the events of the time. Tear gas, rubber bullets and police sweeps, the object of incessant media coverage, are the outward signs of impending change – that the guardians of the social order have grown afraid. And there’s always a little history in that. But perhaps the greatest impact of Seattle will be on the people who were there. Just as anti-war demonstrations and civil rights sit-ins of decades ago were focal points from which people fanned out across the country, spreading the gospel of their movement, Seattle is also a beginning of something greater yet to come. What will the people who filled its downtown streets take with them back into this city’s rainy neighbourhoods, or to similar communities in towns and cities across the country?

Notes
1. I have to thank Albert, Dean, Geoff, Jon, Kent, Steve, Jake and Tresa from Seattle; Akio and Steve from Eugene; Ann, Chris and Elizabeth from Vancouver, British Columbia; Corey, Shelley, Shawna, and Jeff from Victoria, British Columbia; Michelle from Toronto; Bill O. and Tina from Chicago; Peter from Kent; Mitchel from Brooklyn; Damon from Pittsburgh; Jeff from Massachusetts; Tom, Sam, Mark and David from the Bay Area; plus three anonymous respondents. Helpful suggestions were made by Abbie Bakan, Colin Barker, Mick Charlton, Nick Howard, Steve Leigh, Michelle Robidoux and Sabby Sagall.
2. J. Brecher, Strike! (San Francisco 1972), p. 104.
3. D. Henwood, Left Business Observer (http://www.panix.com/~dhenwood/ lbo_about.html), 30 November 1999. [Note by ETOL: This link has not been checked.]
4. No respondent estimated under 40,000. The highest suggestion was over 100,000. The best guess is somewhere in the 60,000-80,000 region.
5. Estimates of where people came from varied wildly from 15 percent to 80 percent from the Seattle locality, but the majority suggest 50 percent to 70 percent local, so we could settle for around 60 percent, or 40,000 people.
6. A WTO conference might easily have been scheduled for, say, Washington DC. Given that city’s relationship to contingent conurbations down the East Coast we might now have been reviewing and assessing a demonstration of upwards of a million. The level of local participation at Seattle is therefore very remarkable and must surely reflect a new engagement.
7. D. Moynihan, Z Magazine, December 1999.
8. Report by K. Murphy and N. Cleeland, Los Angles Times, 4 December 1999.
9. D. Henwood, op. cit.
 



John Charlton writes:AT PRESENT there are about
nine million migrant workers working in the EEC countries and
Switzerland – excluding internal migration (Southern Italians
working in the prosperous north). There are one million North
Africans, 850,000 Italians, 750,000 Irish, 500,000 Turks, 500,000
Yugoslavs, 500,000 Spanish, 500,000 Africans, 400,000 Indians and
Pakistanis, 400,000 West Indians and 300,000 Portuguese. Although
immigrants remit £1,000 million per year to their country of
origin, their exploitation by Northern European capital seriously
inhibits the economic development of their homelands as they are
drawn from the fittest sections of the working population. Because
they are young, fit, predominantly single, they also take out much
less in social benefits than does the indigenous working population
in their country of adoption. They tend to work for lower wages and
fill the jobs which the native workers do not want. To a considerable
extent Europe’s tremendous post war prosperity has been built
upon the backs of the migrants.
But ‘Europe’ has not shown its gratitude. The
governments of all the EEC countries have responded to their
inability to provide a decent standard of living for workers –
houses, schools, hospitals and job security – by blaming the
influx of immigrants. All have imposed immigration controls in stages
over the past ten years. In Britain, the Commonwealth Immigration
Acts of 1962 and 1968 and the 1971 Immigration Act, have virtually
closed the door to black immigrants. In July 1974 France imposed a
total ban on new entrants unless a specific job was arranged and
accommodation guaranteed. Germany too has imposed rigid quotas and is
currently drafting legislation to limit further entry. Belgium and
Holland have also tightened their policies. The most recent moves in
the direction of restriction are closely related to the economic
recession which has hit Europe in the past two years and go far
beyond the limiting of new entrants. Depriving existing immigrants of
their jobs and repatriation has become respectable currency. A
representative of the German Employers’ Federation has said:
‘In the case of a decline of the employment
situation ... the foreigner would have to expect to be the first to
lose his job.’
The government has ordered firms to discriminate against foreign
workers. Germans were to be given first preference for jobs.
Employers should make foreign workers redundant -even offering
redundancy pay – whereupon the authorities would withdraw work
and residence permits and expel them. To make life even more
difficult areas are to be designated where no more immigrants are to
be permitted to live, urban areas to impose a limit of 12 per cent
foreigners within their boundaries and cuts to be made in child
allowances.
In October 1974 a referendum was held in Switzerland, staged
managed by the Neo-fascist National Action Party, which aimed at
cutting the number of immigrants in residence by half. Over 30 per
cent voted in favour. A right wing politician, Swarzenbach is
building on this ‘success’ by demanding the apparently
more modest demand of a 2½ per cent cut in the immigrant
numbers.
At the same time a much harsher policy has developed towards
dependents. The British immigration authorities are developing savage
attitudes towards the wives and children of Pakistani and Indian
immigrants. The last Labour government insisted on a ‘special
entry certificate’ for each wife, husband or child who wanted
to join a worker in Britain. A vast bureaucracy of ‘entry
certificate officers’ was established in the High Commissions
of the ‘country of origin’ – chiefly Pakistan,
India, Bangladesh and East Africa.
These officers investigate the claims of workers’
dependents. They assume that the prospective immigrants are not the
wives, husbands or children of workers in Britain. So the applicants
are cross-examined. If the stories differ in one small detail from
the stories of the workers they seek to join, their applications are
refused. Also hopeful immigrants are made to wait months and even
years for information. The Times reported in November 1974:
‘A newly married woman was told she would have to
wait till mid 1976 before she could even get an interview for her
entry certificate application.’
The Swiss, German and Dutch authorities have a deliberate policy
of rotation of work permits to deter foreign workers from bringing
their wives and families. The Dutch government is quite explicit:
‘... our country has a need for foreign labour and
it does not have a need for families from abroad.’
So the law is being tightened up in every country. New immigrants
are increasingly finding the obtaining of entry difficult and many
existing ones are living precariously. However wholesale repatriation
is not really on the agenda. Migrants are central to the
economy of Western Europe and will remain so. Those who do stay are
going to find life becoming tougher and tougher as the threat
of repatriation is used. Immigrants have always done the dirtiest and
lowest paid jobs. The building trade, transitory, poorly paid,
dangerous and disorganised claims a very high proportion of
immigrants in all countries. (In France 35 per cent male migrants are
building workers, in Switzerland 33.7 per cent, Germany 21 per cent
and Britain 30 per cent). Transport, foundry work, clothing
manufacture, hotels and catering also have very high incidences of
immigrant workers and in some cases they provide the overwhelming
majority of workers. Promotion is extremely rare; employers always
using the excuse that indigenous workers would not stand for it.
Actually of course it suits the employers much better to avoid any
movement to integration, to have a permanent rootless and weak
stratum in the workplaces.
There is a depressing uniformity about the living accommodation
made available to immigrants. ‘Even where no direct law forbids
occupation to foreigners, very little public housing is available.
Local authorities discriminate in compiling their housing lists. A
more common form of accommodation is that provided by companies. It
is usually of the hostel variety and available only to single workers
– a further disincentive to bringing dependents. Minimum
provisions are laid down in Germany:
‘every occupant of such accommodation shall be
provided with a minimum of a straw palliasse and a pillow. Woollen
blankets, and bed linen ... shall be changed once a month; The straw
must be replaced as required but at least every three months.’
Hot water need only be provided if the work carried out by the
tenants is classified as dirty. Clearly the worker could be forgiven
for thinking he was entering prison! The impression might be
confirmed in some cases by the rules and regulations imposed which
include clearing the hostel after 5 a.m. every day, being in bed with
lights out by 10 p.m., and the forbidding of visitors. One survey
showed that wardens were often former concentration camp employees;
whilst Algerian workers in France often find themselves supervised by
expelled colons!
However, workers in this sort of accommodation can count
themselves fortunate compared with the plight of those forced to seek
accommodation in the private sector. In their book, Immigrant
Workers and the Class Structure in Western Europe, Castles and
Kosack report:
‘In an old chocolate factory owned by a private
speculator at Ivry (a suburb of Paris) 541 black Africans were
sharing 11 rooms in 1969. Some of the dormitories including one in
which 70 people were sleeping had no windows. The ground floor
boasted two taps with drinking water, the other floors two taps with
more drinking water. There were five WCs and one wash basin.’
Even worse conditions prevail in the shanty towns or bidonvilles
on the outskirts of French industrial towns. It is estimated that
some 100,000 people (largely immigrants) live in the bidonvilles:
‘The bidonville looks like a rubbish dump.
The inhabitants pile any materials around their walls and on their
roofs in a vain attempt to keep out the wet and cold and to protect
the roofs from being carried away by a strong wind. There are no
sanitary amenities of any kind. The open sewers are a constant danger
to health.’
Housing is the most dramatic illustration of the grim place
occupied by immigrants in Western Europe. However it is also the case
that immigrants are disadvantaged in every other area. They suffer
more accidents at work, greater incidences of diseases like TB, wait
longer for hospital treatment and have poorer facilities for their
own education and their children’s.
At the same time as the governments are tightening up the law on
legal immigrants, the traffic in illegal immigrants is intensifying.
It is estimated that there are over one million permanent illegal
immigrants in Europe and that possibly as many as 250,000 are brought
in each year. This is a very big business indeed. The operators have
vast sums in capital tied up in it and they operate like 18th century
slavers. Villages in Mali and Senegal are used as pools of indentured
labour. Young men and women are provided with passports, travel
documents and work permits, flown into private airfields, or carried
in crates in container trucks, housed in primitive barracks and
provided with jobs. The catch is that they are tied financially to
the operator for years. They can be paid any wages he thinks fit,
given any available accommodation and charged any rent and, since
they are illegal and subject to immediate deportation, they dare not
protest. Recently a German employer denounced his 17 Moroccan workers
to the police as illegal immigrants. It was then discovered that he
had not paid them for a whole year. He denounced them to the police
when they raised the question of wages!
The level of organisation and the smooth running of operations –
which for example can bring hundreds of busloads of Turks into
Germany, disguised as tourists from Ankara and deliver them to their
employers – speak of a sophisticated international network. It
is interesting that no big operator has yet been brought to book.
Instead the authorities concentrate on waging brutal manhunts of the
helpless victims. In Britain the Home Office employs a massive force
of policemen around the coast lines of South East England to chase
pathetic half starved Pakistanis. The authorities are well aware that
the division between legal and so-called illegal is one to exploit in
their policy of intimidation. Unfortunately some immigrants
themselves are frightened into accepting the division themselves.



Major Trade Union Federations in the EEC



West European trade unions have a pretty poor record where these
matters are concerned. Many have a verbal commitment to recruitment
and defence of foreign workers at a national level, but the record in
specific situations ranges from the passive to the reactionary. They
show little interest in organising immigrants. Exceptions are in
industries which have long traditions of closed shops and
unionisation. All have passively accepted the recent legislative
moves against immigrants, and in the case of the major Swiss Unions
actively campaigned for restrictive legislation.
And when in January, Roy Jenkins, the Home Secretary, relaxed the
Immigration Act in order to allow the entry of Fillipino girls
(wanted by his rich friends as domestic servants) the TUC registered
a strong protest This is the other side of the coin of ‘Buy
British’, an economic nationalism which can only divide and
weaken the working class at a time when maximum unity is essential.
The unions do not in general appoint officials with special
knowledge of the language or culture of the immigrant groups. Many
actively argue that no special provisions are required and even that
special provisions are themselves discriminatory. When immigrants do
fight back against their dreadful conditions they have learnt to
expect no help from their union and in some cases even active
opposition. The recent actions at Mansfield Hosiery, Imperial
Typewriters and Kenilworth Products and earlier at Courtaulds,
Preston, and Birmid, Smethwick, in Britain provide examples of unions
who quite callously sold out black workers. And such examples abound
in Europe too.
The position of the migratory workers and the attitudes of the
trade unions places the whole future of the working class in
jeopardy. In the absence of principled propaganda campaigns and
determined workshop struggles for unity, the stage is surrendered to
the extreme right always ready to exploit racialist sentiments in the
working class. In each of the European countries the neo-fascists
have gained strength recently. The Order Nouveau (French fascists)
worked very closely with the French Mafia in summer 1973, when they
organised a campaign of brutal violence against the North African
workers of Marseilles. A local Marseilles newspaper showed how
strongly was fascist influence when they published an editorial which
would have done credit to Goebbels:
‘We have had enough of Algerian troublemakers,
syphilitics and pimps, madmen, thieves, and killers who take
advantage of uncontrolled immigration.’
The same organisation in 1974 organised a national petition
calling for an end to all immigration. In Germany the NPD has been
very prominent in attacking the alleged depravity of Turks and Slavs.
In Britain the outpourings of Enoch Powell in the mid-sixties pushed
the government, the opposition and the press to the right on the
immigration issue. There has been a sharp increase in violence
against the foreigner in every country and as the recession deepens
we can expect racialist hysteria to increase. The employers, the
governments and the extreme right have got ready-made targets and the
unions will bear a heavy responsibility for allowing this situation
to develop.
But it is not all gloom. For, recently, immigrants in all
countries have begun to fight back – and with some success. The
responsibilities of the revolutionary left in all countries is clear.
It must involve itself in all such struggles helping and encouraging
immigrant workers to combat their own oppression. In Britain, black
workers are becoming increasingly responsive to revolutionary
politics. It is here that the great hope lies.
 



The Lancashire and Cheshire Miners
Raymond Challinor
Frank Graham, £3.75
COLLIER militants around the country tend to look with disdain at the record of Lancashire miners in recent battles with government and employers. Perhaps unjustly, they have been collectively associated with the attitudes projected by men like Sidney Ford, Sid Vincent and Joe Gormley – passive acceptance of anti-miner policies and downright collaboration with the boss. But it was not always like this. As recently as the 1940s and ’50s Lancashire miners were in the forefront of militant battles over wages and notably for concessionary coal. Indeed, in September 1950, a Sutton Colliery, St Helen’s miner, was gaoled for refusing to pay damages arising from an unofficial strike. St Helen’s miners struck immediately till he was released.
Certainly in the 19th century Lancashire miners were as militant in pursuit of their rights as those on any other coalfield. Neither were they reluctant to involve themselves in solidarity with workers in other industries – or broader political agitation, such as Chartism. However, the cornerstone of all their activity was the struggle to fashion the union, firstly at pit and district level, then at County level and finally to participate in the emergence of the Miners’ Federation of Great Britain.
The desperately few men of foresight, courage and determination had to overcome tremendous obstacles; the crude arrogance of the coal owners, the nervous and arbitrary brutality of the forces of the state, the treachery from within their own ranks and the demoralising tendency for districts to fragment from local prejudice.
This is the story which Raymond Challinor tells with much analytical skill, sympathy and power. For an exciting picture of a major strike, the ebb and flow, the conflict of interests, the reconciliation of differences, see the chapter on the now forgotten seven week strike of 1881. You will discover that Arthur Scargill did not invent the flying picket! And that the leading reactionaries in Parliament for savage government retaliation were – the Irish Nationalist MPs, the ‘heroic’ Parnell advocating ‘buckshot’ against the forces of darkness.
He forces us too, to examine the widely held belief that mining communities hang together because they are isolated, introverted, stationary and stable. Not so in 19th century Lanes. Ex-hill farmers, Pennine weavers, Irishmen, Welshmen and Staffordshire men rubbed shoulders at the same pit-heads with the natives of Wigan and St Helens in a period of rapid expansion of the industry. In exactly opposite conditions a similar phenomenon exists now – in South Yorkshire, Notts, Warwick, Staffs and Kent.
Less exciting – perhaps inevitably so, since he is dealing only with the actions and attitudes of the leaders – is the coverage of the shifts in political allegiance at the fag end of the century as the Labour Party begins to emerge. Even then it is fascinating to learn that Lib-Labism had a very fragile existence among Lanes miners, not so much that there was an overwhelming demand for Labour independence but that so many miners were intransigently Tory – in a county dominated by Liberal capitalists.
Diverging from the main theme, a chapter on the miner’s social life raise first a perhaps macabre sniffle then a gale of hilarity. There is the detailed coverage of the collier’s major sport, ‘purring’ or kicking – organised for money. This was a game of football played without the unnecessary complication of using a ball. Two men just kicked each others’ shins until one stumbled and was then battered into insensibility. Clogs were worn with ‘wooden spies with narrow toes bound with iron or tin’.
Would that all Chief Constables would suffer the fate of the Wigan worthy who was dismissed for drunkenness and misconduct while on duty. ‘I thought it was not proper of him,’ said Martha Seddon, ‘to put his hand on my bosom drunk.’
The only disappointment with the book is that Ray Challinor was not able to continue his narrative into the twentieth century. We badly need someone as free as he is from the blinkers of the ritual bowing to the bureaucrats – of left or right – to bring the story of the Lancashire Miners up to date – not to mention the broader job on the NUM since 1945.
 



Russia in Revolution 1890-1918
Lionel Kochan
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 55s
Lionel Kochan weaves the diverse fibres of Tsarist Russia into a fast moving narrative. Making a valid comparison between Witte and Stalin, he sees the forced industrialisation from the top of the early 1890s as the crucial element, previously absent, which imposed strains on the system that could not be absorbed. Using this as a reason for starting at 1890, he describes the familiar elements which, acting and reacting upon one another, produced the cataclysmic events of 1917; the divided aristocracy, part ‘progressive,’ substituting itself for the bourgeoisie, anxious to share the spoils of the world with Britain, Germany etc, part hedonistic and feudal; the divided peasantry, part travelling upwards on the escalator to the bourgeoisie, major part dispossessed and descending into wage slavery; the working class, recently peasant, rapidly developing class consciousness in the giant factory units established by the foreign capitalist; the middle class, students, lawyers, doctors etc, growing increasingly disenchanted; the small revolutionary groups, driven underground by the Tsarist terror, injecting their ideas and growing in relevance; and, standing astride the pyramid, Nicholas himself, the ‘holy father on earth,’ jealous of his divine right, and determined to pass it on virgo intacta to his successor – Nicholas who, at a time when European monarchy was fast approaching the stage of riding its bicycles through the streets, could say,
‘Do you mean that I am to regain the confidence of my people, Ambassador, or that they are to regain my confidence?’
By 1905 then, all the actors were on the stage. Bloody Sunday was the curtain raiser. In a matter of hours the elements of opposition, disparate, defeated continually in separate confrontations with authority, fused in a dramatic heightening of class consciousness. Nothing could ever be the same again. A conclusion something like 1917 became inevitable. It is a pity the blurb claims the book to be ‘a searching analysis ... a study in depth;’ this it is not, but, as a compelling and highly readable introduction to the subject, it will take some beating.
 






‘You’re not trying to pass doctors off as part of the
working class, are you?’ Question at a recent SWP meeting.



Deskilling, narrowing pay differentials, increasing supervision
and loss of autonomy, longer working hours, pressure on breaks and
greater stress have been the hallmarks of every big transformation of
the labour process since capitalism began. Handicraft workers in the
domestic system were subjected to the fierce discipline of time in
the early stages of the industrial revolution. Craftsmen in metal and
most other mediums were deskilled by technical innovations throughout
the 19th century and have continued to have their skills assaulted in
the 20th. The privileged male commercial clerk was replaced by
cheaper female labour, typewriters and adding machines. In the late
20th century computerised techniques have relentlessly undermined a
whole range of skilled work in many different fields.
Whilst such processes have been a continuous feature of the growth
of capitalism they have been intensified in periods of recession.
Faced with a sharp decline in their ability to maintain profit
levels, employers have tried to introduce organisational and
technical innovation whilst reining in wage increases. Handicraft
workers suffered massively in the first big depression in the late
1830s. Many skilled craftsmen had their conditions eroded in the
great depression which commenced in 1873. The depression of the
interwar years was a period of much experimentation in what was
called ‘scientific management’. Mass unemployment experienced by
workers in slumps has been a vital weapon in the bosses’ armoury.
The current recession has been no exception to this rule. Many
groups of workers have been subjected to additional stresses,
attempted cuts in real wages and displacement by new technologies and
changed working practices in addition to becoming victims of
overproduction. Relatively little attention, however, has been given
to the manner in which changes in the labour process have struck at
the professions, many of them occupying management or quasi
management roles. They have been cushioned by higher living standards
and generally better job security. They would hardly merit
sympathetic responses from a working class somewhat shell shocked
after more than a decade of attacks!
However, in the current decline and decomposition of capitalism,
in a desperate attempt to hang on to profit rates, the system is even
attacking elements which have helped to form the cement holding
together gross inequalities. At different rates of implementation
medicine, law, education and social work are all sampling practices
previously experienced largely by industrial and low paid clerical workers.
In the new hospital trusts accountants and administrators are
wrenching autonomy away from doctors. The campaign to reduce junior
doctors’ hours is largely a thinly disguised pay cut. Reduced hours
are a sick joke anyway since increased paperwork means work is
constantly taken home. A further twist is programmes to commit the
life work of highly skilled specialists to computer memory. This
should be a rational contribution to accessible medical knowledge. In
the present market-oriented service it is likely to be used to
deskill medical personnel and cut costs. In the health market
managers are the new elite, their salaries and status having passed
that of all but a small number of specialists. Absurdly, highly
trained specialists now seek non-medical management posts in pursuit
of money and status.
Implausibly, perhaps, similar things are happening to lawyers. The
change of rule on legal aid, for example, is destroying small legal
practices and producing the greatest rash of mergers ever. Giant
practices are emerging in all the big cities, staffed by young
salaried lawyers working very long hours with no hope of following
the traditional route to partnership. And they are run by
professional managers and accountants.
University lecturers are seeing their privileged existence
slipping through their fingers. Appointed on short term contracts,
their salaries are repeatedly pegged by administrators’ cries of
institutional poverty. They are subjected to larger classes and more
of them and are driven to produce distance learning packs and
computer aided teaching devices. The working day is extended and in
the rush to semester programmes so is the working year. Like hospital
doctors and many lawyers the only avenue to higher earnings is – to
become a manager.
At the hardest end of the profession are school teachers. The
features which are still only tendencies for most teachers in higher
education are already in place in the schools. Especially significant
is the massively increased level of supervision engendered by the
following of national curriculum programmes. A young teacher in a
first job can now expect to have to work on preparation and
administration till past midnight five days a week. This represents a
20 percent increase in the working day in the past decade without any
salary recompense.
Social workers too are bowing beneath the strain of increased
workloads brought on by the ‘care in the community’ initiative
which aims to turn them into the system’s ‘gatekeepers’. In
certain areas (psychiatric and children) a social worker can expect
to have to complete no less than 11 forms for each client.
Supervision has rapidly intensified and the individual worker has had
almost every area of personal initiative and choice taken away in the
pursuit, by management, of bureaucratic routinisation.
It must be stressed that, although it is possible to discern a
pattern in these attacks, their impact is different in different
situations, and so are possible outcomes. At a general level it can
be argued that, by attacking pay, conditions and status, the ruling
class may be sacrificing one of its crucial bulwarks in a politically
and socially reliable professional strata. Historically, shifts in
the labour process have tended to produce resistance and
organisation. Chartism attended the wrecking of the handicraft
industry and its replacement by factories. New Unionism came out of
the organisational and technological shake up of the late 19th
century depression. White collar unionism grew partly as a response
to the development of large enterprises in the depression of the
interwar years.
The professions have a considerable legacy of privileged status.
It is already undermined in the case of teachers and social workers
who moved to unionisation decades ago. Differential conditions among
doctors and lawyers, for example, could be enough to muffle anger and
stifle militant tendencies. We might not want to argue that doctors
are part of the working class. Nevertheless, something significant is
happening among professional workers in late capitalism. Whilst it
might not be the centrepiece of concern for revolutionary socialists
it does demand our attention.
 



“I hardly need say I’ve been a labour man all my life, but I feel betrayed. They are more Tory than the Tories. At the next election I’ll be staying at home (if I’ve got one to stay in) and I can tell you that goes for most of my mates.” – A Doncaster miner
ANGER AND BITTERNESS towards the Labour government, the majority of miners’ MPs. the NCB, and many NUM officials is rising as the effects of the government’s policy towards the industry works itself out. And nowhere is this felt more than South Yorkshire, until recently an area less troubled by the industry’s contraction than many others.
Redundancy and closure are the main sources of concern, but miners are also angry about speed up, increasing numbers of accidents, harsher work disciplines and the steady disintegration of conciliation procedures.
Last month the NCB announced that during the current financial year, 70 pits would be closed, bringing the total for April 67–March 69 to 121, with 70,000 men affected out of a total labour force of less than 390,000. They blandly announced that it would be no longer possible to re-employ all redundant miners in the industry, and regrettably, of course, 30,000 would be sacked. By 1971 redundancies will be running at an average of 35,000 per year.
Then Chairman Brass of the Yorkshire Division revealed in the annual report that the divisional manpower total must be halved from 88.000 to 45,000 by 1975. In the same report, the Bevercotes “experiment” with its token workforce is described as “the saviour of the industry.” Whose industry? miners might well ask.
Having cynically created ghost towns in Scotland, Cumberland, the North East and South Wales, the Coal Board are now planning to bring the disease to Yorkshire, with the difference that the new ghost towns will be peopled by abandoned miners and their families who have nowhere to go.
From the frenzied drive of the management towards increased productivity. there is an upward trend in accidents. The majority of accidents appear to derive from speed up as they are concerned with machinery. Since 1952. accidents have risen from about 120 per 100.000 man shifts to about 200 – despite alleged improvements in safely conditions.
A miner at Hatfield Colliery said: “If you observed the safety regulations on my job, the whole pit would come to a stop in 10 minutes Two men are doing three men’s work.”
A miner at another South Yorkshire pit said that there had been a breakdown in relationships because the manager had arbitrarily ordered a shift back down the shaft when, after working in wet conditions, they had exercised their customary right to come to the top 10 minutes early. The manager told the men that, as they had nothing in writing, there was nothing to negotiate about. Conciliation was ignored.
In a situation of rapid contraction, the management seem to hold most of the cards. With the assistance of the press they have succeeded in getting the idea accepted that the solution to the workers’ problems is the solution to the nation’s problems, namely increased productivity, and that the pursuit of this objective justifies any inroad into the workers’ rights.
The union leadership, for so long almost indistinguishable from the management, plays the role of NCO to the Coal Board, confining its public utterances to attacking absenteeism.
It is clear that miners must fight against the inroads being made into their conditions, with or without their union leaders. Some of the traditional weapons will have to be put aside. Clearly they can no longer place any faith in parliamentary representation, or very much faith in the established negotiating procedure. The treatment of the new pay claim will no doubt give proof of that if the last derisory 12s. 6d. has not done so already.
They must build or rebuild strong rank and file organisations at the pit level. The struggle over conditions could still be won, for in South Yorkshire in the near future redundancies will still be mainly of the selective kind, and therefore easier to fight.
In an area where coal is going to be mined for as long as anyone can see, strong organisation could still resist redundancies, or at least control the phasing, and obtain the best agreements.
But to fight the threat of closure, to provide long-term solutions, not only for the Yorkshire miner, but for all miners, requires a wider political organisation, centred on demands made of the state, like “work or full maintenance.”
In the now emerging political situation, masses of workers everywhere will be faced by the same problem, and no other form of fight has any meaning.
 



DONCASTER:– 450 angry National Coal Board tenants met at the Scorethorpe Club, Bentley last week on the first stage of their campaign to resist the NCB’s plan to raise rents by as much as £1 10s a week.
Messages of support were received from two of the largest collieries in the area, Broads worth and Bentley, and the meeting was heartened by the news that Armthorpe and Thumscoe tenants are still holding out against the Board after six months.
A militant resolution passed unanimously by the meeting called for a continuous fight through every stage of legal negotiations, followed if necessary by action at colliery level.
After the meeting, secretary of the Scorethorpe Tenants Action Committee, Jock Martin, said, ‘I am confident that the tenants are so united by the Coal Board’s greedy action that support for all necessary measures will be maintained until victory is won.’
Help in delivering leaflets is needed. Contact J, Martin, 6 Danesway, Scorethorpe, Doncaster.
 



DONCASTER:– Yorkshire miners are preparing for a bitter struggle against the National Coal Board’s plan to increase their rents by as much as £1 10s a week.
The Coal Industry Housing Association which runs NCB housing, asked the Yorkshire Rents Committee, drawn from ‘a panel of experts with professional connections in the estate and property business’ (the chairman earns £18 a day), to reassess miners’ rents on an economic basis, bringing them into line with local authority rents.
This comparison is totally false. CIHA commitments on houses built 16 to 40 years ago bear no relation to those of a local authority trying to build new houses with an 8½ per cent interest rate.
And local authorities have much greater responsibility than the NCB for maintenance and other amenities.
 
Enraged
Following the bosses’ time honoured principle of divide and rule, assessment forms, printed aptly on thin lavatory paper, have been arriving through the letter boxes on the coalfield over a three month period.
Next door neighbours have received their forms at quite different times and some enraged miners have thought the man next door had escaped the increase.
The forms call for landlord and tenant jointly to indicate their agreement of the new ‘fair’ rent, which can be anything up to 31s 6d a week.
Many tenants believe that against a background of sharply rising prices in the shops, wage freeze and Alf Robens’ pay increase of £15,000 a year, the only ‘fail’ rent that they could agree to would be one considerably less than they are paying at present. They are understandably angry at the judgment of the ‘panel of experts’.
 
Refuse
Since rents are docked from wages at the pit head – which is another issue worth fighting – a total rent strike is not practical. But refusal to sign the forms means that the increase cannot be levied until after a public enquiry – and forms are being collected by tenant activists.
Plans are under way to make the enquiry genuinely public, with tenants attending in force.
Despite the value of insisting upon legal rights to the bitter end, there is an increasing awareness that the only really effective weapon is a strike at the pits, a policy that can only be won and sustained through open discussion at mass meetings of tenants and miners.
The miners have been kicked around and blackmailed long enough as their differences have been exploited by the NCB brass hats. The rents question is an issue that unites the whole coalfield. Determination can bring victory.
 



SHEFFIELD:– 2,000 people marched from Tinsley Wire Works, where barbed wire is made for use in Vietnam, through the working-class districts of the city on Saturday.
They marched to a rally outside the City Hall to protest against continued US barbarity in Vietnam and in solidarity with the National Liberation Front.
Police provocation and brutality reached new heights on the demonstration. Demonstrators were harried and pushed around throughout the march and 24 were arrested.
 
Boot went in
Several marchers were charged with assault when they were simply defending themselves or their comrades from assault by the police.
Sheffield citizens who saw five policemen lay into a young demonstrator on a pavement in the town centre won’t easily forget the vicious expressions on the coppers’ faces as their boots went in.
The closing rally was ringed completely by a three-deep circle of coppers and three people were arbitrarily dragged from the crowd and later charged with assault.
If the demonstration was marked for the escalation in police violence. it had another more disgusting aspect. The Communist Party provided the stewards and some of them went out of their way to help the police to make arrests.
 
Tore up cards
They pointed out ‘disruptive’ demonstrators and in one case even helped a copper to drag a comrade to a waiting police bus.
Many rank and file party members were angered by these actions and said they would push the party for a full enquiry. Three party members tore up their party cards on the spot.
The demonstration was almost completely ignored by the press, the plight of those arrested must be made known as widely as possible. Ten were fined a total of £225 on Monday and the rest face equally stiff fines, if not imprisonment.
Money is urgently needed. Please send donations to J. Wilkin, 15 Raven Road, Sheffield.
 



Ray Challinor, who died last week, was one of the people at the founding meeting of the Socialist Review Group – the forerunner of the SWP – in October 1950.
Ray was born in the Potteries, North Staffordshire. His teacher parents were active in the Independent Labour Party (ILP), and Ray was involved in politics from his earliest years. He developed the “habit of politics”, an addiction which was to stay with him all his life.
When National Service beckoned after the Second World War, he registered as a conscientious objector. He chose to work on the land, where he “created havoc everywhere I went”.
He joined the ILP, aligning with its far left tendency. He attended its 1945 annual conference where he met T. Dan Smith, a young Trotskyist activist from Tyneside. They remained friends and Ray tended towards believing Smith’s claim that he was a victim of an establishment conspiracy when he was convicted of corruption in 1973.
The deviousness of the state was a constant interest of Ray’s. He pursued it in remote historical periods and in contemporary political activity in the Potteries, Wigan and for the last 40 years of his life in the north east of England.
He arrived at the theory of state capitalism independently of Tony Cliff and was a vital member of the first Socialist Review group, editing and contributing to the little monthly paper. Like other members he was active in the Labour Party, which the group used as a propaganda platform for revolutionary politics.
He was briefly a councillor in Newcastle under Lyme and even more briefly, a parliamentary candidate. His nomination was too much for T&G union leaders and for some of the Potteries’ party establishment, such as the right wing Labour MP John Golding. Ray had a physical fight with him in public.
Ray could be verbally belligerent. He was certainly courageous.
A good example of this was his usual visits to the picket line at Courtaulds in Preston in 1965 where he was invited on to the strike committee. The dispute involved racism and the possibility of a black trade union breakaway. Ray and the International Socialists – which the Socialist Review Group had become – were mentioned in the national media. He had an influence in what was possibly the first public demonstration of the group’s hardline stance against racism.
His courage was also highlighted when he played a leading part in a campaign in the 1970s after a Geordie nightclub bouncer, Liddle Towers, died while in police custody. The death was followed by a shameful cover-up. Ray was in the news for attacking the Northumbria chief constable. He received death threats.
The other public part of his busy life was historical research and writing.
He was a founder of the Society for the Study of Labour History and for 30 years a lynchpin in the North East Labour History Society.
He had a great nose for obscure events and figures in labour history such as his biography, John S. Clarke: Parliamentarian, Poet, Lion-Tamer (1977), and often unconventional perspectives. His criticism of Vladimir Lenin’s advice to the infant British Communist Party, in The Origins of British Bolshevism (1977), annoyed some leading SWP members. He certainly made readers think and argue.
Probably his best book was the biography of the Chartist lawyer, W.P. Roberts, in 1990.
He was always a part of the IS-SWP circle of members and supporters. At times he engaged in feuds with the party in which he would fearlessly argue his corner.
When we changed from a group to a party during the bitter class struggles of the 1970s, he gave up his membership, objecting to the manner of its transformation. He continued to subscribe to the party press, and attended many meetings including the annual Marxism event where he regularly spoke.
His revolutionary outlook was never in doubt and on Tyneside he was part of every militant political campaign. He was always very good company, generous with his money, his time and his formidable library accumulated over 60 years.
His friendship with many comrades was shared by his wife of 60 years, Mabel. All who struggled for socialism with him will remember his comradeship with affection.
Our condolences go out to Mabel, his son Russell, his granddaughter Clare and his sister Joan.
 



Harry Bridges: The Rise and Fall of Radical Labour in the US
Charles P. Larrowe
Merlin Press, £3.
RELENTLESS determination laced with courage, in the face of a ruthless and often brutal enemy has been a recurrent feature of the labour movement in the United States. So has a blatant and often breathtaking collaboration with that same enemy. These contradictory elements have frequently been shared by the same leader. In some respects Harry Bridges, a founder and for nearly forty years the leader of the West Coast longshoreman’s union, is typical of the phenomena. An Australian, he spent his youth at sea, settling in San Francisco in 1922 as a dockworker. In the 1920’s he was engaged in a number of courageous, but largely unsuccessful attempts to bust the Company Union. He flirted briefly with the ‘Wobblies’ before settling into a close association with the American Communist Party. In the early thirties he helped to build a vigorous rank and file movement on the waterside, with its own widely read paper, The Waterside Worker.
The 1920’s was a period of employer ascendancy, strongly supported by the forces of the state. As the depression deepened, union organisation became increasingly precarious. Then, in 1932, Franklin Roosevelt was elected to the Presidency, and as part of his attempt to win the conservative leadership of the American Federation of Labour (AF of L), he introduced legislation which gave a degree of Government backing to the unionisation of American industry. This policy was greeted with predictable hostility by the major employers’ organisations and the result was a tremendous wave of strikes and sit-ins.
Confrontation reached an early peak in 1934 with three major and decisive battles. Auto workers at Toledo, Ohio, and truck drivers (teamsters), in Minneapolis struck for recognition and negotiating rights. Despite the murderous attacks of armed strike breakers, hired by the bosses, the police and National Guardsmen, and vicious press witch hunts, the workers won most of their demands. The third battle in that year was on the west coast. Longshoremen struck against the company union and its ‘cattle market’ hiring system and for agreements taking in the whole coast. It was this strike which brought Harry Bridges into prominence. He showed tremendous organising skill and a rock like determination in the face of employer and state reaction. He would not be intimidated, though they tried very hard, and he could not be bought off though they tried hard to. Despite the murder of two dockers, the lies of the press and the treachery of Joe Ryan, the national longshoremen’s leader, the dockers won through, and were at least able to establish union hiring halls.
The battles of 1934 had the effect of exposing the leaders of the AF of L as spineless collaborators determined to defend their craft status and strongly resistant to the development of industrial unionism. The new general unions were expelled and they formed their own national body, the Congress of Industrial Organisations (CIO) in 1936. Harry Bridges took the new and militant International Longshoreman’s Union (ILWU) into the CIO, which by 1938 had nearly four million members.
By the mid-thirties he was a nationally known figure, hero-worshipped by his members and vilified by employers and press. Three times in 12 years he was hauled before judicial enquiries aimed at having him deported. Hundreds of fraudulent witnesses were used against him including a number of former trusted comrades. Twice he was convicted for alleged, but never proven, membership of a subversive organisation, and was saved only by eleventh hour decisions of the Supreme Court.
Unlike so many trade union leaders Bridges has shown no interest in personal aggrandisement, has not run his union like a Chicago mob and has lived a modest existence. He maintained the loyalty of the membership even during the hysterical Macarthyite period – which said something for his integrity. However, he has an achilles heel, his consistent alignment with the Stalinists. During the war he threw himself – and his members – enthusiastically into the war effort, signing and maintaining a no strike agreement. He also used the machine bureaucratically against critics, especially from the left and demonstrated a very unsympathetic attitude to the campus rebellions of the late sixties. However, certainly his worst ‘crime’ was his pioneering of a Devlin style productivity bargain on the West Coast in the late fifties, which resulted in the depletion of the dock labour force at a time of rising unemployment.
Comrades interested in following up the American trade union issues of the period will not get a great deal of help from this book. The author shines in his retelling of the judicial procedures, but he certainly does not live up to his subtitle.
Bridges’ attitudes to the big issues are touched on in only a cursory manner and we are left in ignorance. Perhaps it is not too surprising since Larrowe tells us in the foreword that the subject himself, though alive and kicking, would give him no help at all in writing the book!
 



Hugh Gaitskell 1906-63
Ed. W.T. Rodgers
Thames & Hudson, 25s.
This is a collection of essays, most of which are highly personal reflections on the various writers’ relationships with Hugh Gaitskell. Written as it was immediately after his death, and edited by his arch-disciple Bill Rodgers, one could hardly expect to find a balanced judgment, and sure enough there is not one. For the most pan the contributions are so loaded with nostalgia for the ‘lost leader’ or ‘chum’ that they offer little of value for the serious student of politics. However, three of the fifteen essays, those by Michael Postan, David Wood and Arthur Schlesinger Jnr, are of interest because here, in stating Gaitskell’s position on Marxism, the mixed economy, and the Atlantic Alliance, the writers are by implication stating the position of the political arm of the Labour movement: the complete rejection of a class-based, in favour of a nation-based, ideology. The fact that Gaitskell’s general strategy of far-right reformism was never attacked from a class position (the Bomb – always the moral issue; even Clause Four – ‘the Nation should reap the benefits ...’) is a sad reflection on the political awareness of the party, and the result is that all opposition, all criticism, has crumbled, at a time when greater inroads are likely to be made into working-class standards.
A critical evaluation of Gaitskell and his times could be a valuable contribution to an understanding of the situation of the class and the party since the war; this, despite the extravagant claims of the blurb, is not it.



£60 a Second on Defence
Raymond Fletcher
MacGibbon & Kee, 15s.
This little book is well worth an hour or two of one’s time. In a very readable way it gives a comprehensive factual account of the farce of British defence policy since 1945. The writer has two main themes: firstly, the massive waste of funds and technical skill on project after project, which did not start with the return of the Tories in 1951 – although it has reached its most sublime with the Swift Aircraft (£22 millions) and Blue Streak (£84 millions) – but when the Labour Government in 1945 cheerfully entered the arms race and presented Parliament with a bill for £100 millions in 1951, for unspecified atomic research; secondly, the persistent government secrecy and duplicity regarding plans and accounts. A Labour Party firmly committed to a bi-partisan defence policy can make no fundamental criticism, with the result that, as Mr Fletcher points out, Russian intelligence knows more about British Defence than do the British people. In his brief analysis of the causes of mounting costs Mr Fletcher pays no attention to the theory that the arms race plays an indispensable part in modern capitalism’s struggle against the damaging effects of over-production.
However, this criticism apart, the book is worth reading for its collection of useful figures on the background to the subject. How many people know, for example, that a short time ago the Army paid out £1,600,000 for 1,250,000 pairs of boots (enough for 5 pairs per soldier) only to find them surplus to requirements, selling them for £576,000!?

