

What are the forces in this month’s election and what are the prospects for the left? Bassem Chit reports
* * *
The elections in Lebanon have always been a peculiar affair involving electoral alliances between sectarian parties. But the elections on 7 June have international resonance. For the first time in Lebanon’s history the opposition movement headed by Hizbollah could form the next government.
The main electoral battle is between the opposition March 8 Alliance and the loyalist March 14 Alliance. Hassan Nasrallah’s Hizbollah and Michel Aoun’s mainly Christian Free Patriotic Movement are leading the opposition camp, while Saad Hariri’s Future Current and the Phalange Party are leading the loyalist camp.
Nasrallah expressed his wish to form a national unity government in the event of a victory. Hariri rejected the offer and said that if the opposition wins, his bloc will not take part in government.
US secretary of state Hillary Clinton, fearing its allies might be ousted, showed up unannounced in Beirut last month and made an implicit threat of aid reduction in case the opposition wins. Even the US’s vice president Joe Biden came and pleaded for a vote against Hizbollah.
Within the opposition, Hizbollah is leading the battle for the support of the resistance, while Aoun, with great vivacity, is leading the battle against corruption with vague Barack Obama style promises of “change”.
The March 14 Alliance, on the other hand, is having a hard time following up. They are mainly focusing on smearing the opposition as agents of Syria.
It is unquestionable that the mood is shifting against March 14. Since the 1990s the policies of Rafik Hariri and his son Saad have mainly focused on borrowing money and then selling the $40 billion accumulated debt to local banks with sky-high interest rates. As a result the state is going bankrupt, and is pushing privatisation.
Although the opposition reflects a real antagonism against the rule of the financial and banking bourgeoisie (represented by Hariri and his allies) it is far from being a real agent for change. It has been pushing for privatisation within the current national unity government.
The minister of labour, who is a leading member of Hizbollah’s parliamentary bloc, has rejected the trade unions’ demands to raise the monthly minimum wage from $200 to $600, offering only a mere $330.
The opposition represents the interests of small businesses (about 30 percent of the population), sections of the middle class, and the bourgeoisie who were harmed by Hariri’s financial policies. They are quite likely to ignore working class demands.
The left in Lebanon has been slowly recovering from a series of defeats going back to the civil war. It also faced heavy repression during the Syrian occupation that followed. But it was able to re-emerge as an independent force in its support for the resistance during Israel’s war on Lebanon in 2006 and with the stand it took against the invasion of Gaza.
Moreover we have seen a growing involvement of the left in the trade unions, accompanied by a revival in protests and strikes. This found its clearest expression in the elections for the leadership of the Communist Party in February. The left wing head of the militant teachers’ union, Hanna Gharib, won, thereby reversing the previous leadership’s flirtations with neoliberalism.
The victory shows that the left is beginning to regain its role in providing an alternative for ordinary people crushed by neoliberalism while maintaining a principled stand against imperialism.
The Communist Party, with the support of the rest of the left, is going into the elections calling for radical economic and political reforms. It is entering the electoral battle with five candidates in five districts. Although the sectarian electoral system is biased against the left, the elections are a good opportunity to widen support for our side.
The main task ahead is to defeat the US-backed March 14 Alliance, and at the same time to build a real independent organisation of the working class that is able to stand firm against the neoliberal policies the opposition and the loyalists are both committed to.
We want to build resistance to imperialism, war and neoliberalism.
 



Demonstrations and sit-ins have been organised daily in Beirut and other cities in Lebanon since the beginning of Israel’s aggression against Gaza.
During the first few hours of the war, groups of students and young workers from Palestinian and Lebanese left wing and socialist organisations organised a sit-in in front of the United Nations headquarters in Beirut.
This sit-in has become the centre of a wave of protests and demonstrations. There was a march from the city centre to the Egyptian embassy on Sunday 28 December.
Barbed wire, soldiers and riot police were in place to protect the embassy.
Demonstrators chanted against Egyptian dictator Hosni Mubarak and called for Egypt’s borders with Gaza to be opened.
The demonstration drew in people from the surrounding neighbourhoods and there were clashes with security forces.
Similar demonstrations and sit-ins took place in other major cities and the Palestinian refugee camps.
 
Gathering
That evening the Lebanese resistance group Hizbollah called for a big gathering in the southern suburbs of Beirut the following day, which drew in tens of thousands of people.
These protests spilled over to a mass rally on New Year’s Eve and a new round of demonstrations.
When news of the Israeli land invasion came through, the sit-in called for a march on the US embassy located in the hills above Beirut.
The army and police fired water cannons and tear gas at the protesters after we broke through three lines of security forces.
Our battle is to break through the silence of the Arab regimes and convince people to take to the streets in support of the resistance and against the collaboration of our rulers.
“Regime change” – removing the Arab rulers by a movement from below – is now the phrase on everyone’s lips. Our regimes are politically weak and have failed their people on all questions.
Only the masses can create the necessary change and their voice is beginning to be heard.
 



I have read Ghada Karmi’s piece with great interest. She gives an excellent insight on the current political developments within Palestine.
Although Karmi’s views and observations are correct, one cannot ignore the pessimism that takes over her conclusion.
It is definitely true that the liberation of Palestine under the banner of a one-state solution cannot and would not be done solely through the struggle of the Palestinian people alone. And as we have seen during Israel’s onslaught on Gaza, hundreds of thousands of people all around the globe rallied in defence of Gaza and in support of resistance which on the one hand had an immense impact in halting the Israeli offensive, and on the other underlined the international aspect of the cause.
But we have to always keep in mind that the political success that the global anti-war movement has achieved could have never been done without the resilience of the Palestinian people.
People marched on the streets of Cairo, Beirut, London and Paris, because they saw their brothers and sisters fighting against the most vicious weapons of imperialism and capitalism. It is solidarity that brought the Israeli aggression to a halt, and it is solidarity from within and without that will bring liberation to Palestine.



 


Bassem Chit
Beirut, Lebanon



 







Recent events exposed the weakness of the US-backed government and both the strength and limitations of the Hezbollah-led opposition, argues Bassem Chit.



* * *
Lebanon’s 14 March coalition government has been an ally of US and European imperialism since it took power in 2005. The coalition capitalised on popular resentment against Syria’s 29-year occupation to push for a neoliberal, pro-imperialist agenda. The government increased the role of “domestic intelligence” agencies in coordination with the US, and formed an armed militia under the guise of private security companies. They hoped that these security companies would become powerful enough to match Hezbollah. So the government could wage Israel and the US’s war on the resistance.
In early May the government discovered that Hezbollah was monitoring military aircraft landing at Beirut International Airport and operating a secret military communication system. The government fired the head of security at the airport – a man close to the resistance – and closed the communications network.
This was a declaration of war. Hezbollah and its allies reacted swiftly. In a few days of fighting they swept away these militias destroying the “US project”. The rapid defeat of the government revealed the hollowness of their popular support. It represents a massive victory for the resistance. The government capitulated at peace talks held in Doha, Qatar.
But despite this success, Hezbollah and its allies face difficult questions. The opposition has been pushing for a national unity government, using popular resentment against 14 March to get more seats in the cabinet, ministries and so on.
Yet any challenge to neoliberalism is missing. The 14 March government has implemented “economic reforms” such as the removal of protection on local produce, and massive cuts in social benefits and state services. By showing little concern over the growing anger against neoliberal policies, the opposition has stated that there will be no change of direction with the new government.
The most important evidence for this was the general strike called by the opposition in January 2007. The strike was organised to put “street pressure” on the government, but it turned out to be, as one Hezbollah official said, “a popular Intifada”.
While the opposition leadership demanded a bigger role in the cabinet, the movement called for the government to fall, higher wages, less taxes, cheaper bread and policies to tackle the shortage of water and electricity.
As this movement was threatening the opposition’s control over the “street” the general strike was called off, just as it was beginning to bite. Despite the opposition’s powerful resistance to imperialism, it does not represent the interests of the working class.
There is a second weakness in the opposition strategy. The Doha peace deal does not present any real solution to the sectarian political system. The opposition only wanted the electoral system reformed.
By accepting a rearrangement of the sectarian allocation of power, the opposition has made its peace with the system. This means they will only succeed in delaying a new crisis. The signal they are sending is that they are willing to form a “bourgeois united front” against the interests of the working class.
As socialists we oppose such a move, and are pushing harder for class politics. We support the right of the resistance to bear arms, but we also support the people who hold these weapons, the people who help the resistance fighters and gave shelter to those displaced during Israel’s 2006 war on Lebanon. The resistance’s victory in July 2006 came from the masses, not, as Hezbollah claim, “from heaven”.
The economic problems are those of everyday life. Today over a third of the population live under the official poverty line. The minimum wage has remained at $200 per month – the official poverty line – since 1996.
The victory for the resistance over imperialism provides a golden opportunity for the left. The ruling class will try to build illusions that Lebanon’s sectarianism is “embedded within society”, but recent struggle has seen a slow withering away of sectarianism, to be replaced by growing class antagonism. Hope, more than ever, lies within the grasp of the working class.
 



When we marched through Beirut we felt the world had changed. This was the day when you took sides – either you were with the bombs or you stood out against imperialism.
After years of silence the left in Lebanon was able to organise itself and to draw in ordinary people. We felt our little march was part of a global movement that was destroying the barriers between east and west.
 



Some 2,300 electricity workers in Lebanon have been on strike for the past 79 days. They are demanding permanent contracts from Électricité du Liban (EdL), the state department that manages electricity in the country.
The electricity workers are currently employed through casual or daily contracts. They do not receive any social security, pensions or benefits. They are banned from striking or forming unions. And thousands of other state workers in Lebanon are in a similar situation.
The strike has been entirely self-organised. Workers have formed committees to represent them, bypassing the structures of official politics – and bypassing the sectarian political climate that dominates in Lebanon.
One reflection of that organisation is a sit-in by striking electricity workers inside EdL’s headquarters. Shifts are organised every day with delegates reporting back to a general assembly.
These assemblies take decisions regarding the sit-in and its organisation. They also include daily reports on EdL’s accounts and losses to demonstrate the economic strength of the strike.
The state has responded to the strike with extreme hostility. Power minister Gebran Bassil refused to even shake hands with strikers’ delegates.
 
Thugs
Bassil is affiliated to the Free Patriotic Movement (FPM), a Christian party allied to Hizbollah. He has pressured other Lebanese political parties to take a stand against the strike. On Monday he mobilised FPM thugs to try and kick the workers out of the EdL headquarters.
The arguments used by Bassil against the strike are fundamentally sectarian in nature. He says giving the casual workers fixed contracts would destabilise the Christian-Muslim balance in state employment. The majority of the casual labourers are Muslim.
The workers’ response to Bassil’s arguments has been forthright. They insist that permanent contracts and benefits are a right and not a sectarian deal to be manipulated by politicians.
Three workers were injured on Monday when FPM thugs, including former special forces members, threw bricks at them and attacked them with knives.
The three workers’ names were Omar, Ali and Edgar – one Sunni, one Shia and one Christian, symbolising workers’ solidarity across the sectarian divide.
The strikers issued a statement after the attack that declared, “We are neither Christian nor Muslims – we are workers who have rights, and we won’t step back until we get them.”
 
Foiled
Another attempted mob attack on the sit-in was foiled on Thursday. Socialists and activists gathered in support of the workers and stood their ground until the thugs had sloped off.
Political leaders in Lebanon fear the electricity workers could trigger a wave of strikes across the public sector. Civil service workers have already held a one day general strike. This took place on Tuesday and received strong support across the country.
Successive Lebanese governments have promoted the casualisation of labour under the guidance of the World Trade Organisation and World Bank. These attacks on workers’ rights go hand in hand with the privatisations that have been driven through over the past couple of decades.
The ruling class is also worried that the mutinous spirit could spread to the private sector. Private companies have been encouraged by the state to adopt similar employment practices, taking on workers on daily contracts with no benefits.
The EdL workers strike has radicalised a new generation of workers in Lebanon and inspired them to fight back against casualisation. And their solidarity has demonstrated the central role of the working class in overcoming sectarian politics in Lebanon.
For all of these reasons we urge trade unions and socialists across the world to send solidarity messages to the striking workers of Lebanon – and to support their battle against sectarianism, privatisation and casualisation.
 



Recent defections from Bashar al-Assad’s government show that it is crumbling. It can only hang on by brutally crushing the popular uprising.
Sections of the mass movement have been forced to take up arms in response to the regime’s relentless attacks.
The real issue is the survival of the movement itself. The revolution is very open – it does not have a centralised leadership. In many ways this is a strength as it makes it harder for the regime to target.
Those opposing Assad on the ground in Syria are not acting under the mandate of outside forces. International powers have been trying to intervene but the revolution has not been hijacked.
We have to stand with the revolution against the regime and at same time stand against international intervention.
The revolt is developing from below. Local Coordinating Committees continue to organise despite facing shelling and the threat of regime spies.
Mass demonstrations still happen. Often they are symbolic, keeping political activity going in neighbourhoods won to revolution.
 
Alternative
Here there is a level of self organisation of daily life creating a sense of an alternative. Leadership is emerging organically out of struggle.
In some villages women have been organising solidarity sit-ins for those who have been detained by the regime.
People make neighbourhoods secure, doctors organise in hospitals, committees develop to look after food, to care for refugees and so on.
It looks different to the revolution in Egypt, where some important political breakthroughs took place before the revolution started. The working class had already gained some experience and the roots of organisation.
But in Syria there has been an absence of politics for 40 years in reality. Now many workers are part of this uprising, but not on the demonstrations in organised blocks.
The fight is not easy but new political forces are coming through. There is a strong sense of solidarity across borders, people feel connected by these historic struggles against their rulers.
 



A quarter of a million workers, students and professionals marched through the streets of Beirut on Wednesday of last week in one of the biggest workers’ demonstrations in Lebanon’s history. Schools, shops and businesses closed for a day in solidarity with the demonstrators.
Christians and Muslims poured in from the poor suburbs, chanting that “our rights are a red line” that can’t be crossed and calling on the government to resign.
The march, organised by the teachers’ union and the Union Coordination Committee, has heralded the return of class politics in a country divided by religious sectarianism and pro and anti-Syrian political parties.
For the Lebanese Communist Party, one of the oldest parties in the Middle East, the demonstration is its biggest mobilisation since the civil war ended in 1990.
The anger of the marchers was directed at Lebanese prime minister Fouad Siniora.
His reforms will slash pensions, increase VAT from 10 to 12 percent, raise fuel prices by 30 percent and impose short term contracts on government workers and teachers.
The head of the teachers’ union and veteran communist, Hanna Gharib, told the demonstrators, “We have come from all over Lebanon to say ‘no’ to the short term contracts, ‘yes’ to protecting our right to medical care, salaries and pensions.”
Siniora has just returned from a visit to the US where he was warmly welcomed by George Bush. His reform package is hailed as the economic version of the anti-Syrian Cedar Revolution of 2005 that he hopes will attract more foreign investment.
But the demonstration has turned Lebanese politics on its head.
The Cedar Revolution was held up as proof that the invasion of Iraq was creating democratic ripples across the region. After the anti-Syrian protests, US diplomats celebrated their success by colonising the restaurants and bars of downtown Beirut.
US military officers surveyed the capabilities of the Lebanese army to tackle Hizbollah, the guerrilla movement that drove the Israelis out of southern Lebanon.
Now their optimism has begun to melt away. The promise of a new Lebanon looks very much like the old Lebanon, with rising cost of living and unpopular neo-liberal policies.
The government has been confronted by the return of class politics, and it is finding it can no longer wave a wand, cry “Syrian plot” and shame people off the streets.
The biggest failure belongs to the leaders of the Cedar Revolution. The government is an alliance of the far right Phalangists, the Socialist Party of Walid Jumblatt and Saad Hariri’s Future Movement.
The demonstration was a public defeat for them. As the unions began to organise the protest, Future Movement activists toured schools to dissuade teachers from joining the protest. They were given short shrift.
So the government accused the protest organisers of being the paid hirelings of Syria. Saad Hariri, the son of slain former prime minister Rafik Hariri, denounced the march as a “Syrian-backed attempt to destabilise Lebanon”.
Siniora has made tackling the country’s massive £21 billion debt a priority. The debt, which is owned by local banks, was run up during the breakneck reconstruction following the end of the war.
Whole areas of the capital were rebuilt while infrastructure projects – dubbed “highways to the sky” – bypassed deprived areas.
Ordinary people began to object to the billions of dollars being thrown at prestigious development projects while large swathes of the country sank into poverty, with intermittent electricity, poor services and unemployment.
The demonstration was backed by several opposition parties, among them Michele Aoun’s Free Patriotic Movement and Hizbollah.
Although they were on opposite sides during the Cedar Revolution, they were united in the hope they could stop the demonstration calling for the resignation of the government.
Both these parties want to use the rising antagonism against the government to boost their popularity ahead of parliamentary elections.
The left has to push for more mobilisation and radicalisation on class issues – especially now that ordinary people are fed up with the current order. The demonstration is a historic moment that the left in Lebanon cannot afford to miss.
 



The US’s attempt to “democratise” the Middle East – or, to put it bluntly, to create puppet regimes – has had two spectacular failures recently.
In Iraq this democracy has created sectarian chaos, while in Palestine the US-backed elections produced a victory for the Islamic movement Hamas – not exactly what George Bush had in mind when he mapped out his grand plan for democracy in the region.
But the US administration thinks that Lebanon could be the silver lining of some very dark clouds. Last month George Bush stated in a meeting with Lebanese prime minister Faud Siniora that “there is no question in my mind that Lebanon can serve as a great example for what is possible in the broader Middle East”.
Lebanon’s “cedar revolution” is being touted as the shining example of regime change on the cheap. Since the mass protest drove out the Syrians last year, Lebanon has seen an ascending flow of US interference. It varies from direct political manipulation and media campaigns to discreet funding of civil movements through “NGOs”.
A few months after the protests I received a call from a friend telling me that a US NGO called Freedom House wanted to meet “Lebanese activists”. Being a well known activist on the left and one of the organisers of the anti-war movement, I was intrigued by the purpose of the meeting. A few of us were invited to an expensive British restaurant in one of Beirut’s trendy neighbourhoods.
An American-Lebanese woman representing Freedom House was accompanied by a “retired revolutionary” from Ukraine. The guy was eager to get us on board, and boasted of the joys of being “US-funded” – he added that after Ukraine’s Orange Revolution he even had the opportunity to “meet George Bush.” He obviously thought that was enough to close the deal.
After some questioning about the intentions of Freedom House it became clear they wanted to “fund youth movements to help the process of democratisation”. At that point we told them that if they really wanted democracy to thrive in Lebanon they should leave the country immediately. Undeterred, they returned a few months later wanting to fund “transparency workshops and projects”. Again we refused.
That the US is wanting to finance Lebanese leftists might seem odd, but it is part of a pattern of political interference that emerged since the invasion of Iraq. During the “cedar revolution” US ambassador Jeffrey Feltman invited many of the leaders of the anti-Syrian movement to dinner parties. The US embassy also had a direct hand in fomenting the anti-Syrian protests.
The New York Post reported how, at the height of last year’s protests, “the CIA and European intelligence services were quietly giving money and logistical support to organisers of the anti-Syrian protests to ramp up pressure on Syrian president Bashar al-Assad ... The secret program is similar to previous support of pro-democracy movements in Georgia and Ukraine, which also led to peaceful demonstrations.”
Included in this support were the billboard sized electronic “Freedom Clock” for “Freedom Square” in order to mark the “countdown to freedom” – all supplied by the Pulse of Freedom organisation, funded by the NGO Spirit of America.
Now the country is awash with dubious NGOs. Among them is the United States Committee for a Free Lebanon, headed by Ziad Abdel Nour. The son of wealthy right wing Lebanese MP, Nour let the cat out of the bag when he declared, “We have absolutely no problem with heavy US involvement in Lebanon. On an economic level, military level, political level, security level ... whatever it is. Israel is the 51st state of the United States. Let Lebanon be the 52nd state. And if the Arabs don’t like it, tough luck.”
Earlier this year we got a sense of our role as the 52nd state. The Chicago Tribune reported that US army officers were in the country to assess the capabilities of the Lebanese military to confront Hezbollah, the resistance movement that drove the Israelis out of south Lebanon.
As well as trying to tempt the left into its orbit and bankroll the many genuine civil movements, there is a whiff of arrogance about the US in Lebanon. Embassy staff and their hangers-on regularly colonise the cafes and restaurants in downtown Beirut. It seems no expense will be spared to wine and dine their way to regime change.
Yet the US has a problem. The sparkle has gone out of the “cedar revolution” and, far from delivering stability and prosperity, the country is sinking into economic malaise. The slogan that marked the revolution, “We have had enough of your lies, now leave”, is still being chanted, but now its is not aimed at the Syrians but at the US-backed politicians that run the country. You can’t buy that.
 







They say everything evolves around the idea of death,
we all aim for death,
we all know one thing is certain
but as I draw these ideas into my head, I find no meaning
if death is the only persisting truth
then why is it only recognized through life
why is it so essential to live if we all long for death
in every minute of our lives, in every thought, word and sentence
we are only pushing death away
do we actually need to recognize death,
is it that important to be thinking of an end
 that we have no way of knowing when it happens
emptiness is another word for silence
death is another word for sanctuary
we have created a world that is horrible enough
to push us to believe in death as the only purpose
is death the problem or is it us
is life depressing, or do we make it of such
we draw our own history letter by letter, point by point
we create our ends and we create our beginnings
we can lit the lights or we can put them down
we decide our paths in every decision in every word and in every look
it is time we look into life in the purpose of making something out of it
it is time to stop looking at our ends, and look for new beginnings
we have endured so much pessimism.
take a deep breath and hit the road, it is time for change
it is our time to write our own history
we are no pones inside the course of life, we are life,
 and without us life has no mere existence.



 



The relation between the individual and society is an organic and dialectical relation, it is not a relation between 2 separate entities but rather a relation like the relation between the human cells and the human organic structure.
Choices of individuals, the inter-individual relations creates the social dynamic, and the social dynamic sets the condition that an individual live within, so society is affected by the choices of individuals as much as the choices of individuals are affected by society.
The rhetoric that lets that individuals dictate their own history or future, without taking into consideration the role of society in shaping such history and future, is in itself contradictory because individuals can not exist as a self conscious individual without its presence within the existing social conditions and constructs.
The self development relies mainly on the existence of the self within society, individuals acquire language/methods of expression and their self consciousness within the realm of society; individuals are not free from free from the dictation of the social development and realization, societal progression and development as well is not free from the choices taken by individuals.
As this link presides over the social dynamic, thus the emancipation of society from one social context to another necessitates the emancipation of the individual that constitutes society itself, also the emancipation of the individual can not be realized unless there is a mass emancipation of society.
Political individualism is not but a fake realization of the individual, it creates a frame of progressive genuine ideas without any occurring changes within the social construct, it is progressive in comparison with the prevailing ideas in society, but at the same it is unable to relate to the rising contradictions within society, thus it develops as an intellectual ghetto which is able to take a position from the current social realm but unable to change it.
This break in communication between the formed intellectual autonomy and society as a whole requires from these individuals a defence mechanism, an identity that sets them different from the masses, and with the permanent break with society it develops itself as a lifestyle, and sometimes it develops into a puritan left afraid from its own contradictions, it struggles to stay uniform and enclosed.
 



Politically things are moving very fast. It’s already clear that we have a historic chance to build a new workers’ movement that transcends sectarian divisions out of the rubble of Lebanon.
The relief effort was a real test for Lebanese society.
The fact that people came together from across the different sects to deliver relief shows that on some level we have got rid of sectarianism as a social problem. But we need to drive this much deeper.
There is a great deal of anger at the Lebanese government and I don’t think the government will last long. People feel that it was covering up for the Israeli aggression while the resistance was winning the fights on the ground.
It took the government of Fouad Siniora a whole week to come out against aggression. This is because a section of them hate their own people – to a degree, they wanted the population to be punished in order to win a political argument against the resistance.
But it’s an argument they have now lost. The Hariri gang, the Lebanese Forces and other pro-US forces behind last year’s so called “cedar revolution” have been defeated. The next phase of politics will be led by Hizbollah and Michael Aoun’s Free Patriotic Movement.
Now we need a grassroots movement that can fight for social justice and democracy across the Middle East. Much of the traditional left here has not grasped that Israel’s defeat is not just a win within Lebanon, but a defeat for the very idea of imperialism, and a defeat for the Arab regimes supported by imperialism.
The key task for the international left as a whole is to look at this question of imperialism, how to fight it and how to build movements that can organise internationally against imperialism – and not just in emergency situations.
 



Amid the carnage and slaughter in Lebanon a new force is emerging that has confounded Israel – the tremendous unity shown by ordinary Lebanese towards each other.
This has, more than anything else, become the defining moment for a country with a tangled history of religious sectarianism.
Lebanon is a country that lives in the shadow of civil war, but Israel miscalculated in thinking it could rekindle sectarian hatred in its battle against Hizbollah. This is what they meant when they threatened to “turn the country back 20 years”.
Ordinary Lebanese are rediscovering unity in resistance, which had seemed lost during 15 years of civil war (1975–90). The majority have backed Hizbollah in its struggle against Israel.
Yet Hizbollah is trapped by the major contradictions of Lebanese society – between class and religious sects.
Hizbollah was transformed by its role in the resistance from a purely sectarian party to one that appealed to nationalism, yet it is a movement that is still embedded in the Shia Muslim community. It is a party of resistance not revolution. But it would be a mistake to characterise it, as author Gilbert Achcar did, as “utterly bourgeois in social structure”.
Hizbollah is a child of a religious sectarian system where the Shia are losers rather than winners. Hizbollah’s leader Hassan Nasrallah was raised in the slums in east Beirut, an area of grinding poverty and the scene of the first sectarian massacre by right wing Christian militias during the civil war.
Hizbollah’s two cabinet members reflect the expectations of ordinary people. One of the party’s first acts when it was given control over the ministry of labour was to remove the ban on Palestinian refugees’ right to work, and to campaign for the rights of peasants.
 
Representation
Because the party is based among the poorer sections of Lebanese society, it has a layer of trade union activists and officials who, in recent industrial disputes, have sought to represent all workers.
Yet the organisation also has support among shop keepers and small businesses – this is evident from some of its fee paying schools which cater for more wealthy sections of the Shia community.
Its resistance to Israel has created an audience beyond its base, but its political ideology and leadership are embedded in Shia religious beliefs.
Hizbollah has struggled to adapt to a Lebanese society that is itself changing. Before the civil war the majority lived in villages and worked the land. Now around two thirds of the population live in Beirut. Although the majority of neighbourhoods are dominated by one religious sect or another, most people’s workplaces are mixed.
Sectarianism is not merely an expression of hatred between religious groups – it is rooted in a system that gives privileges to one group over others. But during the civil war the mass of ordinary people were pushed into misery and poverty – hunger did not distinguish between religious identities. The greatest division in the country became class, not religion.
The groundswell of support from all communities for the victims of Israel’s attacks shows the general revulsion against religious sectarianism. This desire for unity was reflected in the growing movement against neo-liberal policies, and anger at the growing chasm between rich and poor. Before Israel’s latest war, half a million Lebanese workers marched against the government’s economic policies.
This unity has been building for many years and is rooted in the resistance to Israeli occupation. Robert Pape looked at Lebanese suicide bombers that fought the Israelis in the 1980s. He found that out of 41, “Only eight were Islamic fundamentalists. Twenty seven were from leftist political groups like the Lebanese Communist Party and the Arab Socialist Union. Three were Christians. All were born in Lebanon.”
Whatever the outcome of this war, Lebanon faces a severe test. Building on the magnificent solidarity that has been the heart of a general resistance to Israel, we need a movement that can transcend one community. We have seen glimpses of this movement over the last month – and a vision of what Lebanon can become.
 



One of Gabriel García Márquez’s novels is called Chronicle of a Death Foretold. And sometimes deaths are like that – however painful, they are expected and perhaps (though not in the case of the García Márquez story) mark the conclusion of a fulfilled life.
But sometimes a death leaves you quite unreconciled, raging at the injustice of the world. This was what I felt when I heard on Wednesday last week of the death of the Lebanese revolutionary socialist Bassem Chit. He was only 34 when a heart attack struck him down.
I had known Bassem since the early 2000s. It was a time of political renewal, in Lebanon as elsewhere, as a new generation of activists sought to confront capitalist globalisation and George W. Bush’s war drive in the Middle East.
Bassem was one of a group of young socialists in Beirut who gravitated around the politics of the International Socialist Tendency (IST) – the international revolutionary current to which the Socialist Workers Party belongs.
Politics is necessarily complicated in Lebanon because of the sectarian carve-up between different religious denominations. Always in the background is the memory of the terrible civil war that devastated Lebanon between 1975 and 1990.
The civil war ended with Lebanon being reduced almost to a dependency of Syria (from which it had been carved out by French imperialism). The most powerful domestic political force is Hizbollah, the Shia Islamist movement closely aligned to the regime of Bashar al-Assad in Syria.
When Assad reacted to the popular revolution that exploded in Syria in 2011 by launching a sectarian civil war, huge numbers of Syrians fled to Lebanon. Many fear this war could spread to Lebanon, igniting another bloody confrontation.
Given Hizbollah’s active support for Assad, speaking up for the Syrian Revolution is a dangerous thing to do in Lebanon. But this didn’t hold Bassem back. He didn’t flinch from showing practical as well as verbal solidarity.
 
Principle
Bassem brought to all the perplexities and intricacies of Lebanon and Syria a lucidity that came, not simply from clarity of analysis, but also from firmness of principle.
His opposition to sectarianism was profound, with deep personal roots. His family came from a village close to the border with Israel, where sectarian divisions were exploited by the colonial powers, by Lebanon’s rulers, and recently by the Syrians and the Israelis.
When Bassem spoke – as he did, for example, at the SWP’s Marxism 2014 festival last summer, he always wove together a grasp of factual detail with his command of broader theoretical and political perspectives. One always learned from him.
There was a quality about Bassem that I can only describe as sweetness. I don’t mean this in a sentimental sense – he was unrelenting against the class enemy, comparing Assad to the Khmer Rouge leader Pol Pot. But there was something exceptional about the serenity with which Bassem approached concrete issues that reflected his confidence in himself and in his politics.
This serenity shouldn’t be confused with passivity. Bassem was an activist, who worked relentlessly to unite workers in Lebanon across the sectarian divisions.
He was one of the founders of the Socialist Forum, where supporters of the IS Tendency and the Fourth International in Lebanon are united in a common organisation.
Bassem was also an animating figure of the journal Permanent Revolution. This brings together revolutionary Marxists throughout the Arab world, and has had a significant impact in the couple of years since it was founded. I was looking forward to working with him in the cooperation Bassem proposed with the theoretical journal I edit, International Socialism.
Bassem’s death is a tremendous blow to his friends, and family, and comrades. But it’s hard to overstate the political loss the revolutionary left in the Middle East has suffered.
He was just entering his prime and beginning to exert his talents for intellectual analysis and political leadership.
We are going to miss Bassem terribly. But all we can do is continue on the road that we shared with him for a while. He would expect nothing less.
 



Yusef Khalil pays tribute to a Lebanese socialist remembered for his fighting spirit.
THE LEFT lost a dedicated fighter last week with the death of Lebanese revolutionary socialist Bassem Chit of a heart attack at the young age of 34. Fearless and full of energy and excitement, Bassem left an impact on everybody he touched.
I always looked forward to catching up with Bassem every time I was in Lebanon. I sometimes found it challenging to understand the prevailing sectarianism in Lebanese society and to counter it in my daily interactions. Every struggle, every movement, every demand for change seemed to be dismissed on sectarian grounds: the minister belongs to this sect; the workers are from this other sect; these key positions are held by this sectarian party; this union is under the influence of this secular party, which is today allied with that sectarian party; the demands of this movement may sound legitimate, but it would upset the balance with this other sect; and on and on.
But Bassem had a remarkable ability to break down complex issues and shed light on them in a clear, accessible manner. He would patiently, yet very passionately, explain that sectarianism is a product of capitalist relations in Lebanon; that all struggles of the oppressed deserved our support; and that to overthrow this capitalist sectarian system, we need a revolutionary party. Indeed, the day he left us, he was scheduled to give a talk to university students on “The Marxist analysis of social classes in Lebanon.”
Bassem’s conviction was contagious. His sharp analysis was indispensable to figuring out a perspective and the next steps for the left. As his friends have said, he was a reference point to many of us. He gave us hope.
“Bassem could capture your imagination with a passion that forced you to rethink many existing explanations, or simply reject dominant paradigms altogether,” wrote Moroccan activist Miriyam Aouragh for RS21. “Wherever he went, his interventions and contributions left a mark.”
Bassem was a consistent opponent of imperialism, sectarianism, clientelism and everything that weakens and divides the working class. He fought for his ideas tenaciously. This put him in conflict with other leftists/nationalists/secularists, who opportunistically compromised with sectarian Lebanese politics.
He also disagreed with those who saw that any of the Arab regimes were allies in the liberation of Palestine. According to Bassem, Zionism would not be defeated without the overthrow of Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad, the monarchs of the Gulf and the rest of the regimes that the Arab revolutionaries rose up against in 2011.

IT WAS these relations of geopolitics, patronage and limits of what is permissible that Bassem himself rebelled against. He stood on the side of the oppressed, no matter how difficult or dangerous that position was. As one of his friends said in a tribute, “Bassem won the hatred of some and the admiration of many more.”
Sawt Al Niswa (Voice of the Women), an independent feminist webspace, thanked Bassem for generously giving his time and support for their project. They remembered him with these words:
In a country and region increasingly sectarianized, segregated and besieged, and in dire need for radical action against racism, economic and political oppressions, Bassem continuously helped fight for the rights of the oppressed, the ostracized, the disenfranchised and the marginalized – not out of charity, but out of solidarity. For Bassem believed that the struggle for economic and social justice and the dismantling of the capitalist system and its neoliberal agenda were integrally linked to the claiming and defense of personal and political rights for everyone, everywhere.
With a sharp intellect and boundless energy, Bassem was an adept Marxist activist, as highly effective in theoretical debates as in concrete organizing. He worked tirelessly to ensure the continuous production of Permanent Revolution, the collaborative Arabic-language theoretical journal of revolutionary Marxism, which features analysis from across the region: Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, through to the Gulf and Iran.
His comrades in the Socialist Forum in Lebanon mourned him, saying that Bassem dedicated his life to the “liberation of humanity from all forms of hegemony, occupation and oppression. With his sudden departure, we lost more than a rare revolutionary activist. We also lost a unique leader with very creative initiatives. It will not be easy at all to fill the huge vacuum of his absence.”
That absence is felt beyond Lebanon. The Revolutionary Socialists in Egypt paid tribute to Bassem, writing:
It is no exaggeration to say that Bassem Chit gave his life [to] the cause of revolution and solidarity with the victims of oppression. He gave his life to the struggle against sectarianism in Lebanon and the Arab world, and to solidarity with the Palestinian people and their struggle for liberation, to the cause of the Syrian people and their revolution, and to expose the plight of refugees in Lebanon. He was a genuine internationalist fighter, who saw socialism as an achievable dream and a real hope, not only in Lebanon but the whole world: for humanity free from sectarianism, racism and false divisions.
Bassem was a towering figure on the Arab revolutionary Left. He had the unique ability to coordinate the issuing of a statement on behalf of revolutionary organizations in different countries and complete all the necessary discussions and corrections in half a day ...
We have lost a tremendous fighting spirit. We have lost a keen revolutionary intelligence. We have lost the theoretical and political contributions we were expecting from him in the long term.
Bassem will be sorely missed. He was taken from us way too early. To his family and his comrades, we send our deepest condolences.
And in the memory of Bassem, we renew our commitment to revolutionary socialism and to the realization of his dream and vision of a world where humans live in dignity, free from oppression and exploitation.
 







What explains sectarian divisions such as the Shia-Sunni divide in the Middle East?
Lebanese socialist Bassem Chit rejects claims that sectarianism is a “pre-modern” force and argues it is rooted in the pattern of capitalist development and crisis in the region.





There is a growing debate over the role of religious sectarianism in the Middle East since the outbreak of the Arab Revolutions. Most writing on the issue deals with the question from a cultural perspective. One of the most striking examples of such an approach is the debate surrounding the supposedly Shia-Sunni divide, which many authors treat as an extension of a conflict over who should have assumed power following the death of the Prophet Mohammed in 632 CE.
In such analyses history becomes an independent force by itself, transcending all the social developments and the changes that have taken place since the original schism.
Sectarianism is a modern phenomenon. It is the present that is making these connections to the past, not as an act of revenge for old battles, but to win those of today.
This employment of history in the service of the present is not unique. As Karl Marx put it in 1852 in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon, it is a symptom of a modern crisis:
“Precisely in such epochs of revolutionary crisis [the bourgeoisie] anxiously conjure up the spirits of the past to their service, borrowing from them names, battle slogans, and costumes in order to present this new scene in world history in time-honoured disguise and borrowed language.”
Sectarianism is the child of the present-day contradictions of modern Arab and Middle Eastern societies.
Its most vulgar outbursts always surface in times of crisis – the Maronite-Druze conflict in Mount Lebanon in the 1860s was a reflection of the contradictions arising from the introduction of capitalism. Similarly the 1975–1990 civil war saw the rise of sectarianism as a defining character of the political conflict, as a both a sign of the crisis of the newly established Lebanese state, and a strategy to destroy the mass popular movement at the time.
The US war on Iraq provided the context for the outburst of sectarian conflict, galvanising a long history of sectarian policies introduced by Saddam Hussein’s regime. The most recent examples of its appearance in Syria, Bahrain and occasionally Egypt, can only be understood in the context of the developing revolutionary struggles taking place across the region.
Sectarianism’s role in the political and ideological arena has always been centred on redefining a crisis in a new ideological form – an attempt to reproduce a “new” hegemony to conceal the crisis of bourgeois society. And although it is usually held up as an antidote to Arab nationalism, or lack of national unity, in reality it is a reflection of nationalism.
 
Nationalism
Both Arab nationalism and sectarianism were the products of the colonial era. They functioned as the premise for anti-colonial politics, and at the same time the justification of colonial rule. Although Arab nationalism masked itself in a secularist guise, in reality this was a myth, as it constantly adopted, used and co-opted religion to protect its rule.
Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser initiated reforms of the al-Azhar Mosque, which serves as the leading authority in Sunni Islam, to ensure its prominence over the Muslim Brotherhood and the more conservative Wahhabism promoted by Saudi Arabia.
In the 1970s Syrian dictator Hafiz al-Assad adopted sectarian and kinship-based favouritism to consolidate his rule. His Baathist regime built mosques and funded Islamic schools, raised the pay of the country’s Sunni religious establishment, propagated Islam in the mass media and encouraged a conservative Islamic establishment to legitimise his regime. In 1973 Assad introduced an amendment to the secular constitution which declared that “the religion of the president is Islam”.
On the other side of the same spectrum we have witnessed the development of a form of sectarian-nationalism, such as Shia-nationalism in Iran, and Wahhabi Sunni-nationalism in Saudi Arabia. Lebanon reflected a more unsettled version of this fusion, where Ta’ayush (common-living and national unity) defined its national identity, but sectarianism its practice.
The reason why many consider sectarianism as a “counter-nationalist” and a “pre-modern expression” is due to the fact that most dominant interpretations of the historical developments of modern Arab and Middle Eastern societies are crude and Eurocentric – in which the development of capitalism (and thus modernity) is understood to follow the European model. In this case the understanding of modernity is that of an ideological break with religious establishments and ideas.
However, history and capitalism do not develop in a uniform fashion, but by a process of “combined and uneven development” as Leon Trotsky describes it. So “modernity” as the ideological expression, and the interpretation of the accomplished transition from feudalism to capitalism, cannot be uniform itself, but reflects historical trajectories that differ between one region and another.
The reason why religion still plays an important role in defining political expression in Arab and Middle Eastern societies is because this transition did not happen as a product of slow and long revolutionary transformations, but by Western colonial rule. Capitalism created both nationalism and sectarianism defined as a reaction, and a by-product, of the crude social transformations it generated.
Before colonial occupation religious institutions in the Middle East did not rise to the commanding heights as those in the West. Instead they played a servile role to the existing autocracies. Under the Ottoman Empire the Qanun (the secular legal system) coexisted with religious law (Sharia).
During the period of deteriorating feudal power religious institutions shifted their allegiance to the new bourgeois classes, and in some cases these institutions expanded their power base through the acquisition of land or by encouraging capitalist investments in land under their control.
The newly formed bourgeois states rose not as a revolutionary break with religion (as it happened in many places in Europe), but rather by legitimising its authority. This can be widely observed across the region in the personal-status laws, for example, among others.
 
Revolution
In that sense there is not one type of sectarianism, but different versions, each following the historically specific conditions of development of bourgeois politics, and how it formulates its language of competition and hegemony in relation to religion.
In Egypt the Coptic Christian community has become a battleground between the Muslim Brotherhood and the Military Council, in which the military presented itself as protector (although many attacks on the Coptic churches were conducted or facilitated by the military), against the sectarian “terrorism” of the Muslim Brotherhood.
In Syria the Assad regime portrays itself as the protector of religious minorities in the face of the “dark forces” of the “Sunni-Takfiri” groups, while Lebanon’s Hezbollah, a Shia political force, justifies its military intervention in support of the regime both as a battle against the “US-Israeli-Takfiri Plot”, and to protect the legacy of Zainab, the daughter of Imam Ali (cousin of the prophet), who was captured in the battle of Karbala in 680 CE, by adopting the slogan, “Zainab shall not be captured twice”. This expresses both the nationalist and sectarian dimension of its intervention.
The Al Qaida affiliated Islamic State of Iraq and Syria/Levant (ISIS) and its rivals in Jabhat al-Nusra are both examples of newly formed sectarian organisations in Syria. They arose as a reaction to the weak structures of the Free Syrian Army and to the brutal onslaught of the Syrian regime on the popular uprising. Many people who did not agree with their deeply sectarian ideology found in them the discipline lacking in other fighting organisations in Syria.
Both sectarianism and nationalism provide the opportunity in which the ruling classes can discipline and divide the working class (being the major threat to their rule) in order to maintain its dominance, and to reproduce their hegemony in a fabricated “heroic battle”, to contain their crisis. Again, as Marx wrote in the Eighteenth Brumaire:
“But unheroic though bourgeois society is, it nevertheless needed heroism, sacrifice, terror, civil war, and national wars to bring it into being. And in the austere classical traditions of the Roman Republic the bourgeois gladiators found the ideals and the art forms, the self-deceptions, that they needed to conceal from themselves the bourgeois-limited content of their struggles and to keep their passion on the high plane of great historic tragedy.”
Within the fear and terror produced by the established order, sectarian and nationalist politics find their potential, and in that sense workers can adopt sectarian ideas if left uncontested – as they are portrayed as the “only immediate” solution for either protection (Shia workers in Lebanon abiding to Hezbollah’s politics and Sunni workers abiding to the different Sunni political parties); or for victory (Syrians who subscribe to sectarian groups as they are better funded and more organised); or Egyptian workers who identify with the Military Council or the Muslim Brotherhood as an immediate solution for the lack of a viable revolutionary alternative.
For such reasons revolutionary socialists should not dismiss sectarianism as simply a crude tactic of divide and rule. We must also address the historical conditions for its existence and its prevalence by questioning the very nature of modern Arab and Middle Eastern societies and the role of religion in them.
We need to develop the revolutionary counter-ideology, in which not only are the conditions of exploitation uncovered, but also the means of ideological hegemony are constantly contested, and where revolutionary secularism does not reflect either “secular-nationalism” or “secular-liberalism”, but rather to build on the global struggle for socialism.
 



Bassem Chit’s critique of Arab nationalism
by Simon Assaf

Identity and entity
The reduction of current struggles in Lebanon and Syria in particular, and across the Middle East in general, to purely abstract nationalistic, sectarian and “identitarian” dimensions is one of the dominating features of the analytical and methodical logic of the Arab nationalist and Stalinist left. [1]
Their analysis fails to consider the social structures involved and their contradictions, the ideological engines powering such national or sectarian identities. Nor does it take into account the crises that they experience, in particular those imposed by the revolutionary process; a process that is ongoing despite its fluctuations and fractures.
The methodology of the Arab nationalist and Stalinist left sees the situation in the Middle East and in the Lebanese and Syrian region in particular, through the lens of antagonistic binaries and approaches society and its contradictions through a set of predetermined cultural and national/religious identities. Therefore we hear of “Sunni-Shia strife”, the Oriental culture, Arabs, the West, Orientalism, identity crisis, sectarian rule, Christians, Muslims, etc. According to such characterisations, these identities are treated as independent structures and established entities that interact among themselves in a relationship of convergence, divergence and struggle on the local, regional and international theatres of the shifting balance of power.
The movements of the masses are therefore evaluated according to their closeness to a particular regional or international alliance and their distance from another. The “resistance” axis is said to include Iran and Syria, and is supported by Russia. An opposing “American-Zionist-Takfir” [2] axis is viewed as being backed by the US and includes regimes like Saudi Arabia and Qatar. A mass movement is subsequently legitimised or de-legitimised according to where it stands in the struggle between these axes. The ongoing struggle is pictured as a struggle between identities that are legitimised by the political language used to describe them, regardless of how genuine these entities themselves are, particularly in the face of the revolutionary transformations that govern the situation today.
The Stalinist and Arab nationalist left have never seen beyond the milestone of national struggle and national liberation to which, in spite of their importance and necessity, the revolution cannot be restricted. This perspective on the revolution is invoked by the language used to describe it. Herein lies the essential problem: are we seeing the revolutionary process, on the one hand, through its actual reality, in other words through the context that gave birth to it and the contradictions characterising that context; or, on the other hand, evaluating it based on a theoretical assumption that has never been able to concede that the Arab or non-Arab individual in this region cannot be exclusively reduced to his or her national identity?
“National entity” and national identity remain the main pillars of Stalinist and Arab nationalist leftist thought and language, through which some are classified as “patriots” and others as “traitors” or “clients”. Systematically accusing others of treason is not only a moral failing on the part of some individuals, but is a natural consequence of nationalist thought, whenever compelled to defend its position in the dominant ideological structure. Of course, this does not imply that there are no traitors or political forces that are clients of imperialism; however, it means that the systematic accusation of treason often becomes the dominant language of the nationalist rhetoric, whenever nationalism is in crisis or in a position of having to defend its hegemony over the dominant political language in society.
We can observe this nowadays because of the revolutionary process that is sweeping the region. The first assumption put forward by many in the Stalinist and Arab nationalist currents, in their approach to the events of early 2011, was that the uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia were caused by the relations between the regimes there and US imperialism. However, this assumption was quickly rebuffed by the rise of the mass movement in Syria, whose regime is considered by the Stalinists and Arab nationalists to be a “resistance” regime—a “citadel of resistance” to Zionism and imperialism.
Since the beginning of the Syrian Revolution the advocates of Arab nationalism and Stalinism have been trying to rethink the hierarchy of the struggle in such a way as to distinguish between two struggles, the national liberation struggle and the social liberation struggle. The second is subordinated to the first, by virtue of the commitment to the fundamental national entity. While the national liberation struggle becomes an existential battle, the social struggle is treated as a mere case of reformist struggle within the boundaries of “keeping one’s house in order”. That is what Samah Idriss [3] insinuated on 4 December 2013:
Our issue with the Arab regimes is an issue with oppression, criminality, corruption and clientelism. Our problem with Israel is a problem with the entity itself, its regime, its state, its army, its institutions, its economy, its culture, its tourism, its industry, its agriculture, its right, its left and its centre. [4]
Idriss is right to state that the issue with Israel is one with the entity itself; however, he does not address the following problematic: Can the struggle against the Zionist entity be resolved and won within the context of the current entities of the Arab regimes? Or even through the very notion of national entities? Or is it actually only solvable through a drastic reconfiguration of these entities?
That is what history has shown before, with the path of the Palestinian Revolution that has imposed transformations and contradictions on the reality of the established Arab entities, from Syria to Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and others. In its rise, the Palestinian Revolution clashed objectively, not only with the Zionist entity, but also with the national structure of the whole of the Arab regimes. Perhaps one of the major examples of that clash with, for instance, the “Syrian national interest”—ie the interests of a “final” Syrian entity—is the events of “Black September” in 1970, when then Syrian defence minister Hafez al-Assad:
opposed Syrian military support for the Palestinians, for fear that Syria would be drawn into an all-out war with Israel. He refused to provide air cover to the Syrian tanks when they came under Jordanian attack, forcing the brigade to withdraw. This left the Palestinians isolated, and thousands were massacred by Hussein’s forces in pogroms that became known as “Black September”. [5]
This clash (between the Palestinian Revolution and the Arab entities) was not restricted to Syria and Jordan; it also naturally led to a clash with the structure of the Lebanese entity, as could be seen during the Lebanese Civil War and the resulting ideological struggles over the identity and “finality” of the entity. This was proven by the Taif agreement [6] where the “patriotic” bourgeoisie re-emphasised the finality of the Lebanese entity, with an Arab face, and Syrian-Saudi sponsorship.
This pattern of the finality or inevitability of entities can be applied to all Arab regimes, be they “resistant” or not. In Egypt, for instance, “the Camp David agreement was the political indicator of the changes in Egyptian reality, and watchwords like ‘disengagement’ and ‘Arab isolation’ contained the implicit and explicit announcement of the shift of the Egyptian regime towards a market economy”. [7] Arab isolation, disengagement and other expressions, like “Egypt first”, “Jordan first” or “Lebanon first”, are nothing but the implicit and explicit expression of the politics of the finality of Arab national entities, meaning, in effect, a commitment to the divisions brought about by European colonial powers at the beginning of the 20th century.
There can be no formal distinction between the nationalist rhetoric of the Arab regimes and their politics, on one side, and the nationalist rhetoric that is dominant today among the traditional left on the other, even if they differ in their details. Both categorically insist on the centrality of national entities and identities as the bases for political and social mobilisation, even if this struggle cannot possibly be undertaken without the alignment of these entities with one or another of the dominant axes on the regional and international theatres. In truth, these policies and their underlying logic are nothing but the repetition of Cold War rhetoric, from which the Arab nationalist and Stalinist left have assumed the necessity of alignment to one side against another. It represents the complete abandonment of any attempt to exit the duality of that imperialist antagonism and head towards a genuinely revolutionary mass movement that would not base its strategy on advocating one imperialism against another. Naturally these policies are always presented under the cover of national identity or national liberation.
That is what As’ad AbuKhalil [8] says in an article for the Al-Akhbar journal on 16 October 2013 under the title A Call for the Return to the Lebanese Civil War where AbuKhalil summarises the underlying latent conflict in Lebanon—which is yet to be resolved—in the following problematics: “1. The identity of Lebanon. 2. The Lebanese foreign policy and the government’s position on the regional conflict. 3. The position on the Palestinian cause. 4. The disagreement on social justice. 5. The issue of sectarian injustice. 6. The type of ruling regime.” He then goes on to describe the different Lebanese religious sects:
No single sect has had a fixed political position in Lebanon—in spite of those who promote the theory of a moral superiority of one sect against another—because the sects, by virtue of the sectarian system, are akin to the tribes of Afghanistan and Iraq: up for grabs, moving from one position to another, by virtue of the prevailing conditions. That makes Walid Jumblatt [9] the true representative of narrow sectarianism. [10]
In this view, AbuKhalil emphasises two points: the first is that the problematic of the Lebanese question is concerned with resolving the “Lebanese identity” issue. The second is that resolving said issue is the task of Lebanon’s established sectarian entities—that are, according to AbuKhalil, like “the tribes of Afghanistan and Iraq”. The rhetoric, adopted by Idriss and AbuKhalil, is not far from that of the allies of the Syrian regime in Lebanon, from Hizbollah to the Free Patriotic Movement to the Syrian Social Nationalist Party and others, even if Idriss and AbuKhalil distinguish themselves from those parties by criticising, from time to time, the “resistance” regimes. However, they remain part of these cleavages, within the general rhetoric of the politics of conflicting axes, without tackling the ideological and intellectual fabric of those politics or making any attempt to fracture that rhetoric.
The secretary general of Hizbollah, Hassan Nasrallah, made the following declaration in a televised speech on 30 April 2013: “Syria has, in the region and the world, genuine friends who will not allow it to fall into the hands of the United States or Israel or the Takfiri groups” [11]; and in June 2013: “the issue is not one of [Hizbollah’s] intervention in Syria…the Syrian Arab Army is fighting on various parts of Syrian territory, and we are assuming part of the responsibilities in facing this worldwide project that wants to precipitate the downfall of the region, not only Syria, that is the American-Israeli-Takfiri project”. [12]
From this speech, it is clear that Nasrallah is genuinely convinced of the veracity of the conflict of axes thesis, in which Hizbollah has sided with the Syrian regime and its regional and international allies against the “American-Israeli-Takfiri project”. The correlation between Hizbollah’s position and that of the Arab nationalists and the traditional left is no coincidence. Their argument is an application, perhaps even a literal one, of the stageist Stalinist vision, which calls for a historical and strategic alliance with the national bourgeoisie to attain democratic national rule as a first stage, before proceeding to the building of a strong regime and state apparatus that would contribute to developing the means of production and allow, at a further stage, for a revolution that would pave the way for socialism.
We have seen not so long ago where this recipe has taken us. The alliance of the “National Movement” [13] with the “nationalist/Muslim” bourgeoisie in opposition to the “isolationist/reactionary/Christian” bourgeoisie, on the eve of and during the Lebanese Civil War ended in the confirmation of sectarian rule in Lebanon and the punishment of the Palestinians for their “spoiling of Lebanon”. We can also extend this vision to the outcome of the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO). The PLO’s commitment to the project of the “state”, in other words the commitment to the finality of the Palestinian national entity, which restricted the Palestinian cause, from an Arab and worldwide popular movement unbound with identities, to the bourgeois, bureaucratic and “nationalist” template, whose “achievement” will include the emergence of Abu Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas) and his entourage. [14]
This very strategy is still upheld by the Stalinist left in general, as the Egyptian Communist Party declares in its political programme:
The party believes that the 25 January [2011] Revolution is the most important episode in the national democratic revolution, and that it is in essence a popular and democratic revolution with national and social prospects, and has risen to eradicate tyranny and corruption, achieve political and economical independence, put an end to clientelism, achieve self-sustained independent development, rebuild the state apparatus on popular democratic bases, put an end to monopolies, build the national industry, conduct profound changes in the agricultural sector, achieve political and social democracy, and respect the rights and dignity of the Egyptian individual as well as public liberties. [15]
From this stance, the Egyptian traditional left justifies voting in favour of the military’s constitution and considering the Muslim Brotherhood to be the greatest danger to the revolution—with no mention of the military—as well as its alignment with the “Syrian regime and the Syrian Arab Army” in opposition to the imperialist plan against the Arab region and particularly against Syria.
Using the same approach, albeit with a different twist, Nahed Hattar [16] and his lackeys adopt their own take on nationalism that can euphemistically be described as a reincarnation of neo-fascist Syrian nationalist thought but, with a “new” cover making it easier to digest for the old left.
On the Syrian question, Hattar says:
We have stood, clearly, with the regime of President Bashar Al-Assad against Gulf and Wahhabi barbarism, Qatari and Saudi, as well as against neo-Ottomanism. We are not merely “sympathetic” to the Syrian regime, as [Hazem] Saghieh puts it, but we are, in the nationalist war, fighting in the same trench. And we believe that we have chosen the right trench. We have, of course, our own methodical and critical analysis of that regime, and we have our own declared programme of struggle inside Syria to build a nationalist, resistance and developmentalist state. However that is a Syrian, Levantine, internal political struggle that does not affect the unity of the forces that are repulsing the external aggression, the Western, Zionist, Wahhabi and Ottoman aggression. [17]
At the end of the day, the vision that all of these people share is that national liberation, or the building of the national state, in any form, requires at first the nation’s liberation. National liberation determines what is external and what is internal to the state, and through which the issues of that interior—issues around Arab, Levantine, Syrian, Lebanese or other identitarian formations—can be debated. This is confirmed by Khalid Hadadi [18] in his latest article in Nida’a [19] where he argues that, as the sectarian nature of the Lebanese regime makes the regional contradictions a part of internal Lebanese politics, that reality can only be changed through “building the civil, secular, democratic resistance state”. [20] He says that:
conditions for a deeper solution related to the refoundation of the Lebanese state must be met, in a way that surpasses its war-provoking, division and clientelism-encouraging nature, towards a salvation conference that would lay the foundations to build that civil, secular, democratic and resistant state.
This proposition does not, of course, address the class nature of that state. From here we can see how this ideological current, from its far-right to its far-left, in its ultranationalist or its national-popular incarnation, has never gone beyond the central issue of the dominance of the bourgeois national state, i.e. a state with the capacity to form a class alliance that would provide a bourgeois-proletarian conciliation while at the same time ensuring national unity, through which the external dangers can be confronted, or the relations of competition and convergence with that exterior can be set.
 
Imperialism, capitalism and the national state
The national bourgeois state is one of the essential structures established by Western colonialism as a condition of capitalist expansion in the colonies, in its economic, social and political aspects. The bourgeois state constituted a rupture or fracture with the prevailing semi-feudal system. It would be illusory to consider nationalist thought as being in contradiction with capitalism; the emergence of the state is conditional to the development of capitalist economic and social structures, and the divergence from and ultimate destruction of pre-capitalist structures. From thereon in, the notions of “entity” and “national identity”, the finality of a certain entity and its relation to other entities are concepts that cannot come into being without the centralised establishment of a bourgeois state apparatus that governs society under the cover of a “national identity”, be it Arab, Levantine, Lebanese, Syrian, Islamic, Christian or other. All constitute an ideological cover for the dominating bourgeois regime itself.
And it is not peculiar that those sections of the left that identify with one national ideology or another put the issue of the national cover for that bourgeois domination at the top of their political agenda. Their policies are not so much in contradiction with the established bourgeois regime as in accordance with it, since their starting point is the ideological structure of the very same bourgeois regime.
As Mahdi Amel puts it in his book Theoretical Introductions to the Study of the Effect of Socialist Thought on National Liberation Movements:
And by this thought structure we mean the ideological field in which the individual’s ideology is determined, built and developed, ie this one soil from which multiple ideas can sprout, the differences between which can reach the point of contradiction; however, their roots are set in the same soil that determines the nature of their emergence and their field of development. The existence of contradictions between these ideas does not negate, but affirms the fact that they are situated in one ideological soil. [21]
Therefore, the ideological premises from which nationalist thought stems to confront the dependency on imperialism are in no fundamental contradiction with imperialism. They share the same thought structure, that is, the bourgeois governance system, with which they identify. For this reason, we see that the Arab nationalist regimes that emerged in the last decades of the 20th century, and that were considered back then—and still today—as progressive regimes by large chunks of the traditional and national left, have proven over time that they were no different from the bourgeois “client” regimes, as they are called. Indeed, the Arab nationalist regimes have renewed their relation to and identification with the interests of imperialism, even if the degree to which they identify with those interests might differ. That differentiation, like the one between Saudi Arabia and Syria for instance, is a proof of the continuation of this pattern of relations, and a negation of the independence of these regimes or their liberation from imperialist domination.
We go back to Mahdi Amel, and his analysis of “progressive regimes” that transform the dominant petty bourgeoisie into a renewed colonial bourgeoisie:
We notice, for instance, that the change in dominant class in the so-called “progressive regimes”, like those of Egypt and Syria, has always taken place in the context of an ectopic form of class struggle. This helps us to understand the special nature of the political practice of the petty bourgeoisie… The petty bourgeoisie is necessarily urged to renew these relations of production, to permanently reproduce those relations in the political practice of its class struggle against the colonial bourgeoisie itself, because the renewal of the relations of production is a necessary and absolute condition for its continuation as a dominant class. However, the necessity to become the dominant class in the context of the existing relations of production will push the petty bourgeoisie to assimilate into the dominant class that it has replaced and against which it is engaged in a class struggle, and therefore to identify with it and not diverge from it… The existence of a state sector does not change the class nature of the relations of production. [22]
For this reason, the national task cannot be effectively accomplished, and this reality is presented as the expression of a crisis of identity or a crisis of nationalism, taking us back to the issue of entity and identity without getting to grips with the capitalist class structure and its uneven development which result in the creation of relations of dependency on imperialism. That is the essential problem with the strategic perspectives of the traditional left and the nationalist currents in general. It is clear that the best that can be achieved with the stance they have adopted is an improvement in the conditions of capitalist and nationalist competition between the established entities, without defying the structure that not only allows that competition to exist, but opens the door to foreign and regional interference, or regional or international dominance over a given country.
This is why national liberation is not a stage that precedes social liberation and class struggle, but it is in reality part and parcel of the one and only social class struggle. National liberation doesn’t precede social revolution, but it is produced by it, as one of its processes, because it is impossible to achieve independence within the system of capitalist dependence, dominance and competition that rules the world. True independence or national liberation cannot be achieved in the current conditions without being included in the process of socialist revolution itself.
Therefore national liberation movements, by fighting the national liberation struggle from outside the class struggle, are heading towards assimilation with the dominant bourgeoisie and becoming players in the convergence and competition within the dominant bourgeois capitalist axes. This phenomenon can be observed in the PLO, Hamas and Hizbollah with the latter’s recent and ongoing shifts in its socio-economic and organisational structure as well as its local and regional positioning, a point I will return to later.
It is not the sectarian regime per se that establishes dependency, and the connection between the inside and the outside; rather it is merely an ideological cover for capitalist dependency. That dependency cannot be broken from within the capitalist structure itself because the bourgeois state is not only an internal system of class domination, but is also at the same time an apparatus for national, regional and international capitalist competition. What follows is that the national cover for the bourgeois state is nothing but a fitting and refitting of the axes of that capitalist competition, its terrain of dominance, and its capacity to contain the struggles that arise within its societies from the structural contradictions of the capitalist system.
The structural crisis of nationalist thought, from its left to its right, lies in the fact that it lives on those contradictions that characterise the capitalist system, and cannot part with them. It is itself an articulation of the attempt by that bourgeois ideological structure to conceive new identities in order to maintain its ideological dominance in renewed ideological clothing. This point is confirmed by the emergence of a crisis of identity every time the bourgeois ruling class itself is in crisis, or sees cracks in the ideological domination through which it justifies its class rule.
 
The crisis of bourgeois rule and the new crisis of capitalism
We cannot understand those shifts, and the identitarian struggle and the concurrent re-emergence of historic identities—be they religious, national, regional or sectarian—outside the context of capitalist structure, its shifts and contradictions; the struggles over identity are an expression of the crisis of capitalism itself. Frederick Engels said:
According to the materialist conception of history, the ultimately determining element in history is the production and reproduction of real life. Other than this neither Marx nor I have ever asserted. Hence if somebody twists this into saying that the economic element is the only determining one, he transforms that proposition into a meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase. The economic situation is the basis, but the various elements of the superstructure—political forms of the class struggle and its results, to wit: constitutions established by the victorious class after a successful battle, etc, juridical forms, and even the reflexes of all these actual struggles in the brains of the participants, political, juristic, philosophical theories, religious views and their further development into systems of dogmas—also exercise their influence upon the course of the historical struggles and in many cases preponderate in determining their form. [23]
There is a clear correlation between the dominant ideology, the dominant class structure, and the absence of the issue of class relations in the rhetorical identitarian and geostrategic debate dominant in the nationalist current and its left; it is nothing but an attempt to escape a confrontation with the exploding class contradictions in their current, international, regional and local realities. This attempt to revamp those contradictions or postpone their explosion aims to preserve the existing class hegemony, in any possible way, be it sectarian or national or other.
The shifts and transformations happening throughout the world, and taking a thoroughly confrontational form in the Arab world, are in contradiction, not only with the liberal thought structure, but also with the worldview of the Arab nationalist and traditional left. For what is characteristic of both liberal thought and nationalist thought is that they compete with each other, rather than contradict one another, within the dominant structure of bourgeois thought. They form, at least in the Arab world, the most obvious incarnation of that theatre of competitive interactions between two poles, whether one attempts to assert domination over another or they form an alliance to confront mutual threats. These threats are in truth the contradictions, fractures and struggles that are happening within the established system of capitalist hegemony, i.e. that very same national bourgeois state, whichever cover it happens to adopt—liberal, nationalist or other.
These relations are confirmed daily through, for instance, the US-Syrian agreement on the Syrian regime’s chemical weapons. The US-Iranian agreement on the Iranian nuclear programme, which was followed by an Iranian-Saudi convergence, materialised with, among other things, apologies to the Bahraini regime by the Manar TV and Noor radio channels, both of which belong to Hizbollah, for their coverage of the events in Bahrain—that is, the Bahraini Revolution that began in 2011.
Such agreements are not only indicators of decreasing US hegemony over the region due to shifts in internal US affairs. They are also aimed at giving the dominant Arab and regional regimes greater leeway to put their own imploding houses in order. These agreements are building up to an attempt by those regimes to contain and tackle the Arab and non-Arab mass movements in the region, from Egypt to Syria and Bahrain, Iran and others while simultaneously isolating the Palestinian people, and the Palestinian cause altogether, from the revolutionary masses that surround them.
Going back to Idriss’s depiction of the struggle against Israel as an existential one, in contrast to the struggles with the Arab regimes, with the latter reduced to a mere struggle against tyranny, and other internal affairs, we ask, how can Palestine be liberated? How can a project of resistance be sustained through the existing structures of the Arab regimes? Or through the national bourgeois apparatus, in the context of the shifts and alliances that are sprouting on the regional and international political theatres? The answer to this question can, in reality, only come from a process that neither the nationalist nor the Stalinist left will recognise, that is, the revolution: not as an entity’s revolution, or a national revolution, but a permanent revolution that arises from the structural contradictions in Arab societies. By its class nature, this revolution cannot but be in fundamental contradiction with the established system of class dominance, and with the systems of regional and international dependency. The social, economic and political problems that arise on the political level cannot be solved by any bourgeois refurbishment of the established regimes in their own national space. They can only be solved by the overthrow of the system of bourgeois rule and by defying the system of class dominance in general. The watchword that no one on the revolutionary left must shy away from proclaiming today is socialism! It is not as a historical leap by the masses towards another regime, but as the process through which the dominant ideology can be destroyed, through which the class contradictions that support the bourgeois regimes can be exposed, in order to overcome this apparatus towards its antithesis: revolutionary workers’ power, through which it is really possible to overcome religious sectarianism, persecution, exploitation, injustice and oppression, and what is more, to fracture the cycle of capitalist and imperialist dependence.
I will not address the evidence for the class nature of the Arab revolutions, for many have written on the subject in the Permanent Revolution journal and elsewhere. The question we must address is that of the interconnectivity of the revolutionary struggle, the fact that it is spreading from one country to another, and its capacity to defy the established balance of forces at the local and regional scales. The revolutionary struggle is defying the finality of the national entities that were imposed on the peoples of the region by colonial divisions and later by the dominant bourgeoisie and bureaucracy, in agreement and in convergence with imperialism.
The revolutions rocking our region are not the expressions of a crisis of identity, as pictured by some, but they are, first and foremost, the expressions of the crisis of the bourgeois national state and the dominant capitalist system. It is therefore impossible to address the issues of resistance and liberation from imperialism from outside that context. On the contrary, resistance and liberation must identify with the perspectives of the ongoing revolutions, not be imposed on them from above in a pre-packaged nationalist ideology, which is itself going through crisis as an expression of the same bourgeois regime.
 
Hizbollah, resistance and revolution
It is from this vantage point that we must approach the issue of Hizbollah and those of resistance and national liberation. Can Hizbollah, with its established structure and its sectarian and bourgeois nature, put an end to occupation or achieve national liberation?
The nationalist and Stalinist left entertain many illusions when it comes to Hizbollah. In addition to the sacred character that Hizbollah ascribes to itself, that left also considers it sacred, describing it as a resistance movement which is not governed by reality or by the class structure in which we live. Naturally, because of the centrality of national identity and the national question which overpowers any other consideration, Hizbollah’s role as an apparatus of resistance is granted, by the traditional left, with an existence in abstraction from its class position in society or even given a proletarian gloss, regardless of reality. Therefore, the traditional left supports Hizbollah blindly, not only from the viewpoint of national liberation, but also from the viewpoint of social struggle. The oppression of South Beirut and South Lebanon [24], which many leftist activists harp on about, becomes in these circumstances, another attempt to excuse sectarian bias using the language of class. Sectarian parties in Lebanon use class language (Shia deprivation, Christian injustice, etc.) to legitimise their sectarian rhetoric.
The nationalist and Stalinist left, who are wholly allied to Hizbollah and to the Syrian regime’s allies in Lebanon, utilise the same sectarian rhetoric and give it a class dimension, transforming, for instance, Ashoura’ [25] into a symbol of confronting oppression, or the Dahiyeh area of South Beirut [26] into a symbol of resistance and dynamism.
These expressions do not differ from sectarian rhetoric, but legitimise it and reinforce feelings of sectarian pride, which was always a defining element of the dominant sectarian discourse. Just as the Phalangists promoted, in their period of dominance, [27] a discourse of Christian sectarian pride under the cover of Lebanese nationalism, Hizbollah nowadays promotes “Shia” sectarian culture and identifies it with Lebanese national culture. Therefore, patriotism is put in a distinctively sectarian mould. This logic can easily reach extremes among people, making a client or a traitor of every Sunni, while making every Shia a resister of imperialism or a patriot.
Lately a rampage of racism towards Syrian refugees has been seen among proponents of the idea that Syria is a resistant regime. The refugees are described as traitors. Some say: “Wouldn’t it be better to give money to the resistance fighters in Qalamoun?” [28] or “How can we sympathise with a child or a woman who was left here in a tent by her husband or brother, so he can go murder women and children in his own country?” This discourse aids the propaganda and denigration campaigns the national current and its left have adopted since the beginning of the Syrian Revolution. While, when it comes to the Egyptian Revolution, they are capable of distinguishing between the Salafists, the Muslim Brotherhood, the nationalists, the liberals, the leftists, the military and the revolutionaries, they are absolutely incapable of applying a similar demarcation in the case of Syria. Thus anyone who supported the Syrian Revolution becomes a “Daeshi” [29], and the revolution becomes a mere “upheaval”, until the conflict is painted as one between the regime and the Takfiris.
Our goal here is not to deny the existence of the Takfiris or their relationship with Gulf regimes, but to expose the similarities between the respective discourses of the Stalinist and nationalist left on one side and the Takfiris on the other. In the Takfiri discourse there are believers and infidels; in the nationalist left’s discourse there are patriots and traitors. This stems from the fact that this “left” does not share the ideology of the revolutionary left, but that of nationalism itself, in leftist cloth. In other words it has become part of the dominant bourgeois discourse itself, and not its antithesis; that left does not see in itself an antithesis to the bourgeoisie; rather it identifies with the bourgeoisie, and becomes its apologist by directly distorting the reality. This is what people like As’ad AbuKhalil do. In another of his articles in the Al-Akhbar newspaper, on The Theory of Dialectics and the Renewal of the Arab Left, he says: “There are plenty of advocates of capitalism in our region, and they themselves are the enemies of the resistance in Lebanon.” The first thing AbuKhalil does is clear “the resistance” (understand, Hizbollah) from the “charge” of being capitalists, before adding later in his article:
But the capacity to do that stems from the categorical rejection of the principles of capitalism (Abdel Karim Mrouwwe now believes that the capitalist state can protect us from capitalism), and its whole superstructure which, supported by the oil and gas Gulf states, determines our taste in poetry, art, culture, journalism, dance and aesthetics.
AbuKhalil sees only one of the competing axes on the regional theatre—the Gulf axis—as capitalist, but does not mention the capitalist structure of, say, the Iranian regime or their allies in Lebanon and Syria. Through this blatant distortion of reality, he reduces the anti-capitalist struggle to a struggle against the Gulf regimes and their helpers, as if the resistance, Hizbollah and Iran, were part of an international proletarian alliance!
There is no need to prove the bourgeois nature of Hizbollah or the Syrian regime, as many have written on this subject before; their bourgeois nature is irrefutably proven by their economic role, and in the case of Hizbollah, by the social and economic policies that they have adopted in the past few years. Hassan Nasrallah’s famous “We will not stand behind bread” [30], or Hizbollah’s support for privatisation, its opposition to the demands of the trade union Coordinating Committee [31] and the agreement it made with the Amal Movement and the Free Patriotic Movement to stop the state electricity company workers winning their demands, are all proof of Hizbollah’s bourgeois nature. Other indicators are the extensive sums Hizbollah invests in the real estate sector, which made the Southern suburbs of Beirut (a pro-Hizbollah stronghold) one of the most expensive neighbourhoods in greater Beirut. There is no need to mention the tuition fees of Hizbollah-run schools, which have become schools for the Shia middle classes rather than the poor, or the substantial amounts of money Hizbollah amasses through its healthcare institutions such as the Great Prophet Hospital in South Beirut. All of this proves that Hizbollah is the party of the Shia middle classes and bourgeoisie, the hegemony over whom it shares with the Amal Movement, and not, as many on the nationalist and Stalinist left picture it, the party of the poor and deprived.
Owing to its capitalist nature, Hizbollah has clearly entered a phase of bureaucratic bourgeois growth, particularly since the Israeli war on Lebanon in July 2006. This is evidenced by the way its cadre and members display their wealth and the privileges they enjoy such as social, economic, educational and health services. This will naturally cause a split between this arriviste bureaucracy and the large masses that Hizbollah relies on to assert its political legitimacy during elections or popular rallies. This is sometimes shown by the latent complaints of common Hizbollah supporters, who have expressed their resentment over that flaunting of wealth, and the bullying influence that members of this bureaucratic clique often exert on other people in the neighbourhoods where they operate. [32]
This divergence between the class nature of Hizbollah’s supporters—and part of its membership—and its cadre, particularly at mid and senior level, is the main contradiction that Hizbollah will face in the current and future periods. This is indicated by the fact that Hizbollah is increasingly providing a Jihadi religious cover for their policies, by building mosques, depicting their intervention in Syria as a religious duty, or through the provocative sectarian slogan “Zeynab shall not be captured twice”. [33] Hizbollah’s increased use of religious messages compared to previous years indicates the necessity for them to contain their base, through an ideological and religious discipline that is bound to become more and more necessary in a context of class crisis, on a local and regional scale. Perhaps—although we cannot be certain in this case—the latest Al-Manar affair (the Hizbollah TV station had apologised to the Bahraini government for its coverage of the revolution there, after which Hizbollah sacked the TV station’s director) can be seen as an indicator of the influence of that class crisis on the party’s bureaucratic discipline; it has shown a contradiction between the party’s political and media apparatus.
The nationalist and Stalinist left do not grasp the fact that the conditions that gave birth to revolutions in the region are the same conditions that govern the resistance to occupation and imperialism. The continuation and success of that resistance are not only dependent on the degree of enthusiasm about arms; it is also necessary to see if the arms-bearing side can escape the balance of interests that controls those arms and makes them available, and if it will escape, with its bourgeois alignment, from the ongoing implosions in the class structures of regional and Arab societies.
The issue of the revolution gives the resistance another dimension, and poses an essential problematic on the current “resistance cases”, like Hizbollah and Hamas: Can the Zionist entity collapse? Can US, EU or Russian interference be stopped without a radical break with the bourgeois structure that legitimises foreign interference and dominance? Will the “Arab” bourgeoisie relinquish their common interests with the American or Israeli bourgeoisie in order to liberate Palestine? Will the Iranian regime, for instance, give up the necessity to integrate into the world oil market? Will the Syrian regime give up its economic relations with Western regimes? Or will the Syrian moguls give up their relations with other tycoons from the West, China or Russia in the name of Arab higher interests? Naturally the answer is no, because we live in a highly interlaced world economy, the myth of self-sufficiency is nothing but a myth. All the attempts at self-sufficiency have shown that its proponents will align themselves, sooner or later, with one of the great capitalist poles. This is not caused by a degeneration of values among the bourgeoisie; it is a natural consequence of the interlacement of interests between the regional and foreign bourgeoisies, particularly when the former is placed in the position of defending its hegemony against the rise of class struggle. That interlacement is part of the global capitalist fabric in which we live and which is still in a position of dominance, even if it is clearly faltering.
Therefore we cannot but see liberation from imperialism and occupation as part of the process of social liberation. It enters the process of class struggle, not only from the realm of economics, but also from its social, ideological and cultural perspective. Liberation and emancipation are not two distinct phases in a successive programme, but two sides of the same struggle, the struggle for the organisation of the working class in the region on an independent, revolutionary basis. This is not only needed to develop the purely economic and trade unionist struggle, but also as a step towards the achievement of real liberation, and the fracture of the system on which imperialism subsists and through which it controls the region, that is, the capitalist system that governs all of our lives.
Mass resistance is no longer the hypothetical issue it used to be, one that was rebuffed by many for its irrelevance; it has become a historical necessity for the emancipation of the people of the Middle East, not only from occupation and imperialism, but also from dictatorship, oppression, tyranny and exploitation. Without mass resistance, human salvation will remain a mere dream, not an actual serious project waiting for the conditions of its fulfilment.
Being realist today does not mean depending on a structure that emerged not so long ago out of the destruction of existing resistance organisations [34], but it is by building structures of a radically different class nature from the ones that were built for past defeats. Hizbollah has ended the Israeli occupation of south Lebanon, but will not, because of its very bourgeois nature, be capable of putting an end to the “Israeli threat” or “imperialist hegemony”. Therefore, all those who consider themselves revolutionaries must answer this essential question: How do we really emancipate ourselves from imperialism? And how can Palestine really be free, not only through delusional hopes resting on regimes that will abandon any project that clashes with their bourgeois hegemonic interests, as they have done in the past?
For all these reasons, the support for revolutions in our region and the whole world is not only an ethical issue, but an essentially realist position. For it is only through revolution that it is possible to break dependency, clientelism, occupation, oppression, tyranny and exploitation, and their resulting culture. It cannot be done through delusions based on the hope that some bourgeois apparatus (Arab or otherwise) might carry us to a better tomorrow. We know in advance that this will never happen, as any improved social situation will clash with bourgeois dominance and bourgeois interests. Change will only be made by the revolutionary masses, for it is in their core interest.

Notes
1. Translated by Haytham Cero. Thanks to Wassim Wagdy, Anne Alexander and Camilla Royle for comments on the draft.
2. Translator’s note: Takfiri refers to Islamist movements, such as ISIS, who declare that their Muslim opponents are apostates, rather than simply misguided.
3. Translator’s note: Samah Idriss is editor-in-chief of the Al-Adab, politics/arts/culture magazine in Beirut. He often writes for Al-Akhbar and is an organiser in the boycott and anti-normalisation (of Israel) movement in Lebanon.
4. On his Facebook page, 4 December 2013.
5. Shaoul, Jean and Chris Marsden, 2000, The Bitter Legacy of Syria’s Hafez Al-Assad, World Socialist Web Site (16 June).
6. Translator’s note: The Taif Agreement was signed in 1989 to put an end to the Lebanese civil war.
7. Ahmad Noor, 2013, Egypt: Diaries of a Revolution, Permanent Revolution, issue 3 (March).
8. Translator’s note: As’ad AbuKhalil is Professor of Political Science at California State University, Stanislaus and blogs at the Angry Arab News Service.
9. Translator’s note: Walid Jumblatt is the leader of the Progressive Socialist Party, which draws most of its membership from the Druze community in Lebanon.
10. AbuKhalil, As’ad, 2013, A Call for the Return of the Lebanese Civil War, Al-Akhbar (16 November).
11. Nasrallah, Hassan, 2013a, Syria’s Friends Will Not Allow It to Fall, Al-Akhbar (1 May).
12. Nasrallah, Hassan, 2013b, We will be where we need to be and we are the Last of the Interveners in Syria, Al-Akhbar (25 June).
13. Translator’s note: The Lebanese National Movement in Lebanon was led by Kamal Jumblatt of the Progressive Socialist Party (Walid Jumblatt’s father) and brought together the nationalist and Stalinist left in an alliance against the Lebanese government in the early stages of the Lebanese civil war in the 1970s.
14. See Philip Marfleet’s article in this issue, An end to isolation? Palestine and the Arab revolutions, International Socialism, 2 : 145, Winter 2015, pp. 73-96.
15. Website of the Egyptian Communist Party, cp-egypt.com.
16. Translator’s note: Jordanian writer and journalist who writes regularly for Lebanese newspaper Al-Akhbar.
17. Hattar, Nahed, 2013, Orientalism ... as seen by a Nusra Front Liberal!, Al-Akhbar (19 November).
18. Translator’s note: Secretary General of the Lebanese Communist Party.
19. Translator’s note: the LCP journal.
20. Hadadi, Khalid, 2013, The Iranian-Western agreement ... the beginning of ‘bargaining wars’?, Nida’a magazine, issue 226 (December).
21. Amel, Mahdi, 1980, Theoretical Introductions to the Study of the Effect of Socialist Thought on National Liberation Movements (Dar-al-Farabi). Translator’s note: Mahdi Amel was a Lebanese Marxist theoretician and academic. Member of the Central Committee of the Lebanese Communist Party, he formulated a Marxist critique of Arab nationalist thought and Arab bourgeois culture in general. He was assassinated by gunmen, widely believed to be connected with Hizbollah, in Beirut on 18 May 1987.
22. Amel, 1980, Theoretical Introductions to the Study of the Effect of Socialist Thought on National Liberation Movements (Dar-al-Farabi).
23. Engels, Frederick, 1890b, Letter to Joseph Bloch of 21 September. See also Engels, Frederick, 1890a, Letter to Conrad Schmidt of 5 August, Engels, Frederick, 1890c, Letter to Conrad Schmidt of 27 October and Engels, Frederick, 1893, Letter to Franz Mehring of 14 July.
24. Translator’s note: The South of Lebanon and the southern suburbs of Beirut have a largely Shia population and were historically relatively impoverished and politically marginalised compared to other areas of the country.
25. Translator’s note: The Shia festival of Ashoura’ commemorates the martyrdom of Hussein, grandson of the Prophet Muhammad, in battle near Karbala’ in 680 CE.
26. Translator’s note: The Dahiyeh area is where Hizbollah is headquartered.
27. Translator’s note: The Phalangist movement was a sectarian militia inspired by European fascist movements and founded by Pierre Gemayel in 1936, which played a key role in the Lebanese Civil War and carried out the massacre of Palestinians in Sabra and Shatila refugee camps in 1982.
28. Translator’s note: Mountains in Syria where Hizbollah is fighting, close to the border with Lebanon.
29. Translator’s note: A denigrating term for supporters of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) known also by its Arabic acronym Da’ash.
30. Translator’s note: i.e. Hizbollah will not subsidise basic food needs.
31. Translator’s note: The Coordinating Committee has played a key role in organising recent public sector strikes in Lebanon.
32. For more details on Hizbollah’s dive into sectarianism, see Assaf, Simon, 2013, Hezbollah’s Sectarian Turn, Socialist Review (July/August).
33. Translator’s note: a reference to the Sayyidah Zeynab mosque in Damascus, the supposed burial place of the prophet Muhammad’s granddaughter Zeynab, and considered a holy shrine in Shia tradition. It has been guarded by Hizbollah fighters as well as various Iraqi Shia militias since the beginning of the war in Syria.
34. Translator’s note: The Lebanese National Resistance Front was composed mainly of LCP and Palestinian militants and emerged in 1982 after Israeli invasion. It carried out guerrilla attacks against Israel and the SLA (the South Lebanon Army which was allied to Israel), but was hit by assassinations of leftist activists in the mid to late 1980s, which were attributed to Hizbollah and other Islamist movements. Hizbollah emerged as the dominant resistance faction after LNRF’s decay in the late 1980s.
 



Before his sudden death in October 2014 at the age of 34, Lebanese revolutionary socialist Bassem Chit fired the first salvo in what he hoped would be a far reaching debate on the problems of the left exposed by the Arab Spring in general, and the revolution in Syria in particular.
His article Nationalism, Resistance and Revolution was originally published in the fourth issue of Marxist journal Thawra al-Daema (Permanent Revolution) in January 2014. [1]
The journal, which Bassem helped to establish, continues to be distributed throughout the Arab world.
At the centre of Bassem’s argument is the fundamental flaw in political perspectives among those influenced by Stalinism and Arab nationalism that has dominated the left for over half a century. He characterises this current as having two flawed components. The first is that they judge the actions of the masses not by the contradictions arising out of their social conditions, but through their supposed relations to regional and imperial rivalries. Secondly they reduce the demands of the masses to simple reforms inside existing regimes.
Bassem argues that, as these regimes fracture, the masses are further defined by their identity – such as by being Shia or Sunni Muslim, or with ethnicity such as Kurdish, or some abstract label such as “Levantine”. He proposes instead that the Arab regimes are fully capitalist and are presided over by ruling classes manoeuvring between global and regional interests as well as defending their own economic and social positions.
He argues that their mistaken analysis has led many on the “left” to identify with the Syrian regime while denouncing the popular movements against it as allied to the “American-Israeli-Takfiri project” – Sunni Islamists, Zionists and Western imperialism. The traditional left has also failed to recognise the importance of the revolutions across the region in 2011, seeing them as mere social struggles and, in the case of Egypt, voting in favour of the military’s constitution.
Bassem criticises the traditional left and Arab nationalists for subordinating the struggle for social liberation to that of national liberation. This is a further degeneration of the previous “stageism” – where social liberation comes after national liberation and the building of a strong state.
By fighting the national liberation struggle from “outside the class struggle”, national liberation movements “are heading towards assimilation with the dominant bourgeoisie”. He maintains instead that the two struggles are part of the same process and cannot be separated. Bassem writes: “National liberation cannot be achieved in the current conditions without being included in the process of socialist revolution itself”.
But it is towards the “sectarianisation” of social classes that he reserves his harshest criticism. The Stalinists and nationalist currents characterise social classes not by their relations to the means of production, but by their identity.
Thus at different periods a section of the ruling class is seen as progressive or reactionary according to the particular balance of regional and imperial interests. The Shia Muslims were at one point described as the “working class” of Lebanon, and the Christian Lebanese as “a ruling class”.
In the run up to the Lebanese civil war (1975–1990) the Sunni Muslim section of the ruling class was declared “patriotic”, only to become “traitors” a few decades later. In a similar fashion the Shia and Alawi minority of Syria are part of an arc of “resistance” against the Sunni Muslims, who are now denounced as traitors in alliance with Israel, the Gulf states and the West.
This degeneration of the traditional left and Arab nationalists has disastrous consequences. Bassem instead concludes that any fundamental change can “only be made by the revolutionary masses, for it is in their core interest”.

Footnote
1. The original, in Arabic, can be read here: http://permanentrevolution-journal.org/ar/node/66.
 



What led to the emergence of the Islamic State group?
People in the Middle East have suffered enormously from poverty, oppression and Western imperialism. With the retreat of the left in recent decades many looked at political Islam as an alternative.
But this is a broad and varied category – and both the US war on Iraq and the revolutions across the Arab world have changed the political agenda.
On the one hand there are mass organisations such as the Muslim Brotherhood, Hizbollah and Hamas. These recruit and organise ordinary people on a political agenda, even if they organise militarily as well.
In contrast, a group such as Al Qaida builds on political ideas, but without building a popular movement among ordinary people.
Like the Narodniks in 19th century Russia, it is a terrorist organisation in a traditional sense with the aim of destabilising the enemy.
Particularly since the occupation of Iraq, groups that merge these two traditions are growing. They adopt terrorist tactics at the same time as recruiting people politically.
Isis – the group that later became the Islamic State – and others such as Jabhat al-Nusra are examples of this.
 
How did groups such as Isis overtake other forms of political Islam?
The revolutions were full of contradictions.
In Egypt, the Muslim Brotherhood experienced a terrible defeat after going into government and working with the regime. In Tunisia, An-Nahda had to retreat into opposition. Many of those looking to Sunni political Islam started to turn away from these established groups, as they weren’t able to deliver.
This allowed factional groups to emerge as a hardline alternative. Very organised, with funding and a clear programme, they were more attractive especially to the most radicalised militants.
Meanwhile Shia political Islam was on the offensive, with support from Iran. Lebanon’s Hizbollah has intervened from a very sectarian perspective to defend the dictatorship in Syria against the revolution. In Iraq, Nouri al-Maliki’s government has led a wide offensive on Sunni areas.
Such factors combined with a continuing destruction of the social fabric in Iraq and Syria. This is down to both regimes’ heavy repressive and sectarian policies, and a bloody history of imperialism and regional interferences.
This provided groups like Isis both a political momentum and a sectarian purpose. The also fed on the heavy destabilisation of Al Qaida’s bureaucratic structure.
 
Where did all their money come from?
Many forces are involved, from Saudi Arabia and Qatar to local and regional businessmen and possibly the US itself.
Funding for Islamist groups is always a very twisted affair. One group can get backing from somewhere, only to merge or get taken over by another – along with its money and arms. Their funding structures change and transform in relation to political or strategic shifts.
The CIA is involved in every country in the region. And the story of the West backing Osama bin Laden only for him to become their worst enemy has many echoes.
It’s not unusual for people who have passed through contact with the CIA later to pop up and become Islamist leaders. The Islamic State also gains arms and money with territorial possession. And now of course it also gets revenue from selling oil it controls.
Particularly in Syria, Isis was a product of local militias and groups consolidating into one powerful organisation.
This is very attractive to warlords and much of the petty bourgeoisie thrown up by the war, who need to control the streets where they operate.
 
How did the Syrian revolution come to this?
The influence of Isis reflects the militarisation of the revolt from very early on. Bashar al-Assad’s regime unleashed horrible repression, and created the conditions for a civil war.
That regime is now emptied of any political substance. It has completely lost credibility on the ground, and is ruling purely by scaring people into obedience and helplessness.
Many of the Syrian activists and civilians who were part of early political protests are either in regime prisons or outside Syria as refugees. Others are in liberated areas, drained of resources from having to fend off both Isis and regime forces.
Syria has been emptied to polarise the fight between one threat and another, pushing back and fragmenting much of the mass movement – and that helped Isis.
 
Was there an alternative to this degeneration?
There was, but you need to consider the broader context to see it.
When the revolution in Egypt started, there were protests in support of it all over the Arab World. But the small mobilisations we helped organise in Beirut were the only ones in support of the Syrian revolution.
At the same time, there is a history of deep segregation between the Syrian working class and the Lebanese working class, and there have been no political parties in Syria for the last 40 years.
Much of the wider left opposed the Syrian revolution.
Hizbollah and others argued that the revolutions were only happening against regimes which collaborate with imperialism – and that the Syrian regime wasn’t like that. As if the revolutions weren’t also connected to economic crisis, repression and so on.
They closed down breathing space for the Syrian revolutionaries to propagate their politics or to build solidarity. So the Syrian revolution was besieged and isolated. Without that isolation, its degeneration into an armed conflict was never a given.
Lebanon and Syria are interconnected. You cannot see a sustained movement in one without the other.
You also need unity and solidarity between movements in the countries of the region. They cannot be limited only within national boundaries.
 
Can anything be done to stop the Islamic State?
The only way you defend yourself against forces like this is to organise people in a way that fends off sectarianism.
Sectarianism is a tactic used by the ruling class to attack the revolution. It has the potential to become a very organic culture, which just fuels itself into more and more killings.
In 1990 Beirut was completely segregated between Christians and Muslims. But over ten years there was more intermixing.
By the 2000s, the potential to create a general aggressive culture of sectarianism was more limited because of common living and common experiences. Social movements developed and created links, and a space to organise against sectarianism.
In 2011, we marched into working class areas where sectarian militias occupied the streets. Families came from their homes and joined the demonstrations, because we used anti-sectarian slogans that spoke about their real worries and demands.
You’re fending off the sectarian militias from controlling the area they are in geographically or psychologically.
In Iraq it is harder because the social and political decay left by the occupation led to fiercer segregation in mixed areas. But the left needs to intervene to create a real alternative and shift new generations from getting recruited by sectarian parties.
 
What effect does US intervention have?
The US is on the defensive and trying to protect its own interests in Iraq. An intervention will inflame the situation and prolong the conflict.
The Islamic State exists because of a lack of revolutionary politics. A movement from below which fends off the regime and fills the vacuum the Islamic State is currently filling could win people away from it.
You can point to Isis as being part of the counter-revolutionary forces which criminalise revolution. The line of struggle against both the regime and against these reactionaries becomes clearer.
But when imperialists intervene it gives structures like Isis more favourable conditions.
It galvanises regional rivalries which allows the further spreading of factional conflicts. This fragments the masses and besieges the working class in a war-driven economy.
And it limits the possibility of building political movements and mass mobilisations which offer the only real alternative against these sectarian forces.
 



Introduction
In the last few weeks there has been a lot of talking about “Alternative Media” as a notion and practice. The issue here is much more far than some specifications we can set and then we can say that this media outlet is alternative or not. Alternative by the English explanation is mainly something different from what is existent but as for us leftist, Marxist Leninist, international socialists, social democrats, and the new tendency “evolutionaries”; there should be a common understanding on what alternative media is.
Alternative media first of all requires and alternative reading of society and the interactions and the events inside of it. for me, this reading was clarified quite specifically by Marx, many years ago.
“History is made by the actions of the millions not by the actions of individuals like generals and kings” (something like that I can’t remember the exact sentence).
Mainstream media and corporate media mainly takes on describing the events, from the ruling class points of view, hiding away by terminologies like “professionalism”, “objectivity” and many other things.
Being other than mainstream media is not the objective, it is one of the requirements, but the objective is establishing an alternative reading of society, being on the side of the people not the ruling elite.
Mainstream media would state that the US gave 30 billion Dollars to a country “A”, but they wouldn’t say that these 30 billion came at the price of taking out the country’s resources, establishing a new government, more oppression, a high rate of unemployment, privatization plans and etc. ...
Alternative media, however, should be explaining the crisis, finding it’s causes, not only the direct causes, but all its manifestations; it should establish a theoretical and ideological headquarters for the movement, and here I quote from a poster I once saw “I give money to the poor, they say I’m a saint; I ask why are the poor hungry they say that I’m a communist”. Alternative media should be dealing with the causes and explaining the crisis, not only dealing with its symptoms.
An alternative paper should be a tool for the movement and not outside of it, it should run on the same pace of the movement and sometimes push it forward tackling issues which are somehow sensitive and undiscussed, it encourages activists, it gives a clearer view of the achievements and the mistakes done, without being an intellectual elite, people who are writing in the newspaper or the site should be involved directly in the current discussions, actions, and decisions, and should write about them.
 
What kind of newspaper do we need?
The left in Lebanon is now in the process of building and realignment, it is establishing the basic grounds for a new movement, and which has shown its will and dedication through the “No War No Dictatorship” campaign.
This process of building requires the proper theoretical and analytical backbone to establish a strong coalition that is connected by a vivid and vital space of thoughts and ideas; this struggle of ideas is crucial for the movement, as it cannot go forward without it.
In a movement we need to know our objectives and our strategies, everyone in the movement also has to know theory and analysis, as everyone should have the ability to convince discuss and fight for his/her beliefs.
And here I am not speaking about like general purposes, like we need “equal rights between men and women” we have to move forward with ideas and we need to know why do we need equal rights, why is equality crucially important for us, why is it beneficial for us to have such equality. All these questions have to be answered and it is the duty of the movement as a whole to provide these answers to each individual within the movement.
“The role of a newspaper, however, is not limited solely to the dissemination of ideas, to political education, and to the enlistment of political allies. A newspaper is not only a collective propagandist and a collective agitator, it is also a collective organizer” (Vladimir Lenin).
An Alternative or what we seek to be a revolutionary newspaper aims to help erect the building of a revolutionary movement. a revolutionary newspaper prepares the ground for the creation of the revolutionary movement, both ideologically and organizationally, and it educated a whole generation of professional revolutionaries. The paper combines propaganda with the development of theory.
There is uneven consciousness within society and the working class, thus a newspaper aims to raise the levels of consciousness within society thus more people would be aware of the threats and the consequences of capitalism, and gradually would try to exile indifference within society for the sake of building a much larger movement.
The newspaper is an educator and an organizer for the movement; it promotes consciousness and provides revolutionary education.
The role of a newspaper here is crucial, as I have described through the paragraphs above, the revolutionary newspaper is the ground base of the movement, and we have to see the movement as the university of activists and what is special within this university is that everyone is an instructor and a student at the same time, it is an permanent interaction of thoughts and ideas and experiences, it is somehow an organic body of continuous manifestations of actions, thoughts and ideas.
A revolutionary newspaper is the one who takes these manifestations and experiences and archives them and concretize them and make them affordable to all the people. The role of the paper goes more to be the holder and the translator of these experiences into a more acceptable format to let other activists know about them and also trying to let people from outside the movement to know about our beliefs and thoughts, thus it works somehow as a recruitment unit.
And from here we need to know that an alternative paper should at all times subjective and as it must take sides. Hereto I say that the subjectivity of an alternative newspaper is a crucial requirement of the newspaper for being alternative, it has to take sides; no question about it.
 
As for the layout: that’s another thing
The layout always reflects the democratic structure and the ideas of the staff within the newspaper.
If we take the Guardian for example, you can see the hierarchy within the layout and formation of the newspaper. The so called professionalism is reflected by the blocks put in a refine hierarchy, the order of the text, the categorization, the separator lines that define importance and etc. ...
And also the excessive conformity of the layout what you choose for layout reflects the orientation of the newspaper and it’s tendency.
An alternative newspaper should reflect the openness and the direct democracy that this newspaper has within its staff and it’s direct relation to the struggle, it should be a propaganda unit for the struggle and the movement. Here I am not talking about another Baath and Teshrin newspaper. These are the state’s propaganda, it ain’t the people’s nor the movement’s newspaper.
 
Internal democracy and decision making
Democracy inside of an alternative newspaper is a key issue for the newspaper to be alternative, and when speaking about democracy, I don’t mean consensus, as for me consensus is anti-democratic as sometimes, the minority could block a decision, thus it would be the rule of the minority. We wouldn’t need democracy if we have a system than can perfectly reflect the wishes of everyone.
Democracy is ongoing battlefield of ideas and proposals and it’s crucially important to have a democratic procedure within a paper to have an alternative paper.
A newspaper is an interactive ground for political currents and views and readings; this vital space of battling ideas. A newspaper is a place for discussion, ideology and analysis. An alternative newspaper is the carrier of the goals and aims and the identity of the movement.
An alternative newspaper is the backbone of the building process of the movement.
Thus the internal organization of the newspaper should reflect the internal organizational structure of the movement itself. Internal democracy is an ongoing process of building, not a fixed system as blue’s article described. This process is built by experience by trial and error in the purpose in fitting the needs of the group and the group’s perspective of democracy.
 



It is six months since the wave of revolts started sweeping through the Middle East and north Africa. And the wave is far from over.
New political formations are taking shape across the region.
In Egypt, the growth of broad socialist groupings, and the formation of the Democratic Workers Party, clearly shows the shift to the left and class politics.
In Tunisia we witnessed the birth of the 14 January coalition between radical left forces, trade unions and others.
In Yemen, Syria and Libya the movement still has momentum, and it is getting increasingly organised.
Last week Syrian president Bashar Al-Assad promised reforms to tackle corruption and an amnesty for protesters.
This is a desperate attempt to demobilise the movement against his regime – Assad’s “reforms” would only take place if the protests stop. But it has had little impact on those taking to the streets.
In Lebanon, discussions on how to bring down the sectarian regime have spread across the country for the first time in decades.
The widening political rift between the Arab masses and the ruling elite is now spreading widely across the region. New battle lines are taking shape.
Now the Arab masses are taking up the question of opposition to religious sectarianism.
The ruling elite have increasingly used sectarianism in attempts to discredit and crush the movement. We can see this in Bahrain, Syria and Egypt.
Armed sectarian clashes also broke out last week between different groups in north Lebanon.
Religious sectarianism poses a real threat to the movement.
It can transform revolutionary struggles into bloody wars that crush working class unity and reinforce a new state of fear.
 
Leverage
Sectarianism is an attempt to create the illusion that the welfare of one religious group lies in its ability to wage war and have economic and political leverage over another.
Yet these benefits are restricted to the ruling classes, while the working class and the unemployed become fuel for such wars.
It tries to create unity between rulers and workers from the same sect. This can only be challenged through class unity.
The Iraq war played an important part in preparing the ground for heightened sectarian politics in the region.
Sectarianism became the scarecrow used by regimes to scare off the popular movements.
This was obvious with Gaddafi, Assad, Mubarak and others. The equation for them was “either me or civil war”, using the example of Iraq to illustrate the horrors of sectarian warfare.
Imperialism has tried to use this to its benefit. The US government’s position on democracy has been completely discredited by recent events.
It is desperately trying to ally itself with the forces most ready to preserve US interests in the region, under the guise of wanting stability and reforms.
Meanwhile, the masses call for the regimes to be brought down.
Moreover, the US and Israel know that the real threat from these movements is wider democracy in the region.
They know that the Arab masses resent Zionism. The Israeli state is panicking as the regimes it has supported with the Americans come under threat.
The Arab revolutionary left has a historic opportunity to build. Revolutionary movements have achieved in days what reformists have promised for decades, but never delivered.
The Arab Revolution has only just started.
The region, which was for decades described as a political desert, is now a buzzing arena of debate and struggle for economic and political rights, democracy, equality, freedom and national dignity.
It showed what the Arab masses are really made of. Claims that Arabs are inherently sectarian, oppressive towards women and unable to live under democracy are quickly fading.
The real obstacles to change are shown up as the Arab dictatorships and imperialism.
This reminds us of a slogan used against the war on Iraq and Arab collaboration with imperialism: No war, no dictatorships!
 



This is the first time in decades that the Arab world has witnessed an insurrection that brought down a dictator. The revolt started with demands for work, bread and water, but these soon merged with political demands for freedom and liberty.
The slogan for the rebellion became: “Bread, Education and Liberty”.
Across the Arab world, people held solidarity meetings and prepared for action in support of the Tunisian revolution.
The words “Inch-allah I-nna”, roughly translated from Arabic as “Hoping it happens here”, were repeatedly voiced in Arab streets.
In Algeria people made several attempts to protest at the Tunisian embassy, but police forcefully stopped and dispersed them.
Protests took place in Jordan, Lebanon and Egypt. Protesters shouted slogans supporting the Tunisian revolution and for bringing down all Arab regimes.
In contrast, the Arab rulers stayed silent. Most media channels and papers in the Arab world blocked any coverage of the revolt.
Ben Ali went on national TV and attacked the protesters as terrorists.
The response from the street was fast – more people joined the rebellion.
 
Opposition
On 13 January, the Union Generale des Travailleurs Tunisien (UGTT) called a regional general strike at Sfax, the second largest city in the country.
The strike brought tens of thousands to the city to protest – a sight never seen before. Similar protests happened in Kairouan and Jendouba.
There were rumours of the army beginning to side with protesters and within hours Ben Ali had left the country.
That left Arab rulers and kings shaken.
Many on the Arab left and opposition forces took the opportunity to demand economic and social reforms.
As the speaker of the Tunisian parliament and prime minister declared themselves legitimate leaders of the state, militias were still attacking neighbourhoods and cities around the country.
These militias are affiliated with Ben Ali’s regime and family.
Trade unions and left wing parties called for people to organise local popular defence committees to protect the revolution.
These popular committees were able to limit the activities of the militias and in some cases arrest and prosecute its members.
The revolution has not finished and the battle has only just begun.
The remnants of the old regime are manoeuvring, trying to get control over the popular movement and consolidate their power.
In Tunisia, as in most Arab countries, there are two oppositions.
One is the recognised or “official” opposition, which most Tunisians see as a bunch of collaborators and too close to Ben Ali’s regime. The other opposition are the banned organisations, mostly composed of far-left political parties and radical social democratic parties.
This has been closely engaged in calling and organising the protests.
Many feel the movement could not have developed this far without the involvement of the trade unions.
One activist said, “It set the tempo for the movement. As long as the UGTT called for strikes, people knew that the battle continued.”
 
Vacuum
Islamists are another factor in Tunisian politics. They were not involved in the uprising, but are trying to capitalise on the power vacuum that resulted after the fall of Ben Ali.
Much of the “official” opposition, including the Islamists, are ready to make concessions with the remnants of Ben Ali’s regime.
Much of the real opposition, however, is calling for the formation of a constituent assembly that can put forward a new constitution for the country. Those in the real opposition think that an election under the current law would only re-establish the old regime and its allies in power.
The balance of power in Tunisia is still unclear.
What is clear is that the Tunisian revolution is highly significant.
For many across the Arab world, it shows things that once seemed impossible can be attained through a mass movement.
It shows that change can be carried out through activity on the streets – not through bureaucratic debates in the parliament or the cabinet.
And it shows that the battle for change still carries hope after decades of oppression and despotism.
Arab rulers know that the economic and political situation across all Middle Eastern countries has much in common with that in Tunisia.
It’s enough to give them sleepless nights.
 



Ten years have passed since the tragic events of 9/11. While I sympathise with those who died in the US, I cannot but remember the countless atrocities committed by the US government in their name against Muslims and Arabs around the globe.
The US has tried to paint Arabs and Muslims as backwards, oppressors, terrorists – and with these slogans it has legitimised countless attacks.
In Iraq, millions of people are still stuck in an endless chain of violence and crisis.
In Afghanistan the war continues, and is flooding into Pakistan. And we have seen the 2006 war on Lebanon.
Palestinians are suffering more than ever at the hands of Israel, one of the most brutal regimes that has ever existed.
The democracy that the US promised to the Arab people meant nothing more than oil contracts, privatisation and increased spending on “security”.
The “will of the people” that the “liberators” never stopped talking about was crushed daily by the regimes that the US had planted or supported for decades.
But in 2011 the world has taken a sharp turn.
The masses of the Arab world are rising up against those same regimes that the US has for long described as “strategic allies and “pioneers of stability and democracy”.
From Tahrir Square to the streets of Tunisia, the squares of Bahrain and Yemen, and through Syria, we have learned that democracy and freedom is not given.
It is taken – by the will, unity and determination of the masses.
But this is only the start. The Arab masses know that the price of freedom is not cheap, and that the only way to guarantee the gains of their revolutions is by breaking and pushing out imperialism.
We need to trust the masses of the world – not the regimes and ruling classes.
 



The intervention of the Western powers is a real threat to the Arab revolutions. It allows the dictators to pose as defenders of national independence.
In fact it is the dictators, who have relied on the West’s support for decades, who ensure the grip of imperialism.
There will be some who argue we need Western support to win. But the West is not interested in winning revolutions. It is pursuing specific economic and strategic interests.
Neither Nato nor its planes can bring liberation. The only way to win real freedom and democracy is by our own hand – solidarity within the Arab revolutions.
Anti-imperialism is in the fabric of the Arab political movements. We cannot separate the fight for democratic freedoms from the struggle to defeat imperialism.
What the imperialists want, and there are forces among the Libyan rebels who agree, is to sustain the system with a different face.
But it’s important to see that the fall of Gaddafi might also radicalise other revolutionary struggles. It will have an impact in the Gulf states.
In Libya it’s too early to judge if all the people will welcome Nato with open arms. At the start of revolutions people unite in wide coalitions, but once the dictators fall contradictions will come to the surface.
But the decisive factor is the process in Egypt. It is the most powerful movement in the region and what happens there shapes all the struggles across the region.
We are still just at the beginning of the revolutionary process, and these are just the first small steps.
 







Western intervention will either strengthen Assad’s grip or destroy the gains of the Syrian revolt, says Lebanese socialist Bassem Chit





Since news broke of a possible US strike on Syria the overwhelming mood in the region has been an escalation of fear. Thousands of Syrians fled towards the Lebanese border, while in Lebanon people were preparing for the worst.
The vision of a US strike on Syria as a liberatory breath probably only occurred to a tiny minority of people. It could only appeal to people who can easily escape the repercussions or who are so desperate that they welcome any change.
First an attack will be disastrous for the people of Syria. It undermines the development of the revolution that offers real hope. There is no such thing as a “surgical strike”. The US administration’s claim that it will punish the regime without also hurting millions of people in Syria and across the region is a fiction.
In reality a US strike is most likely to strengthen Assad. Alternatively, if the West is determined to bring him down, it will have to destroy most of Syria.
In the first scenario, Assad would be able to continue his murderous actions against the Syrian population while posing as an anti-imperialist hero. This would further isolate the Syrian Revolution. Already some people who supported the revolution are turning back to the regime under the pretext that it must be defended from the US.
We have seen what it means when the US decides to “depose a dictator” in Iraq, in Afghanistan and in Libya.
Even if the Americans succeed, they will also have destroyed all the structures and the networks built by the Syrian revolutionaries during their struggle against the regime. All the experience of self-organisation, all the democratic processes put in place by the active masses, all the political developments within them – all of these will be destroyed.
That will leave an empty space for opportunist forces, the proxies of Al Qaida and the regressive regimes such as Saudi Arabia and Qatar, to take on the leading role.
In both scenarios, the US attack will first and foremost damage the Syrian Revolution. Moreover it will be a pretext for the regime’s allies in the region to rescue it by widening the circle of war.
Lebanon’s leaders could submerge it in yet another war to escape the rising popular resentment against Hizbollah sending fighters to bolster Assad in Syria.
It would silence local support for the Syrian Revolution under the slogan of “national discipline” against imperialism. Already the violence is spreading. Just last week Lebanon witnessed car bombs in densely populated neighbourhoods of both Beirut and Tripoli.
The idea that revolutions are won by some swift action that disposes of a regime and builds another, is a fiction.
Regimes are not simply structures balanced somewhere in some capital, that can be simply got rid of or taken over. They are a complex web of relations of interests among those on the top of society. They continuously adapt their roles and the agencies of economy and thought and politics to benefit changing situations. And they have the money and the knowledge to do so.
That is why revolutions are not about simply deposing a dictator or a military council or a corrupt president, however integral and necessary those actions may be. They are also about sparking a process of mass transformation and of self-education and confidence within the masses.
This develops through their continuous movement and struggle for change. It emerges from the factory of ideas set up by the revolutionary process, as alternative structures and agencies of resistance and of self-organisation are erected.
In time this process forms the dual power that can truly defy the existing order. That is when the system can be brought down to open the space for a true mass transformation of society towards a better future.
These processes must take place, even with dangerous setbacks. As has happened in Egypt such setbacks can be an important space to polarise people to a revolutionary position. They can filter out those elements who are willing to compromise with the ruling order at the first opportunity.
Moreover, observers often exaggerate the depth of these setbacks. The roots of the revolutions we are seeing are not simply a result of political conflict.
At their base are contradictions between the immense socio-economic developments happening at the base of Arab society and the existing superstructure and the political order.
These contradictions are far from disappearing. In Egypt, Syria, Bahrain or wherever, revolutionaries remind people of these contradictions and the necessity to push the revolutionary process forward.
They argue for the importance of giving time for these agencies and structures of resistance to develop and to support them. They can never, never fall to despair and call for foreign intervention or to side with one side of the ruling class against the other.
The first and foremost task is to support the masses as they develop their own potential to achieve change through their own collective action.
This can never be achieved by substituting for their movement with some surgical actions, whether a coup or a swift strike.
 




A Syrian refugee, when asked how Lebanon was treating him, lamented and said:
“How is it treating me? It isn’t treating me, it treats my money. Because of the nature of my job (veterinarian) I’m dealing with middle upper class Lebanese who only make their judgments based on money. They see that I’m here spending, and they see that I too come from the middle classes so they don’t show as much bigotry as it is normally the sentiment against us (Syrians) in Lebanon.”
The end of Lebanon’s civil war was marked by a more direct hegemonic role of the Syrian regime over the country’s political and economic spheres, with a high level of complicity from the Lebanese rulers with the Syrian regime. This status quo allowed the Syrian regime, on one hand, to escape the economic stagnation the country faced [1], through the open borders policy, allowing scores of Syrian workers to come to Lebanon in search of jobs. On the other hand, it gave the Lebanese ruling class and its contractors access to cheap labor, without providing them with any rights, in the large reconstruction projects that were initiated by the government in the early 1990’s, after 15 years of civil war.
The multi-class composition of Syrian refugees in Lebanon has challenged pre-existing xenophobic sentiments and stigmas, as the starting quote mentions:
“They see that I’m here spending, and they see that I too come from the middle classes so they don’t show as much bigotry as it is normally the sentiment against us (Syrians) in Lebanon”.
However, it only does so on a class basis. The Syrian middle classes are able, in effect, albeit to a small extent, to escape the stigmatization, which is becoming more and more focused and concentrated on poor and working class Syrian refugees in Lebanon. The ongoing popular uprising that started in Syria in early 2011 especially after the oppressive response by the regime, has now turned into an all-out war across the country. As a result, a high number of Syrian citizens fled their country into Lebanon. Yet, and in contrast to the previous composition of the Syrian community that was present in Lebanon before 2011, this new influx introduced new and different segments of the Syrian population into Lebanon, such as the Syrian upper and lower middle classes. These newcomers found striking similarities with the Lebanese middle classes. However, the majority of refugees is still composed of Syrian workers and the urban and rural poor. Resentment against the Syrian regime’s control over Lebanon grew in the post-civil war years, yet this discontent was easily channelled through the dominant discourses into an unchallenged (neither by the Syrian or Lebanese State, nor by the majority of civil society organizations and political parties in Lebanon) xenophobic and racist sentiments against Syrian workers. They became stereotyped and stigmatized as “ignorant” and “menial” workers. Although it was exactly this Syrian labor force that rebuilt Lebanon in the post-war era.
At the same time, the influx of Syrian refugees is also shaping contradictory sentiments among the wider populace in Lebanon. On one side there is an element of basic sympathy, which can be identified through a diverse scope of activities such as Lebanese families hosting refugees in their homes or property, as well as basic support like clothing and food in different regions and locations in cities and villages. As a 50-year-old woman comments, contemplating that issue of basic sympathy:
“It is unethical to blame the refugees for the problems we are facing, they had no choice in coming here, they are running from war, like we ran before them from the [Lebanese] civil war.”
On the other side, there are the dominant discourses propagated by leading political forces and elites, along with their affiliated media stations. They have been actively scapegoating Syrian refugees and blaming them for economic, social and security failures in the country. These discourses are then replicated through the daily politics of individuals and groups, forging a xenophobic and racist popular culture against Syrian refugees.
MP Michel Aoun recently stated that the “Syrian refugees are a serious danger”, while Samir Geagea, the main figure in Lebanon’s Lebanese Forces, stressed on 30th August 2013, about “Lebanon’s inability to handle [The Syrian refugee crisis] more, and that a viable solution needs to be put in place, and the only solution is to establish safe zones within Syria’s borders under international protection.” Moreover, Marwan Charbel, Lebanon’s internal security minister declared on February 28th, 2013, that the “Syrian refugees are threatening the security situation in Lebanon”. Other major political forces in Lebanon, like Hizbullah, Amal, Jumblatt’s PSP (Progressive Socialist Party), and Hariri’s Future Current mostly stressed the Humanitarian aspect of the “Syrian refugees Crisis” in Lebanon, but have refrained from countering any of the racist and xenophobic discourses, in the political and media spheres and even among their base of supporters and cadres.
The scapegoating discourse does not spur out of a natural inclination towards racism. Rather, it signals a deep crisis that the Lebanese state and its ruling elite have been facing since 2005. [2] More recently, it became galvanized by the crisis faced by the Syrian regime and the consequent influx of refugees, which has uncovered Lebanon’s ruling elite’s inability to manage the rising needs within society and the calls for reform.
Social dismay in Lebanon also started to accumulate around 2011, exacerbated by a history of corruption and conflicts, in the absence of any real and concrete plans of economic and social development and reform. The past two years witnessed a short-lived social mobilization against sectarianism and a prolonged mobilization and strike movement by the Trade Union Coordination Committee, in addition to localized protests, such as the electricity workers’ open strike. Added to that was the rising pressure from civil society forces for equal rights for women and other social issues. This led the Lebanese State and major political forces in the country to actively try to escape that pressure by attempting to channel existing popular resentment against the State towards a xenophobic and racist victimization of poor Syrian refugees.
To simply say that the Lebanese are naturally racist is shortsighted. This over-simplification tends to overlook factors that concentrate and divert people’s frustration against their own regime, towards scapegoating and discrimination against Syrian refugees. In order to discern this process of diversion or deflection, the role of Lebanon’s media institutions needs to be interpreted and the manner in which they shape people’s general understanding and consciousness of the world around them and its contradictions.
On August 6th, 2013, a news article published by An-Nahar newspaper, a Arabic Lebanese political daily, mentions that:
“The worker and craftsman from Akkar already suffers from a tough economic hardship and shrinking job opportunities. They are being forced between the hammer of a human feeling, sympathy with the displaced Syrians, and the anvil of the reality of living difficulties. The Syrian seasonal workers have become today’s workers and permanent residents working in various business available in Akkar”
The author in this paragraph summarizes the problematic of this article. First, he manages to establish an unquestionable status quo in Akkar by saying it “already suffers from a tough economic hardship and shrinking job opportunities.” He then suggests that what is galvanizing these hardships is also another unquestionable fact, which is the taking over of jobs by the Syrian refugees, who are “already registered as refugees and are benefiting from international, Arab and local aid”.
The author fails to mention the reasons of economic stagnation in Akkar, North of Lebanon, which has been witnessing a serious lack of attention from the Lebanese State especially in terms of socio-economic development. A study conducted by Mada Association in 2008 notices the following about the area:
“In 1998, Akkar accounted for 12.5 percent of the total number of deprived individuals in Lebanon, with 63.3 percent of the families in the region living in poverty and 23.3 percent of them in extreme poverty. Preliminary results of the 2004 mapping using the same living conditions index show that Akkar continues to have the highest share of poor households in Lebanon.”
From another side, the author also fails to mention the reasons why Syrian refugees, who are “receiving aid,” as he states, are in dire need of finding jobs. He also fails to ask whether the provided aid is actually enough to sustain the Syrian refugees, who did not flee to Lebanon by choice, but were rather forced to do so due to the ongoing violence in Syria.
Oxfam, an international humanitarian organization, carried out a Fair Share Analysis of Donations to the UN Syria Crisis Appeal, September 2013, and deduced the following:
“Research carried out by international aid agency Oxfam reveals that many donor countries are failing to provide their share of the urgently-needed funding for the humanitarian response to the Syria crisis. While the need for a political solution to the crisis is as urgent as ever, Oxfam says donors including France, Qatar and Russia, must also prioritise funding the UN’s $5 billion appeals.”
By omitting these facts, the author, on one hand, leaves the reader with the conclusion that people in Akkar are communities who, in order to make a living, need to fend for themselves, without showing the shortcomings and responsibilities of the State or the region’s elected MPs. On the other hand, he suggests that Akkar’s residents, although living a tough reality, they were generally doing ok, until the Syrian refugees arrived to the region.
This method of diversion is prevalent in Lebanese media reporting. In an article published by Assafir newspaper on September 4th, 2013, which could be read as a feel-good story about the refugees. However, the story’s conclusion focuses on the negative sentiments that sum up refugees as a nuisance and alien to the “Lebanese way of life.”
“The large number of motorcycles, though making life easier for Syrian refugees, has become an ample curse for the local population in the villages. The movements of dozens of motorbikes in villages have annoyed their residents, who in turn complained about the annoying sounds in narrow streets and alleys, in addition to the smoke that is emitted from each motorbike. This urged local authorities and security forces to control their movement, by setting specific limited hours for their movement.”
Although the author mentions the reasons why Syrian refugees use motorbikes, as it has a low cost compared to the high costs of local transportation systems in Lebanon, he misses the fact that the use of motorbikes is also a prevalent means of transportation, for the same reasons mentioned above, for many Lebanese from working class or poor backgrounds. Instead of tackling the question of transportation, facing both poor Lebanese and poor Syrian refugees alike, which is by all means the responsibility of the Lebanese State and ruling elites, the issue is thus diverted into an unresolvable dilemma presented in the concluding comparison, portraying quaint Lebanese villages versus the noise and nuisance that is caused by Syrian refugees on motorbikes.
Another example of this method of reporting can be found in an article published on April 19th, 2013 by Al-Akhbar newspaper, another Arabic, Lebanese political daily. The author seems to have just discovered or is re-discovering Souk Al-Ahad (The Sunday Market). The author observes, based on the present businesses and the crowds in the Sunday Market, that the Syrian refugees are now:
“changing landmarks in Beirut and its daily routine and Sunday market has had the lion’s share from this change”.
Yet this market has been historically one of the most visited places by poor working class Lebanese and Syrian and other migrant workers alike. But the author neglects that fact by saying that, before the Syrians came, it was a “quiet” shopping area. When one of the stall owners mentions the real problem of the continuous rising of stalls’ rent prices by the market’s Lebanese management: 
“Mohamad denies the increasing number of stalls in the market is a result of the influx of Syrian refugees into Lebanon, and explains it on the basis that the price of a stall in Souk Al-Ahad is US$175 per week, with raising prices permanently put up by the market management.”
The author fails to pursue this issue, but continues to generally describe the Lebanese stall owners’ reaction to Syrian customers and vice versa.
The article overlooks the effects of rising rent prices and the reasons behind the hike in product prices, which many of the author’s interviewees mentioned in the article. One woman is reportedly saying
“Are Lebanese used to pay such prices or where they hiked just to welcome the Syrian visitor?”
The author simply focuses on the antagonism that exists between Lebanese and Syrians, inadvertently contributing to the portrayal of an embedded racism, without showing who are the ones responsible or pulling the strings and fuelling such racism.
The use of the word “Lebanese prestige” at the beginning of the article, to describe an assumed slow or quiet movement in the market before the influx of Syrian refugees, hints at a certain assumed bourgeois character of Lebanese citizens. It is then re-established by describing the “Lebanese corner” of the market, as being similar in shape to the bourgeois streets of downtown Beirut, compared to the popular character of the other stalls (where the author does not really say whether they are Lebanese or Syrian).
The missing facts and questions for understanding the antagonism rising within the politics of this market are many. Who is the Lebanese management? Why did it hike the rent prices? What were the reasons behind the rent hike? How did that impact the prices of goods sold in the market? Who was affected? How did that play in fuelling or driving antagonistic sentiments between Syrian and Lebanese shoppers and stall operators?
Falling into the same problematic of media reporting in Lebanon when dealing with the question of racism against Syrian refugees is the continued focus on reporting “racist behavior,” whether in support or in condemnation. Either way, it is being enforced as the media fails to look into what drives it, what encourages it, and what are the conditions that are nourishing its propagation within society.
All in all, those responsible for economic policies in Lebanon, the establishment of working and accessible transportation systems, the management of markets, such as Souk Al-Ahad, are all outside the picture the media reports when tackling questions related to Syrian refugees in Lebanon. The reader is left with two conclusions; either the Lebanese are inherently racist, as a unchanging fact, or Syrian refugees are greedy workers who steal jobs from poor Lebanese citizens.
The examples of media reporting on Syrian refugees in Lebanon are many and most follow these two stereotypes in one way or another. On rare occasions, articles point to the structural causes and the political environment that effortlessly manage to divert existing genuine resentment against the harsh conditions people face in Lebanon, through scapegoating “foreign elements.”
This culture of diversion, if it may be called as such, is not new. It has been a longstanding accompanying discourse of Lebanon’s ruling elite, in building their own political hegemony and preserving their rule. The ills of Lebanon are always relegated to being the result of interference of “stranger” and/or “foreign” elements. This is exceptionally true in the dominant discourses interpreting the causes of the long civil war that destroyed the country between 1975 and 1989, following which the ruling elite declared a general amnesty and resorted to explain the civil war as a result of the interference of “Palestinians” or “Syrians” in local Lebanese affairs. It was enough to divert attention from the real causes of the war, the State’s sectarianism being one of the major causes.
Yet this scapegoating is never done on the level of interfering governments or rich Arab and foreign interventionists. Quite the contrary, it has always been directed against migrant workers, refugees, workers, and the poor. It is exactly this economic or class element of this culture that is worrying. The opening quote of this article mentions that “it [Lebanon] treats my money”, making Lebanon a safe haven for the rich and, at the same time, a punitive establishment for the poor. The punishments is incited through sectarianism and racist and xenophobic strife and conflict.
In an environment of economic scarcity, hardship, and poverty, questions about who is more poor and more needy, among the poor, is directly and indirectly attempting to hide a more important and more crucial question, which is why do Syrian and Lebanese, whether in Lebanon or in Syria, have to live in poverty and hardship? In the meantime, projects for constructing billion-dollar shopping malls and sky-high expensive resorts and buildings are ongoing in different places around the country. It is that culture of not questioning poverty and scarcity, that allows and drives the development of racism, sectarianism, and xenophobia.
As a result, it is the poor and the refugees who pay the price and they learn to replicate the same discourse within their own interpretations of reality:
“We have covered larger sections of Lebanon and we have become too many to the extent that the Lebanese cannot tolerate us any longer. They have also increased their authority and control over us at work. Even some of them have stopped paying us our salaries. The hard living conditions are not the only reasons that make Syrian refugees line up at the doors of UNHCR, but also because in Lebanon they don’t feel that they are outside the Syrian crisis. Everyone in Lebanon wants to know where we are from, who we belong to, or who we support. This way, the Lebanese choose to deal with us based on our backgrounds”.
Nasser fled with two generations from his family, all wanting to reach the West. It doesn’t matter which country they go to, what only matters is to get out of here, Nasser tells al-Akhbar newspaper on October 16th, 2012.
Stories and news reports about Syrian refugees in Lebanon are abundant in Lebanese media. Stories covering the refugees seem to cover almost all aspects of being a Syrian refugee in Lebanon. However, they are always portrayed in majority as having a “turbulent” effect on Lebanese society, without actually looking to the already existing turbulent conditions in the country. The fact that Syrian refugees are being coerced towards a refugee status is similar to that which many Lebanese faced during the 2006 Israeli war on Lebanon or the Civil War. But it is mostly neglected or only used to justify support for the regime or segments of the opposition in Syria. It does not purport to show the striking similarities in hardships, oppression, and exploitation that both Syrian and Lebanese face, while living under the existing ruling orders; the continuous state of stagnation of reforms that both the Syrian and Lebanese regimes are facing; or the effects this stagnation has in terms of exacerbating social and civil injustices.
The media commands how people understand and interpret reality to a large extent. Thus, if the space is left for a short-sighted or deflected explanation of reality, this contributes, in one way or the other, to diverting people’s focus away from the real problems. Thus, it creates a culture of misinformation, which contradicts the democratic culture that the media presumably contributes to developing.
In conclusion, civil society organizations in Lebanon cannot continue treating Syrian refugees in Lebanon through a strictly humanitarian lens. They must be mindful of the prevailing discourses that shape people’s opinions about refugees. They should also systematically counter that discourse by putting pressure on media institutions, in addition to the State, and by developing alternative discourses. This could win people outside the racist and sectarian discourses and lead to a focus on real issues that people face and the shared experience both Lebanese and Syrians are facing and have faced in the past, in their struggle against exploitation and survival under oppression, exploitation, wars, and social injustices.

Notes
1. “Syria’s economic stagnation is rooted in official as well as informal economic and fiscal policies and decisions that have undergirded incentives for liberalizing the national market since the early 1990s”, Bassam Haddad, Change and Statis in Syria, Merip, 2013.
2. The Lebanese ruling class crisis has presented itself in several forms during the past few years, either by their inability to resolve the political conflict that has been reaping through the country since 2005, and in their inability to respond to the rising economic hardships that most Lebanese are facing, as well as the massively accumulated national debt which accounts to more than 40 billion US dollars (which is a result of the pandemic state of corruption that characterizes the Lebanese ruling order).
 



War on Iraq and the destabilization of the region:
The war on Iraq was even by the words of the US administration a war for economic control and to keep the oil flow from the Middle East. Sunday Herald newspaper (UK) stated:
“President Bush’s Cabinet agreed in April 2001 that ‘Iraq remains a destabilising influence to the flow of oil to international markets from the Middle East’ and because this is an unacceptable risk to the US, ‘military intervention’ is necessary.”
Achieving control over the oil in Iraq, is not simply taking control over the oil refineries there, they need also to create a political environment in Iraq and the region to guarantee their control over such resources.
This means US interference in the region is not only limited to Iraq, but it would exceed to start fingering the present regimes in the Middle East like Syria, Iran and Lebanon.
The impact of the war was direct and fast, high fuel prices, refugees, destabilization of the political regimes in the region.
Syria was never away from being fingered by the US, During the war on Iraq, and the first stages of the occupation, the US has repeatedly attacked Syria for helping “insurgent” groups to flee through Syria or to attack from Syria, or even to transport weapons through the Iraqi-Syrian borders.
These attacks present a real threat to the regime in Syria, especially when the American troops are just miles away from Damascus. This resulted in tightening the grip of control of the Syrian regime in Syria and also in Lebanon this can be seen when Syria pushed for a change in the Lebanese constitution extending Lahoud’s presidential mandate.
 
Lebanon: Class, Sectarianism and the re-alignment of the ruling class
The local political scene in Lebanon at this point was witnessing an intensification of the class struggle as a result of the continuous clash between Hariri’s neo-liberal policies and the semi state-capitalist model pushed by the Syrian regime, and what added to the situation was the war on Iraq, which led the players inside the Lebanese political scene to re-align, which all in all created a highly unstable political scene.
May 27th, 2004, mass demonstration took place all over the country, protesting against the socio-economic policies as well as the rise of fuel prices; in reaction the army marched towards one of the poorest suburbs in south Beirut and started shooting live ammunition against the demonstrators, killing five workers.
At that point there was a rise in class antagonism, especially due to the repeated attacks and destruction of what is left of the trade unions.
There was a clear threat to the ruling class in the country, which forced a re-alignment of the ruling class and an intensification of the conflict within it. This was clearly seen in the repeated attacks between Lahoud and Hariri, and the forming opposition known at that point as the Bristol Coalition.
Parts of the ruling class saw that the US is determined in reshaping the regimes in the Middle East, and in an attempt to maintain its rule, two options where put to the table either the Ukrainian Model or the Iraqi Model.
But due to the high unpopularity of the present political leadership, the opposition or the Bristol coalition was not able to attract any support from the people, their demonstrations was no more than small assemblies of some of their political leaders. The opposition was mainly formed of the druze leader Walid Junblat and his party the Progressive Socialist Party, which is neither progressive, nor socialist and merely a party. Also inside the opposition is quite a collection of Christian parties that go from center right to the far right like, the Lebanese Forces. In addition to the Democratic Left which is no more than an opportunistic attempt to form a Lebanese version of the European social democracy.
At the same time Lahoud’s Coalition was in the same position, having no popular support at all, leading a coalition of mafia leaders and very corrupt politicians and Baathist propagandists.
As for Hariri, he maintained the center between both coalitions, but was leaning a bit towards the opposition. But Hariri also was far away from having any actual support from the people, except for the forced support of his several companies’ employees and the beneficiaries from his student grants. Hariri is responsible for the privatization plans, the VAT in addition to privatizing most of Beirut’s Center known as Solidere, in reference to the company that actually bought the area, and where Hariri has considerable shares in it.
After the elections in Iraq and Palestine, the US seemed more determined on continuing its new Middle East Project, with their new developed theory of constructive disharmony. The theory claims that by creating a general political disharmony or in other words destabilizing the political scene in the region, they can benefit from the resulting chaos in pushing for the creation of new puppet regimes that can serve of best interest in this new era of US politics.
This strategy was highly present especially in the obvious and direct interference of US ambassadors in the local policies of the countries they were in. In Lebanon, the US ambassador as well as the Europeans played a determining role in the local policies and allowing considerable amounts of money to flow into the country in support of political and civil society movements.
The situation was moving rather timidly, and needed somehow of a braking point, a curve, somehow a push to move things forward.
 
Hariri’s Assassination:
On Monday, February 14, 2005, the motorcade carrying former Lebanese Prime Minister, Rafic Hariri, was torn to pieces by, what it seems, 350 kilograms of TNT. The explosion killed Hariri, 7 of his companions, and 11 bystanders.
After 10 minutes of the assassination, the words “civil-war” was on every tongue, the blast reminded everyone of the horrors of the civil war that finished not so long ago.
The following days saw hundreds of thousands of Lebanese turn to the streets. People went to the streets, expressing their refusal to any violence that might start, the opposition at this point saw the situation as a golden opportunity to continue with their plans, and move to the offensive, the first step was by directly shifting the fingers of accusation towards the Syrian regime, the argument was easily won because of know history of confrontation between Syria and Hariri and because of the History of the Syrian rule over Lebanon. but still the opposition needed to fill in the huge gap between them and the people, and at this point they declared a political war, somehow of a civil unrest, which was enough to gain them enough support.
 
Revolution of the ruling class on itself
The opposition saw this also as a way to deflect the class struggle to a confessional and racist conflict, religious sectarianism was encouraged, which is a strategy that has been used historically by the Lebanese ruling class to oppress and demolish the class struggle by emphasizing on confessional, religious and ethnic differences, the same strategy was used during the 1860 civil war, and 1975 civil war. And this strategy also coincides with the politics used by the US administration to deal with the Middle East, and especially in Iraq.
At that point the events were accelerated to point where there was a real threat of a new civil war; tens of racist attacks were carried out all over the country mainly directed against Syrian workers, and Palestinians. This rhetoric was highly encouraged by the media, locally and internationally.
The CNN and most of the western media where always emphasizing on the Chrsitian religious identity of the people who were assassinated after Hariri even though that the 2 main figures who were assassinated (Samir Kassir and Georges Hawi) were from the communist and leftist tradition, Samir Kassir was of Palestinian origin, member of the democratic left. Georges Hawi was an ex-secretary general of the CP.
The local media, was filled with racism and confessionalism, Pamela Tannouri from Annahar newspaper said in one of her articles about the Syrians: “you know them from their faces ... they want to enforce their culture and history on us”, other newspapers showed testimonies from the opposition demonstrators saying “you know them from how they smell and how they look” placards showed statements like “100% Lebanese” during all this time the political leadership of the opposition stayed silent refusing that there is any confessionalism and racism in the streets. The loyalists camp being totally driven out of the political scene, allowed Hezbollah to go in into the scene by holding a demonstration to wave goodbye for the withdrawing Syrian troops, and actually used the same rhetoric as the opposition, Hezbollah was able to marginalize large section of the Lebanese society mainly the Shiaa, and hold it to fuel the tension which would allow him to put himself as a considerable power in the country, and he did exactly that, by holding a demonstration of nearly a million demonstrator. This actually put the whole of the country in a state of strong sectarian confrontations, many confessional and sectarian incidents were recorded, and most of the time the media stayed silent on them.
Michel Aoun, another warlord, who was living in exile, came back to country, and destabilized the opposition and withdrew from it. When the parliamentary elections were due, the country saw three massive blocks, formed mainly out of Hizbollah, the opposition led by Rafic Hariri’s son: Saed Hariri and the third pole was Aoun’s Free Patriotic Movement, which is mainly an anti-Syrian movement.
The elections also showed a high interference of the US ambassador and diplomats as well as for French and European diplomats, and their role was not of an advisory role only but it extended itself in actually selecting candidates for the elections, especially in Beirut. Also a big collection of electoral monitoring organization spread all over the country, the participation rate in the elections showed there is still a silent majority; in some cities the electoral rates didn’t exceed 20%, which still showed the unpopularity of the political leadership despite the mass mobilizations. This high unpopularity was due to the successive betrayal of the popular movement by the leaders of the opposition.
For example, the coalition in south Lebanon which was considered a pro-Syrian coalition was formed of Hizbollah, Amal, Junblat and Saed Hariri. In Beirut, where the coalition was considered anti-Syrian was also formed of Hizbollah, Jumblat, Saed Hariri and the Christian Parties.
The dishonest politics were quite obvious, and this led to many people losing interest in the electoral process, especially after the Maronite Patriarch pushed not to lower the age of voting to 18 years old instead of 21 year, so that mainly meant that most of the people who actually fueled the demonstrations where not allowed to decide what happens to their country.
 
The Elections: a glass coalition
The elections resulted in a winning majority for the opposition, but still Hizbollah and Aoun Managed to get a considerable number of seats in the parliament. Lahoud was still on the presidency. Parts of the opposition were calling for the resignation of Lahoud, but the patriarch objected to these calls since the presidential seat in Lebanon is a Maronite seat and Lahoud’s resignation meant weakening the position of the Maronites in the country. This also led to the loss of trust deepening inside the supporters of the opposition.
Many of the opposition forces were hoping for a national unity coalition, but the dream didn’t last long and that is because the ruling class in such a fast attempt to reconstruct its political organization, did not manage to resolve the contradictions that are highly present in the local political scene, such as sectarianism, also the weapon used by the ruling class to mobilize the masses backfired in pushing confessional and civil-war related questions to surface again, which did not hold the coalition for long. Hizbollah and Aoun are now growing closer and closer to each other; you can see the early formation of such an alliance in the recent student elections in the universities, where hizbollah and Aoun formed an electoral alliance on a national scale.
The glass coalition will not last as long as it was intended, especially that many of the Lebanese parties are structurally unable to cope with a lot of the changes in the Lebanese society, and through the past 10 years, many of these parties has encountered many structural problems related to the internal democratic process. So basically we will see a lot of changes in the political formations in the country.
 
Mehlis Report: Syria, Lebanon and the free market
Mehlis, the commissioner of the UN International Independent investigation commission, Mehlis was on the front pages or most of the Lebanese local newspapers in the country for most of his stay, actually in his report he points out the extraordinary media coverage of the investigation.
Without even going into the detail if his report is actually telling us something, Mehlis report is being used consecutively by the US to corner and to “punish” Syria, which in the most probable cases would lead to economic and political sanctions like the ones that were put on Iraq. Quite recently Syria decided to link its economy to the global market by freeing up the Syrian Lira, such policy would drive large sections of society into poverty, and if the sanctions happen these people would be condemned into strong poverty and unemployment.
The White House has decided long time ago that it is essential to guarantee US economic hegemony over the world market, that is why still the currency used at OPEC is US dollars, and these policies are essential for the US also in the new open Markets in the Middle East, Iraq, Jordan, Egypt and Lebanon, and now Syria they have all linked their currencies with the US dollar.
It’s not only that, this requires also opening up the markets, through WTO, privatization plans, grants, etc. ...
Recently, the Lebanese government is systematically attacking the majority of the population, by a series of neo-liberal policies that would condemn a large majority of society under poverty, unemployment and social discrimination. Not a long time ago, the government decided to cut aid to the agricultural sectors, they also decided to cut disability funds to 50%. Rising fuel and gas prices, there have been threats on raising the price of bread also. It doesn’t stop here, there have been serious talks on raising the VAT from 10% to 18%, and with a 200$ minimum wage, and Beirut being one of the most expensive cities in the middle east, this would actually mean a crisis.
Solidere the company that owns Beirut’s downtown has sold a considerable number of shares and property in the few months after Hariri’s death, money was being purred in from Europe as funding plans or grants, also the CNN recently did a documentary on Lebanon, which is more an advertisement for investors to come to Lebanon, we can see the first traces of market globalization with the communication sectors, which witnessed an instant drop of prices, as a result of the first steps in opening the sector for competition, which will most probably end-up in closing many service providers putting hundreds jobless, exactly what happened with the mobile phone sector. Also another indicator is the rising prices in the housing sector. Lebanon will experience a boom, which most probably will be expressed in high prices, and more class antagonism, which is slowly manifesting especially after the political scene has cooled off.
The surfacing class issues are pushing the Lebanese ruling class to use the International Investigation to maintain its dominance over the political debate in the country, and to divert attention from issues like racism, class and confessionalism.
The international investigation is used as the main propaganda tool to create the state enemy which would allow them to maintain their status, a Lebanese version of George Orwell’s 1984.
 
Is there any hope?
Saadallah Wannous, a well known progressive Syrian playwright said: “we are committed by hope” hope for change is always present as always as there are people. The movement is alive and we can see it re-emerging all over the Middle East.

Iraq: the recent weeks, we have seen that the last US led attack in west Iraq, has pushed for its own allies in the government to turn against it, and actually the choice of resistance is winning more people on the ground. The US arguments of democracy in middle east is not getting more support but rather loosing support, IRAQ has been a live example of such democracy.
 
Palestine: The recent elections inside the Fatah faction in Palestine, the results came giving the majority of votes to Marwan el Barghouti, he is one of the young members in the party, and imprisoned for life in Israeli prisons, and we can also see quite a dominant choice for new militant voices, this shift can be translated in a shift for keeping the intifada going, keeping the resistance alive.
 
The Gulf: we have seen in the past few years, especially after the invasion of Iraq, a rise in movement in the Arabian gulf, we have seen a lot of reports emerging out of the area, where 5 years ago it’s somehow impossible to get any bit of information, now we see a rise in genuine civil society organizations, we have also seen anti-war demonstrations, rising movements in Saudi Arabia calling for democratization and for workers rights.
 
Egypt: we are witnessing a rising movement against the state, against Imperialism and against capitalism, for example the kefaya movement, and if the movement in Egypt manages to win more support which is what its doing that will mean that it will give more hope for the movement in the region as a whole.
 
Lebanon: the left has been highly present over the past few years, and has been under attack since the 1975, but still has the ability to revive itself, in 1996 the coalition drown between the left and secular organization collected somehow of 25% of the votes nationwide, but due to sectarian structure of the electoral system didn’t manage to get seats in the parliament, in the years following the trade unions were leading a strong workers movement. In 1998 we have seen the rise of the independent leftist groups inside universities, between 1998 and 2001 the new left built the anti-globalization movement, and was able to break the ban on political activities in the country, as well as leading many activities against imperialism. In 2002, the new left formed a coalition that led a 45-day sit-in in martyr’s square in Beirut, and managed to lead the anti-war movement against the Israeli aggression on Jenin and Ramallah. In 2003 the “no war no dictatorships” campaign managed to win the argument against war and imperialism as well as the argument of people’s democracy against US driven democracy, the same thing that is happening in Egypt right now in the kefaya movement. On May 27th 2004, mass demonstrations took place all over the country, protesting against the socio-economic policies as well as the rise of fuel prices; in reaction the army marched towards one of the poorest suburbs in south Beirut and started shooting live ammunition against the demonstrators, killing five workers.

After Hariri’s assassination and the so-called revolution the new forming far-left has been able to win the arguments over the questions of class, sectarianism, and managed to answer the questions over the economic changes, and proved to be right in its assessment of the current political changes. The democratic left, the new left centrists, allied with the government, are losing arguments in the face of radical politics, they are losing control in universities for more radical politics, and their leadership has moved to the defensive.
A movement is on the rise and this time it is coming out from ordinary people, and shows a necessity to organize, mobilize and agitate. Waiting was never an answer and it will never be, the movement in the middle east has encountered many defeats, and is still recovering, but at the same time, it is showing progress it is winning more and more support, and this time not in middle class coffee shops or bars, but now it is gaining support among ordinary people, the movement is more and more recognizing its place in the class struggle and moving from being dispersed to being more organized and more clear in politics and theory and action.
 



US and Europe’s increased pressure in the Middle East political scene after Hariri’s Assassination.
Since the 9/11 attacks on the US, the Bush administration has declared a worldwide war on terror, and they decided that the word terrorist falls on anyone who disagrees with them or they have conflicting interest with the US.
The Bush administration set itself as the guardian of western values of democracy openness, and freedom of expression, and as such guardian they have the right to topple any regime, or create a war, or enforce sanctions on any country “they” consider is not fit within these values. In simple terms “either you’re with us, or against us”.
Syria was never away from being fingered by the US, Syria held one of the main political poles in the region especially since it had an input in the Palestinian political scene, and also since it controls two fronts in the Arab-Israeli conflict (Joulan and South Lebanon) and one of the main aspects why Syria doesn’t want to leave Lebanon is because they would lose a considerable political card in the peace process, and also there are more than 1 million Syrian worker in Lebanon, and Lebanon represents a get-away from the sanctions forced on Syria by the US. So a large section of the Syrian economy depends on them staying in Lebanon. Actually Syria’s withdrawal from Lebanon means the end of the Baa’th regime.
During the war on Iraq, and the first stages of the occupation, and still the US has repeatedly attacked Syria for helping “insurgent” groups to flee through Syria or to attack from Syria, or even to transport weapons through the Iraqi-Syrian borders.
After the elections in Iraq and in Palestine, Syria has lost a lot from its position as a main and decisive political pole in the region and especially by the rising tensions between Syria and Europe. And the Baa’th regime is forced more and more to cooperate with US demands.
Syrian ambassador in the US Imad Moustapha said: “Whenever the United States came to Syria asking us for assistance, on issues they wanted our assistance ... we immediately engaged with the United States.” “This has included our support for the elections in Iraq, our securing the borders. We have done everything possible to secure the borders between Syria and Iraq.”
The assassination of ex-Prime minister Rafik Hariri in Beirut came as another blow to Syria, since the word on the street in Lebanon is that Syria organized the assassination, and the US is using the assassination to weaken more and more the Syrian regime, and is also using the rising tension between Syria and Europe.
Bush’s visit to Europe falls also within this purpose. National security adviser Stephen Hadley said Bush will also give a major speech that “will focus on his vision of a united trans-Atlantic community, working together to promote freedom and democracy, particularly in the broader Middle East.” Bush knows that the US cannot go along in declaring a new war in the Middle East without Europe’s support, and this can be translated in what Bush said: “My first goal is to remind both Americans and Europeans that the trans-Atlantic relationship is very important for our mutual security and for peace.”
And one the first direct steps in forming an alliance with Europe on the issue of the middle is the 1559 UN resolution which was drafted by France and the US, which class for the immediate withdrawal of Syrian troops out of Lebanon.
The US didn’t attack Syria of being behind Hariri’s assassination but they said that Syria’s presence in Lebanon is causing too much instability, which is one of the main causes for Hariri’s death. Condoleezza Rice said: “But the Syrians – given their position in Lebanon, given their interference in Lebanese affairs, given the fact that their forces are there, given the terrorists that operate in southern Lebanon with Syrian forces in close proximity to them – does put on the Syrians a special responsibility for the kind of destabilization there.”
What is surprising about the US response is that it wasn’t fast, and the bush administration seems like it is playing the centre between Europe and France in particular from one side and Syria, which gives the US more advantage in controlling the political scene.
It is obvious for Europe that the US will never embrace the international criminal court they hold so dear, which means they have to hold a harder front against Syria and Iran, just to avoid losing their interests in the Middle East. And the Bush administration is using this factor in putting Europe more and more on the frontline in the Middle East, where at the same time it still reminds Europe that the US can always resort to military action. And they proved that in Iraq, and they didn’t deny such actions when talking about disarming Iran from its nuclear weapons, and also they mentioned about harder measurements to be taken against Syria if it does not withdraw its 13,000 troops from Lebanon “we’re very serious about this.” Bush and Chirac exclaimed. And one of Bush’s main points from visiting Europe is to meet with Russian officials to try and stop Russia’s support for Iran’s nuclear program and as well try to stop Russia’s proposed sale of surface-to-air missiles to Syria.
Bush said he would talk with Russian President Vladimir Putin about actions widely viewed as a retreat from democracy. “I mean, he’s done some things that [have] concerned people,” Bush said.
So the US administration as well as Europe and especially France are pretty serious on actually limiting more and more Syria’s control, and definitely intend to end the Baa’th regime in Syria, the United States pulled Margaret Scobey, its ambassador from Syria on Tuesday. “It’s a very strong signal to return one’s ambassador,” Rice said. So the US is ascending the tensions against Syria, and Syria knows it but both ends from the Syrian regime is a dead end. If they go with the US plans and demands, this would definitely mean the end of the Baa’th in Syria, and if they don’t they will have to in a confrontation with the US and Europe, and they know that it will also end in the death of the bath regime in Syria.
But I still don’t think that Syria is first on the US agenda, Iran still takes that place, and the rising tensions between the US and Europe from one side and Syria on the other, means harder fronts on the Iranian front. And Iranian and Syrian officials declared that they will try to hold a united front against US threats, and then Iranian official declared that what is between Iran and Syria is common interests and not a united front. And obviously Iran is trying to escape US threats and its alliance with Syria would be like an open gate from the US to more fierce attacks on Iran.
So Syria is actually stuck on so many fronts, and it is more and more being isolated from the region, and which can be translated in a great confusion within the Syrian administration, where the Syrian Information minister would state that “if Syria withdrew some of its troops out of Lebanon and Hariri got killed, what will happen if it withdraws all of its troops?” and at the same time Lebanon is filled with rage against the Syrian presence. And still there has been no clear position taken from Syria to deal with Hariri’s assassination.
Actually there is no way out for the Syrian regime, the problem lies is what happens next? The Lebanese elections will play a decisive role in this situation, and the opposition is holding a strong front against the government which is more and more loosing grip of the situation and it may resort to violence, and at the same time the opposition, even if it has declared that they will only go with democratic methods, but given the history of the leaders of the Lebanese opposition where most of them are war lords, exactly like the government, I think they will benefit from the situation, and may use it to push for a more violent confrontations, and whatever happens in the Lebanese scene, it will definitely be used by the US to attack Syria.
And also Syrian officials have declared that if the Lebanese parliament decides that Syrian troops should be out of Lebanon, they will go out. Which can be taken that Syria is losing all of it cards. If a war breaks out in Lebanon, which is not a far possibility especially with the rising racist tides fed by the conflict between the government and the opposition, it will not be a strange thing to see US or European troops in the country especially that the opposition are calling for support from Europe and the US. This will definitely mean the end of Syria’s Baa’th regime.
The possibilities are a lot, especially with the changes happening in the Lebanese political scene, and the inability of Syria and it’s pro-government in Lebanon to deal with the situation. But I think things will get clearer during the coming few weeks and more definitely after the Lebanese elections
 
The Lebanese Opposition
The Lebanese opposition is mainly formed from a wide range of organizations and coalitions, it took a start in the past few years, by the rise of the FPM (Free Patriotic Movement) led by Michel Aoun, which mainly can be classified as neo-Liberal Lebanese Nationalists, there politics can be generally represented by the slogan “Lebanon is for the Lebanese” and they call from the complete withdrawal of Syrian troops from Lebanon.
Another part of the opposition is Qornet Shehwan which gathers a range of Christian parties, and they called for better Syrian-Lebanese relations, and they have raised their speech into a more confrontational one through the past months especially after the 1559 UN resolution.
And one main character in the Lebanese opposition is the PSP (Progressive Socialist Party) President and Druze leader Walid Junblat who recently shifted into a total confrontation with the government and Syria, and by this unifying the opposition under the Bristol agreement. This led the Democratic left a Lebanese version of European social democrats to join the opposition.
And before Hariri’s death, Hariri was leaning more and more towards the opposition but also trying to hold the centre. Hariri who was ex prime minister in Lebanon, represents the neo-liberal policies in the country from privatization plans, and rebuilding Down-Town Beirut which is now owned by a company he started called Solidere, and owns 10% of the shares in Downtown Beirut.
So the Lebanese opposition maintains a line combining between the Far-right, passing through centre right, till it reaches the centre left.
And the centre left in it which can be represented by the Democratic left is leaning more and more towards the right, especially after they adopted the last opposition statement which calls for an international intervention and also calls for the international community to keep an eye on Lebanon.
After Rafik el Hariri’s death, a long rooted racism which is present in the Lebanese society is more and more being used by the opposition to gain more votes in the coming elections, and through-out the past 3 days there has been at least 2 attacks by anonymous groups on Syrian workers. And you might also hear words on the street saying “Syrians are like animals, they need to be out” or “all Syrians need to be out, cause whenever they are around they are only putting themselves in danger”
So the Lebanese opposition is more and more moving towards using such feelings in their political campaigns by simply not pointing out this dangerous problem.
And the main problem in this opposition that the majority of it is war-lords from the last Lebanese civil war, and while the government is being more and more cornered and may resort to violence to maintain the situation, they might benefit from it and push for more violent conflicts between them and the government, especially that they are preparing for a demo on Monday. And actually it is obvious on the streets that both the government and the opposition might resort to an armed conflict at some point. And probably drive the country into another civil war.
Walid Junblat said in the past few days that all taboos have fallen, and everything is possible. And he even called for a foreign mandate over Lebanon.
Another problem with it is it is clearly trying to bet on the US and France, but the problem with that is that the US and France main target is Syria, and they simply care less about what happens in Lebanon, and it is very obvious that they are not giving the support that the opposition is requiring from them. When the opposition is clearly accusing Syria in killing Hariri, the US and France is still abstaining from doing that.
 



The funeral of assassinated former prime minister Hariri saw hundreds of thousands take to the streets in a parade of strength by the Lebanese opposition.
The word on the street was that Syria organised the assassination. Lebanon is filled with rage against the Syrian presence.
The US is using the killing to weaken the Syrian regime. The US withdrew its ambassador after the assassination and has stepped up its rhetoric.
And there is rising tension over UN resolution 1559, drafted by France and the US, which calls for the immediate withdrawal of Syrian troops from Lebanon.
Syria doesn’t want to leave Lebanon because it would lose a considerable stake in the Middle East peace process.
There are also around one million Syrian workers in Lebanon – mainly in unskilled, low paid jobs.
Their earnings represent a way round the sanctions forced on Syria by the US. A large section of the Syrian economy depends on it staying in Lebanon.
The Syrian regime is becoming more isolated in the region and is in great confusion, with the US now on its eastern border in Iraq and Israel to the west. The situation could spell serious trouble for the Baath regime.
The pro-Syrian Lebanese government coalition is also losing its grip. Neither current prime minister Omar Karami nor president Emile Lahoud has come up with a view on what happened. Hariri’s death means the government is getting weaker and the opposition stronger, especially as the opposition captured public sentiments by claiming Hariri as a martyr. The opposition is stirring up anger towards the Syrian regime and channelling it for its own benefit.
Split
A clear split in the Lebanese ruling class is forming, and it is getting more and more severe. The government’s call for discussion and a general reconciliation was refused by the opposition.
Hariri represented the centre in Lebanese politics and stood for neo-liberal policies and privatisation. He was a key character in the Lebanese economy and owned 10 percent of the shares in Solidere, the firm that owns the “centre-ville” city centre development in the capital, Beirut.
He also represented a political welcome for foreign investment in the country, especially from the Gulf states. The Lebanese opposition is formed from a wide range of organisations and coalitions.
The past few years has seen the rise of the Free Patriotic Movement led by Michel Aoun – neo-liberal Lebanese nationalists, whose politics can be summed up in the slogan “Lebanon for the Lebanese”. They a call for a complete withdrawal of Syrian troops from Lebanon and the expulsion of Syrian workers.
Another part of the opposition is Qornet Shehwan, which gathers together a range of Christian parties. They call for better Syrian-Lebanese relations, but they have adopted a more confrontational tone in recent months, especially after the passing of UN resolution 1559.
The Progressive Socialist Party headed by Druze Muslim leader Walid Jumblat is another element in the opposition. Jumblat recently shifted into a total confrontation with the government and Syria. This led the Democratic Left – a Lebanese version of European social democrats – to join the opposition.
Before his death, Hariri too was leaning more and more towards the opposition, although he also tried to hold the centre.
Together the Lebanese opposition is maintaining a strong front and there are fears the government may resort to violence against it. The opposition has declared that they will stick to democratic methods.
But most leaders of the Lebanese opposition were formerly warlords, like many in the government. They may use the situation to push for a more violent confrontation.
In the wake of Hariri’s death, the opposition is also tapping into deep rooted racism in Lebanese society against Syrian workers. They hope to use this to gain more votes in the coming elections.
In the past few days there have been at least two attacks by anonymous groups on Syrian workers and racist sentiments are expressed in the street.
On the streets there is a feeling that either the government or the opposition might resort to armed conflict at some point, which could drive the country into another civil war.
Walid Jumblat has said that all taboos have fallen, and everything is possible. He even called for a Western mandate over Lebanon. The opposition is calling for support from the US and Europe. If there was war, people would not be surprised to see US or European troops in the country.
The opposition has clearly chosen to be the next US ally in Lebanon and has quickly shifted from calling for mending relations with Syria, to supporting the UN resolution 1559. But while the opposition is clearly accusing Syria of killing Hariri, the US and France have stopped short of saying so directly.
The situation should become clearer in the next few weeks and after forthcoming elections.
But for the left in Lebanon it is important not to get caught up in the political debris caused by the split in the ruling class, but to build a political alternative.
We are trying to build a movement to stand against the ruling class that might leading the country towards another civil war. At the same time we reject the Syrian regime’s control over Lebanon. And we firmly reject any attempts of the US or Europe to start a war on Syria.
 



There is a growing fear that US policies in the Middle East are stoking up sectarian tensions in Lebanon, and threatening a return to civil war. These fears have drawn people into the streets to protest against US interference in the country.
On Tuesday 8 March up to one million people, almost a third of the country, demonstrated against US demands that Syrian troops leave the country and the resistance organisation Hizbollah be disarmed.
It was one of the biggest demonstrations Lebanon had ever seen. But this was not the demonstration splashed across the world’s media on 14 March, and applauded by Bush and Blair.
On 8 March people held placards with a simple slogan – “No to US interference in Lebanon.” The march was called after weeks of the so called “cedar revolution” – anti-Syrian protests backed by right wing parties and blessed by George Bush and Tony Blair.
George Bush, who hailed the anti-Syrian protests as a new “tide of democracy spreading over the Middle East”, was silenced by the scale of the march.
One of the 8 March protesters was Maher, 25, from the mixed Ras al-Naba quarter of Beirut.
He said:
“I agree that Syrian troops should leave the country, but I don’t want them to be replaced by US troops. Let us not forget what the Americans are doing in Iraq.
“Why should I trust the UN? The same organisation hasn’t stopped Israeli aggression in south Lebanon, nor have they implemented UN resolutions over Palestine.”
Many of the people who marched fear that Israel and the US are trying to exploit tensions in the country.
Maher says:
“The Israelis are the biggest terrorists in the region. I want Syrian troops to leave the country, but I don’t want there to be a racist war against the Syrians, the Palestinians, or other Lebanese communities. I don’t agree with everything Hizbollah says, but I feel I need to have my voice heard.”
Despite the unity against US plans for the region, there are many who feel that neither the “opposition”, which is backed by the US, nor the “loyalists” who support Syria, have answers to Lebanon’s problems.
There is also a great fear that the country could be splitting along sectarian lines.
Some people protested against the assassination of former prime minister Rafiq Hariri and the presence of Syrian troops. Then they joined the Hizbollah-backed demonstration because they are also opposed to US plans for the region.
Nader, a 22 year old student from the Arab University in Beirut, at first joined the opposition demonstration, but found himself disagreeing with the aims of the “cedar revolution”.
He says:
“I went to the demo, but when I tried to discuss issues I disagreed with, like US interference, sectarianism and the neo-liberal policies implemented by Hariri’s government, I was accused of being a ‘loyalist’ and a member of the mukhabarat [secret police].
“So I joined the demonstration called by Hizbollah.”
Growing anger at government policies are also fuelling general discontent. Last April the Syrian-backed government, with Hariri as prime minister, gunned down five metal workers during a protest against rising fuel prices.
Over the last ten years both the loyalists and the opposition have implemented harsh neo-liberal policies that have pushed thousands into poverty.
Last Sunday the Lebanese Communist Party and other left wing groups drew over 3,000 people to a meeting to protest at the rising sectarianism in the country. The left has called for a full withdrawal of Syrian troops and a rejection of US interference.
 



The US has hailed the resignation of the Lebanese government as part of a democratic wave sweeping the world. What they are calling the “cedar revolution” – modelled on the “orange revolution” in the Ukraine and the “rose revolution” in Georgia – is less a revolution and more a medium sized demonstration of the supporters of the opposition, which is mainly made up of right wing parties.
Most of these parties have participated in ruling Lebanon since the end of the war.
All these parties had militias during the civil war, all took part in sectarian massacres and terrorism. All the parties have, at some point, co-operated in eroding Lebanon’s democracy.
They have all supported the rule of the security services, both Lebanese and Syrian, and have voted for harsh neo-liberal policies that have seen rises in poverty and unemployment, and cuts in pensions and health provisions.
One of the demands of the opposition is independence for Lebanon, yet they are happy to support the policies that allow the US to dominate the region – most of them do not object to the presence of 150,000 US troops in Iraq.
The main opposition leader, Walid Jumblatt, supports the US and France meddling in Lebanon. The US ambassador to Lebanon, Jeffrey Feltman, was active in helping to coordinate the opposition.
Feltman’s previous post was as the head of the Coalition Provisional Authority in the Irbil province in Iraq. The US is using the political crisis in Lebanon to put pressure on Syria – next on its target list for regime change.
The demonstration in central Beirut – there were no other protests around the country – was more like a business sponsored event.
The 12,000 demonstrators were a fraction of the 100,000 who attended former prime minister Rafiq Hariri’s funeral. The mainstream media supplied a giant screen for them to watch the parliamentary debate that led to the government’s resignation. The tents and public toilets were sponsored by the powerful Hariri family and Solidere, the company that owns most of the downtown area.
The demonstrators even sang the theme tune to one of the main television stations. As Lebanon heads to the polls in May, the opposition will take part in the carve-up of ministries and government jobs. They have already suspended the “cedar revolution” and instructed their supporters to return home. Meanwhile the real problems faced by ordinary people will be ignored.
 

