

The puppets of Wall Street on Capitol Hill are “investigating” the House of Morgan. A sop to the petty bourgeoisie and a sham in its aims, the Senate Banking Committee has disclosed damning evidence on the tentacles of control of J.P. Morgan and Co., which reach out into every pore of the financial, industrial and political life of American capitalism.
The revelations of the investigation are vindication of the contention of the Marxians propounded decades ago. Finance capital wields its control over the banking institutions of the nation thru a meshwork of interlocking directorates which cunningly evade all laws aimed at them by the trust-busting middle class. The trustified industries, with few exceptions, are either indebted to or outrightly owned, thru stock control by the Morgan trust. The Morgan institution dominates thru its financial affluence a huge section of the American industrial life.
But J.P. Morgan does not trust to his outright or partial control to assure his dominating influence. Nor does he depend upon abstract for indirect methods to keep the government, both major political parties, subservient to his interests and needs. Practically half of the national committee of the Republican party, including Edward T. Rickard, financial adviser to Herbert Hoover for more than ten years, and the chairman of this committee, John R. Nutt, are personal beneficiaries of Morgan’s benevolence. The same goes equally for the Democratic party, whose ex-national chairman, Raskob, and the present Roosevelt administration, through the medium of the secretary of the treasury, Woodin, have received “gifts” from the House of Morgan which discriminates against no one in the major party set-ups.
Letters from the above-named individuals, disclosed at the investigation, show that they were quite ready to “reciprocate.” And they have! A mere glance at the banking holiday proclaimed by Woodin and the “diplomacy” of Norman H. Davis, ambassador at large for the U.S. is proof sufficient that J.P. does not scatter his money idly. Every dollar given to a government official brings results!
The inquiry in Washington, despite the facts brought to light, is a circus of such dimensions as would make the great showman, Barnum, look like a miserable piker. The avowed purpose of the investigation is to reform the banking laws so that the “little fellow” will have a chance. In this connection it is interesting to note that the banking bill which is to do that has been proposed and drafted by the most ardent proponent of Morgan in the investigation, Senator Carter Glass, Virginia millionaire newspaper publisher.
Like the Pujo investigation under the “New Freedom” of Wilson the Pecora inquiry of the “New Deal” is a grand stage to divert the attention of the discontented away from struggle, give them confidence in the “anti-big business” attitude of the administration, only in reality to fasten the strangle .hold of finance capital upon the millions of masses.
 



New York, N.Y. – More than four hundred delegates attended the Anti-Eviction and Relief Conference called by the provisional Commit tee Against Evictions at Irving Plaza on June 3rd. These delegates came from organizations close to or under the direct influence of the Communist party and its unemployed councils. With the exception of the Left Opposition and the Musteites, it was a purely party gathering.
The failure to secure the participation of the socialist or the Lovestonite unemployed councils must be laid directly at the door of fear, sabotage and disruption on the part of the reformists and their close allies in this perfidious job, the Lovestonite Right wing. What no doubt helped the reformist misleaders in refusing to participate in a common conference and a common demonstration are the past errors of the Stalinists for which they have not yet paid in full.
All the efforts on the part of the Provisional United Front Committee to organize the struggle against evictions jointly with the socialist and Lovestonite unemployed movements were in vain. Their sabotage was consistent and to all intents and purposes, deliberate. They, together with all city-wide organizations were invited to a provisional conference last May where a program, a series of demands and a plan of action were to be elaborated. The socialists and their unemployed leagues were conspicuous by their absence. The Lovestonites came but withdrew after the provisional conference rejected their unacceptable demands to exclude all political or trade union bodies.
But this was hardly the worst of the actions of the reformists, whose whole policy has helped to divide the unemployed to the great satisfaction of Tammany Hall. The misleaders called a conference of their own. They objected to the participation of political organizations in the provisional united front but they sat side by side with the socialist party in the conference of their own calling. What the reformists really had objection to was the militant Left wing organizations.
Not content with this miserable record of sabotage the Right wingers, in mortal dread of the program of the Left wing militants and their effectiveness in action, excluded the complete delegation of the Provisional United Front body from their conference. The revolt simmered among the rank and file of the socialist gathering against this splitting tactic. They moved the reconsideration of this ruling to exclude the Left wing and passed a motion to that effect by majority vote. It was ruled out of order, in true bureaucratic style, by the cynical socialist impressarios who fished out an unheard of alibi – “a two thirds vote is necessary for reconsideration” (!). Let the reader keep in mind that the Lovestonites have been part and parcel of this conference and share the responsibility for’ its treacherous deeds.
 
Winter’s Report
The united front conference opened with an able presentation by Carl Winters, secretary of the provisional committee, of its past history and the persistent endeavors it made to consummate a united front with the socialists and Lovestonite unemployed groups. The latter remained obdurate and blocked the path of linked struggle. Despite constant appeal they refused to participate jointly in the demonstrations with the Unemployed Councils at the Home Relief Bureaus and went out of their way to avoid common action. The last straw in their stack of deliberate division of the movement was the setting of a separate date for the city-wide demonstration to be held at the City Hall against the eviction and relief-slashing orders of Tammany Hall. This anti-working class move was perpetrated with the socialist leaders in full knowledge of the sincere desire of the United Front Conference for one demonstration on June 6th. All the pleas, negotiations committees and reasons were to no avail. The reformists were determined to proceed with their own demonstration on June 6th. Towards this end they sent lying reports to the press accusing the Left wing conference of standing in the way of a united demonstration.
Winters exploded this nonsense, which flew in the face of all the previous facts and explained that when the Right wing unemployed groups were forced into a hole by the protests of their rank and file, they adopted the reactionary excuse offered by the Lovestonites that they were ready for joint action provided there were no political banners at the demonstration. He closed with the statement that the Left wing conference would be present at the demonstration on June 6th with the banners of all organizations carried above the demonstrators.
Then followed a pitiful sight. A delegation of three, the Lovestonite Rubenstein, of the Association of the Unemployed, and two others representing the socialist jobless movements, requested and received the floor to make an appeal for unity. This was granted to them. They only reiterated their abominable conditions for the demonstration: no political banners. The reception accorded to them was cordial but their proposal went against the grain of the militants present.
Characterizing the attitude of the conference towards the “concessions” offered, was a resolution introduced by Amter for the resolutions committee which properly castigated the socialists for their violation of the decisions accepted in the Chicago conference and for their subsequent sabotage. To prevent the Stalinists from retreating from the position of the united front, so painfully acquired, comrade William Kitt of the Alteration Painters’ Union, presented an amendment to the resolution calling for another “appeal for united action of all working class organizations and for one powerful demonstration on June 6th and a united delegation.” Both the resolution and the amendment were unanimously accepted by the conference. The proposal to demonstrate on June 6th was also carried.
 
The Delegate from the L.O. Speaks
The discussion that followed was of a purely agitational character. It was only when the delegate of the Left Opposition, George Clarke, took the floor that a silence of interest fell over the hall. The delegates were desirous of learning what the Left Opposition had to say and what policies it advocated for the unemployed movement.
He greeted the conference in the name of the Left Opposition stating that if the party continued on the new turn in the united front tactic and if they faithfully adhered to the decisions of the Chicago unemployed conference, new vistas of growth and a powerful impetus could be given not only to the jobless movement but to working class action in general. Comrade Clarke condemned the tactics of the socialists and the Lovestonites which, he declared, would divide the employed from the unemployed by excluding trade union bodies – the very thing that has prevented the unemployed movement from attaining any mass dimensions up till now. The exclusion of political organizations, he continued, was a reactionary move worthy of a died-in-the-wool A.F.L. labor skate; the struggle of the unemployed is a political struggle – it confronts the state at every turn and requires the participation of political organizations.
Comrade Clarke criticized Winters’ proposals for the formation of local councils – delegated bodies of all working class organizations in the neighborhood – as not being extensive enough. Without the participation of central bodies this would mean a revision to the old tactic. He concluded his speech with the remarks that after years of blundering by the Stalinists one could not hope to force the sabotaging reformists into the united front over night, that persistent and stubborn efforts were needed and the goal was assured. His speech was greeted with a good round of applause. Comrade Weisbord of the Communist League of Struggle, also spoke along the same lines elaborating on some of the points.
 
Minor Intervenes for the Official Party
Then followed the Stalinist barrage – a mountain of confusion. Its mouthpiece was Robert Minor, speaking for the C.E.C. of the Communist party. He roared that no turn had been made (in face of the C.I. manifesto, the Chicago events and the repeated appeal to the S.P. central bodies, this sounded extremely ludicrous), the party is still following the lines of the united front from below. He laid down the ultimatistic demand – if the socialists won’t come along with us then we’ll go it alone, for who represents the masses, we or they? In this case why all the desperate efforts for united front conferences and demonstrations with the socialists and affiliated organizations?
Israel Amter reported for the resolutions committee. He re-echoed Minor’s ultimatism and said that the Chicago conference of the unemployed did not represent the rank and file of the organizations assembled. Then whom did they speak for, themselves? And upon what authority did they arrive at the important decisions made at that gathering? These questions he quite naturally failed to answer. The whole tone of his report was that we have endeavored to form the united front with the socialists but they refuse to come along – so, he intimated, we are getting ready to return to the “united front from below.” Amter presented a document for the resolutions committee, known as the Workers’ Relief Ordinance, which contains various vital demands for the unemployed.
Comrade Kitt made a minority report on the resolutions on the Chicago congress and their application to New York. The resolution omitted mention of the city central bodies that were to be invited to the formation of the federation in New York and called for representation in such a federation on the basis of numerical strength. Comrade Kitt explained that such clauses would give the reformists a loophole to crawl out of the federation and proposed that the unification take place on the same basis as in the Chicago conference. The Stalinists defeated the amendments and consequently assume the responsibility for the restraint the reformist leaders will be able to exert on their followers when this question of unity comes up for consideration.
The six hour day and five day week was another bone of contention at the conference with the Stalinists. Defending the ambiguous slogan of the shorter work week they claimed that everything else was the stagger system, and in view of the fact that some workers were working as high as seventy hour’s a week, the slogan of the six hour day was out of the question. The delegates of the Left Opposition and the Spartacus Youth brought powerful arguments to bear in favor of the concrete slogan of the six hour day and pointed out that all the conditions were laid for the building of a huge movement around that basis and uniting the unemployed and employed. The Stalinists took fright and accused us of a maneuver to put the party on record against the six hour day slogan and then proceeded to switch the issue with the line that this was only a local and not a national conference, etc., etc., ad nauseam. The six hour day resolution lost – but not because the workers were against it.
 
Finally – the Stalinists for Soviet Credits!
A signal victory was won for the Left Opposition at this conference. After three years of persevering struggle the Stalinists accepted the internationalist resolution of the Left Opposition for recognition of and long term credits to the Soviet Union. Not very long ago it was called counter-revolutionary by the Stalinist bureaucrats – at this conference Amter said that “this resolution (on long term credits) needs little explanation. I am sure that everyone is in favor of it.” With a few minor changes which in reality make the Stalinist adoption of this resolution more contradictory than ever, the conference went on record unanimously in favor of long term credits to the Soviet Union. The world does move!
By the time it came to the nomination and election of the permanent committee, the hall had dwindled from more than 400 to about one-fourth as many and with the aid of the remaining Stalinist stalwarts, the committee was packed with apparatus trusties. The Musteites, to be sure, were awarded a place on the committee but the “counter-revolutionary” Left Opposition was debarred.
 



The jackal press has let loose a veritable furore against the would-be-killer of Franklin D. Roosevelt. This same ruling class to which the death of hundreds of workers and their families by starvation is just a daily event, which murders workers on the picket without an afterthought, which sent millions of young workers to the slaughter house of the world war with equanimity sets up a lynching howl against Zangara – a product of the self-same system. How shallow does this indignation sound from the pen prostitutes who lose no opportunity to sanction a Negro lynching in the bourbon South!
It is not Cermak, mayor of Chicago (who is responsible for the shooting of demonstrating unemployed), but Zangara who is the victim of this affair. Four years of starvation have not failed to leave their effects upon the working class. It has aroused bitter resentment in the hearts of the oppressed. Zangara attempt on the life of the president-elect is a misguided expression of this burning discontent. It is the intensive exploitation, and the years of hunger regime that drove Zangara to this desperate expedient – those who reap the wind sow the whirlwind.
The method which Zangara chose to indicate his opposition to the rule of the parasitic capitalist class is not the method of the Communists. We do not support individual terror. On the contrary, the annals of the revolutionary movement is rich in its implacable opposition to this petty bourgeois tactic. It is not out of any moral considerations that we oppose terroristic actions of an individual character. The blood of proletarian fighters covers the hands of the capitalist hirelings. It is they who sent Sacco-Vanzetti to a hideous death. It is they who hold Tom Mooney in a living tomb for a crime which the whole world knows he never committed. The day of reckoning with the barons of murder and profit will yet arrive. But it will never advance one step by individual terrorism. While a capitalist society exists the death of any one of these officials will change nothing. There are hundreds, nay, thousands of lackeys who can and will take the place of the officials. What is responsible for the wretched conditions of today is not the individual, but the class system of capitalism. And the way to abolish the system is not by petty-bourgeois, anarchist terror but by united action of the million masses in determined struggle against all forms of class oppression. It is only on this scientific Marxian basis that we take our stand against individual action. With the same vigor we will stand against any attempt to lynch or persecute the real victim, Zangara.
Undoubtedly, the master class will try to utilize this event to stir up an “anti-red” hysteria or some sort of a drive against the foreign-born revolutionary workers. But our position is clear. The capitalist class cannot mask the privation into which it has driven the masses by a “red herring” of this kind. Our fight will go on to the end.
 



All the capitalist bombast about an early economic revival has burst like a pricked baloon. Wm. Green, president of the American Federation of Labor has announced that the unemployment figures now stand at the appalling total of 12,000,000 and that between the months of December and January alone, more than 200,000 were laid off. And Bill Green is hardly given to exaggeration. On the contrary the number of jobless must far exceed his estimate.
The meaning of this statement is quite clear. More than 25 percent of those listed by the census as gainfully employed are now pounding the pavement and lining up at soup kitchens and breadlines. About as many workers do not receive more than part time employment. And if we add to these their wives and children then more than 50,000,000 human beings are standing on the brink of starvation in plentiful America. All of the employment schemes, all of the panaceas of the pot-bellied politicians all of the promises of the “captains of industry” have gone up in smoke. The working class is reduced to beggary, extending its hands for alms in the charity institutions of the country. Such is the balance sheet of four [year]s of capitalist crisis. Such is the privation into which capitalism drives the masses.
But if millions are idle and hungry, if millions still working have their wages cut to the bone, the prospect for future employment is slim. The black scene of permanent joblessness has become a grim reality. Bill Green says in the same article that “hundreds of thousands of jobs have been completely eliminated during the depression”. And further that if the work week were universally shortened to 30 hours, we could put to work 6,6000,000 of the unemployed.” In other words even this optimistic calculation would leave approximately five and a half million workers permanently without jobs. How can the bankruptcy of this system be more glaringly exposed than by the fact that it has cast millions of willing and able-bodied slaves on the scrap heap. Their freedom to starve is now complete.
What is to be done about it? What action shall the proletariat take to ameliorate its wretched conditions? Green proposes the six hour day – five day week. Yes, that is one of the objects the labor movement must strive and struggle for. But, certainly, Green’s advocacy of it does not bring this change one step nearer. For him it is merely a plausible theory which he was forced to accept at the insistence and discontent of the rank and file. And in spite of his bold threats this labor skate and his cohorts will never spur the ranks of labor into action – and it is only by struggle that it can be obtained. They are too closely bound up with capitalism to think of striking it such a heavy blow We must advance towards these demands: the thirty hour week; unemployment insurance; credits to Soviet Russia, in active combat against the capitalist class and all their agents in the ranks of labor.
But the curse of unemployment, which has come to stay can never be obliterated until the system that produces it is banished from the face of the earth. According to Green, in 1929 – boom times, mind you – there were over two millions out of work. After this crisis has spent itself on the backs of the workers there will be nearly 6,000,000 out of jobs. When will this end? It will end when the American proletarian revolution buries capitalism into the limbo of history.
 



The State Senatorial Committee investigating conditions in the mines of southern Illinois received a real dose of the class struggle in a battle that occurred in a Peabody mine in Springfield which they were “investigating”. Two members of the Progressive Miners Union, three scabs and two deputy sheriffs were injured in the skirmish that occurred at the Woodside and Capital mines when the labor-hating Peabody trust attempted to operate them with scab labor.
More than 1,000 miners of the P.M.A. were on hand at each mine when the strikebreakers were getting ready to leave for the day. The 100 scabs (according to the N.Y. Times report) were protected by a mob of company gunmen who immediately opened fire on the pickets. The miners who could not be subdued even by this murderous fusillade, retaliated by hurling chunks of coal and stone at the thugs and scabs. According to this same news report the miners, overwhelmed by these armed representatives of “law and order”, withdrew their lines.
This is just another instance where the Peabody gang is making an attempt to circumvent the only bona-fide union of coal diggers in the slate of Illinois with the extinct and discredited shell of a “union” of Lewis-Walker and Co. But they are meeting with stiff resistance from the miners. These miners working in the Peabody mines have been out on strike now for almost a year. They are striking virtually only for union recognition. They refuse to let the Peabody slave-drivers force them into the treacherous outfit known as the UMWA. While the remainder of the miners in Illinois, not in the employ of the Peabody Co. have signed up the independent employers and have been at work for several months these workers have valiantly held out. Those miners in the rest of the state who are working at the present time have contributed large amounts of money out of their meager wages to maintain their brothers yet on strike. Not only this but at the first skirmish with the bosses the members of the PMA have joined their forces in solidarity with the striking miners. More power to the Illinois miners in their struggle against the scab-herders and their agents of the Lewis gang!
 







BULLETIN
As we go to press we learn from the evening papers of the savage assault made by the N.Y. Police upon demonstrations in New York at the Home Belief Bureaus where unemployed workers protested the slashing of relief and the cessation of rent payments by the city. The thugs in uniform brutally slugged the workers. Many were taken to the hospital for treatment.





The working masses of New York are setting their first dose of the Roosevelt “New Deal.” Tammany Hall, “the friend of the people,” has ordered the wholesale eviction of the New York unemployed from their homes. Working in cooperation with their election backers, the landlords and the bankers, the McCooeys, the Currys, the O’Briens and the rest of the honest men in control of the City government have cut off all payment of rents for the unemployed. This is no small matter. It cuts into the lives of more than 1,000,000 unemployed, their wives and children. Tammany’s brutal eviction order tells the jobless masses of this city to pack their belongings and to rent a sleeping place for themselves on the park benches, the subway or a flop-house – if they can get into one.
This is the fourth year of the economic crisis. The masses have watched the degradation of their standards of life with little or no resistance. So long as they were able to “get by” on the handouts of the relief institutions they remained dormant and passive. The Communists warned that even these pitiful doles would be retracted if the workers did not fight for their maintenance and for the granting of the only half-way substantial form of relief under capitalism – unemployment insurance. These warnings have now become a sinister fact. Relief has either been reduced or eliminated in various parts of the country. New York is now falling in line with new dole to be dispensed to the American workers – the dole of starvation and evictions.
The capitalist class is determined to carry out its cynical hunger program. Listen to what a capitalist information agency, the Kiplinger Washington letter has to say and draw your own conclusions:
“Organized labor now has the chance of a generation to fix wages into the general scheme of production costs and to promote collective bargaining. Labor leaders do not seem to see it, however. You as employers seem safe in assuming continuing stupidity of labor.”
This cynical but clear-sighted statement applies with equal force to the movement of the unemployed. But the failure to organize powerful unemployed organizations falls squarely upon the sectarian policy of the Stalinists which resulted in the division of the employed and unemployed. Yet, great opportunities still stand before the movement today. With hundreds of thousands of jobless about to be forcefully thrown out of their lodgings, with relief checks drastically slashed by the city, great masses of the jobless can be set into motion to frustrate the starvation orders of Tammany Hall. The Unemployed Councils of (ireater New York have called upon all workers, for all are directly or indirectly affected, irrespective of color, nationality or political creed to come in huge numbers to a city-wide demonstration against the attacks of the bankers and landlords – to raise their voices and their ftsts against the mass evictions and the reduction of relief.
The Left Opposition stands solidly behind this movement and calls upon all workers to lend their fighting support to stay the hand of the Tammany evictor. All out on Thursday, May 25th!
 
N. Y. Conference Against Evictions and Relief Cuts
On May 18, in answer to a call of the Unemployed Councils of greater New York, a provisional conference took place to organize the struggle against evictions, relief cuts and to prepare a larger united front which is to take place on June 4th.
Represented at this conference were the Communist Party, the T.U.U.L., the Unemployed Councils, the I.W.O, the CPLA, the Association of the Unemployed (controlled by the Lovestoneites,) the IWW, and the N.Y. Barnch of the Left Opposition which, although uninvited, sent three delegates, comrades Hilton, Lewitt and Clarke.
The conference began by an attempt of the Stalinists to exclude the Left Opposition from the provisional gathering through a motion by Benjamin to exclude all organizations not invited in the call for the conference. They, the Stalinists benevolently granted, would have the right to participate in the broader conference (where they could be swamped by the host of local party auxiliaries.) By this procedure, the I.W.W., also not included in the original call, would be barred from the preliminary deliberations. The protest of Cohen of the CPLA and Sizemore of the IWW succeeded in forcing the Stalinists to retract and passed the motion of Lewitt to seat all city-wide organizations present.
Next came the choice morsel of the meeting, if we may call it that. The Lovestonite from the Association of the Unemployed, Rubenstein, took the floor to make the most reactionary proposal yet heard from the Right wing camp. He demanded that the conference be restricted to unemployed organizations only. (This would mean that the only organizations eligible would be the Unemployed Councils and the Association of Unemployed, the S.P. unemployed organization having sabotaged the conference.) Rubenstein further stated that his organization was unanimously opposed to the participation of any political groups (!). This Right wing proposal, which one would expect from an A.F.L. Red baiter, could only succeed in ousting all trade union bodies which have a huge unemployed membership (dividing the employed from the jobless) and all political bodies which are directly interested in the relief question as a political struggle. Rubenstein’s attempt to take refuge behind the backwardness of t he members of the Association of Unemployed was futile as he directly implicated the Lovestone group by saying that this stand represented the unanimous opinion of his organization. The conference opposed this proposal as a man. Rubenstein withdrew from the conference, adding insult to injury and splitting the conference.
The conference then discussed and accepted a draft call for action and for the June 4th conference. It elected an Ex. Comm. from which they succeeded in barring the Left Opposition. As its part in this struggle the Left Opposition had pledged all its forces, the use of its headquarters for information and congregation to the jobless in the fight against evictions and relief cuts.
 



The Tiger’s tail has been twisted. The “rascals” have been driven out of office. The “millennium” of the end of “bossism” has come to New York. Honest-to-goodness government is installed in power and the days of corruption, skull-duggery and political racketeering are over. The shining champion of cheapness and honesty in municipal administration, the master demagogue, Fiorello H. LaGuardia is ensconced in City Hall to the great rejoicing of the “economy” experts, the pious Christians, the yellow press, the innumerable office-seekers – not to mention the Big Boys who backed and financed his campaign.
It was a tense campaign filled with recrimination abuse and character assassination in which the right was no doubt shared by all the contestants for the mayoralty alike. There can be no doubt that this election must have been a real tickler to anyone with a sense of humor.
The great issue trumpeted up and down our fair city was boss or no boss. Tammany’s candidate, the others admitted, was a square shooter but “Honest” John O’Brien had an evil genius behind him whispering Mephistofelian advice into his ear. “Holy” Joe McKee, the crusader against Tammany dictation was accused of being the catspaw of the same kind of boss domineering which he inveighed so strongly against. And LaGuardia, ever ready with radical phrases to please the demos, was charged with being a Communist. No less!
 
A Rude Awakening
The rude awakening will come for the masses in New York when they discover that the election promises to clean up the city, to make an end to corruption, whether carried out or bursting like soap bubbles, will not make a particle of difference in their economic conditions. The dead weight of the four years of abysmal privation, and body-wracking unemployment, will not be lightened when and if the grafters are cleaned out by LaGuardia.
Quite another matter are the promises Mr. LaGuardia has made to introduce “economy” into the city administration, where he contends extravagant waste has prevailed under Tammany. When LaGuardia talks of “economy” he is not addressing himself to the workers but to the gentlemen of Wall Street who will supervise his actions in office. The New York City government is saddled with a huge debt to Morgan, Rockefeller et al., who want it honored, the principal and the interest. The panaceas heralded by LaGuardia and others, that dispensing with useless office holders will balance the budget and provide funds to meet the city’s obligations are so much election ranting. If this debt is to be met – and the bankers are demanding their pound of flesh – then the demagogic phrase-mongering of LaGuardia will give way to cold reality.
The necessary funds will come out of the hides of the toiling population of the city of New York. Education facilities will be stripped and the wages of the teachers cut. The nickel fare will pass into oblivion. Unemployment relief will be drastically slashed from the miserable pittance it is today; the Republican instead of the Tammany camp-followers will be its chief beneficiaries. Injunctions, police terrorism, strike breaking – it is a pipe-dream to expect any change towards liberalism from LaGuardia and his retinue. The mayor has changed but the system remains. Capitalism rules. The workers suffer.
 
The Labor Vote
For the militants and revolutionists, the results of the recent elections are hardly gratifying. Under the elusive sway of the NRA, the tantalizing promises of LaGuardia, the brain-trying confusion of the campaign, the masses in their groping backwardness cast their votes for the representatives of the capitalist parties. Barring the vote stealing, election gerrymandering and violence at the polls – these are a constant factor – the parties purporting to represent the workers made a frightfully poor showing.
The Socialist party, and its standard bearer Charles Solomon, whose whole campaign was of such a pink-tea reform nature that LaGuardia stole his thunder, receiving three-fourths of the liberal votes cast for Hillquit last year. The socialist vote dropped from 249,887 to 63,450. So indistinguishable were the programs of LaGuardia and Solomon that the prevailing opinion among the socialist voters of a year ago was to vote for the man who had a chance to get elected.
 
The Vote for the C.P.
The Communist party and its mayoralty candidate, Robert Minor, received 26,564 votes or an increase of 2,500 votes over the vote recorded for Patterson last year. Considering the huge increase of voters this year the Communist vote has remained stationary. The campaign conducted by Minor and the Stalinists many times sunk into the most vulgar opportunism. The crimes of Stalinism in the unions and in the class struggle in this city, the repercussions of their bankruptcy throughout the world, is sadly registered in this election.
 



The tranquil quiet of Yakima Valley, Washington, where the hops are grown, later to be dispensed over a brass rail as foaming New Deal beer, is raging with bitter class war. For some time now the slaves who pick the essence of your refreshing drink have been in full revolt against their profit-lusting masters under the auspices of the Agricultural Workers Union No. 110 of the I.W.W.
What do these slaves want? They want to live, decently, like ordinary human beings. They want something to fill their bellies, to stop that gnawing ache that never seems to cease. They want a roof over their heads and a bed under their toil-weary bodies.
Not much, you think. In these days of the NRA the laboring people should be striving a higher goals than mere animal existence. Hasn’t the grinning Moses in Washington led his people into the promised land where hunger and want are no more, where the well-fed workingman consecrates his efforts to culture and character building? Do you believe this? Then listen to the dream-shattering story of Yakima, Washington.
 
The Beer Ballyhoo
You remember the ballyhoo that attended the propaganda that the return of legal beer would make millions of jobs and bring prosperity in its wake. If your pockets are empty and your eyes open then the Great Delusion must be apparent to you. But what of that? Prosperity did come – to the brewery owners and the big farmers who grow the hops on their ranches.
These ranchers saw the vision of gain, of making their pile. The brewers needed their hops. Their damaged fortunes would be repaired, they would get rich again. But one thing stood in their way. They had not reckoned with this. The workers were demanding consideration. Downright unreasonable! Yes, it was quite unreasonable to the masters that the slaves should protest against working in the fields for a piece-work rate amounting to one and one half cent on the pound, and sometimes merely for their meals and the privilege of sleeping in the barn. Decent conditions of existence and lucrative profits don’t jibe.
 
Harvesting Ceases
The hop pickers organized and presented their demands to the farmers. The farmers laughed at them. 35 to 50 cents an hour? The eight-hour day? The abolition of child labor in the field under the age of 18? Never! The strike was on.
The hop pickers left the fields. The harvesting of this golden crop came to a standstill.The picket line was formed. The rich farmers took this little “spree” of the workers jocularly. At first. But when intimidation failed, when appeals to “Americanism” and race prejudice were ignored, when all their elaborate strategems came to naught and the workers remained firm, the farmers became desperate at the sight of their golden crop rotting on the ground.
They too began to organize. Not the kind of organization intended to bring better life to human beings. They were bent on the direct opposite: grinding the heel of oppression deep into the workers back. The riff-raff of the town and the country was called to arms. Mobs of Vigilantes roved the countryside. Pickhandle brigades armed with clubs and pitchforks terrorized the striking workers, bulldozing them, looking for an excuse to club and murder. The business men and their “law-and-order” hoodlums were determined to crush the strike. No method that would attain this end was too low, too brutal, too savage.
 
Mob Fury
They precipitated a fight with the pickets. A fight? Outnumbering the strikers six to one, armed with pickhandles, gaspipes and rocks tney sailed into this peaceful, unarmed group of workers and found an outlet for their crazed, demented fury by cracking tneir bones and skulls, beating them into insensibility. The pickets fought valiantly but the odds were too great. When the smoke of the slaughter had cleared they marched those workers who still could walk into town.
There without warrant, trial or arrest they flung the workers into a makeshift contraption of barbed wire, a bull pen. The legal sanction was, of course, quickly granted. The bullpen, hardly known in the East, is a familiar Western institution employed to sap every grain of rebellion out of militant workers. The only comparison that approaches it is the black hole of Calcutta. It has been used time and again to imprison striking metal miners, the I.W.W., in Idaho and Colorado. This is the description given it in the bulletin issued by the General Defense Committee on the Yakima struggle:
 
The “Bullpen”
“These stockades, commonly called ‘bullpens’, were rotten ramshackle affairs, open to wind, sun and rain, often two stories high, with toilet facilities – such as they were – in the same enclosure where men and women had to spend every moment of the many days they were held, and often so crowded that there was hardly more than enough room to stand up in. Such a structure is the place where eighty men and women were placed, for the elements to attack and the crowds to stare at, in Yakima City. And there they have remained since that memorable day in August when terror broke loose in lovely Yakima Valley.”
Then martial law was proclaimed. Street meetings were forbidden and broken up. The I.W.W. camps were destroyed, the men driven out, the property burned. A grant of $3,000 was asked of the state to build a bigger and stronger stockade and $23,000 for the expenses of the prosecution. Strikers, and those connected only remotely with the strike were slugged, tarred and feathered and left lifeless along the road. Incoming freight trains were searched for “agitators”. The kept press unleashed a howl of lynch talk. All sorts of ruses were used to find a pretext for frame-up. The workers are indicted under charges ranging from vagrancy to criminal syndicalism.
Unspeakable Conditions
Conditions among the imprisoned workers are unspeakable. A mild description is contained in this letter received by the General Defense Committee: “All the fellow workers in the can are in a very bad shape – one blanket each in a chicken house. All need clothes bad. A cold wave hit this section, snow 18 inches 70 miles from here; at present a cold rain is falling. The fellow workers are dressed for July in Florida, without coats many of them. If anything can be done about this it should be done right now, as all of the fellow workers have colds, etc. W.I. Fischer spends half his time in the county hospital.”
Meanwhile these strikers are to stand trial where the boss class justice will endeavor to railroad them from five to twenty-five years. They are to be tried in the city of Yakima where mob law prevails and the respectable citizens are howling for blood, where the slightest sympathy for the imprisoned men is a crime punished by lynching.
This is a class battle of the first water. Action from the organized, militant workers are the only effective instruments in this fight which is the fight of every wage slave.

Contributions for the defense of the Yakima strikers should be sent to Harry J. Clark, Yakima Defense Committee, Box 365, Seattle, Washington, or to the General Defense Committee, 2422 N. Halsted St., Chicago, Ill.
 



Events are moving rapidly in the Far East. The Japanese military expedition to carve a colonial empire out of Northern China has gotten under full swing as lour Japanese armies numbering more than 10,000 soldiers are advancing with the aid of tanks, planes and artillery along a 225 mile front into the Jehol province. The Japanese assault which began with the ruthless invasion and destruction of the city of Shanhaikwan a little over a week ago, under the pretext of defensive measures against the impotent Chinese garrison located in the above mentioned city, has turned out according to universal expectation, which the Japanese did little to conceal, to be their first move in the partition of China.
Leaving a trail of devastation and ruin in their wake the Japanese imperialists are advancing upon their long talked-of aim to add the Jehol province and possibly Inner Mongolia to their puppet state Manchukuo. In spite of the braggadocio of the Chinese generals and the Kuo Min Tang, that they would resist to the last drop of blood, the Japanese have started, their march with nothing to block their way but the intense cold. As a matter of fact, Japan refuses to be deterred by any circumstances from her Chinese conquest and rumors are current that Chiang Kai-Shek is looking towards negotiations “for an amicable settlement of the dispute.” Were it not for the pressure from the Chinese masses and the foreign imperialists, who have their own axe to grind (on the Chinese people) the Chiang Kai-Sheks would capitulate to Japan without even their present pretensions.
And this is borne out by innumerable facts that even the Chinese censor could not keep hidden. The invasion of Shanhaikwan was known for some time previous to its occurrence not only by Chang Hsiao Liang, commander of the garrison, but also to many far less informed journalists. And yet no attempt was made to bring reinforcements to strengthen it. On the contrary the fort was
abandoned to the tender mercies of the Japs who proceeded to wipe out every Chinese-looking person that was found in the city. During the battle which lasted hardly 24 hours the need for assistance became quite apparent. Every one looked to Chiang Kai-Shek, the generalissimo of the Chinese armies – but the general was too busy fighting Communists in southern China! Every new step of this gentry, proves that it is not duly unwilling but incapable of fighting the Japanese marauders. The only place where the Chinese bourgeoisie and their flunkeys have shown any belligerency is in the talkfest chambers of the League of Nations. And no wonder! To call into being an effective resistance to the invaders would mean to set the Chinese masses into motion. The Chinese bourgeoisie fears, above everything else, the Chinese people. They conceive of them as a far greater enemy than all the imperialists combined. The bourgeoisie and the militarists are quite well aware that the struggle against the foreign invader might easily be turned against them as would have been the case in 1925&dash;1927 were it not for the Menshevik policies of Stalin and Co.
But the Chinese bourgeoisie will not succeed in stifling the discontent of the toiling millions. Already widespread resentment is breaking loose against the Chinese compradores. Resolutions calling for decisive action are pouring into Nanking from all parts of the country. Mass meetings of students burning with resentment against the flagrant betrayal of Chiang, are gaining in momentum. The Japanese imperialists may yet succeed – in blowing the spark of the third Chinese revolution into flames. And that is a conflagration that has burned more than one imperialism in the past!
The Japanese adventure in northern China is fraught with the direct consequences for the workers of the world and for the Soviet Union. World war hangs in the balance. The working class must remain on the alert.
Japan is staking everything on this Chinese expedition. Despite the severe crisis shaking Japanese economy to its very foundations: despite a huge national deficit which is growing every day; despite the falling value of the yen; despite an unprecedented mass hunger and privation that is wracking every Japanese city and village, the Military is plunging the country into an ever greater crisis in pursuit of their imperialist designs. All their grandiose plans may blow up under the huge volcano that is gathering fuel in the simmering discontent of the Japanese workers and peasants. The war-crazed and avaricious militarists will stop at nothing.
Simultaneous with the Jehol invasion has come the refusal to sign the non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union. What a striking confirmation that is of the Left Opposition’s condemnation of the Stalinist signature of the Kellogg pact, to which these “non-aggression” pacts are merely a corollary. To sign this innocuous pact would have been of little consequence for the Japanese imperialists. It would not have stopped the military plans by one inch of conquered territory. But what they have done is significant. They have refused to sign the pact on a flimsy pretext. Stalin, they say, has changed the industrialization plans in preparation for war. In view of the present difficulties of the five year plan, this charge is not only absurd but is a cover for Japanese provocations against the Soviet Union. The Daily Worker reports that four Soviet ships have been interned by the Japanese military. Japan’s hostile acts are clear to all.
At the same time another significant fact comes to light. Unlike the events of last year when the conquest of Manchuria was met with anxious outcries on the part of American and other imperialists who feared for their own profits and concessions, the silence of this year has been conspicuous. Is it because the imperialist powers know in advance that Japan’s rampage will this time end up in an assault upon the Soviet Union! There are strong indications that this may be the case.
The workers must be on their guard for any eventuality. They must give their support to the Chinese workers and peasants in the struggle against the Japanese plunderers and the Chiang Kai-Shek butchers of the Chinese people!
 



The rattle of the sabre grows louder in the Far East. As the Japanese conquest grows in scope and as the plunder and murder of these robber bandits proceeds unabated grave events of international consequence loom on the horizon. Fear for their territory and sources of exploitation have struck fear into the hearts of American and British imperialism. The equanimity that marked the original attitude of American imperialism has given way to an attitude of extreme anxiety over Japan’s possible purpose in her invasion of the Jehol territory. At the outset, when it seemed that the Japanese military expedition might end in intervention against the Soviet Union, the diplomatic circles in Washington were quiet as the grave. But now, when it appears that American profits and the huge Chinese colonial market will be swallowed up by Japanese capitalism, a virtual furor of protest has emerged from the Washington watchdogs of the Wall Street bankers’, munition makers’ and manufacturers’ interests in every part of the globe.
Already recrimination, abuse and contradictory rumors calculated to incite the war fever fill the air, both in America and in Japan. The old and familiar story of “atrocities” begins to make screaming headlines on the front pages of the yellow journals. The Tokio War Office gives out information to the Japanese press that the United States is making huge sales of war supplies to the Chinese. The United States foreign office counter’s by saying the whole matter is a colossal fabrication, that the sale of ammunition to China in the last period was a mere bagatelle. The truth perhaps lies somewhere between these two, although it is a well known fact that the DuPonts are not wasting any opportunity to reap profits from their deadly products. And they will sell this war paraphernalia to the Japanese just as soon as to the Chinese. Such are the noble and principled motives that actuated these same gentlemen in the last world slaughter. They have but one criterion – pecuniary gain. They reserve the sentimental phrases for consumption by the masses.
Simultaneously a new sensation has flashed across the American scandal sheets. A group of Japanese workers, according to these press reports stormed the Singer Sewing Machine plant in Yokohoma and left a wreckage behind them amounting to several hundreds of thousands of dollar’s. Counter charges and claims are made that there was insufficient police protection; that it was a group of Left wing workers that committed the deed, eta, etc., ad nauseam. And now we hear still more ominous news that the Japanese fleet maneuvers have been advanced from October to June or July in the Pacific. And the American naval maneuvers, likewise in the Pacific, are scheduled to take place in about a month. Naval maneuvers are usually the prelude to more serious action.
At the same time we notice another significant fact. The attitude of the League of Nations has undergone an abrupt and fundamental revision. In less than a week the position of the “black international of imperialism” changed from one of yielding to all the Japanese demands to a hard boiled attitude of no concessions whatever. At first glance this it somewhat astonishing. But upon looking deeper into the change it is quite in accord with the spirit of recent international events.
During this past week when the Lytton report hung fire the American colossus intervened to lay down the law. To the public it merely reaffirmed its policy on the Far Eastern question of January 1932. “Protection of the open door ... respect for the territorial and administrative integrity of China ... the Nine Power pact ... the Kellogg-Briand Peace Treaty” and all the other shams that serve to camouflage the desire of the American capitalist class for self-aggrandizement in China and the opening up of huge markets for the profiteers. But behind the scenes another and more powerful weapon was brought into action. And with this weapon the American imperialists bludgeoned the League of Nations to make its position conform to American interests.
This weapon is the war debt, which has been suspended over the heads of the defaulting nations, by the U.S. for this purpose among others.
The voice of the American Shylock has thundered forth: “If you want a favorable settlement on the debt you owe us, then support our policy against the Japanese!” And as the old saying goes “money talks”. The whole League of Nations including France which has previously given Japan her warmest support fell into line. And now the papers tell us that a strong condemnatory resolution against Japan will be adopted. Great Britain which had been reticent about “provoking Japan has now offered diplomatic representations to the latter about the tense situation which is endangering British interests. The American whip strikes sharply and imperatively. But any illusion that any possible action of the League of Nations will permanently stop Japan’s adventure in Jehol and elsewhere is not only absurd but dangerous. The most any action of the League can accomplish is to cause new alignments and intensify imperialist rivalry to the breaking point. The Wall Street agents in Washington are using the League of Nations as their battering ram against the Japanese. When the time comes they will pass over from the realm of words. Already we hear the music of the future.
Secretary of State, Stimson in his statement to Congress on the question of Philippine independence, on Jan. 16th slid, regarding the situation that might ensue if the Philippines were freed, “Such a situation might be an irreparable blow to American influence at a time when the state of affairs in the Far East is chaotic, when every element of stability is threatened and when may come out of the Orient one of these historic moments which might disturb the whole earth.” Stripped of the diplomatic verbiage the meaning of this statement is clear as day. The danger of war stands in close proximity.
But parallel With the danger of a world conflagration rises the possibility of a bloody assault upon the Soviet Union. For, however, rich and desirable the Chinese market is to the imperialist bandits their interests would be better served by an attack upon the workers’ fatherland than by tearing one other’s throats over their booty.
The Japanese militarists have many times tried to provoke the Soviet Union. In the last issue of the Militant we recounted their hostile acts. They are enraged over Russia’s refusal to recognize the puppet state of Manchukuo and her resumption of diplomatic relations with China. They want to force the Soviet Union to act according to the standards of capitalist greed. But the Soviet Union has no imperialist axe to grind. Its interests are the interests of the international proletariat and conversely. The present actions of Japan and the other capitalist powers must alarm the working class to the growing danger of another world war. Not only does an imperialist war become a present danger but a united attack upon the Soviet Union is threatened.
After four years of misery and privation for the working class the imperialists are preparing a huge blood bath for them to drown their sorrows in. To these preparations, intrigues, and the like the working class must be ready to answer with the only answer at their disposal, the transformation of the imperialist war into the civil war’ for the overthrow of the capitalist system.
 



The Foreign Policy Association, hardly known for its Communist leanings, has recently issued a very interesting report on the class forces and relations in China. The report issued over the signature of T.A. Bisson lacks the usual bourgeois bombast and makes the effort to confine itself to the actual facts. As such it deserves comment.
The central pivot of the Chinese situation, today, is the expanding influence of Communism in the interior of China, which the report declares, is the “key to political events in China”. The recognition of this fact is most significant to revolutionaries throughout the world. It points to the complete bankruptcy of the Chinese bourgeoisie to solve any of the needs of the Chinese people. In spite of all the material support the Chiang Kai-Sheks have received from the American imperialists they have not been able to alleviate the indescribable conditions of the Chinese masses even in the most elementary manner. They have not been able to consolidate China and consummate its internal unity. They have remained the compradores, the lackeys of foreign imperialism. Bisson states that the anti-foreign policy, the drastic social and internal reforms, which he claims “were being rapidly and easily achieved during the 1925-1927” period no longer obtain today. This clearly bears out the analysis made by the Left Opposition of the reactionary role of the Chinese bourgeoisie in the revolution. We have declared many times, not only on the basis of the experience of the Russian revolutions but of the particular class relationships, that exist in China, that the Chinese bourgeoisie could not be a progressive factor. Our analysis directly contradicted the revisionist policy of the Stalin-Bucharin leadership of the Comintern, which lost the Chinese Communist Party in the camp of the Kuo Min Tang, because the latter would “fight against imperialism” because it feared the consequences of the action of the toiling masses who would necessarily have to be brought into motion. At this point we disagree with Bisson, who says echoing the Mensheviks of the Stalin faction, that the Kuo Min Tang had set an anti-imperialist movement afoot in the 1926-1927 period. Innumerable facts have been adduced to prove the falsity of this statement. Events have incontestably demonstrated that the Kuo Min Tang bourgeoisie never fought against imperialism but against one or another imperialist nation with the support and sponsorship of some other imperialist nation.
The driving force of Communism still retains its vitality despite the defeat which Stalinism led it into and the four years of ruthless extermination of the flower of the movement by the butcher Chiang Kai-Shek and his hangmen. Bisson admits that under this danger of Communism “the Left and Right wings of the Kuo Min Tang – formerly quite distinct – have drawn so closely together as to become practically indistinguishable ...” We might add that so great is the apprehension of the Chinese generals of the spread of Communism in the interior of China that even under the impact of the blows of the Japanese imperialists, partitioning northern China, they could not spare any forces from their campaign against the Communists.
On the character of this Communist movement in China the statement of Bisson further vindicates the prediction and analysis of the Left Opposition. He characterizes the movement as having made “steady gains in China’s agrarian hinterland”. Not a word about the strength of Communism in the urban and industrial centers. And how can it be otherwise? Augmenting their criminal errors in the revolutionary period the Stalinist bureaucracy has turned its face away from the proletariat and has established what is virtually a peasants’ party drawing on the belated echo of the rural areas to the revolutionary upsurge that has passed and which has not as yet re-arisen in its real force.
The fundamental problem of the future of the Chinese people is raised by Bisson with singular clarity. “Capitalist domination of the Kuo Min Tang, however, has not suppressed the issue thus raised. With the progress of the Chinese Communist movement, the choice between reconstructing China on a socialist or a capitalist basis is pressed more and more insistently on Chinese leaders. On which of these bases shall China seek to satisfy its supreme political necessities – national unification, stability and security?” This is the crux of the Chinese “puzzle” just as it is of the chaos that reigns throughout the rest of the world.
But this problem has passed from the domain of pedantic inquiry to the plane of tested reality. In China, no sooner had the bourgeoisie seized the reins of government than it has found itself in a paralytic impasse, unable to solve any of the burning questions of its national economy, let alone the dire needs of the hungry masses. To put the question is to answer it ... Either capitalism will plunge the masses into the abyss of barbarism or the emergence of humanity on a higher plane will come through the triumph of the proletariat.
 



Paterson, N.J. – The strongest sector of the nationwide strike of silk workers, its Paterson division of more than 25,000 men holds firm. The tie-up in this city has closed every shop, the looms are idle and the workers have responded 100 percent solid to the strike call.
Striking against the intolerable conditions forced upon them by the vicious wage-slashing of the four years of the crisis the producers of silk are determined to take no promises from the NRA and by struggle to jack up their wages from the miserable $13 average to a $36 minimum, to bring down the hours from the slave working day of 11 and 12 hours prior to the strike to a 30 hour week.
Paterson is in the grip of the strike. Men and women, of all nationalities, young and old, those who have never known the meaning of union organizations and veterans of class struggle, are banding side by side on the picket lines, in huge, enthusiastic strike meetings displaying a spirit of militancy equalled only by the heroic battle of 1913.
The great virility of this struggle is vividly demonstrated by the pouring out of the mills of more than 15,000 dye workers who for the first time in 20 years have taken their stand on the picket line ready to see the fight to the end. Bursting the shackles of long oppression and exploitation they are braving the police clubs, and tear gas, flocking into the union halls – a testimony to the great power that lies latent in the unorganized mass of workers in this country.
Meanwhile in Washington, negotiations are in progress between the union officials, the manufacturers, and the false friends of labor of the Roosevelt administration. A code for the silk workers is also under consideration. But the workers are watchful. They will not be tricked into any fake agreement, they will not be content with any conditions merely because it bears the insignia of the NRA. Already they have turned down a code that perpetuated the wretched conditions that have plagued the silk trade for years.
The real leader of the strike in Paterson is the Associated Silk Workers, an autonomous local of the United Textile Workers which is affiliated to the A.F. of L.
The decisive section of the industry, the 10,000 broad silk workers, are striking under the aegis of the Associated. It is marvelous to see the spirit of these workers. They are not newcomers to the picket line. This is by no means the first strike they have participated in. On the contrary, they have written a tradition in letters of red in the history of American labor. The workers in this union are wary of the betrayers of the American Federation of Labor. Years of sellouts have brought this lesson home to them. The name of MacMahon, the president of the U.T.W. is anathema to the members of the Associated Silk Workers.
The rank and file of the Associated have thrown new leaders to the fore. The strike committee is controlled by genuine progressives – Left wingers who have been repelled by the horrible mismanagement, the crimes and the fearful bureaucracy of the Stalinists.
But for the dye workers, the ranks of the strikers are united. Here the forces are divided between the Associated and the Stalinist-controlled National Textile Workers Union.
The dye workers are green to the struggle. They came by accident to the paper union of the Stalinists. They were ready to accept any union that reached them first. But it is the universal opinion in Paterson among the more mature workers in the industry that the N.T.W. will be unable to hold the dyers permanently. There is more than one fact that can be produced in proof of this.
The criminal (after listening to the stories of good, reliable fighters one is tempted to say, insane) policy of the Stalinists and their paper N.T.W. has driven many of the best militants into the Associated, made them bitter against the N.T.W. Prior to the strike, the N.T.W. had practically no influence among the weavers, and the weavers, the more conscious group in the silk industry, passed them by when the strike started and made common cause with the Associated. So discredited, impotent and uninfluential was the N.T.W. at the outbreak of the strike that – this is common knowledge in Paterson – the N.T.W. tried frantically to postpone the date of the strike in order to make “preparations”. Further, so great was the stigma of rotten internal life in the N.T.W. and its adventurist tactics, that Stalinists themselves were instrumental in forming a craft union of the warpers, independent of their paper union! One more fact. A member of the N.T.W. organized 3,000 workers – throwsters – hitherto unorganized and brought them not in to the N.T.W., but into the Associated. Can there be any doubt now whether the Stalinist outfit will hold the dyers?
The advanced, experienced workers in Paterson will have nothing to do with the N.T.W. The inexperienced dyers will not be long in finding out the justice of their decision.
In Paterson as elsewhere the workers are streaming into the real unions. They are paying no attention to the paper outfits run by the Stalinists. There is no place for the Left wingers in Paterson but in the Associated which they can transform into a powerful weapon for the militants nationally – a starting wedge in the struggle against the bosses and’ the reactionaries.
 



Paterson, N.J. – The great odds fought against by the embattled silk workers have been greatly increased by the split in the ranks occasioned by the vote of the dye house workers under the U.T.W. to accept the agreement and return to work. The fifteen thousand workers in the dye houses are taking up their places at the tubs after a seven weeks strike under a contract offering concessions in wages and union recognition.
Under the separate agreement the dyers have obtained union recognition for their organization, the United Textile Workers, from the powerful institute of Dyers and Printers, the manufacturers association. They have been granted a minimum wage of $23 which constitutes an increase of from five to seven dollars over what they had been receiving prior to the strike. The closed shop was not obtained but the employers have agreed, according to the contract, to deal with the union shop committees over grievances, firing, etc.
 
Vote Not Unanimous
The vote for the agreement was neither unanimous nor did it include the majority of the dye workers, although a decisive section participated. The sentiment of the dye workers cannot be judged accurately by the outcome of the vote because the majority of the dyers did not vote and because of the peculiar ballot they were asked to cast. They were asked to vote on the following questions: “Do you favor acceptance of the settlement terms?” 3,311 voted for acceptance and 1,422 voted against. The second question, which undoubtedly appeared to be a contradiction to the workers was: “Do you want to stay out until the weavers return?” 1,913 declared for staying out with the weavers and 2,539 for returning to the job immediately.
The large size of this minority vote is highly symptomatic of the confusion and doubt in the minds of the dyers, inexperienced in union affairs and taken in by the trick method of posing the question. The dyers were faced with a dilemma. The agreement gave them certain concessions – wages, recognition, etc. – and consequently there was some sentiment for its acceptance. But the question must have no doubt cropped up: “If we have an agreement, and the agreement is favorable, then why not return to work; why wait for the weavers who may be out for a long time yet?”
 
The Separation of the Dyers
The question of a national strike settlement and of the dependence of one section of the silk industry upon another was never made clear to the dyers. They did not perceive the heavy blow they were dealing the weavers by returning to work. They had not years of experience and a tradition of many strikes to make them aware of this elementary lesson of solidarity. The isolation of the dyers into a separate union had awakened craft consciousness. Only vaguely did they feel themselves part of the strike led by the American Federation of Silk Workers.
On the other hand the dye workers were handicapped by bad leadership. Leading their section of the strike, were two old-line politicians, Vigorito and Pirolo, self-seeking, out for votes. The dyers’ interests were secondary to their own careerist ambitions. Besides these two shady figures was the conniving and fakery of McMahon through his agent, Pat Quinlan. A conscious Left wing was not present in the dyers local. Except if one, by a stretch of the imagination, could consider Jack Rubenstein of the Lovestoneites in that category. But Rubenstein failed to take a clear position on most of the questions facing the dyers. Where he should have been strong and uncompromising he was weak and conciliatory. He took no definite position before the dyers on the question of breaking the ranks of the strike and accepting the separate agreement. The policy of the Lovestoneites of pussyfooting before the A.F. of L. skates had disastrous consequences here as it has had in every case.
 
Disruptive Role of N.T.W.
If the dyers were misguided by the reactionaries they were confused and demoralized by the disruptive policy of the National Textile Workers Union. At the outset the Stalinists divided the dyers into two unions. They continued with baseless recrimination. When they felt the ground was slipping under their feet the Stalinists began to pack the meetings of the U.T.W. dyers with disruption as their aim. They succeeded in winning over two “dyers” on their insincere proposals for united action – the old-line politicians, Vigorito and Pirola!
The strike committee of the dyers repudiated Vigorito and Pirola who thought, judging by the “organized” applause, that more votes could be obtained by this unity business. It will be remembered that not so long ago the N.T.W. had levelled shafts, of attack at Vigorito and Pirola as agents of the bosses. The disruption of the N.T.W. made calm deliberative meetings of the dye workers impossible; they gave an excuse for the voting of the dyers on the agreement to be conducted secretly and by shops instead of in open strike meeting.
And now, as a last fit of desperation, as a last seed of confusion, the N.T.W. makes a complete change of policy but hardly in the right direction. This is the latest proposal of the N.T.W.:
“The National Textile Workers Union stands ready to merge with the members of the U.T.W. and unorganized workers, into One Dye Workers Union.”
Not unity but a new union. (There are not enough unions now!)
 
Tactics of the Bosses
The canny dye bosses were well aware of the inexperience of the dye workers, and their lack of effective leadership. For ten days they wore out a rank and file negotiations committee by incessant meetings, flattering these gullible workers with back-slapping and honeyed words but fighting like tigers for every point of the agreement. And when the workers’ negotiations committee was demoralized with fatigue they set the stage for a last act of intimidation. All the cops were called off their regular beats for “duty” at the mills, rumors were spread that a large gang of strike breakers and thugs had been imported into Paterson, the bosses made a public statement that the mills would open and the mayor backed them up by saying that he would see to it that “any man who wanted to return to work would not be prevented from doing so.” It was under these circumstances that the agreement was made.
One can say with some certainty that this split in the strike was prepared even before the outbreak of the strike. The outcome might have been different if the dyers had been affiliated with the A.F.S.W. Before the strike, Schweitzer, the cautious, week-kneed organizer of the A.S.W. turned down an offer to organize the dyers into the Associated so that the organizer of the dyers, Yanerelli, made a deal with McMahon and the dye house workers went directly into the U.T.W.
 
Evil Result of Separate Organization
In the U.T.W. the mass of the strikers, the more experienced and tested militants in the A.F.S.W., had no control over the actions of the dyers. It is true that there was some sort of reciprocal representatives of the two unions on the respective strike committees. The lack of forces prevented the working of this committee. Given these circumstances the appeal of Schweitzer calling upon the dyers to remain out until the weavers got a settlement was only a futile gesture.
By the separate agreement with the dyers, the bosses surely have obtained a moral advantage. Already 3,000 jacquard workers want to stampede back to work. The bosses have given them certain concessions and they have also voted to go back to the job following the lead of the dyers. Further disorganization is to be seen in the action of the jacquard workers in withdrawing from the strike committee of the A.F.S.W. and forming a strike committee of their own.
The defection of the dyers has unquestionably made the road of the silk workers to victory more difficult and more tortuous. But a great mass remains on strike and a great power is still in their hands, and if they hold their ranks solid they can yet force a favorable settlement.
 



“It is fitting that in the capital of the nation a statue should stand through the ages to remind future generations of the services to that nation of a patriot who served his country well.”
These are President Roosevelt’s words of tribute in dedicating a monument not to a general, an admiral or an imperialist free-booter but to a labor leader – Samuel Gompers, the deceased president of the American Federation of Labor. The president of the United States is so lavish with his praise for Gompers because he feels a deep admiration for the man whom he rightly considers not a tribune of the oppressed or a warrior for a new society but a stanch pillar of the powers-that-be, a “patriot”.
We have no argument with Roosevelt when he says that Gompers “served his country well”. Indeed Wilson’s eulogy of Gompers, quoted by Roosevelt, reveals how deeply the masters are indebted to Samuel Gompers.
“If I may be permitted to do so”, said Wilson in 1917, “I want to express my admiration of his patriotic courage, his large vision and his statesmanlike sense of what has to be done. I like to lay my mind alongside of a mind that knows how to pull in harness. The horses that kick over the traces will have to be put in a corral.”
“In Harness” – For the Bosses
From the outset of his career as a labor leader, Gompers caused the capitalist class little worry. He knew how to pull in harness – not for the workers. The bosses reaped a lucrative harvest from the plasticity of Samuel Gompers who traded the fighting batallions of the proletariat for the Judas gold of respectability.
Gompers founded the American Federation of Labor; he was its president until his death in 1924. For this activity he has not suffered the storm of abuse, calumny and vilification with which the ruling class so profusely showers the protagonists of the labor movement. On the contrary he is glorified in a monument erected to his memory in the citadel of American imperialism. A curse at the death of “Big Bill” Haywood, a sigh of relief at the passing of Debs and a monument for Gompers! The oligarchy of capital knows how to estimate the work of labor’s leaders.
It never could be said of Mr. Gompers that he “kicked over the traces”. His kick was at the working class. His long years of service, earning him such profuse praise from Roosevelt, began with renegacy from the socialist movement whose ideas he assimilated as a young cigar maker. He deserted socialism for the respectability of a “pure and simple” craft union movement whose motto was “a fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work”. He wanted no connection with the socialists because they preached a doctrine of “class hatred and violence as an importation of foreigners”. No connection with the socialists or the mass of unskilled who might be contaminated with radical ideas – this was his credo in founding the A.F. of L. in 1881. The great mass of exploited workers standing outside of the sequestered cloister of the aristocracy of labor were also outside the concern of Gompers.
 
A Bulwark Against Radicalism
The whole career of Samuel Gompers was predicated on currying the favor of the master class, of showing them by deeds that the labor movement that he led was good 100% American – a bulwark against radicalism. In 1894 the memorable strike led by the American Labor Union and its great inspirational force, Eugene Victor Debs, dared the power of the railway magnates. The government sent the militia against the strikers. On the other side the railroad men were supported by the Knights of Labor and the Farmers’ Alliance which promised to feed the strikers. The country was in an uproar, the class lines were drawn taut and the unions were clamoring for action – for support of the Pullman workers.
Gompers called a meeting of the A.F. of L. Executive Council and refused to call either general or local strikes in support of the beleaguered railroad workers. Debs was charged with contempt of court for violating the injunction. Gomper’s seized this opportunity to prove to the master class that the labor organization associated with his name would have no part in radical action. The strike was lost, in no small degree because of the treachery of Gompers. Debs went to jail; Gompers won the good graces of Wall Street. Gompers was learning the lesson of solidarity – with the ruling class.
 
National Civic Federation
It was as president of the National Civic Federation that Gompers earned his spurs as a trusted lieutenant of the capitalists within the ranks of labor. An organization composed of notorious labor haters like Ralph Easly and labor misleaders like Gompers and Mitchell, this Civic Federation was an open class-collaboration agency consecrated to the idea of “the partnership of labor and capital”, to the settling of strikes at the expense of the workers and to blocking the road to organization of the unorganized.
Through this organization and together with the kings and barons of finance and industry Gompers waged a bitter struggle against socialism within and without the American Federation of Labor. As president of this organization he was instrumental in betraying the steel strike of 1901 and numerous strikes thereafter. The membership of Gompers in this capitalist organization and his concurrent presidency of the American Federation of Labor is keenly symbolic of his role of the guardian, the watchdog of the interests of the capitalist class in the labor movement.
Against the I.W.W. this evil genius of labor unleashed the virus of his hatred. That the I.W.W. was championing the cause of the oppressed and challenging the strongholds of trustified capital meant nothing for Gompers. They were reds, “against the government” and he was out to destroy the I.W.W. When the U.T.W. officials acted as strikebreakers at Lawrence in 1912 to stamp out the militant battle led by the I.W.W., Gompers condoned the act. The same at Paterson in 1913 by a backdoor agreement with the bosses. With remarkable indifference Gompers ignored the bloody massacre of the striking coal miners in Ludlow Colorado by the Rockfeller interests. Similarly with the St. Bartholomew’s night in the copper strike in Calumet, Michigan.
 
Against Industrial Unionism ...
Gompers detested the I.W.W. as much for their industrial form of organization, which cut across the lines of craft and encompassed the mass of unskilled, as for their burning creed of class struggle. The consistent policy of Gompers was to divide the organized workers into innumerable segments, to rip the labor movement asunder with wasteful jurisdiction disputes. To this every day the American Federation of Labor is torn by fruitless jurisdictional bickerings – the seed sown by Gompers is still sprouting its rotten fruits.
 
“Non-Partisan” Politics
In politics as in the trade unions, Gompers earned the statue erected to him in Washington. Here he chained labor to the political chariot of the capitalist class – the Republican and Democratic Gold-Dust twins of Big business. By the slogan of “Reward your friends” Gompers made labor the grovelling lick-spittle of the political representatives of the bosses. He shied away from a party for the workers like leprosy, only to maintain a corps of toadying lobbyists who crawled on all fours for favors from the standpat parties of the master class.
A Recruiting Sergeant for Capitalist War
It was quite appropriate that Gompers should be the recruiting sergeant for the American Imperialist plunderbund holding the American workers in line for the slaughter for profits they were prosecuting in Europe. The capitalists made certain there would be no trouble from the workers when they entered the war by immediately enlisting the only-too-willing services of Gompers. He secured a declaration from the A.F. of L. pledging its support of the government in the war in the event of United States’ participation. Gompers was a member of the Council of National Defense created in 1916, and was influential in priming American public opinion to war consciousness.
Prior to and even after the outbreak of the war to make the world safe for bigger and better profits there was a large pacifist sentiment in this country and in the labor organizations. This would never do for Gompers who put his whole heart into the patriotic campaign into driving the workers into the Morgans’ carnage. He was the father of the American Alliance for Labor and Democracy which enlisted the social-patriots like Spargo and Russell and spread war propaganda from one end of the country to the other.
If the war was to be a success there must be a docile, unrebellious, hard working proletariat in the home country and Gompers was the man for that. A member of the War Labor Board he watched hawklike that there be no strikes during the war; and if such broke loose in spite of him, Gompers had a machine to hamstring the workers struggle for whom exploitation grew more intense in times of war. And for this service Roosevelt is not stingy in his plaudits when he says that “it was his (Gompers’) patriotic leadership for the unanimous mobilization of the workers in every part of the union which supplemented the mobilization of the men who went to the front”. A monument to Gompers in Washington – little crosses on the battlefields of France for the workers who fought for Wall Street’s gold.
 
In His Dotage – Fighting the “Reds”
For Gompers the war did not end with the declaration of the armistice in November 1918 – not the class war, to be sure; he had long ceased to recognize that. Under the cry that the war was still on Gompers and Lewis, frightened white by the invocation of the Lever Act declaring the coal strike outlaw, drove 425,000 coal miners back to the pits. Gompers did everything in his power to sabotage the great steel strike of 1919 and he finally succeeded in putting the rebellious steel workers “in the corral”.
Samuel Gompers spent his dotage in a fitting manner – fighting reds. Here he was the fury of old age incarnated. Part and parcel of the post-war red hysteria, Gompers did his “bit” to preserve “American institutions” from the Bolsheviks. He hounded the Communists and expelled the Left wingers from the A.F. of L.
The American workers will remember this labor lieutenant of the capitalist class with an oath of hate on their lips After the proletariat of this country crosses the pinnacle of power it will write this inscription under the monument in Washington :
“Samuel Gomper’s – the Evil Genius of the American Labor Movement.”
 



After a four year’s intermission, the Republican Party convenes in Chicago to put on its grand jamboree – called a convention – to nominate the president of the U.S.A. It meets in the gala holiday atmosphere, that makes it resemble a circus or a field day rather than a serious political gathering to decide the destinies of the nation for the coming period.
We are informed that between the classy hotels where the delegates are lodged and the Chicago Stadium where the convention is taking place, the speakies are doing a thriving business. But despite all this the spirit of four years ago seems to be missing. Gone are the thunderous plaudits that rend the roof and shiver the windows into splinters. Gone is the wild cheering, the mad parading around the convention hall, the insane blaring of brass bands that lasted for hours at a time, that greeted the making of some obscure point that strikes the delegates’ fancy.
Even the mention of the nomination of Herbert Hoover which raised a storm of interminable hurrahs, a few years ago was received with a coldness that would make even the eskimos shiver. Now we can account for the large sale of prohibition liquor to the delegates. The moonshine is consumed not so much in the spirit of celebration, but to bolster up the depressed state of mind of the convention delegates.
Three years have passed since the beginning of this bitterest and deep-going crisis and it is still getting worse. The republicans have full and good cause for being gloomy and pessimistic. The people, they are fearful, will attribute the crisis to them, and vote them out of office. But, protests the G.O.P., the crisis operates according to immutable laws. Correct. But – these immutable laws are of capitalism itself. And the Republicans are the most ardent defenders of the capitalist system. They come in for a thrashing whichever way you look at it. Their three years tenure of office (since the crisis) is enough to convince the most benighted and uninformed worker that not only does capitalism plunge them into misery, but it stubbornly refuses to do anything to alleviate their suffering.
Consider the speech of the Keynoter, Senator L.T. Dickinson. For more than an hour he prated and boasted of the achievements of the president. He refused unemployment insurance to the jobless workers because it would degrade American manhood and drove them right on the breadlines. No dole – that will unbalance the budget. Then the congress turns right around and grants a subsidy of several hundred millions to the R.R.s to pay off overdue dividends. He maintained the high standard of wages. How? By the famous agreement of three years ago, in which the capitalists gave their promise not to cut wages and the A.F. of L. sold out by its promise not to strike. Result? In the words of Dickinson “wages have been maintained at the high level wherever possible”, which is an euphemistic way of calling this vicious wage cut drive that has included all categories of the American working class. “There have been fewer strikes than in any preceding depression”, which means the treachery of the labor fakers has been complete. And now this same
Bill Green comes crawling back on his belly to the same exploiters who so unceremoniously spit in his face a short time ago, to plead for the five day week, to allay the rising discontent of the working masses!
And what is the big issue at this convention, where everything is decided behind closed doors in luxurious hotel suites? Prohibition. But we don’t want to get rid of this camouflage issue too hurriedly, so we’ll write a program that is neither wet nor dry, call it “resubmission” and let it hang for three more years.
 



The city of New York, the metropolis of the world, is engaged in one of its very regular scandals in which muckraking, corruption, righteous indignation and outright cynicism are all mixed up in a bottle labelled – Tammany. After many months, in which time “the lion of reform”, Sam Seabury, has been occupied in cleaning up the shady places in the city government, and unearthing the “tin boxes” where the custodians of city affairs deposit their somewhat doubtful earnings, last week, the dapper night club mayor of beer parade fame was put on the witness stand to answer for some peculiar items on his bank account.
Nobody was very much startled by Seabury’s revelations concerning the bribes and “gifts” received by Walker in the course of his glamorous tenure of office. The population of New York seems to have grown apathetic to the doings and undoings of Tammany. The prevailing sentiment can be summed up in the following words: “If Jimmy is smart enough to get the boodle, more power to him. If I were in his place, I’d do the same”. Nevertheless, with all the recent talk about balancing the budget, efficient government, city planning, etc., it is interesting to recount some of the adventures of James J. Walker.
We all remember the regal style in which Walker cruised the Atlantic, comfortably ensconced in the imperial suite of the S.S. Berengaria. For trips to Europe other sources of income than the meagre $40,000 per annum, which is the Mayor’s salary, are required. But the resourceful Jimmy had no trouble in finding these. It appears that the Equitable Coach Company wanted a franchise to run buses on the streets of New York. Jimmy wanted a trip to Europe – two and two makes four. On August 9, 1927, Walker signed the bill for the franchise. On August 10, he left for Europe with a $10,000 letter of credit made out in his name and backed up with the cash supplied by J. Allen Smith, political contact man for the Equitable. The hustle and bustle of New York, as can be seen, allows no time for procrastination.
The exploits of our good mayor, however, do not end with his European voyage. It appears that a certain Mr. Sisto, a taxi cab financier, presented Walker With a small “gift” of $26,535 worth of bonds. Why? Because his interests were seeking the stricter municipal control to insure a monopoly for the Parmelee Taxi Cab Corp.? Oh, no! We must not contradict a man’s word sealed with the solemn oath of the law. Mr. Sisto, by his own frank admission, handed out this money for no other reason than his “deep admiration” for the mayor! But the mayor has more than one admirer in the city of New York.
Samuel Ungerleider, a well known stock broker, testified before the Hofstadter Committee that he purchased 1,000 shares of stock from Walker’s agent, Sherwood, who has mysteriously disappeared, for $51,960 when the market price of the stock at the time was $29,000. We presume that this $30,000 donation was given out of similar considerations of esteem to those that prompted Mr. Sisto. Only, in the absence of his attorney, M. Ungerleider said, he could make no statements on the subject. However, we are led to believe, through knowledge of his connections, that Ungerleider was just a little concerned over the fate of the securities of the Parmelee Taxi Cab Corporation.
A veritable furor of genuine indignation was stirred up over Walker receiving money he never worked for. Paul Block, newspaper publisher and “salesman” of tiles to the city subway contractors, started a joint brokerage account with the mayor, from which Jimmy received $246,692, between February 1927 and August 1929. And the mayor never invested a cent in this venture. Why that’s real exploitation! Just think of the poor hard-working Mr. Block who had to clip all the coupons by himself, the mayor not contributing a stitch of his own “labor” and then receiving over $200,000.
What a farce these bootblacks of the capitalist class, reformers and corruptions alike, make of the tragic lot of the working class under capitalism. Investment of money is considered hard honest labor, but profits and dividends where no investment is made, is branded as ill-begotten lucre.
We have no reason to and we are not undertaking the defense of Jimmy Walker. We will leave that to the apologists of Capitalism, of which he is a typical product. The point is, however, that to us it is irrelevant as to how the master class divides its profits derived from the blood and bones of the toiling masses. Does it make a particle of difference to the working class whether Mr. Block and his ilk squander their profits for their purposes or divide it among their political henchmen and state servants. It does, however, demonstrate the very close connection the master class has with the leading government officials, vindicating over again the contention of Karl Marx, that the “state is nothing short of the executive committee of the ruling class.”
With the dent the economic crisis has made in the standard of living of the working class, with wage cuts and starvation rampant in the country, with the experience of the strike against coolie conditions in Kentucky still fresh in our minds, it is quite instructive to read of the doings of the capitalist class and their officers. The working class, which has been told by these same capitalist hirelings to “learn to live on less”, to accept wage cuts as a “patriotic duty”, to forget about unemployment insurance because the budget has to be “balanced”, should take note of this outright and flagrant hypocrisy that the master class practices, without the slightest fear of “exposure”.
The liberals, the preachers, and the socialist party are out in full force, raising the hue and cry of “driving the rascals out” and changing the present administration “for clean, honest and efficient government”. The workers can have nothing to do with this kind of tripe. First, because corruption is inherent in the capitalist system and will not be eliminated until the whole decadent mechanism of this system, in all its ramifications is abolished. In return for their services of keeping the working class in check, the political lackies sometimes extort a greater part of the booty than their masters have set aside for them. The politicians are astounded that their shady deals should be probed in a system where everything is to a greater or lesser degree of the same character. And Assemblyman Steingut correctly speaks up “that such an inquisition is more worthy of Russia than of the U.S.” Only in the workers’ republic they deal more directly with grafters and waste much less time!
Does “good government” improve the lot of the workers, assuming that it is possible? Does it hinder wage cuts or alleviate unemployment? Milwaukee, heralded as a shining example of efficiency in government by the liberals and reformers of the S.P. type is a striking proof to the contrary. No. Aside from saving money for the bosses (in which the workers can have no interest) it is a camouflage issue, raised to distract the attention of the workers from the vital, burning problems of their everyday existence.
 



The salaries of the Federal civil service employees have come under the knife. As part of the general wage cutting drive and the campaign for cheaper government, $12,000,000 has been slashed from the wages of the federal workers at one fell stroke by the U.S. Congress. After weeks of anxious deliberation the legislators summoned up enough courage to put through the wage cut, under the trick name of the “furlough bill.” Like the bonus veterans the civil service workers crowded every space in the chambers and galleries of the senate to watch their trusted representatives apply the axe to their payroll.
They were watching a little show which is the first act of unseating the government employees from their throne of privilege. The strongholds of the labor aristocracy are being broken down with unrelenting consistency. First the skilled workers who managed to escape the ruthless advance of the new machine inventions, were caught in the wage cut drive that was the reward for their docility, class collaborationism, and business union ventures during the period of “prosperity”. And now civil service workers are getting their compensation for their patient service to the capitalist government in the form of slashes in their envelope. The road is being cleared for a unified and homogeneous working class movement that will cut across all the traditional prejudices and strata of the proletariat.
While the current economic crisis means no good for the workers in a material way it is a veritable boon for the capitalist masters. The ruling class not only takes advantage of the huge unemployed army to scale down the standard of living but to put the screws to their henchmen who run the government for them. They want cheaper and more efficient government. The time is over, they say, when they can afford to squander money on their lackeys. The leading imperialist government of the world, with a battle on its hands for markets and colonies and a discontented working class which must be held in check, needs a bureaucracy which will do its work efficiently – on rations. During the last few years preceding the crisis the expenditures and corruption of the federal gov’t ran the treasury into a deficit of several hundreds of millions of dollars. This must be made up somehow. Certainly, the Wall Street magnates do not intend to pay for this out of their own profits. After squeezing the petty bourgeoisie dry in the stock crash they milked what remained of their rapidly vanishing wealth by the imposition of a heavy load of new taxes. But this is not enough. Consequently the white collar slaves came in for a well rounded trimming.
The bill reducing the wages of the government employees is an interesting commentary on the hypocrisy the capitalist lickspittles, of the republican and democratic parties alike, peddle off in the name of philanthropy. The very name of the bill is indisputable proof of this.
It is called the “Furlough Plan”. This means that instead of an outright and brazen wage cut, the federal employees are given a month’s vacation during the year – without pay, of course. It is reasoned, we suppose, that since all the workers, nowadays are on a more or less permanent holiday there is no ground to discriminate against the Washington office workers. The bill is so calculated as to put all those earning slightly more than $1,000 per annum on the five day week with a corresponding reduction of pay, and on enough vacations to bring their salaries down to the one thousand mark. The bill even reaches out to the countryside to hit the rural mail carriers for an 81/3% cut and a one-eighth cut on their allowance for vehicles. This measure will no doubt, do its bit to remove these people from the “idiocy of rural life.” It will help to make this backward section of the working class more class conscious.
Another hypocritical gesture of the bill is the 15 percent reduction made in the huge salary of the vice-president (evidently the value of Curtis’s sleeping performances have declined in the crisis deflation), and the 10 per cent cut in the $10,000 salaries of the congressmen. Who can say our legislators are not self-sacrificing?
The unmistakable identity of the republicans and democrats is shown by their attitude towards the civil service workers. Only the republicans were more “radical” in this instance. The democrats wanted an outright cut in wages while the G.O.P. preferred to camouflage the cut with the “furlough plan”. The republicans were the stronger, so the democrats compromised and helped the former trim the office workers.
 



The Republicans and the Democrats are two sides of one medal. The only difference between them is that the Republicans are in and the Democrats are out. If one understands this, then it is not difficult to grasp the meaning and purpose of the two old parties.
In the final analysis, they are both employed by the same master – Wall Street. But these parties do not say or even do the identical thing. There is a division of labor between them. The fact that they have special and different duties to perform towards their common master, is particularly noticeable during a crisis.
The Republican party holds the reins of government. Consequently all its statements and actions must not only be directed towards maintaining the status quo (the capitalist system) but also to defend the methods employed during their tenure of office, to perpetuate the system. The task that falls to the Democrats, in this election campaign, is a horse of a different color. Problem of Democrats
The pernicious duty of the Democrats springs entirely from present conditions – the economic crisis. Discontent is rife throughout the land. But it is still vague, embryonic and undirected. It is not yet clear to the American masses how to turn or against which enemy their blows should be levelled. The trick of the Democrats is to seize hold of this disgruntlement and to guide it into harmless channels.
The thing to do – and the Democrats make no bones about their little job – is to prevent the masses from seeing things as they actually are. It is not the Capitalist system that is responsible for the unprecedented crisis and the unparalleled misery. The profit system is both perfect and eternal. This is the theory of the Democrats. But the Republican party has misused and abused the “precious” system. And this is the main plank in the Democratic platform. The crisis is due to the Republcans, starvation, wage cuts and evictions, and unemployment – all are due to Republican maladministration. Drive the G.O.P. out, put us in, and everything will be hunky-dory. This sort of tripes is being peddled around by the ton, and no doubt it will have its effect.
The economic catastrophe of today is not the first in American history. They have recurred every few years, as long as the parasitic few, known as “capital”, have held sway over the large majority of exploited wage slaves. And crises have recurred irrespective of which party was in office. We have known “Democratic” crises as well as “Republican”.
The Democrats, with their candidate, Roosevelt, will stand by capitalism to their dying day. But that does not hinder them from selling their demagogic wares in open market. They pose as saviors of the worker and petty bourgeois who are called the “forgotten man”. They will “restore employment, improve present conditions and afford permanent relief to the people”. There is as much truth in this statement as there is in one of Baron Munchhausen’s notorious fables. There is nothing in this program that could accomplish such a miracle. Only the Communists, with their program for the proletarian revolution can solve this knotted problem.
For the unemployed the Democrats have nothing but fake promises and polished words. The shorter working week is promised only as a measure to include government employees. In a previous issue we pointed out the positions of the Democrats on the bill cutting the hours of the civil service employees. But they also gave them a corresponding reduction in wages. And the Democrats want to make this a national program. Morgan is with them. But what about the “forgotten man”? Unemployment Insurance
Unemployment Insurance is slipped into the platform on the sly – but only as a state measure. Roosevelt has been governor of New York State for four years. Where is the unemployment insurance?
Unemployment relief is held out as a big snare for votes. But – the Democratic mayors of New York, Chicago and Detroit have all cut off immediate relief to the unemployed, even though the demand for it becomes more urgent.
The real program of the Democratic lickspittles has already been shown with unmistakable clarity. It is a program of lead. In Democratic Detroit, when the starving demanded relief, Mayor Murphy’s police poured a hail of bullets into their demonstrating ranks, killing four and wounding many others. In Melrose Park, Chicago, Cermak’s Democratic cops trained machine guns on the jobless, murdered one and wounded five.
The program of the Communist League is one of action:

The six hour day, five day week – no reduction in pay.
 
Immediate federal and local relief.
 
Unemployment insurance.
 
Recognition of and credits to Soviet Russia.
 
Vote for Foster and Ford!

This is the program for the workers – the Democrat’s is for the bosses. There can be no mistake in the choice of the proletariat.
 



More than 13,000,000 men pound the pavements of plentiful America, out of work, with no hope of finding employment. Both the conservative Department of Labor and William Green, president of the A.F.L. corroborate these high figures of unemployment. All data published to date point to a daily increase of the jobless army
It is no longer a matter of being jobless for a few weeks. These weeks have turned into months, and the months are rapidly becoming years. The prospects for work are as slight as the greatly reduced wages. The crowds at the factory gates are dwindling into mere handfuls. Even the brazen lies of Henry Ford, of putting thousands back on the job attract far less attention from the unemployed than they did some months ago. The most gullible begin to eye these deceptive statements with suspicion. One finds the curious anomaly in the want ad sections of the newspapers. It is no more the bosses who ask for “help”. Today the workers spend their last dollars in advertisements, begging, pleading, imploring some kindly capitalist to give them employment.
 
Jobless in Extreme Need
Two years ago unemployment meant the loss of a few luxuries. One could manage to exist without a radio and an automobile. But as the crisis continued, the lack of a job forced the worker to make payments on his home, and tens of thousands have gone under the auctioneer’s hammer. Whatever savings the worker possessed have either been used up or have passed into the bankers’ hands in the innumerable bank crashes. For some time, thousands of jobless have been kept afloat by assistance from more fortunate friends and relatives. But this situation is coming to an end, if it is not already concluded. The proletarian friends and relatives have been cast into the workless army. Or, if still working, their wages have been cut so low, that not only is assistance impossible, but they themselves are in dire need of relief of some sort. The picture is changing. The unemployed are ceasing to look for for jobs – they are seeking relief, food and shelter.
The coming winter shows no signs of improvement. More people will be out of work. Death from starvation will threaten every proletarian family. But before the commencement of the winter season, an election campaign will be concluded. Four parties, Republican, Democrat, Socialist and Communist have drawn up platforms and nominated presidential candidates who stand on these platforms. With more than one-fourth of the American working class out of work, there can be no doubt as to the main issue of the campaign. It is unemployment. The acid test for the parties is their stand on this burning question. What have they to offer the jobless in their platforms? What have their actions been in obtaining relief for the unemployed? This article will deal with the record and the stand of the Republican party on this problem.
What have the Republicans done for the jobless? One word can sum up their deeds – nothing. They were elected on the promise of eternal prosperity. One year passed and their prosperity bubble burst.
For almost a year following the stock crash, with industry shutting down and lay-offs rising to the millions, their main occupation was pulling the wool over the eyes of the people. There was no crisis, Hoover said. It was only a temporary fluctuation. Then – when it became impossible to deny what was so obvious, Hoover had another gag. It would all be over in 60 or 90 days. Or if these predictions proved false – then prosperity was around the corner. Like Diogenes who looked in vain for an honest man, the American workers are searching for this corner.
 
Hoover’s Grand Scheme
But even if thousands of workers at the start, might have been inclined to believe in the shams of the “great engineer”, he himself placed no stock in them. He embarked on a “grandiose program” The papers were full of it for days. $500,000,000 was invested in a huge “public works” scheme. Millions of men were to be returned to work. Result – a huge fizzle. And the jobless army kept growing. Wall-Street-Hoover admits today in vetoing the Wagner-Garner “relief bill” that – $300,000,000 will only give jobs to a mere one hundred thousand men.
The next publicity scheme (the only thing the unemployed got out of the Republican administration) was the “stagger system”. The Republican platform says that this scheme of “part time employment – limited unemployment”. It yielded nothing of the kind. Every succeeding month showed an increase in the number of men thrown out of work. What it really did was to cut the standard of wages in half. And you may be sure, the bosses are thankful.
To the Hunger March on Washington that demanded unemployment insurance, Hoover responded with an emphatic No. And to give force to his statement the Capitol was surrounded by the militia armed with all the weapons of modern warfare.
But this wasn’t enough. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation was organized. The purpose of this institution was to hand out a subsidy of over a billion dollars to the banks and the railroads. They were supposed to start the wheels of industry turning with this money. So Hoover said. The bankers and railroad magnates, however, took the money and divided it among themselves, under the high sounding title of “overdue liabilities”.
 
Relief “Un-American”
The Republicans say in their platform that federal relief is un-American; only local relief is permitted. Hardly a month had passed since the platform was adopted and a bill is passed giving federal relief to states in need, to the tune of three hundred million dollars. And this is to be divided among the unemployed and their families who total over forty million people. Even if all the red tape were eliminated it would amount to scarcely ten dollars per person. And this for a whole year!
In a platform of more than twenty thousand words hardly a hundred are devoted to unemployment. To the demand for social insurance, the Republicans give lectures on “rugged American individualism”. To the cry for relief they answer with platitudes about “courage, fortitude and patience”. Starve – but starve quietly! They boast to their masters that there have been “few strikes and social disturbances” under their regime. They will eat these words yet!
Is any more proof necessary? The Republican party remains the most conscious and willing agents of the exploiters of the working class.
We must organize to destroy both the Republicans and the capitalist system which they represent. We must vote Communist as a sign that we understand the first task in our historic mission.
 



If the Republican party confab gave the appearance of a graveyard with a couple of hired noise makers, the democratic convention looks like a veritable madhouse with the inmates acting their natural selves. A casual reading of the proceedings of the convention now in session in Chicago, gives one the impression of a Held day of a lunatic asylum. Fist fights, a jig by the sedate William McAdoo, wild and idiotic cheering at the least, mention of prohibition repeal, chorus girls applauding Jimmy Walker, and professional entertainers to fill in the dull moments, marked the highlights of the political convention of the “democracy.”
The Republican convention insulted the intelligence of the people of these United States by putting up Herbert Hoover as the only nominee and candidate to squeeze some more profits out of the hides of the working class. But the Democrats are no pikers, they give us eight possibilities, all of whom have as much or less in common with the needs of the workers as the “great engineer”.
Smith has the support of the Wall Street magnate, John J. Raskob. Newton D. Baker let go a couple of loose phrases about capitalist “internationalism”, but his able service in sending American workers to the European slaughter house, to coin profits for the Morgan’s Du Ponts, etc., makes him wholly acceptable to the big money bags. Ritchie is wholly innocuous since his only qualification and platform is his dampness. Even Garner won’t be objectionable to the industrialists – he showed his caliber in trimming the petty-bourgeois by a huge levy of taxes foisted upon them. And Roosevelt the most likely nominee, can be counted upon in a pinch to do his bit for his master – in spite of his dishwater liberalism.
But Franklin D. Roosevelt, while he has a majority of delegates behind him, has no path of roses to trod on to reach the nomination. The biggest obstacle that stands in his way is the displeasure that the Wall Street bankers have shown over his liberal demagogy. The Morgans, Fords and Rockefellers are well satisfied with the service rendered by Herbert Hoover. But if it is necessary to have another candidate in the field, for the purpose of deception, they want the most harmless one they can lay hands on. This is not the time to play around
Roosevelt pretends to be the representative of the petty bourgeoisie. Behind him stands the powerful chain of the Hearst papers, that make it a policy to play on the heart strings of the small business man and the small manufacturer. But Tammany Hall stands in his way, because as presidential nominee he will of necessity, have to take drastic measures in his post of Governor of N.Y. against the Tammany crooks, to keep the South and West in line.
The Democratic party in its platform blames the unprecedented economic and social distress on their blood brothers, the Republicans. It recommends, as a remedy “a drastic change in economic and governmental policies.”
The most ignorant person should be able to observe that the tremendous overproduction of wealth and the glut of commodities, on the one hand, and the starvation and unemployment on the other, can be due to nothing else than the system that produces these things. The Democrats are heart and soul for the maintenance of the capitalist system. Their economic existence depends upon it. How then, can anyone hope for a change or a remedy to existent conditions by the election of the “democracy”.
A sop is thrown to the unemployed. Federal relief to the states is a plank, provided “the diminishing resources of the states make it impossible for them to provide for the needy.” Just how much money for relief is not stated. And just when the resources of the states are “diminishing”, makes the whole business smell like another campaign promise that will be violated as soon as the Democrats assume office.
The Republicans have completely ignored unemployment insurance. Therefore, the Democrats, seeing a good vote-catching issue, declare for “unemployment and old-age insurance under state laws.” But the very wording of this plank gives the lie to their “solemn promises”. There are Democratic governors in several states, some of whom are now aspirants for the nomination Has unemployment insurance been introduced in those states? No! Will there be such laws (unless it is given to mean, insurance at the expense of the workers themselves) in the future? Most decidedly, no! Unless, again mass pressure is brought to bear by the working class.
As was to be expected, the main issue for the democrats is the repeal of the 18th Amendment. Raskob says that it is the “only economic issue of any importance in this election campaign”. To a starving populace crying for bread these “representatives of the people” offer beer and alcohol. Where the money will come from to purchase these beverages, with industry prostrate, seems to be a grand mystery. Prohibition is, in reality, nothing more than a soap bubble issue. It will be exploded just as soon as the workers get wise to this smokescreen used, to cover up the burning problems.
This noisy, rambunctious convention can teach the American worker only one thing and one line of action. The capitalist system and all its representatives are rotten and bankrupt. The abolition and destruction of capitalism is their only hope. The piling up of a huge vote for the Communist candidates is their only course in this election.
 



The Socialist party, at the time of this writing, is assembled at Milwaukee to nominate their presidential standard bearers, and to cogitate over the “revolutionary” profundities raised by the “militants” (the would-be Left wing). To the mind of many an S.P. “militant” this is to be a decisive convention – a turning point in the history of the Socialist party. That remains to be seen.
This much however is certain. The pressure of the economic crisis has smoked out a rankling protest against the reactionism of Hillquit, Oneal and Co. The convention was opened by Hillquit. True to type, and reflecting the conditions and moods in the country like a good weathercock, he made a bold keynote address. Capitalism has been shown as a miserably failure. It has collapsed and a new social order must be ushered in to save capitalism from consequent doom.
Brave words. But how is this to be done? Not a word about the vain endeavors of his European brother parties to save dying capitalism from the inevitable fate. Only an intimation that should the socialist party be called upon, they will valiantly perform their “patriotic” duties to help stem the tide of proletarian resentment, where the republican and democratic twins are unable to shine in the signal achievement of deception and perfidy. But this time has not yet arrived. Hillquit can still afford to be the “Marxist” and deliver a withering blast against the advocates of a third party, those who want to fritter away the important services the S.P. may in time render American capitalism, by flirting with the nondescript liberals. This is an underhanded attack at Norman Thomas who is known to have a warm place in his heart for Dewey, Holmes and Co.
But Thomas was not to be outdone as a “revolutionary.” The resolution of the “militants” counter-signed and amended by Thomas, on the Soviet Union, which the New York Times characterizes as “friendly neutrality” is the supposed retort to Hillquit. It tells us that while they don’t endorse all the policies of the Soviet Union, and the proletarian dictatorship peculiar to Russia, and while political prisoners should be released, and civil liberties restored – nevertheless they are emphatic for the defense of Soviet Russia against capitalist intervention. But this dishwasher radicalism had already shocked the convention, and when a resolution appeared on the floor for the forcible confiscation of property, the delegates threw up their hands in horror. Amidst the empty thunders of Norman Thomas – who threatened to decline the presidential nomination – about the applicability of this tactic in Moscow and Leningrad and the havoc and starvation it would wreak in New York and Chicago, the convention voted down this revolutionary pretension to the tune of 166 to 14.
In spite of the new “Left wingism” of the “militants”, they swallowed Thomas whole and nominated him for president midst a rising vote.
At the same time, to show that their “militancy” on organizational questions prevails over clarity of principles they aligned themselves with Thomas to oust Hillquit from the national chairmanship. The convention went into a furor. Accusations of anti-Semitism stirred the peaceful demeanor of the pacifist proponents. Amid all this froth and rage we hear the alternative of the “Left wingers”: Mayor Hoan of Milwaukee! From the frying pan into the fire. Here Hillquit again rises to the occasion and castigates Hoan and Co. for the “modern sewer” socialism which he himself has advocated for years.
It is said that the “deep seated” difference between Thomas and Hillquit is determined by their attitude toward Soviet Russia. After reading the Blanshard resolution on this question we can come to no other conclusion than that it is merely a difference of terminology – six of one and a half a dozen of the other. The real issue, as we see it, between these treacherous leaders of the American social democracy is another one that has been indicated above. Shall the socialist party remain the reformist traducer of the American working class (Hillquit) or shall it become an outright third liberal party of capitalism (Thomas). In this sense the pleadings of Maurer to avoid a split are beside the point at present: there is not yet a strong third party movement afoot. Hillquit is reelected and Thomas is biding his time.
Of course we need a humorous touch. This is provided by the mountebank, Broun, who insists on a wet plank in the party program.
 



KANSAS CITY – A successful mass meeting, with an attendance of 50 workers, was held in Kansas City on December 18, when comrade Arne Swabeck spoke on the Economic Crisis and the Communists. The talk was very well received and aroused a greater interest in the program and work of the Communist League (Opposition). The Stalinists, who are askance at the development of, as they call it, “A Trotskyist Center” in Kansas City, set to work to hinder the meeting. At first they boasted they would send their “big guns” to heckle the speaker but none of them showed up. But several Party rank and file members did attend, despite the intimidation and order by the Stalinist bureaucrats not to attend the meeting. The meeting gave an impetus to the Opposition Open Forum which is soon to begin.
On the following Sunday night a banquet was held. A good time was had by all and a collection was taken up to aid in the work.
The study class in the Fundamentals of Communism is now well under way. The class, conducted by comrade Geo. Clarke, has ten members with good prospects for growth. Those wishing to join should get in touch with George Clarke, care of Buehler’s Bookstore, 220 West 12th Street, Kansas City, Mo.
 



The Socialist party has written in some forty planks into its election program. Its promises run all the way from the abolition of child labor to “planned production and social control”. The Socialist party is the party of gradualness. According to this conception they expect to gain all their demands, excluding the very last one, and then the capitalist system will have been so greatly reformed, that its abolition will be a mere triviality. In this, the Hillquits claim, resides the “realism” of their program as opposed to the ‘”fanaticism” of the Communists. But the very “realistic” German social democracy, the blood relations of the party of Thomas, Oneal and Lee have pursued their realistic program to the very end. And where has it led them? Into the camp of the road makers for Hitler’s brown shirted hordes.
 
The S.P. Program
The Socialist party has a “bold” program on unemployment. They advocate social insurance, the six hour day – five day week, as measures to relieve the suffering of the jobless. And they say further that the curse of unemployment is due to the capitalist system and will not be eradicated until the system itself is done away with. The economic crisis works wonders on the physiognomy of political parties. It gives the democratic party marks of resemblance to the socialist party, and makes the socialist party look somewhat like the Communists. But this is more apparent than real. All these parties have their specific place and specific function. The Communist party is the party of the working class, of the proletarian revolution. The socialist party is the third capitalist party which the bosses call upon when their old standbys have proven unequal to the task. This is easily proven, not by the radical-sounding words in their platform – the treacherous leader’s of the S.P. are past masters at this trade – but by their deeds which always hurl the lie right back into their very glib mouths.
How are the unemployed to attain social insurance, and the shorter work week, according to the S.P.? By struggle? By mass action to force the capitalist class to grant them these burning necessities? No, heavens no! That’s a Bolshevik method, and we Americans disdain to use imported Russian tactics. We stand by the constitution of the U.S., vote for us, and you, the workers, will get everything that your heart desires. Thus the Socialist party throughout its history – in place of action, the holy paper of the ballot box. This, in itself, constitutes outright treason to the working class. It is a trick to lull the workers into satisfied slumber all year round and to rely solely upon the franchise on election day.
When, in the history of the labor movement in this or any country, has the capitalist class granted the workers one single thing except where they have been forced into it by mass pressure? The ballot box did not get even one iota of consideration. Why, the very right to vote for the expropriated masses was achieved through the force of working class power. The eight hour day was not attained by voting one party in and another out. The struggles that finally secured the eight hour day for the American workers (one of the brightest pages in U.S. labor history) constitute the greatest denial of this fake teaching.
 
Meaning of Ballot Box
The capitalist class well understands the significance of the ballot box. Votes are a clue to the strength of a party, but they do not indicate that the voters are anything else but a discontented, passive mass. It is strikes, demonstrations and huge movements that make the capitalist class sit up and take notice. The S.P. fears to embark upon this course. Thus, as an avowed party of reform, it can never gain any reforms at all.
But, if one wants further proof as to the real meaning of the promise of the S.P. for unemployment insurance and relief, he has only to look to Europe. There the Socialist parties have already had the honor to serve the bourgeoisie, in governmental capacity.
In Great Britain the last act of the late “labor” government is indicative of this fact. Faced by a growing deficit in the budget, the McDonald-Henderson cabinet decided to save the capitalists from bankruptcy. How? By eliminating the allowance to the parasitic royal family? Oh, no! The Labour party leaders are the ’umble servants of his Majesty George V. No, their method was to place this burden on the shoulder of the proletariat, by cutting their already paltry dole.
We have even a more glaring instance in Germany. There the criminal leaders of the German S.D., on pretext that Bruening was preventing the advent of Fascism slashed the unemployment insurance several times, in the notorious emergency decrees. Thomas is shouting aloud about Fascism being prepared for America today. This is laughable. But the workers can rest assured that when Fascism actually threatens, he will bow his knee before the American Bruening.
But the Socialist party says that capitalism is the cause of unemployment. They propose the abolition of the system – by the ballot box. No forcible confiscation of property – they promise to the fearful petty bourgeoisie. When will they “abolish” the capitalist system?!
Only when they get a parliamentary majority. The nearest the S.P. will get to this “revolutionary” act is to hold the reins of government for the bosses. Today they are already in the saddle in the city of Milwaukee. The same evictions and police terror against the unemployed reigns in Milwaukee as in any city controlled by the Democratic and the Republican parties. This is a signpost for the future. If the Republican and Democratic parties are outspoken representatives of Wall St., the Socialist party is its concealed, demagogic, radical-tongued servitor. And as such it is all the more dangerous to the working class in its struggle for emancipation. A vote for the Communist party is an indication that you are aware of the heinous role of the S.P.
 



SPRINGFIELD, ILL. – The coal diggers of Illinois are fighting a great battle. It is a battle against many foes, which promises no easy victory. Yet every day is rich in lessons for every miner that wants to learn. Let us take an accounting of our enemies, why they are arrayed against us and why we fight them to the finish.

There are the coal operators who would reduce our living conditions to the starvation level.
 
There are Lewis-Walker and henchmen who steal ballots and club and shoot miners who protest against their corruption and fakery. Their only service to the miners has been a Judas kiss.
 
And then there are the courts, the prisons, the armed deputies, the state troopers and the militia.

There can be no doubt about the real character of the Peabodys and their flunkies, Lewis and Walker. With them there can be no peace. But the troopers, the militia, the deputies – isn’t their duty merely the prevention of speeding on the highways, apprehending thieves, and helping old ladles across the streets?
When we were children we believed in Santa Claus. Before the strike many of us entertained equally ridiculous notions about the troopers and the militia, even though we were quite mature individuals. Then came the march on Franklin County. All we wanted to do was to help our brothers down south maintain the $6.10 wage scale. What did we get? Bullets clubs and machine guns – from troopers and deputies. In Taylorville the militia breaks up miners’ meetings with tear gas bombs.
It is clear now that Lewis and Walker are not the only agency of the coal barons. The whole governmental machinery is brought into action against the workers at the mere crook of the capitalists’ finger. It is a state with its officials, thugs, police, deputies and militia whose purpose it is to insure the rule of the parasitic, exploiting few over the overwhelming majority of the people – the working masses. Can the worker place any confidence in these lickspittles decorated with the badge of authority, and can he hope to win his fight against worsening conditions by merely a union battle? He cannot. He must transform the union struggle into a political struggle; the scrap against wage reduction into the great battle for the overthrow of the capitalist system.
 
The Capitalist Demagogues
This is an election year and the air is thick with the glib phrases and promises of the demagogues of the Republican and the Democratic parties. They want votes and they will promise anything to get them. But actions speak louder than words. And the actions of the Republicans and the Democrats stamp them as lieutenants of the capitalist class in the body politic, just as Green, Lewis, Walker and Co., are the bosses’ lieutenants in the trade unions. Look at their records.
Hoover gives billions of dollars out of the government coffers to the railroads and the banks, while the millions of unemployed starve to death. He promises prosperity, talks patriotism and drives the hungry veterans from Washington with a tear-gas bonus. Emmerson, the Hoover of Illinois, unleashes his brutal deputies, militia and troopers for a savage attack upon defenseless men, women and children thinking that thereby he will drive the miners back into the pits of poverty.
And the Democrats are their twin brothers. They can afford to howl at the Republicans – it is good politics. But their campaign funds come from the same capitalist sources – the Hearsts, the Youngs, the Raskobs, etc. The notorious Samuel Insull is known to have contributed to the funds of both old parties. Governor Roosevelt talks of unemployment insurance but the nearest the New York worker has come to this insurance is a two mile long breadline. Democratic mayors of Detroit and Chicago have sent police to murder workers demanding bread and relief. And in Franklin County the democratic sheriff swears in deputies to assist the Republican troops in their savage assault upon tie miners. And Judge Horner is silent. Like Emmerson he must serve his class which is in bitter and mortal hostility to the miners. It is the class that revels in luxury while the workers have nothing to eat. Both these parties have nothing in common with the miners, their strike, their union. They stand on the side of Peabody and the parasitic ruling class.
Now there is a third party – the socialist party. It claims to stand for the workers and a workers’ government – socialism. Let us apply the acid test of deeds to this party as we have to the others. The National Executive Committee has decided in Chicago “not to interfere in the internal struggle in the miners union between the rank and file and their official” (Lewis and Walker). What does this mean? It means giving undercover support to the fakers by not condemning them openly and officially. It casts the shadow of doubt into the minds of the rest of the working class as to the guilt and perfidy of these misleaders. The S.P. harbors within its ranks such outspoken supporters of Lewis, Walker, and the wage cut as John Hindmarsh, Adolph Germer, Richard Glover, etc. And this party says it stands for the workers!
 
The Socialist Progam
It declares for a workers’ government – Socialism. By what methods does it expect to take over the mines and the factories and the mills for the workers? By the ballot box – “peacefully”. You miners that marched down to Franklin County try to picture this ... The capitalist class that uses machine guns against you to prevent you from getting a dollar more per day, is going to hand over their billion dollar industries to the workers because they cast more paper ballots! Can we believe these people who, like Lewis, have sold out more than once throughout the world.
In 1914 the socialist leaders drove the workers into the world slaughter for the profits of the bankers and the munition makers. In 1918 the German socialist leaders invested with the support of the majority of the working class did not establish a workers’ government but turned the reins of power back to the capitalists and murdered thousands of German workers for protesting. (Like Lewis and Walker who settle for a wage cut after the miners have already voted it down). In 1926 the British socialist leaders of the Labor party betrayed the general strike of many millions of workers and then knifed the miners’ strike of several hundred thousands. Need more evidence be produced to show the deceptive character of the socialist party which steers the workers straight back into the capitalist morass after promising to lead them into socialism? It is the third capitalist party.
There is but one party which represents the workers – the Communist party. The Left Opposition (Communist League of America) calls upon the miners to vote for its candidates – Foster and Ford – in this presidential election.
Communism, which we will achieve through our mass strength and the dictatorship of the proletariat is the only fundamental way out of this crisis of capitalism for the miners as well as the rest of the working class. Soviet Russia has shown the remarkable achievements possible in a land where the workers rule.
The Communists make no bones about ballots. We think nothing can be obtained by ballots except a gauge as to how many workers are ready to go down the line for the abolition of capitalism.
 
Vote Communist
The Left Opposition is aware of the blunders of the official party – Stalinism – in the miners’ struggle as well as elsewhere. It takes no responsibility for them. It realizes and has pointed out the foolish policy of isolation followed by the Communist party. It has condemned the indiscriminate name-calling, the lies and the slanders hurled against the militants of the new union by the Stalinists. The Left Opposition states to the miners that such tactics are not the tactics of genuine Communism.
The force that represents Communism in the coal fields is the Left Opposition – in the election campaign the candidates upholding the Communist banner are Foster and Ford and the party is the Communist party. The Communist League of America calls upon the miners to support the Communist candidates against the candidates of the three old parties!
 



Except for the Fascist bloodhounds, who glory is the extermination of the militant proletariat, acclaim for the unbounded heroism of the Austrian social democracy has been universal. A casual reader of the newspapers is led to believe that die-hard conservatives have made common cause with revolutionaries in tribute to the immortal Austrian working class. Many have ho doubt been confused by the sympathetic treatment accorded to the Austrian workers by American capitalist journals. That society is no more than skin-deep this “united front” of extremes in will soon be proved.
It is out of no sympathy with the working class that the brass check press bemoans its bitter fate in Austria. Not many days prior to the Austrian bloodfest when the friction of social convulsion had burst into a menacing flame in France these self-same newspapers thanked their lucky stars that France had been “saved” from the “riotous Commune, dominated by the mob.”
 
The Capitalist Press
The capitalist press was the civilian field marshall and recruiting sergeant for the imperialist mass murder of fifteen years ago. They revelled in the sadistic White Terror of the post-war years.
The Wrangels and the Kolchaks were proclaimed heroes in their filthy pages.
Indeed wherever the proletariat has striven to power, wherever it has challenged the rights of private property it has found the jackal press barking denunciation at the enemies of “law and order”.
Austria is no exception.
The Austrian workers were not fighting an offensive battle. They were defending their institutions and organizations. While we have nothing but praise for this superb fight against the Fascist monster yet it must be said that both the party and the institutions defended by these workers had become a brake on their revolutionary struggle for socialism. It is only because the capitalist press appreciates the services of Austro-Marxism in maintaining bourgeois civilization that they now reproach Dollfuss. (Yesterday he was hailed as a “modern David”) The New York Times makes no bones as to its motives. Shepherd Stone says in a feature article on February 18th.
 
Bourgeois Praise of Austro-Marxism
“When the Hapsburg monarchy collapsed in 1918 and Austria became the ball instead of the bat in the European game, Socialists and Christian Socialists (the bourgeois Catholics) cooperated to salvage the rains of the Empire. The despised Marxists who barricaded themselves in their tenement houses last week saved Austria from Communism in 1919. At that time propagandists from Moscow and from Budapest, which was temporarily under Communist rule, preached the new faith in the streets of Vienna. But the activities of the Socialist leaders prevented a bloody conflict between proletariat and bourgeoisie. Last week some of the men who had rescued the country from Communism were dying because of their Marxism (sic!).”
Need we explain further that the destruction of Austro-Marxism meant the loss of a steadfast ally to the democratic and liberal capitalist class in Europe and America. Under the cloak of democracy and in the guise of a gradual peaceful evolution from Capitalism to socialism the Bauers, the Adlers, and the Renners stayed the tide of the proletarian revolution long enough for the Heimwehr to thrust it far out of danger.
 
Vienna the Symbol
“Red Vienna” was the symbol for Austro-Marxism. It was hailed by its supporters as living proof that it was possible to attain a great maximum of socialism without violence, without depriving the capitalist class of its wealth or privileges – without acting as Communists. They built apartment houses which the Times says “became models for city planners throughout the world. Rents were astonishingly low, and it was only natural that these blocks should become strongholds of socialism.”
And further:
“Under Socialist rule in Vienna utilities were taken over and in general income from taxation was employed for public improvements and social welfare. Socialist legislation provided for the citizen from a few months before his birth until bis burial. Health, housing, wages, unemployment dole, all came within the scope of municipal government.”
 
Reformist Utopia
Thus the utopia of reform socialism reached its pinnacle in Vienna and here too it ended in a horrible debacle. The achilles heel of the Austrian workers was the lack of state power. The treachery of its leadership lay in their harnessing the struggle for state power when the time was ripe and the proletariat ready. Between the Commune which lasted but two months, and “Red Vienna”, the socialist millennium there was this difference: state power. That is all the difference in the world. The capitalist press is thankful to Bauer and Co., because they did not follow the sure road of the proletarian revolution.
How clear is the difference in tactics and results between Communism and social democracy! The bombarded tenement houses in Vienna stand as demonstration of the futility of trying to reform capitalism out of existence. The thousands of proletarian corpses are dumb witnesses to the fact that the gradualism of the Vienna lackeys meant the gradual arming of the counter-revolution and the not-so-gradual annihilation of the flower of the working class.
“Red Vienna” is now red only in worker’s blood. The pride of “international” socialism has become its everlasting shame!
 



Death has taken a heavy toll among the fighters for revolutionary internationalism in our growing outpost in Kansas City. The grim reaper has swept from the scene of battle without regard to age and service two of our staunchest warriors in that plucky band in the Middle West. Cora Duff – a symbol of the new generation that will hold high our banner – and Shorty Buehler – the steadfast old-guard devoted to our ideas and sacrificing in service – have been snatched from our midst, creating a chasm that will not easy or soon be filled. We salute them as they pass from the struggle and promise to carry on.
We cannot but pause a while to grieve for them, so true were they to our ideals, so dear to us as comrades.
August A. Buehler, better known to us as “Shorty” for his diminutive size, was a landmark for the revolutionary movement in the Middle West. For almost twenty-five years there has been no “Jimmie Higgins” east or west of Kansas City who carried on his work so splendidly and unstintingly as Shorty.
 
A Revolutionist Since 1913
Shorty joined the revolutionary movement during a “free speech” fight in Kansas City in 1913. From that time until his death the untiring efforts of Shorty have contributed heavily to the propagation and perpetuation of the ideas of Marxism in that Mid-Western American city.
Shorty was one of the active spirits in one of the first post-war left wing groups that helped lift the socialist movement out of the bog of reaction and which gathered around the Workers World, edited by Comrade James P. Cannon and the Workers Educational League which spread the message of the Russian revolution and Lenin to the workers of the Mid-West.
Together with others Shorty helped to swing the entire Kansas City branch of the Socialist Party over into the Communist Labor Party. From that time up till 1928, when he was expelled from the Communist Party for holding true to the ideas which had motivated his life-struggle, Shorty was an inspiring persevering member of the Communist Party. Moving Spirit of Kansas City Branch
It is to comrade Buehler more than any other single comrade that we owe our rapidly growing branch of the Communist League in Kansas City. Arranging meetings, distributing leaflets, visiting contacts, soliciting subs for the Militant – no task was too menial, or too big for Shorty.
Sometime in 1927 Shorty opened his bookstore in Kansas City as a means of earning a livelihood. Buehler’s book store was an oasis for revolutionists in the years when reaction and Stalinist persecution and slander held sway. Buehler’s Book Store was not only a place to purchase Marxian literature, it was a bee hive of revolutionary discussion and congregation. More than one young recruit received his first lesson in Communism in the Bookstore on West 12th Street.
The sudden, shocking death of Shorty Buehler is an irreparable loss to the Communist League and the revolutionary movement. The star of Buehler will take its place in the firmament of proletarian fighters, among the immortal Jimmie Higgins’ without whom the cause of Communism, the advance of the proletarian revolution would be impossible.
 
“Don’t Mourn But Organize”
With these inspiring words from a poem by Joe Hill, I.W.W. songster, Comrade Buehler concluded his letter to the writer on the death of Cora Duff who passed away but two short weeks before him.
Cora died young. Her life in the revolutionary movement was all too brief. But in the short space of time that was allotted her she earned a monument for her courage energy and devotion. It was under her guidance and leadership that the Young Spartacus Club of Kansas City was formed and took on flesh and blood as the only Communist youth movement in Kansas City.
The names of those women who have come to the fore as outstanding advocates of the cause of the working class are few. We must agree with Shorty who stated in his last letter that Comrade Duff had the stuff out of which leaders are made. Pretension, artificiality, petty-bourgeois caprices were all alien to her. For earnesty and sincerity Cora Duff took first place. She possessed that proletarian intelligence and insight, undeveloped though it was, which is so uncommon among the men and women in the ranks of labor’s vanguard.
Comrade Duff’s death has robbed us of another of our valiant soldiers in our young army. We salute her even as Shorty did and pass on to the order of the day.
“Don’t Mourn But Organize.”
 







(Ed. Note: This is the first of a series of articles devoted to a study and exposure of the budding fascist movement known as the Silver Shirts of America.)




There is a Fascist movement in America. It is small. It is inconspicuous. It lacks popular protagonists. It has no spokesmen in the accredited capitalist press. It is unknown to most American workers. It does not possess state power and is not represented in any governmental office. BUT IT IS GROWING AND IT DISPOSES OF FINANCES, FREELY GIVEN FROM SOME UNDIVULGED SOURCE.
 
Fascism in the U.S.
To our knowledge, the outstanding Fascist organization in the United States is the Silver Shirts of America with headquarters at Ashville, North Carolina. The literature and form of organization of this outfit, the men in the leadership and the people in back of it, give us the impression that the Silver Shirts are no fly-by-night gathering like the late but unlamented Khaki Shirts of Philadelphia. If not handled in time, and handled properly, they may become a gruesome menace to the labor and revolutionary movement, to the working class fortresses yet to come.
American Fascism, in the guise of the Silver Shirts, has borrowed its stock-in-trade of propaganda, vituperation, sulphur-and-brimstone damnation from the Fascism that goose-steps on German streets in Brown Shirts. Its creed is not a new one; rabidly anti-semitic, arch-reactionary Communist baiters, violently nationalistic, they have been aptly termed “hill-billy Hitlerites.”
The Silver Shirts claim to be a national organization. In Liberation, their weekly organ they publish an organization chart which divides the country into “nine incorporated units” and claim, pretend or boast to have tens of thousands of members. Liberation is a twelve page magazine printed on expensive paper. Beneath the masthead of the magazine is the ostentatious statement, printed in large type, “Edited by William Dudley Pelley.”
 
“The Chief”
Hitler is known as der Fuehrer, Mussolini as Il Duce and our own William Dudley Pelley ... the “Chief” The chief, who is the organizer, inspirer and leader, who is endowed, according to his own admission, with magical, psychical powers to communicate with the dead and the “beyond” by means of “clairvoyance” and “clairaudience”, came to his present pre-eminence by a peculiar yet quite logical road.
Up till May 1928, Pelley tells us, he was a “newspaperman”, which is only a more euphemistic name for the paid agents of the kept press. In that year and month in the state of California – take note of the state – he made two discoveries which he makes known to us in the December 1930-March 1931 number of his magazine the New Liberator, the forerunner of Liberation, and incidentally published by the same institution.
 
Truly “Miraculous”
Under the headline, “The Dead are Alive and Organized”, he recounts his “miraculous” discoveries:
“First, I have become convinced by my own investigations and experiences that there is no such thing as Death – that life once created cannot die to extinction, that there is one continuous stream of consciousness using many lives for expression, of which physical bodies in a mortal world are the lowest and clumsiest.
“Second, I have become convinced through the training of my psychical faculties, confirmed by messages received by other psychical persons and steadfastly proven by current events, that the outstanding master-brains of the ages – the leaders in religion, statecraft, science and art who have ennobled human society by living in it – have not ceased contact with this earthly sphere ... More than this, they have banded themselves together in a vast sublime Lodge of Supernatural Wisdom for a concrete and benevolent earthly purpose. Under the dynamic generalship of Christ, they are contributing their massed intelligence toward the early establishment of an entirely new social order, that shall permanently abolish Ignorance, Depression, Poverty and War.” (Pelley’s emphasis).
 
A New Pope
As can be seen from this superstitious clap-trap, refurbished from the childish idiocy of the dark ages, Mr. Pelley was no ordinary sky-pilot. At one blow Pelley became a pope in his own rights, the direct agent of God and the intermediary
between the world of the “light” and the “shade”. He lectured to nice gullible Christian ladies and gentlemen on the results of the clairvoyant and clairaudient communications, undoubtedly thrilling them to their toe nails, hoodwinking them out of all rationality and providing them with a convenient escape from the harsh realities of life. Possibly Pelley also received returns which were ... not so spiritual.
We have every reason to believe that the Chief-to-be was likewise the master of ceremonies in the great sucker game known as seances. Dozens of mimeographed bulletins, called “readings”, packed with this psychical hocus-pocus, were manufactured by Pelley and his associates and retailed at twenty-five cents a throw. The New Liberator is jammed from cover to cover with this metaphysical buncombe.
It seems that somewhere in the year 1932 Mr. Pelley had a new “revelation” in one of his not uncommon trances – to change his field of operations to the social world. Whether this was caused by a falling off of receipts in the old racket, a lust for power at any price, or possibly a sincere belief, after the manner of General Goering, who spent about one year in the Stockholm insane asylum as a dope addict, is not easy to say ...
It is not illogical that an American Fascist movement should be started by a religious freak, a spiritualist crank. Pelley says he heard the “word” in California, a state which is known for its Aimee McPhersons, Holy-Rollers, Yogi men and a hundred other kinds and descriptions of religious nuts who are patronized by degenerated middle class elements, retired farmers of Kansas and Iowa, etc., etc. Not only California. Billy Sunday claims to have made 65,492 converts and collected (ahem!) $120,000 in cosmopolitan New York alone in 1917. Just think of the fortune he made in the provinces, the backwoods and the hinterland.
But the Silver Shirts were started in the post-depression year, 1932, and a social platform was needed, so the Fascist jargon was taken lock, stock and barrel from the German Minister of Enlightenment. The Jews, Jewish bankers, Jewish Communists, Jewish journalists, etc., ad nauseam are responsible for all the ailments of society from the time of Adam, and especially at the present time. Unless this pest is wiped out root and branch the world will go to the dogs. We will deal with this “philosophy” in all its ramifications in the next article. For the present let us see what happened to Mr. Pelley’s spiritualism.
 
The Psychic Transformed
The transformation was: Mr. Pelley, the Psychic became Mr. Pelley, the Fascist ... “Chief”. Psychicism became the underlying philosophy, just as Aryanism and Teuton Gods are for Hitler and his Hitlerites. It serves a very useful purpose for ... the Chief. One page or more of every issue of Liberation is devoted to this psychic-seance-medium buncombe. We wish we had space to reprint some of these revelations, for they are indeed, revelations of the depths to which man’s ignorance can sink, in this late day and age, to say nothing of their unconscious humor. Above each of these “revelations” appears this gem which should give some indication of its content:
“Out of the vastness of Cosmos the Psychic Antennae tune in on a Voice. If the Word was made flesh and spoke once to men, how much stronger may be its pronouncements when the handicaps of the flesh are perished? If we cannot believe this to Whom or What shall we look for authority of commitments like the following? ...”
 
Omnipotent, Infallible
The Fascist movement needs the myth of the impeccability of its leader, the unassailability of his ideas, the unquestioning of his instructions (leaving aside terror for the moment). Pelley has or is trying to attain this end through his psychism, which gives him the power to prophecy, through his communion with the dead, and therefore to give the right instructions at the right time. Thus, for instance, in an editorial called “A Caution to the Restless ...” (Liberation, Vol. V No. 20) which is a warning to the impatient Silver Shirts who want to go into action against Jews, bankers and Communists immediately, he makes the solemn statement:
“But no matter how this declaration is interpreted, from either foe or supporter, there is a Higher Import, a Deeper Voice that has faithfully in the past instructed the Chief just when, and where, and how to move. He has learned to trust that Voice and act upon it, and when he has so acted in the past he has committed few blunders. But when he has allowed himself to be swept out of step with the Infinite, so to speak, he has had to retrace his steps at great cost and sacrifice to the whole great Silver movement.”
 
“The Higher Import”
“The Chief” admits, for the present, that others may learn to feel this “Higher Import” and hear this “Deeper Voice”. But he reserves to himself the right to judge whether the new prophet has heard correctly or has been adviced by a false spirit. That’s as far as the game has gone up till now – it needs a little “democracy”. If and when this movement of ignorance and superstition attains some power and influence, then heaven help any Silver Shirt that dares challenge the inspired orders of the Chief.
* * * *
Who backs the Silver Shirts, where do they get finances? The inscription on the back side of Liberation says that the Silver Shirts of America are the active civic organization of the League for Liberation and that both Liberation and the Galahad Press, Incorporated, which publishes the magazine, are subsidiaries of the Foundation for Christian Economics, Incorporated. It should be quite obvious that these are only dummy corporations shielding some big financier or industrialist. In more than one issue of the modern alchemists’ Silver sheet “The Chief” talks of prominent men in the business and lay world who consort with him and tell him state secrets but who dare not reveal their names for fear of retaliation intimidation and blackmail from the “Jewish Press” and the “Jewish bankers”.
 
Pelley Praises Ford
The March 1931 issue of The New Liberator has high praise for Henry Ford who, according to Pelley, “is doing, without maudlin sentiment, ... the highest type of constructive spirituality deploying throughout society by way of mass production industry”. And further, “If every employer in America, England and Germany adopted the Ford principles this afternoon, and remained there, the world’s economic depression would be ended tomorrow morning to stay ended.”
It is well know that Henry Ford is a vicious anti-Semite and a no less vicious hater of organized labor ...
Time, events will bring the real backers of this mystical, incipient but barbarian Fascist movement to the fore. Yes, and possibly more ...
 



Moving forward with seven league boots the walk-out of the New York hotel and restaurant workers continues to tie-up hotels and restaurants every day, chalking up fourteen new establishments in the last forty eight hours.
Outstanding among these paralyzed fortresses of the open shop are the Commodore, Longchamps, 79th St., the fourth of this chain to be struck, the Marguery, the Olcott and others. The complete list is published in another column
The work of the picketing committees before the major hotels and restaurants goes on unabated and with remarkable militancy. Supplementing the activity of the individual pickets are the indomitable committees from whose action no scab hotel is immune. So effective is their work that the thugs in blue uniform are beginning to interfere with the pickets. One picket was arrested at the Waldorf and an other at the Great Northern on complaints of scab agents charging "Intimidation". Both are out on bail.
Meanwhile the hotel bosses are becoming desperate at the crippling power of the strike. At the Longchamps, the management offered the strikers $150 to return to work. Gus Felder and Louis Esposito, strikers, went to the management to protest. They were thrown out by gangsters and when they hit the sidewalk fifteen thugs assailed the two strikers, beating one of them so badly that he required medical attention. A couple of the bruisers were also hurt. On charges by the picketers, two of the plug-uglies were apprehended for assault.
Reports reach the union headquarters with increasing frequency that the scabs are unable to fill the bill although they are paid from seven to twelve dollars per day. Twenty three scabs were fired from the Warwick Hotel for incompetency and the chef threatened to quit if do-nothings—meaning strike-breakers—were the only help that could be obtained.
Dozens of telegrams of the following order have been sent to strikers in an attempt to stampede them back to work:
SORRY I WAS NOT PRESENT WHEN STRIKERS DELEGATION APPEARED STOP I AM SURE YOU ARE NOT IN SYMPATHY WITH THIS MOVEMENT
signed THE “MANAGEMENT”
Organizer Kaldis read these telegrams at meetings. The speakers shouted their indignation. Another obstacle they would clear out of the way.
Despite the lies of the kept press the bosses are searching high and low for skilled workers to scab on the thousands now in revolt against intolerable conditions. We have it on reliable information that the City Hotel’s Men’s Association were in session all Saturday, Sunday and Monday late into the night discussing the problem of the shortage of trained cooks and waiters and consulting with railroad men, obviously on plans for herding scabs into New York from other cities.
Protesting the hiring of strikebreakers as a menace to public health the Amalgamated has issued the following statement to the Commissioner of Health, dated January 28th:
Dear Sir:
The public health of this city is endangered through the action of the hotels and restaurants on strike in hiring strike-breakers without health cards. The danger is that hotels in general have in their keeping the health cards of the strikers as, for example, the Waldorf-Astoria and the Savarin Restaurants. For the protection of the public health we take it upon ourselves to inform you of this dangerous situation.



 


Very Respectfully yours,
Amalgamated Hotel and Restaurant Workers Union




N.B. Health cards are being fraudulently passed to the strikebreakers.




 


JULES CHASTONAY
Kitchen Organizer



 




Pelley’s Silver Shirts

Red Baiting and Jew Baiting
 







(Ed. Note – This is the second of a series of articles devoted to a study and exposure of the budding Fascist movement known as the Silver Shirts of America.)




It was a popular impression before the Nazis hoisted themselves into the saddle of power that Adolph Hitler was a clown and his supporters a bunch of “nuts”. It was said that he had no program, that the storm-troops were riff-raff, bitter at the world and eager for blood and revenge. There was more than a grain of truth in this belief. Yet there was method in Hitler’s madness – and a terrible appeal. Witness the million-headed Fascist monster that rules Germany today.
The secret of Hitler’s success with his followers, in part, rested in his ability to invoke real or imaginary foes who were blamed for the grief and worries of society, to promise their heads to crazed, embittered people. Threat and condemnation – this is the Fascist credo. The positive program is a mystery or at best vague promises.
Pelley’s Silver Shirts are founded upon a striking emulation of their German prototypes. On one of the pages of their rag, Liberation, (this is a peculiar way of saying, slavery) all of the so-called panaceas “for saving America” are decried – taboo. These include the lightening of the farmers’ taxes, the abolition of the presidential electoral college, the repeal of prohibition, the elimination of usury, government ownership of public utilities and ... The abolition of the system of production for profit! No! These are only delusions, says the Liberation scribbler, “And those who do not think deeply are led into the pathways of delusive Socialism, if they belong to the ‘intelligentsia’, and into the clutches of anarchistic Communism if they belong to the so-called proletariat.”
Well, then, asks the sane worker, what is wrong with the system we live in?
The answer, recounted below, is quite worthy of the lowliest intellect in Mattawan:
“A foreign virus has been instilled into the body of the nation. Within the flesh of the citizenry crawls the viper of materialism ...
“It is no peculiar fact that the Jews and Jewishness are noted for materialism. Nor is it strange that this gigantic fact should resolve itself into national factors with the Jews at the root and at the bottom of every major corruption and debauchery of our Christian nation and Constitutional form of government!”
In Germany the Jews were accused of having sold the nation’s birthright to the Allies. In America the “Depression ... was the result of a vast JEWISH banker’s conspiracy.” How true to type! The ostensible cause, claimed by the German Hitlerites, for the sweeping ruin of the middle strata of the population was the treaty of Versailles perpetrated by the Jews, and the “foreign yoke” maintained by the Jews. In the United States, according to the Hilly-Billy Hitlerites, 1929 was the Jewish Deluge for the “Gentile” petty bourgeoisie, which is perpetuated by the “Washington Jewish Oligarchy.” This is the ancient scape-goat trotted out and spat upon in order to detract attention from the real burning issue – capitalism.
Bluntly stated, here is what the Jew-scalping “Chief” considers the Insidious plan of the “traducers (Jews) of this Christian form of government.”
 
The Jewish Plot à la Pelley
“We need more Hebrews in the United States to perfect our plans and strategies for the utter despotism of Protocolism over your detested free institutions. So whether you like it or not we are going to bring them in. We will distribute them far and wide over your American nation. We shall see that they are set up as shopkeepers in cities and towns all over the country, entering into competition with your Gentile shopkeepers who are on the verge of bankruptcy through what we have done to your economic and financial system already, plus our pet NRA scheme for making it costlier for you to do business at all. We will also use them, as they demonstrate individual smartness, to worm and weasel into all your fraternal and social organizations and keep bulldog watch over their activities, to see that nothing starts within them for checkmating our international racial program.”
The battle cry for the doomed middle class: Exterminate the Jews and there will be more jobs, professions and business for You!
Great pains are taken to prove that the government is dominated by Jews, that the Federal Reserve and the Treasury is under the thumb of the “Judan swarm”. Notice all the variety of Jews on the inside track in Washington:
“It has gotten to the point that Jews and husbands of Jews, semi-Jews and wives of Jews, Gentile fronts for Jews, statistical Jews, financial Jews, analytical Jews, budget Jews, brain-trust Jews, politics Jews, diplomatic Jews, immigration Jews, Congressional Jews, patronage Jews, mortgage Jews, assessor Jews, foreign conference Jews, war debt Jews, radio Jews, motion picture Jews, sugar Jews, clothing Jews, packing-industry Jews, railroad Jews, publicity Jews, Cuban Jews, League of Nations Jews, Colonel-House-brand of Jews, Barney-Baruch Gentile Jews, Washington editor Jews, government clerk Jews, are swarming all over the place ...”
Hosannas are sung for Hitler’s persecution of Jews and Communists; epithets are heaped on those who protest the savage deeds in Berlin ... This story is drummed on the ears of the ignorant, bigoted Silver Shirt, – whose brain action must become paralyzed after reading several copies of Liberation – until he thinks that his salvation on heaven and earth, materialistically and spiritually, rests with Pelley’s anti-Semitism.
* * * *
“The issue is sharp – how much longer are we going to permit Baruchism (Barnard M. Baruch, the agent of Russian Communism in America according to the feverish brain of the “Chief”) to direct the foreign policy of these Christian and Gentile United States of America? Must we wait for the Red Flag to fly over the White House, and hundreds of our people to be shot down by the American-Jewish Chekka in the streets of Cleveland, Detroit, and Chicago, before we will awaken and arise to a man, smash Jewish Communism in this land of Patrick Henry as Mussolini smashed it in Italy, as Hitler smashed it in Germany?”
As on the European continent, and wherever Fascism has reared its ugly head, it likewise reveals its raison d’etre – anti-working class, destroy the revolutionary and labor movement to perpetuate the existence of the cadaver, capitalism. It is highly significant that in all the fuming and raging about Jewish bankers, moneylenders, the writer has not found a single word in the dozens of Silver Shirt magazines he has labored through, aimed at the industrialists, the factory owners, the exploiters, the slave-drivers in the mine and the mill. Naturally, the banker (for whom we nave no sympathy whatsoever, and who will be eliminated not by Pelley but by the Communist movement), and especially the Jewish banker is a good mark for the chief. He is thereby committed to nothing definite. He can wriggle out any time his masters clamp down, whining “I mean the Jewish bankers, not a good Gentile firm like J.P. Morgan but his competitors Kuhn, Loeb and Co.”
 
The Choicest Invective
Next to the Jews the choicest invective is saved for Soviet Russia, – murderers, cut-throats, thieves, rapists, and various combinations of these and other bouquets ... Russian Communism, says Pelley, finances American Communism through the Armtorg and Barney Baruch, die-hard conservative banker, was and is the liaison officer through whom Communism is infiltrated into the United States. The “Chief” gets purple in the face shouting against the Recognition agreement with Russia which he claims in his delerium has tortured and murdered over 1,670,000 persons. “The Chief” does not think that Communism in this country is or would be so much of a menace to civilization (read: capitalism) except that it is directly aided by Roosevelt’s closest advisors; and many is the impression given in the official organ than Roosevelt himself might be a good-standing member of the Politbureau of the Russian Communist Party ...
Pelley is 100% anti-Soviet. So much so that he denounces his fellow jingo, William Randolph Hearst, for raising a hue and cry about the Japanese Yellow Peril. The Silver Shirt declares that Japan has been fighting the battle of civilization – against Sovietism – when she plundered Northern China and bombarded Shanghai. A plan is recounted whereby
“A ring of steel was to be drawn about Jewish-Soviet Russia, and that ring was to be tightened until the Murder-bund under Stalin was to be strangled from existence. On the East was Japan, on the West was Poland, Germany, and Czechoslovakia – which latter nation meant, of course, France.
“Japan was to commence the fight for the preservation of constitutional civilization and the continued reign of orderly governments in Manchuria. Hitler was to be lifted into power on the West, and out of this ‘lifting’ was to grow a formidable antagonism to Communism throughout Continental Europe. Certain equally significant and vital roles, all delineated at the time were to be played by England and Italy.” (Liberation, December, 9, 1933)
Pelley has all he can do in trying to conceal his chagrin because the brigands assault on the Worker’s Fatherland has not yet commenced. And how he rages against the Recognition because it might help Soviet Russia ...
Let us conclude on the same note we began this installment. The universal features of Fascism apply even to these United States. The middle class is duped, drugged and deceived but like all addicts it does not realize the damage until morning after ...
 



Franklin D. Roosevelt recently paid a glowing tribute to the memory of his predecessor, Woodrow Wilson on the anniversary of his birth. The greatest virtue of this late president was his “pacific” method of handling international disputes, the earnest endeavor to settle them without recourse to arms. This method, which Roosevelt claims he is attempting to perpetuate, was tested in the crucible of events. How did it work? What were the results of pacifism when espoused by the chief officer holder of the United States?
Pacifism is a gospel consecrated to the abolition of war. It abhors the slaughter of man by man. Believing as it does that armed conflict between nations is a reversion of man to barbarism, an inflammation of his savage instincts caused by a lack of adequate education, it is a confirmed advocate of peace conferences, disarmament, non-aggression pacts, etc., as the sure method of making the Christmas spirit everlasting. The war president, Woodrow Wilson, espoused these ideas.
 
“He Kept Us Out of War.”
This college professor, erudite, a lover of the Jeffersonian rhetoric as employed by the slave owning aristocracy in whose territory and tradition he passed the greater part of his life, was elected to his second term as the man who “kept us out of the war” then raging on the European continent. Fact and life later disproved this campaign slogan. In all truth, however, Wilson was quite sincere in his “neutrality” policy towards the European conflict because he had not originated in the environs of imperialistic big business. His life was associated with the middle class, the southern planters included, whose economic interests at the time were bound up more in the domesctic than in the foreign market. Cold reality and the center of economic gravity proved stronger than Wilson’s empty phrases and pacifistic flourishes, as we shall see.
 
Wilson, the Dove of Peace
The outbreak of the mad scramble for spoils in Europe found America in a peculiarly advantageous position, which permitted Wilson to be the dove of peace and the thermometer of the anti-war sentiments then current in this country. The pacifists were satisfied that it was a “foreign” war in which the U.S. had no reason to be entangled. The bankers were content to finance food and commodity exports to both the Allies’ and the Entente. The munition makers sold death dealing weapons to all the belligerent powers. The people did not want war and paid no particular attention to the atrocity stories emanating from English or German sources.
Even the militaristic Theodore Roosevelt could support the policy of neutrality. He expressed the prevailing sentiment, when he said in an article in the New Outlook for September 23, 1914, that “very probably nothing that we could have done would have helped Belgium. We have not the smallest responsibility for what has befallen her.” Wilson was in his element. No decision was required of him and, righteously indignant, he could reprimand the “mad dogs” that were making a shambles out of Europe.
 
Pacifism Leading Into War
The workers and the people in general were lulled into a false security. They had sopped up the propaganda of Wilson’s publicity agent, George Creel, who warned in the 1916 presidential campaign that: “Repudiation of Woodrow Wilson involves repudiation of the policy of neutrality and a return to the evil days, when armed force was the only method of adjusting disputes.” But even as the people were thinking that their intellectual president heeded none of the inspired war stories, and documentary evidence seems to bear that out, events were at work that knocked Wilson off the fence.
The British government barred all shipments to Germany or its allies and to make this certain the British navy blockaded the North Sea, intervening all vessels with Germany or Central power ports as destination declaring their cargoes “contraband”. Despite all of Wilson’s ardent protestations, this field for imperialist investment and commodity export was definitely and irrevocably closed. The bankers were sore. But the Allied war needs were lucrative enough. Concurrently the tide of the war was turning in favor of German imperialism, thereby jeopardizing Wall Street profits and the return on their huge loans to the Allies ...
 
The “War to End All Wars”
The atrocity stories became more gruesome. Preparedness talk Increased in intensity. The Huns were destroying civilization, etc., etc. The vested interests, the real rulers of the nation, brought pressure to bear on the President, the nominal ruler, who began to fume at the barbarism of “Prussian militarism”. That Wilson was a pacifist, a believer in the “human way of adjudicating disputes between nations” was no obstacle to his bellicose threats and warnings to Germany. On the contrary, pacifism was a distinct help to him.
In his war message to congress he reflected! the “frustrated” hopes voiced by press, pulpit, educators, and others, declaring that he had tried to keep the country out of the European holocaust with all the strength at his command, that America was a peace-loving nation. But now it was impossible to abstain any longer, for Germany had violated every law of man and God; the “Boche” was trampling on the interests of humanity and the peoples of this country would be cowards and traitors, indeed, if they did not lend a hand to drive back the black hordes threatening civilization. The pacifism that had endeavored to keep America out of the war was not at an end, however. It had merely become belligerent now. Its slogan was “war to end all wars” and Wilson was the apostle.
 
“To Make the World Safe for Democracy”
The President, who not long before had boasted that America was “too proud to fight”, plunged into tho job of the successful prosecution of the war “to make the world safe tor democracy.” (This was no deterrent to the administration in imprisoning Eugene V. Debs and hundreds of others for insisting on democracy in Wilson’s country.) While the Princeton University president was sending hundreds of American workers across the seas to kill and be killed for the “humanitarianism” of Wall Street’s profits, his pacifism continued unabated.
Prussian militarism was defeated. Wilson went to Paris full of hope for his idealistic solution of the conflict only to find that the victorious bandits of allied imperialism scorned his pacifism, demanding their share of the spoils they had won. Wilson capitulated. He signed the ignominious Treaty of Versailles, which perpetuated and deepened all the imperialistic wounds of the war, receiving in return ironic concessions, like the League of Imperialistic Brigands at Geneva, self determination of several nations which were meat for France and Great Britain, etc., Wilson was hailed in Europe as the evangel of peace. The social democracy went wild over the great American democrat. He was acclaimed as a godsend, literally. Then he returned to America ...
 
The Downfall of Wilson
The capitalist class wanted none of his peace of Versailles. They lined up the country solidly and hostilely against him. The pacifism of Wilson, that had led America into the war and had prosecuted it successfully, was now outlived. American imperialism had other interests. Congress repudiated. Wilson and he was showered with a storm of abuse by the press which called him a “hopeless visionary”.
Wilson died a broken man, but pacifism did not die with him. The clouds of a new imperialist war for a new division of the world’s territories and a further annihilation of the flower of the working class bang heavily as if there had never been a “war to end all wars”. Pacifism stands at the helm again. Another Wilson, many Wilsons will be on hand to lead us into a war, with other slogans perhaps but with fundamentally the same aims – profits, profits and more profits.
Be wary of pacifists and pacifism! This is our message, our commemoration of the late Woodrow Wilson.
 



Five hundred and ninety-seven army air machines soar over New York City in impressive war maneuvers, forming a spectacle which fascinated and thrilled thousands of onlookers. These maneuvers, in the words of chief of staff General MacArthur “are not a ‘circus’ but a test of preparedness of the air branch of warfare.” (N.Y. Times, May 25, 1931.) This air drill over the skyscrapers of N.Y. involving some six hundred planes and more than fourteen hundred men, cost the U.S. government the princely sum of $2,000,000. Aeroplanes are the instruments of the next war. The nations of the world realize this. In not one of their disarmament conferences, where the capitalist governments haggle and wrangle over the scrapping of obsolete and antiquated battleships, will they tolerate for a single moment the question of the reduction of air forces. The American capitalists are likewise well aware of the importance of the airplane. It has proclaimed a five year plan (!) for airplane building, whose provisions it is to increase the amount of service planes by 1,128, from 672 planes today to 1,800 planes in five years.
The political situation in Europe and throughout the world is extremely tense. War clouds darken the face of the whole world. France and her Little Entente are at dagger points with German-Austrian Anschluss. Italy looks with jealous eyes on France’s colonial possessions and every move it makes causes friction between the two countries. America breaks up conference after conference on economic questions, while it grooms itself greedily watching that vast unexploited territory, that is, Soviet Russia, and promoting one counter-revolutionary plot after another, in the hope that this will aid them in their plans to overthrow the first worker’s Republic. The capitalist nations are hopeful of solving their economic ills through a redivision of the world market and colonial spoil, which leads headlong into a new world war. Understood in this sense, the war games in the air assume an especial importance. That war looms in the near future is attested to not only by the feverish military preparations which the capitalist nations are engaged in, but also by the deluge of pacificism which is flooding the country and the world to-day. Pacifism (disarmament, “abolishing” war by treaties, laws, good will, etc.) is an inevitable concomitant of war. It is the barrage behind which preparations for war take place. Pacifism is the soft and soothing music that lulls the working class into a state of drowsy security while the capitalist politicians jockey for positions and intrigue for alliances.
How well the United States knows this! At the same moment that the government is completely and wholeheartedly bent on these openly militaristic and warlike air maneuvers, it institutes another maneuver known as army economy. It abolishes fifty-three obsolete army posts, and thus kills two birds with one stone. It gives the appearance that it is disarming by abolishing several army posts, and it makes a show of economy. It hopes by these methods to blind the working class to its war preparations and to appease the gullible and treacherous pacifists and reformists. But the very next day it gives the lie to its own deceitfulness! It runs a militaristic air show which not only disowns any pacifist illusions it might have created but even its pretences at economy. $2,000,000 at one stroke! And it turns down the demand for social insurance because it will be a strain on the government revenue and on the “citizen’s [read: capitalist’s] income”. The role of the socialists and their liberal allies is clear. Norman Thomas before a “War Policies Commission” congratulates the country (?) “on the conviction that when it comes to a real emergency like war the overblessed profit system won’t work without an immense degree of control”. Presumably meaning, that the capitalist class (Thomas calls it “the country”) is beginning to understand the usefulness of the “socialists” and when war does come, they will lend the “country” some of their ideas to prosecute the war to a successful conclusion, and to hold the working class in check like their worthy predecessors have shown themselves so capable of doing in the governments of the Kaiser, His Majesty Geo. V, the French Republic and other illustrious cabinets from 1915 to 1918 and thereafter.
The capitalist class is looking for ways and means to change the whole economy of peace in such a way that it may be transformed at a moment’s notice to meet the exigencies of war. Plans for universal conscription have been formulated. Elaborate details of war taxation are being devised. And on top of it all propaganda is being flung far and wide that the United States is preparing only defensive measures and will fight only if attacked. A picture of the future can already be seen, even down to the fake causes for which the capitalist class will attempt to make the American workers fight their English, French or Russian comrades.
For the working youth these air maneuvers have a great importance. Thousands of young workers are driven, into the army, navy, and national guard by the lash of the economic depression. In spite of all the indignation of the Charlie Chaplins, who want the “old men to fight the next war”, and of the pacifists who want the combatants to be capitalists and their lackeys, generals, politicians, etc., the working youth will be the cannon fodder of the next war. It therefore becomes ever more necessary to point out the true anti-proletarian character of capitalist militarism and imperialist wars. It is a thousand times more incumbent on the young Communist today than ever before, to bring this message to the young workers in the armed forces; to break down the illusions of pacifism, and to point to the proletarian revolution as the only way out of the catastrophe capitalism is preparing for society.
 



On Friday the nineteenth there was an unemployment demonstration in Cleveland called by the party, in which we took part. Hardly a thousand participated. There were only three placards displayed in the whole rigmarole. And besides it was quite spiritless. Sam Don, the D.O., stood in command from behind. The demonstrators marched on the City Hall where they were allowed without any resistance whatsoever to enter, en masse, the city council chamber, where the city council men awaited them for a hearing. And here lies the crux of the matter.
The party has changed its slogans and its position on the question of unemployment. It no longer demands unemployment insurance – $15 per week and an additional three for each dependent. Today it asks for relief (!) and it does not even specify how much. This brings it into conflict not with the capitalist class or its government, but with the charity organizations! As a matter of fact, the whole hearing, with the councilmen was devoted in the main to proving whether the charities were corrupt or not, whether they had denied food to this individual or not, whether they had given five dollars instead of nine. The unemployed council even produced, three cases to prove the graft of the charity organization. And the, witnesses! Owners of houses, insurance policies, hundreds of dollars in grocery bills, and what not. The party has sunk into the worst kind of opportunism. Not unemployment insurance because that requires a difficult struggle – but the path of least resistance – only relief; it’s easier to get, appears to be the attitude of the party. The whole unemployment struggle degenerates into whether the charities association shall pay its relief in cash or in kind. And to make up for this kind of opportunism the party tells the workers in an adventurist braggadacio. “If they won’t give us this relief we will go and take it.” By the way, the police were completely conspicuous by their absence. Only three mounted cops were visible on the whole line of march; not a single cop in the city hall to be seen. Cleveland.
 



PITTSBURGH. – To those who contend that the coal strike is over, or that the National Miners Union is dead, the national conference held in Pittsburgh, July 15, is a living refutation. 682 delegates from 270 mines representing a total of 45,491 striking miners, according to the report, voiced their approval of the militant policies of the N.M.U. The conference was completely animated by a fighting spirit. Miners fresh from the strike battlefront of West Virginia Pennsylvania, and Kentucky, representing all nationalities, black and white, young and old, came to Pittsburgh, demonstrating their determination to continue, to spread and to win in their heroic struggle against starvation.
 
A Militant Conference
Miner after miner took the floor, painting in no uncertain terms the intolerable conditions which brought on the strike. The ridiculously low wages, outright robbery in the mine and in the company store, unemployment rampant and poverty stalking all over the coal fields, have driven the miners into open revolt. And added to this is the treacherous role of the U.M.W. of A. Only a deaf man could fail to bear from the speeches of the rank and file the undying hatred Lewis and Co. have earned for themselves in the hearts of the coal diggers. The real fighting note of the conference was struck by the picturesque Kentucky delegation. Fresh from the hills of Daniel Boone’s country, they let loose a veritable flow of “Kentucky oratory” upon the conference. Their defiance of the thugs and gunmen cloaked with the badge of “constituted authority” their do-or-die-win-the-strike attitude, stirred the conference. The delegates of Harlan, Kentucky, to a man, pledged their unreserved support to the National Miners Union. This marks a big step forward.
One fact, no one could fail to notice – the growing political consciousness of the mine workers: Peals of stormy applause greeted all remarks however casual, on the Soviet Union, Communism, and a workers’ government in the U.S.A. Even the American backwoodsmen of Kentucky did not fail to express their disapproval of the social system. The name of Reds, they said, didn’t “scare” them at all. Judging from this conference, it is clear that the American working class will “jump a few stages” as they make their way to Communism.
The purpose that the conference should have really had was given in the words of Foster: to realize “a broad enough united front to include miners irrespective of political creed or union affiliation.” This is undeniably an advance for the N.M.U. from its sectarian position of a year ago. Its value consists in the realization that there are tens of thousands of miners, in Illinois, Kanawha, West Virginia and in the anthracite, under influence other than that of the N.M.U. These miners can only be won over to common struggle through a correct application of the united front tactic. And here lies the hitch in the whole policy of the N.M.U. Borich correctly advocated the building of Left wing minorities in the anthracite U.M.W.A., etc. (shades of the “third period”!). But Left wing minorities have their great strength just in so far as they use the tactic of the united front. How is this united front to be accomplished? From below! “No collusion with fakers”; only rank and file committees, representing all unions, was continually emphasized by Foster, Borich, and Co. Keeney betrayed the West Virginia miners: Howat left the Illinois miners in the lurch: all the other progressives are fakers. Therefore, no united front with them. The first part of the reasoning concerning the progressives is absolutely correct. But the second part does not follow at all.
 
A Fosterite “United Front”
The results of this policy are already apparent. The conference was ostensibly called as a united front gathering. It invited rank and file miners from all groups to attend – at the same time branding their leadership as fake. But it could not be a genuine united front since they were merely invited to attend the N.M.U. convention. The result was that not a single delegate from the Kanawha section of West Virginia, not a solitary representative from the Belleville conference in Illinois (the only Illinois delegates represented a group from the struck Orient mines), a few delegates representing only a handful of those organized in the anthracite.
Instead of these “brilliant leaders” taking note of this remarkable signpost of an incorrect policy, they continue to plunge deeper in the same wrong direction. The same negligible results can already be foreseen from the statement of the program committee, calling upon the “West Virginia miners to fight the Keeney leadership, as tools of the bosses, and to set up rank and file unity committees”. It was recognized by miner after miner that thousands were still under the influence of the “progressives”. Yet the leadership refused to take any cognizance of this fact beyond name-calling; and the mythical “united front only from below”. All this in spite of the fact that the credentials committee showed that, out of a total of 822 delegates, only 65 came from the U.M.W.A. (and they came mostly from minority groups in the mines and not the local unions – approximately three delegates to a mine group.)
 
Question of National Strike
The conference very properly decided not to call a national strike as yet. The credentials committee report showed that the delegation consisted of representatives of 35,270 miners still at work, and of 45,491 miners who were on strike. It therefore becomes absolutely necessary to spread and deepen the strike at this stage of the game. The national strike is still a matter of the future.
The six-hour day was incorporated into the program. No explanation was given as to why the eight-hour day slogan issued earlier in the strike was changed to the six. The R.I.L.U. gave the word and the “leaders” forgot that the seven-hour day prevails in the Soviet Union ... and the program was changed. What’s an hour or two between friends?
Resolutions were adopted for the release of every class war prisoner possible – but of course, Morgenstern and Goodman were completely (or purposely) forgotten – they are Left Oppositionists.
It can be said with absolute certainty that the delegates are returning home with renewed vigor to carry out the strike to a successful conclusion. And provided adequate relief reaches the field the strike has great possibilities, it can also be said with just as much assurance that the policies of Foster, Borich, and Company on the united front will constitute no help but rather a tremendous obstacle in the way of further growth of the Left wing in the mining industry, and in undermining; the faith of the workers in the “progressives” of the Keeney, Howat, Muste type. These policies must be replaced by a correct approach to the needs of the present situation – a genuine united front.
 



STAUNTON, ILL. – The campaign for the release of Tom Mooney has broken ground in the coal fields of Illinois. On the initiative of the St. Lonis Brunch of the Communist League of America (Opposition) and thru the instrumentality of the St. Louis United Front Mooney Conference, the movement has got under way. Twenty-six delegates, – from eight U.W.M.A. locals representing approximately 5,000 miners, the Communist League of America (Opposition) and the Communist Party, responded to the call of the Staunton Pardon Mooney Club and met in the Staunton Labor Temple, Lodge Hall, on Sunday, November 20, at 2 p.m.
After disposing of preliminaries, the conference buckled down to business. The conference elected its officers and committees then proceeded to a discussion on methods for the beginning of systematic mass activity for the release of Mooney. The main speech in the discussion was made by comrade Stamm of the St. Louis Communist League of America (Opposition) who, basing himself on Tom Mooney’s appeal of August 20, stressed the importance of a genuine united front; the broadening of the conference to include other organizations in the vicinity of Staunton; mass meetings, demonstrations, etc. Elected on the resolutions committee were Tash of the Communist Party, Clarke of the Communist League of America (Opposition) and Hede (U.M.W.A.).
The committee presented two resolutions. Both were adopted unanimously. The resolution referring to the criminal syndicalist law was amended following a heated discussion but the spirit of the document remained unchanged. Telegrams were sent to Governor Rolph, demanding the immediate and unconditional release of Tom Mooney; to the Prosecuting Attorney of Franklin County, Ill., demanding the quashing of the indictment of the seven victims recently arrested, and their release; to Tom Mooney greeting him and pledging a struggle on his behalf.
A motion introduced by a U.M.W.A. delegate, placing the conference on record as denouncing a malicious slander which appeared in the Illinois Miner of November 28 to the effect that Tom Stamm in the name of the Communist League of America (Opposition) was to debate with Chas. Blome against the release of Mooney, and demanding that the Illinois Miner print a correction, was unanimously carried.
An executive committee representing each local union, the Communist Party, the Communist League of America (Opposition) was elected and will work out plans to broaden the conference and extend its activity. We would like to inquire of the Communist Party as to whether its participation in this conference is a change of policy, and why the I.L.D. and the N.M.U. were conspicuous by their absence?
The conference was a success from many points of view. The delegations were representative ones, and militancy was outstanding.
 



Once more the International Labor Defense has carried out its classical united front policy. This time the Tom Mooney case is made to suffer the incalculable stupidity of Stalinism. Tom Mooney, through his appeal to all working class organizations gave a tremendous impetus to the struggle for the liberation of all class war prisoners. The party at first hesitated to take up the proposal made by Mooney, and then it paved the way for the reformists to seize the hegemony and split the movement, by the incomprehensible Stalinist policy of the “united front from below”. The I.L.D. having been thrown out of the “Mooney Molders Defense Conference” by the labor skates, learned nothing but a few A.F.L. tactics, which they proceeded to apply in their own conference held October 1th at the Irving Plaza Hall.
In order to avoid a meeting which would show the results of a policy of appealing to the “rank and file members of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers and the other unions, independent of the A.F.L. ... and the local unions of the A.F.L.” the party call invites all organizations to send one delegate for every five members. By this very subtle method the conference was packed with party delegates, I.L.D. delegates, and the inevitable fraternal organizations. The credentials report was an incredible hash of figures for which the reporter kept apologizing and promised just as many times to send a “complete” report to the organizations represented following (!) the conference. The party wasted no time. From the very beginning the hand of the teachers (Mr. Green and Sam Gompers) was as clear as day. The chairman and the credentials committee were proposed by the Dist. Comm. of the I.L.D. No further proposals were accepted and the well known steam roller method applied. A delegate from a W.C. branch protested, but Carl Hacker not to be hindered by an “naive” rank and filer, muttering some vague words about facilitating the work of the conference, poo-pooed such antediluvian democratic notions. Then came a rain of banalities about why we unite with the rank and file and not the leadership of the reactionary organizations and other rot about the new “third period” tactics of the bolshevised I.L.D. This was known as the report of the I.L.D. district committee. Following the intermission for lunch, the delegates representing the Communist League of America (Opposition) Geo. Saul and Geo. Clarke were called before the Credentials Committee. Seigel “the leader” of the Comm. coaxed us to withdraw from the conference, explaining to us that since we were “old timers” he knew for what purpose we came to the conference. “Communists”, he said, “go to the A.F. of L. conferences to disrupt them (!) and the Opposition (being enemies of Communism) therefore came to the I.L.D. Conference with the same idea in mind.” These were literally his words. Explain as we might that our real intentions were unity and not split, there was no swerving the infallibility of his bureaucratic decisions. The Credentials Committee was to propose the rejection of the Opposition as delegates to the conference. Comrades Saul and Clarke nevertheless informed the Committee that they would fight the report from the floor.
Using a quotation from the Militant which even the hysterically whipped-up Stalinists could find little to boost, Seigal moved the non-acceptance of the delegates of the C.L.A. and the Weisbord group. Discussion was automatically closed and the former Lovestoneite, Nemser, in the chair proceeded to take the proposal of the credentials committee to a vote which passed not without opposition however. At this point, the delegates of the Opposition, who were demanding a discussion on the report all along, were joined by several other delegates, and the Stalinists were compelled to allow discussion. Discussion which was not to influence the vote on the report but was to sanction it. Del. Hermann of the Carpenters’ Union spoke against this exclusion, saying that his local had elected delegates to a united front conference and not a splitting party. Delegate Berlin of the Workmen’s Circle arose to express similar sentiments, but he was howled down by the chairman and the faithful from below. Then the big guns were brought into play. Maurice Malkin, well known in Right wing circles, stepped upon the stage to recite his little piece. One lie followed another from the mouth of this unequalled convert to the Stalinist camp. Taking the cue from Hacker, Malkin said that in 1925 and for many years following, the I.L.D. was a lawyers’ defense organization and that Shachtman had pleaded guilty when arrested in 1927 in a “Hands Off Nicaragua” demonstration in Washington, proving the depths of the Opposition’s renegacy. That the party had instructed Shachtman to act in this manner and had never condemned him or the others who were responsible for it meant nothing to Malkin.
But that was the mildest of his fabrications. About this time, the comrades representing the C.L.A. protested aloud. That was a signal for the pogrom gang to get to work. In a hysterical, half-crazed voice, a party member arose and demanded our exclusion from the hall to which the chorus did not fail to join in. Carl Hacker, who has learned a few lessons from John L. Lewis, proposed a motion asking the Opposition delegates to withdraw from the hall. The terrorized party members voted for it. When the Opposition refused to leave without making a statement, a pack of hoodlums approached us with the threat to beat up on us. Unwilling to turn the meeting into a riot, we withdrew from the meeting under threat of violence.
We read the next day in the Daily Worker that “someone” overheard one of the Opposition delegates phoning Cannon to the effect that “we tried to disrupt the conference but were unsuccessful.” Having split the conference, the bureaucrats, with an aching conscience had to wrack their feeble brains for such a crude and ridiculous invention in order to convince the delegates that after all it was the Opposition that disrupted the meeting!
 



Nowadays nobody with eyes in his head can mistake the sorry role that Lovestone and his faction are playing in the Communist movement. Years ago his opportunistic ideas could always find shelter under the protecting arm of Stalin’s Comintern; today he must shiver in the rain of criticism. To illustrate this I will point out several things which occurred at a youth meeting held by the Lovestone group in the Grand Opera House last) week. About fifteen people attended this meeting. The audience was mainly composed of Lovestoneites, a few League members and a stool pigeon of the Y.C.L. sent there to report the League members foolish enough to think they could attend any meeting but their own. The reporter of the evening was Will Herberg. He gave a fairly accurate representation of the situation in the Party. Any half-way educated Communist can see the countless mistakes and false policies of the leadership and the impasse into which they have led the C. I. But when he tried to analyze the causes at the bottom of this crisis and to estimate the work and value of the Left Opposition he got himself into an awful mess. His only attempt to discuss the questions the Opposition has raised was on the problem of Thermidor. Firstly he drew an utterly false picture of no unity of opinion among the forces of the Left Opposition on this question. Some, he said, believed that Thermidor was already accomplished, others that it was on its way and still others didn’t believe in it at all.
The first view (that Thermidor is already accomplished in the Soviet Union) is hold by Urbahns, he maintained. And then, like a typically bankrupt politician he attacked this view as the one of the Opposition. This he succeeded in doing, since it doesn’t take much brains to expose as erroneous a theory like this one. But he didn’t dare attack the official viewpoint of the Opposition held by all its adherents from Russia to America. That the danger of the Thermidor is being augmented in the persecution, exiling and shooting of Oppositionists, in the breaking of the alliance between the workers and peasants because of adventurist policies in industrialization and collectivization; in the growing of the power of the Kulak and the Nepmen due to Stalin’s zigzag policies; in the ominous growth of the Thermidorian bureaucracy in the Party and the government – only a Herberg can deny while he shuts his eyes and shout’s “don’t talk to us about Socialism in one country, we want to hear about American questions.”
Covering Lovestone’s Misdeeds The most interesting part of the meeting was Herberg’s answer to the question of Lovestone’s use of underworld tactics in the fight against the Left Opposition and the challenge to debate with us on fundamental questions. Complacently Herberg repudiated the violence perpetrated against the Opposition by the Lovestone group with the naive remark “at that time we were under Stalinist influence”. Even if any weight could be attached to this remark, Lovestone will have to explain away their burglary of the Party office and his own tacit silence while Blumkin was shot and thousands of Oppositionists are criminally persecuted and exiled to Siberia. We are still waiting for Lovestone to raise a voice against the exiling of L.D. Trotsky.
Not less demagogic and cowardly was Herberg’s reply to the challenge of a debate on fundamental issues. No! Herberg won’t debate with us because, 1st, we are too small; secondly because the questions we want to debate about don’t interest the American workers. The great Lovestone, the overwhelming “majority” of the American Party refuses to debate with us because we are too insignificant. Only yesterday Lovestone strained every muscle to prove to a recalcitrant minority that “Trotskyism” was the main danger in the American Party. Not quite so distant as that Lovestone shouted to the wide world that the ideas of “Trotskyism” has captured the C.L. We would suggest to Herberg to recall these trifles before he terms us insignificant to debate with.
 
Evading Questions of Principle
But just like the whole Lovestone crew, no sooner does Herberg say this than he starts to retract it. Well, the reason they didn’t want to debate, according to Herberg is because the questions we raise (Socialism in One Country, Chinese Revolution, Anglo-Russian Committee, etc.) “hold no interest for the American workers”. When Lovestone was in good graces with Stalin, when he ran the Daily Worker, when we had no press, before we could. print any of the suppressed literature, then it was time to scatter scandal, lies and calumnies about us. Now, when we are in a position to reply to his lies and expose his opportunism, Lovestone hides himself in a dark corner and fearfully cries out, “The American workers are not interested in the Chinese Revolution”. Whom does this remind us of? Haven’t we heard somewhere before this same alibi about the American workers not being interested in fundamental problems but in more immediate and more pressing questions. Doesn’t the S.P. carefully avoid the questions of internationalism, the Proletarian Dictatorship, etc. with just such platitudes?
But the Opposition is not afraid to debate with Lovestone on American questions; not afraid to show Lovestone, Herberg and Co. how the question of socialism in one country once helped Lovestone get control of the American party and reduce it to 7,000 and how this question has brought the Partly to its disastrous state today and how it will help bring worse results even with Lovestone’s kind in power in the future to the American Party.
 



The ruling class has few scruples in its punishment of Communists. It picks from the ranks of fighters for the working class and hits with equal severity at all challenges to its rule. Now from the picket line, now from the Party, and it does not hesitate to send to its prisons even the “tender” youth. Harry Eisman, a member of the Young Pioneers has been sentenced to five years imprisonment in the Hawthorne Reformatory for participating in the March 6th unemployment demonstrations.
 
It Depends on Whose Holiday It Is
The ridiculous farce of the charge truancy against school children participating in working class holidays and demonstrations is quite apparent. Countless times throughout the year holidays are officially proclaimed by the authorities—flag day, decoration day, Lincoln’s Birthday, etc. Here the students are turned loose into the streets and forced to sing and cheer the “Star Spangled” capitalist and land of the slave. The boy scouts, camp fire girls, etc., are released from school almost any time the jingo militarists want to show their masters what gracious and valuable service they are rendering them.
But just let a working man’s son or daughter walk out to demonstrate against unemployment and the storm breaks loose. Expulsion, terrorism, and even imprisonment awaits the working class children. The capitalist class knows well the phrase: “The youth is the hope of the future.” All forces are brought into play to make this future one or servility and docile obedience to capitalism.
Harry Eisman sent to prison for five years; two students. Max Weiss of City College, and Sol Wellman of Boy’s High School, are threatened with expulsion; eleven mothers are given jail sentences because their children took part in working class demonstrations. The authorities grow red in the face denouncing the Young Pioneers and the Young Communist League. From the ruling class come cries for the suppression and smashing of these militant youth organizations. Drivers are heralded all over the press to counteract through the Boy Scouts any influence the Young Pioneers have among working class children.
In face of this increased persecution the working class must not remain quiet. Only organizations like the Y.P.S.L, long impotent in the interests of the working class, can fail to respond. With increased unemployment running into the millions, the speed-up and the wage cuts forced on the working class, the cry for organization becomes louder and more imperative. We must consolidate our forces to give impetus to this process.
Especially the working youth which is more exploited, has the great need to ally to the banner of Communism. Any unanswered blow on any section of the working class seriously weakens the whole movement .The case of Harry Eisman does not stand alone as an isolated sign of the cruelty of some city official. On the contrary, it is just one of a long chain of blows dealt both to adult and youth movements. Thus the slogan of Free Harry Eisman should become for the Communist youth a centre for mobilizing the working youth and student. The liberation of this young student is the task of working class youth irrespective of political beliefs and towards this end a broad united front should be created. The Communist League (Opposition) pledges its wholehearted support to save the movement for Harry Eisman from isolation. Let a strong movement be the response to ruling class provocations.
 



PONTIAC. – The evacuation of the Fisher Body plant marks the beginning of the most critical period in the history of the United Automobile Workers.
The eyes of the automobile workers were turned to Pontiac. General Motors was beginning its new offensive against the union. Faced with the repudiation of its agreement by the rank and file conference of G.M. workers, the corporation decided on a test case: to test the militancy of the men and the mettle of the leadership.
With thousands of Pontiac men already tramping the streets as a result of restricted production and the transference of work to Lindon, N.J., and Southgate, California, the layoff of hundreds of men on Monday, November 15, was the straw that broke the camel’s back. The night shift sat down. For months they had suffered indignities at the hands of the plant manager, E.R. Leeder. Speed-up, constant abuses by foremen and sabotaging of the agreement finally drove the desperate Fisher Body men to resistance. Their local was being pounded to pieces. No other road was open.
 
Committeemen Fired
2,500 men sitting in the Fisher plant constituted a threat to the entire peace fabric in the industry. Immediately upon notification by the local, the International office of the UAW dispatched two of its representatives to Pontiac. After they had promised the workers to resume negotiations with the corporation on their grievances, the men left the plant. Members of the plant’s bargaining committee left for Detroit for discussions with the management. On Wednesday morning, just as negotiations were to begin, the company announced the firing of four committeemen: George Method, chairman of the bargaining committee, Otto Rollins, steward, Lester Cizmas, committeeman, and Tom Welch, steward. The committee had no alternative but to break off negotiations, rejecting the reprisals against the leading militants. On Wednesday night the plant was re-occupied and the sit-down was on in earnest. The Pontiac plant, using Fisher bodies, closed down, raising the total of strike-idle to almost 17,000.
The issue of the strike was a crucial one for the entire International. If General Motors could fire stewards and committeemen in Pontiac and get away with it, then they could repeat the performance in Flint, in Detroit, in Lansing, in all of their plants in the country. Chrysler, Hudson and Packard would follow suit. And the drive to organize Ford would be endangered. The Pontiac workers were fighting the battle of every worker in the union.
From the very beginning, the question mark hung over the strikers: would the Executive Board authorize the strike? Martin had already given indications of a hostile attitude. On Thursday, he issued a statement to the press promising General Motors “continuity of production” and “amicable relationships” and denouncing unauthorized strikes. Without mentioning the Pontiac strike, the implication was all too clear.
That same night Fred Pieper, member of the GEB and one of Martin’s chief lieutenants, appeared before a meeting of the entire Pontiac local – consisting of Fisher Body, Pontiac Motor and Yellow Coach – and exhorted the men to return to work. His chief argument consisted of the specious economic analysis that the present slump is a conspiracy of big business to break the unions. Therefore, he concluded, the workers must wait until the conspiracy peters out before it is time to strike. As for the discharged committeemen? Give their cases to the Labor Relations Board and cross your fingers. His remarks were seconded by Dorr Mitchell, reactionary President of the local, who gave them emphasis by refusing to turn over local strike funds, maintaining that the sit-down was unauthorized. The answer of the 2,000 workers present was quite unambiguous. They turned in an overwhelming vote of confidence in their brothers sitting down in the plant.
Despite the hostility of Pieper and Madden, Pontiac GEB member, the local militants refused to believe that Martin would not authorize the strike. The formula circulating among the militants was something on the following order: “Wait ’til Martin is fully acquainted with the facts of our sit-down, then there can be no question but he will authorize it.” As a result, great uncertainty prevailed.
 
Aid From Detroit
On Saturday, members of the Detroit Auto Workers Educational League, a group of UAW members organized for the purpose of promoting class struggle policies and rank and file democracy in the union, arrived in Pontiac. They met with the leading committeemen and shop stewards of the strike-bound plant, organized them into a strike committee, setting into motion the machinery for publicity, relief, etc., and hammering out a policy. The A.W.E.L. was the only group which came to Pontiac to offer the strikers its assistance and advice. None of the leaders of the Unity Group, neither Walter Reuther, Wyndham Mortimer nor any of the other self-appointed champions of the rank and file even put in an appearance. The issue was entirely too hot for them.
That same afternoon, word came through that Martin would be in Pontiac at 5 P.M. to consult with the strike committee. The committee waited in vain for the President in an appointed hotel for over four hours. Martin had been in Pontiac, but in his brazen bureaucratic manner had consulted with the reactionary local officialdom while the strike committee cooled its heels in the hotel. As the strike committee returned to the plant, enervated by doubt and anxiety, an ominous press statement of Martin’s came over the radio to the effect that UAW would show the corporation that the union could discipline recalcitrant workers and unauthorized strikers unassisted. “There must be no unauthorized strikes,” Martin declared in another speech to Lansing workers, that same day, preventing the Lansing Auto workers, with his usual demagogy, from following the Pontiac example.
 
Calls for G.E.B. Support
Yet Martin felt none too certain in his treacherous position. The next morning, Sunday, all members of the International Executive Board were summoned to Detroit to act on the Pontiac situation. It was clear that Martin refused to take sole responsibility – the Executive Board was also to be put on record. The members of the Fisher Body bargaining committee were called to this meeting to explain their actions before the Executive Board. Facing these workers with their just grievances, no one of the officers dared to express open opposition to their strike action. It is even reported that Walter Reuther and Wyndham Mortimer were in favor of authorizing the strike. Once again the committee returned to Pontiac without a decision from their International leadership. An answer had been promised them that same evening. Meanwhile, a meeting of 600 shop stewards in the Westside local, Detroit, answered an appeal of a Pontiac militant, with a promise of support.
At five o’clock the entire International Executive Board was transported from Detroit to the Hildenbrand Hotel in Pontiac where they went into executive session in order to prepare a decision for the membership meeting of the Pontiac local to be held that night. No reports were available at the time on the threats Martin used to intimidate the strike leaders present. But on the next day, Monday, the New York Times carried the story under a Pontiac dateline by its well-informed correspondent, Louis Stark, that uncovered part of the secret. Under the headline: “Murphy Threatens to End GM Strike with State Troops; Governor and Washington Urge Auto to Stop Outlaw Sitdown at Pontiac” the article read:
 
Act Under Government Threat
“That Governor Murphy may have to take drastic action and order out the militia to oust the sit-downers in the Fisher Body plant was the message sent by the chief Executive to Mr. Martin.
“At the same time a representative of the Administration at Washington indicated to the union its extreme interest in the situation and said that, in view of the economic recession, a further uncertain element in the business picture would be embarrassing.”
The Executive board outlawed the strike with the following statement:
“... we unhesitatingly declare that the strike in Fisher Body plant is unauthorized and unsanctioned and is therefore contrary to the constitution and by-laws of the international union and is destructive of the best interests of the union. This illegal and unsanctioned strike jeopardizes the position of the international union.”
With this statement in his pocket, Martin proceeded to the Pontiac local meeting to bludgeon the workers into submission. But the task was not an easy one. Before he was through he had run the gamut of all the demagogue’s tricks in which he is so adept. He threatened, he cajoled, he pleaded, he denounced.
The workers were stunned. The sentiment of the unionists was unmistakable. A plea from Martin for a vote to sustain the action of the GEB brought Charles Soutor, one of the strike leaders, to his feet demanding discussion. He got the floor. Souter declared that if the International refused to back the strike the job of every shop steward was in jeopardy and vigilantes would take hold of Pontiac. But the shop worker was no match for the trained orator. And when Martin interrupted him, spreading the oily promise of protection for the stewards, Souter could not regain the thread of his opening remarks. A weak speech by George Method and then another hammer blow by Martin brought the meeting to an end. The workers left the hall disillusioned and beaten. For all practical purposes the strike was over.
Those Responsible
For the first time since the Milwaukee convention last Aug., the lines were sharply drawn. Sitting on the fence had become impossible. It should be clear Martin alone does not bear responsibility for the smashing of the Fisher Body sit-down. The Pontiac Auto Workers (Nov. 24th) reporting the speeches of members of the Executive Board, at a meeting of Fisher Body men after the evacuation of the plant, quotes Wyndham Mortimer, leader of the Unity Group:
“Pointing out that the decision of the board was unanimous in declaring that unauthorized strikes must be stopped, Wyndham Mortimer, vice president of the International, declared, ‘We are faced with an exceptionally difficult problem. But we were one in deciding for the only possible solution’.”
Rumors were rife that the vote of the Executive Board was split on authorizing the strike. But whatever the vote was, Mortimer’s statement makes it clear that he takes full responsibility for the action of the Board. Moreover either Mortimer or Reuther or both had it in their power to stay the hand of Martin even after the vote had been taken in the Board. If instead of hiding in the hotel room they had gone to the local meeting and spoken in favor of the strike, there is no doubt that Martin would have received a crushing defeat and the sit-down continued. But they too were concerned with “respectability” before the capitalist class and the good-will of John L. Lewis, an old hand at outlawing strikes.
 



After a year of political juggling, the 5-cent fare football has landed back where it started – in the arms of Mayor O’Dwyer. Now as then, the Mayor swears on a stack of Bibles that there will be no increase in the fare as long as he remains in office.
There is an important difference, however, between the situation today and the one that existed in Feb.1947. The people of New York are today completely at the mercy of O’Dwyer’s promises, whereas one year ago the law specifically prevented O’Dwyer from acting on the fare before submitting the question to a popular referendum.
Although the Republican majority in Albany killed the referendum law, it must now be clear that O’Dwyer and the Democratic Party have a lion’s share in depriving the people of this democratic right. It was O’Dwyer who first demanded last November that the referendum be abolished and the fare be raised. But to save his political hide, he wrapped up the higher fare with demands for increased appropriations from Albany to improve hospitals and other city services.
We predicted then that, in the absence of a mass protest movement which would threaten to boot the O’Dwyer gang out of office, the Democrats would discard most of the “package” when faced with a showdown with the Republican majority in Albany.
Only one factor explains the failure of the Democrats to make this compromise: the Isaacson victory in the Bronx. It was the spectre of defeat at the polls that made the Democrats vote against the anti-referendum part of O’Dwyer’s package. The same fear made O’Dwyer pledge that he would not use the power granted him and his Board of Transportation.
The Daily Worker hailed O’Dwyer’s new promise as a “partial victory” for the fight to keep the nickel fare. Yet the truth is just the opposite. The victory goes to O’Dwyer and his scheme to raise the fare. As an experienced politician, O’Dwyer knew from the start that the fare could not be raised at one blow without committing “political suicide.” A series of maneuvers were necessary.
O’Dwyer succeeded in dragging the Social Democratic and Stalinist trade union leaders together with the ALP and Liberal Party leaders behind him in each maneuver. They applauded and cheered O’Dwyer’s grandstanding last February. The 5-cent fare, to believe them, was safe so long as O’Dwyer remained in office.
In this way, the nickel fare issue was kept off the ballot last November to permit the referendum abolishing Proportional Representation to pass and thus eliminate the threat of reprisal at the polls. No sooner was the election over than O’Dwyer announced his changed position on the fare. But by this time he had won the support of Mike Quill, who had misled the CIO Transport Workers membership into believing that an increase in their wages was tied to an increase in fare.
One of the most shameful leaflets in the history of the trade union movement, separating the interests of the transport workers from the rest of the working class, was issued by the TWU officials calling upon their membership to “Get Into the Fight” for the higher fare.
The Stalinist leaders of the CIO Council refused to change their position on the nickel fare as Quill had done. But the opposition to O’Dwyer – on the part of Stalinist CIO, ALP and CP leaders – was of the paper variety. They did not demand a referendum; no demonstrations were organized; the opposition was confined to newspaper statements.
In addition, the Stalinist and Social Democratic stand on city financing was indistinguishable from O’Dwyer’s. It still is. Thus they are succumbing to his third and final maneuver. Together with O’Dwyer, their only program of city financing was to “put the heat on Governor Dewey.” Now that this has failed, what next?
It is now almost inevitable that O’Dwyer will refuse wage increases to the transport workers and lay off personnel in other departments on the grounds that the city is broke. When the opposition to this program becomes strong enough, O’Dwyer will probably use his new powers to raise the fare.
The 5-cent fare can be saved, but it must be saved now! If the labor movement rests on its haunches until the November elections, it might as well be kissed goodbye. No politician will think of raising the fare before November. But it will be another matter after the returns arc in. The time to act is now – behind a realistic program of action:

A petition campaign must be launched by the labor movement to place on the ballot next November a referendum to restore the right of the people of New York to vote on the fare.
 
A mass movement must be set on foot to compel the legislature to grant New York the right to tax Wall Street securities, as a means of financing the city’s transportation system and other services without placing an additional tax on the poor.
 
The city must expropriate the subways. It must stop paying the robber baron’s ransom of over 57 million dollars annually to the bankers in interest charges to sustain the crooked deal whereby the city bought back from private interests railroads built and operated primarily with tax-payers money.
 
The transportation workers must be freed of the dictatorship of the banker-real-estate dominated Board of Transportation. The transport workers run the subways, buses and streetcars. Let them control its operation and determine working conditions.

This program can save the nickel fare. The labor movement has the strength to organize the forces to defeat the banker-real estate crowd.
 



Kermit Johnson and Genora Johnson, nationally prominent workers in the Socialist Party and outstanding militants in the Michigan automobile Union, have resigned from the S.P. and joined the ranks of the American Fourth Internationalists in the Socialist Workers Party.
Their resignation comes as a protest to the bankrupt policies of the S.P. now culminating in the planned retirement into the reactionary Old Guard Social Democratic Federation.
It comes as a climax to a long, difficult struggle to introduce revolutionary principles into the Socialist Party and revolutionary methods into its trade union work. At every stage, these militants were obstructed in their efforts by the opportunist and careerist leaders at the top of the party. Significant Act
Particularly was this the case in Michigan where Walter Reuther, Stalinist stooge, led the party by the nose through the mud of Communist Party wrecking maneuvers in the auto union ... while the agents of Norman Thomas and the N.E.C. prevented the militant workers in the auto union from flinging Mr. Reuther out on his ear.
That Genora and Kermit Johnson have left the Socialist Party after valiantly attempting to change its course, is a significant proof of the impossibility of revolutionists to live in a party which expels the left wing and prepares to unite with the decrepit Old Guard. Their action in joining the S.W.P. blazes a trail for all remaining left wingers in the party, for all who refuse to be submerged into the debris of the Old Guard and who wish to strike out on a fresh path of revolutionary activity.
 
To Those Still in S.P.
The statement of Genora and Kermit Johnson, printed herewith, is especially directed to the automobile workers still in the Socialist Party, to the rank and file S.P. members in the West Side Briggs, Dodge and Hudson locals of the U.A.W. They have had a common experience, with the comrades Johnson in struggling for a clean-cut policy in the union against Walter Reuther, Ben Fisher and Co. It is now obvious that from the situation in the U.A.W. and from the condition of the S. P. nationally that these efforts have run headlong into a brick wall. Intelligent revolutionists will draw the necessary conclusions – conclusions which we are convinced can be no different than those drawn by Kermit and Genora Johnson.
Kermit Johnson was the leader of the successful Chevrolet strike during the famous Flint sit-downs early in 1937; he was formerly chairman of Local 156 (Flint) of the U.A.W. In the recent gubernatorial elections in Michigan he ran for Lieutenant-Governor on the S.P. ticket. He was also a member of the State Executive Committee and the National Labor Committee of the S.P. Organized Emergency Brigade
Genora Johnson was the organizer of the Woman’s Emergency Brigade in Flint, which was a potent factor in mobilizing the women and in winning the famous sit-down in 1937. Prior to her recent illness she took a prominent part in the national work of the Ladies’ Auxiliary of the auto union.
The Socialist Appeal and the Socialist Workers Party extends a full and hearty welcome to Genora and Kermit Johnson into the ranks of the party and bids all other S.P. militants to follow their example.
 



The crisis in the auto workers’ union moves rapidly to a final showdown. With Sidney Hillman and Philip Murray, armed with a ukase from John L. Lewis, attempting to force an odious decision on the U.A.W. Executive Board in Detroit, it is only a matter of time before the crisis is resolved and a split rends the union, or what is the same or worse – the Stalinists grab control. A third possibility is a compromise which will postpone a solution of the faction fight at least until the next convention.
Whatever the outcome, the auto workers’ union faces a difficult and trying future. The new Roosevelt depression has turned a large section of the membership out of the plants, reduced the union rolls, emptied the union treasury. The motor magnates are obviously biding their time for a major onslaught to slash wages, re-introduce the vicious open-shop practices – in a word, smash the auto workers’ union. And in the meantime they are transferring, wherever economically feasible, all work to open shop centers. The powerful fighting reserves in the rank and file make the union more than able to cope with the new attack. But the debilitating effects of disruption from within are paralyzing the hands of the union and exposing it to untold dangers. The labor movement is by this time well acquainted with the source of that disruption: Stalinism.
Crimes of Stalinism Few unions have escaped the disastrous activities carried on by this wrecking crew whose aim is to harness the labor movement to the war machine of the Roosevelt administration. The auto workers’ union has been singled out for the full brunt of their campaign. U.A.W. locals have been kept in constant turmoil; every opportunity has been utilized to keep a constant fire of dissention burning; real issues have been distorted and unimportant ones magnified; real sentiments of the rank and file have been demagogically exploited and betrayed; organization drives were sabotaged if the glory did not fall on some Communist Party idol, and the W.P.A. auxiliary was almost wrecked because it did not serve their treacherous political aims. A catalogue of the crimes of the Stalinists in the auto union would fill a book.
The worst possible outcome of the present conflict will produce at least one salutory result. A large section of the workers will have learned “what the score is” as far as the Communist Party is concerned. The scourge of the labor movement, the Stalinists, deliberately set out to wreck the U.A.W. after they failed to capture it. Unionism means a constant struggle against the boss for better living conditions – it is a weapon for the workers. Stalinism on the other hand serves not the workers but the interests of the dictator of the Soviet workers. It uses the unions for over-the-counter trading with the crooked diplomats who are only agents of the duPonts, Fords and Chryslers. The Stalinists have no allegiance to the union. They are responsible only to Stalin and his G.P.U. Stalinism and unionism are mortal enemies. To know this is the beginning of wisdom for every good union man. The major bid for power made by the Stalinists in the U.A.W. has placed all groups before the acid test. Fine speeches and wordy resolutions could not remove the unavoidable necessity of taking a stand.
A combination of circumstances made the Socialist Party an influential force in the union. Throughout they have performed a wretched role – the shadow of the Stalinists. Left to their own, they fumbled the ball consistently. But the intensity of the fight did not permit them this luxury for long. The cowardliness of the party leaders and shabbiness of the party program made them an easy prey for the cynical and unprincipled careerist, Walter Reuther. His personal ambitions dominated the party policy. Norman Thomas fumed and even made public declarations but Walter Reuther continued to put the party through the paces. With Reuther at the helm, the difference between the C.P. and S.P. was not decisive. The S.P. whined and even protested but in the end it always tagged along behind the Stalinists. Undoubtedly, Reuther will repay the S.P. one of these days for their tolerant treatment, just as David Lasser of the Workers Alliance did – by leaving the party when he is done with it and kicking it in the face on the way out. That is of little importance, however, to American workers who are having demonstrated for them once again in the U.A.W. the utter bankruptcy of the Socialist Party as a force for progressive unionism.
* * *
Martin Fights the C.P.
Only a blind man or a fool would deny that Homer Martin has waged a persistent and courageous struggle against the union busters. He has refused to make any rotten compromise with the Stalinists, resisted their blackmail and spurned their repeated attempts to buy him off. Where countless C.I.O. leaders from Lewis down have taken the easy road and become fronts for the Communist Party in the unions, it is to Martin’s credit that he refused to sell out.
But good intentions never made a good fighter. Especially in a political fight are skill and principles of paramount importance. Martin’s skill in the struggle against the Stalinists has always at best been questionable, and the principles of the administration group allied with him have been open to serious criticism by progressive unionists. Under these conditions, the Stalinist game was tremendously facilitated. As long as Martin fought them with bureaucratic weapons, they could shout “democracy” to the high heaven although secretly they planned a dictatorship. As long as Martin allied himself with reactionaries, the Stalinists could pose as “progressives” although their real policies differed not an iota from those of Martin’s right-wing allies. The auto workers rightly jealous of their democratic rights and desiring a progressive union fell victim to the Stalinist demagogy.
 
A Record of Blunders
Let us cite the record to make the point clear:
1. Martin’s chief lieutenants are men like Fred Pieper and Loren Houser. Notorious for their incompetence, they liberally indulge in red-baiting of the good old-fashioned variety. Hatred for them and their like turned considerable sections of the auto workers against Martin.
2. Martin’s appointments of organizers, whose only quality is their loyalty to the machine and the payroll, alienated progressive workers in nearly all the auto centers. Militant workers, who had grown suspicious and distrustful of Stalinist organizers, were held in line when Martin replaced the Stalinists by arrogant chair-warmers.
3. Martin’s campaign against unauthorized strikes very often had a demoralizing effect on the union and weakened his support among the militant elements. In enforcing the agreement, fighting hostile foremen and managements and beating down provocations, the workers in the plant were forced to resort to a sudden sit-down or slow-down. Some of the unauthorized actions were undoubtedly the work of company agents, but most of them were clearly a manner of settling legitimate grievances on the part of the workers. Instead of Martin pursuing an aggressive policy towards the motor companies for the enforcement of the agreement, he granted General Motors a letter giving them the right to discipline union men engaged in unauthorized actions. This did not help the union in negotiations, it did not discipline the union, it did not help Martin with the militants
 .
Weak with G.M.
4. Negotiations with General Motors were handled in a very timid and conservative manner. Lacking boldness and decision, Martin lost opportunity after opportunity to wrest concessions from the corporation, then he lost the moment to maintain the status quo and finally when depression struck with full force, he was forced to retreat. Then he bungled all over again by signing the agreement without consulting the membership. The Stalinists, originators of this type of high-handed action, unscrupulously exploited Martin’s bureaucratic action and lined up the membership against him.
5. For months Martin sailed along with no program whatever, at least with none visible. C.P. demagogy about militancy and democracy found ready listeners in. this period. Their demagogy went up in smoke when Martin championed and carried the 20-point program at the Executive Board last May. But the program was carried out in the most dilatory fashion. The membership remained uninformed about the union busters. Then Martin startled the entire union by his suspension of five of the leading officers. This terrible mistake consisted not in the innocence of the careerist and stooge officers. No! Their crimes were heavy enough to warrant expulsion ten times over. But no educational campaign had prepared the membership for these disciplinary measures. The bureaucratic suspension put the Stalinists back on the map of the auto union and gave them their strongest talking point. Martin has never fully recovered from the irresponsible manner in which he carried out the suspensions.
 
Stays Among Friends
6. With no other road open Martin finally began an open campaign. While the campaign lacked the effectiveness it would have had before the suspensions, it was a step in the right direction. But here again he bungled. Instead of going into hostile territory to convince opposition locals of the correctness of his action, Martin remained among his friends and kept repeating his story to locals already lined up for him.
Despite all his blunders, Martin’s record – as the head of the most democratic of C.I.O. unions, of the union which had gained most for its membership through militant action, of the union which had organized unemployed workers on an unprecedented scale – gave every reason to expect that the fight could be taken into the camp of the enemy and the Stalinist opposition smashed. But Martin missed his boat once again. And now lines are drawn hard and fast to a point where at least for the present it is impossible to change anybody’s mind.
Events in the auto union are dramatic proof on a large scale that there is only one way to defeat the Stalinists. Harry Lundeberg and the West Coast Sailors gave the Stalinists the trouncing of their life because they fought the C.P. bureaucrats as champions of democracy; they fought the C. P. reactionaries not as conservatives but as progressive militant unionists. Democracy and militancy are the only weapons against Stalinist reaction and dictatorship. These methods are dictated not by expediency but by the needs of the unions, by the true relation of forces and the real role of the C.P.
* * *
The Compromise Proposals
The Socialist Appeal has already pointed out the hypocritical nature of the Lewis “peace plan.” The plan is a clear attempt to destroy the autonomy of the union and to saddle the union with a Stalinist regime. Wiseacres have termed the plan a “compromise.” Yes, something like the compromise Mussolini made with Hailie Sellassie! There is no other course for progressives but to fight the Lewis-Stalinist plan with every ounce of strength at their disposal.
Yet the danger of a split remains an imminent possibilty. With union forces almost equally divided between Martin and the Stalinists a split would create untold damage. The rival unions would be thrown into immediate and bitter conflict. Between court actions and physical violence among workers, the manufacturers would have an open field for wrecking both organizations and re-establishing the open shop.
To avoid the eventuality of such a split, it is necessary that some compromise be made. The compromise cannot and must not surrender the union to the Communist Party, as Lewis proposes. But it must find some formula for composing the differences at least temporarily. Naturally, no one need have any illusions that peace will be achieved by any compromise whatever. The Stalinists will, not lose a minute after the compromise is signed to resume their attempts to capture the union.
Peace within the auto union will come only after the union-wreckers are decisively defeated and discredited in the eyes.of the membership. That is the job for the progressives who must now organize as an independent force and carry the campaign to the rank and file – the only guarantee that the United Automobile Workers will be saved from the cancer of Stalinism and pursue a militant and progressive policy.
 



“Labor statesmen” and their Stalinist camp followers are very angry today – and they have every right to be. They expended millions of dollars from union treasuries and workers’ pocketbooks to elect “friends of labor” – and now the “friends of labor” headed by the President himself have turned up openly in the camp of the enemies of labor. But anger and cursing won’t protect the unions or win an election. The workers want to know: What is to be done now?
The master-minds say that Truman will never again receive the votes of labor. Whitney has pledged part of the treasury of the Trainmen’s Union to defeat him. But who will replace Truman? From what party will the new ‘’friends of labor” be elected? These questions reduce all the brave shouting to an inaudible whisper.
These gentlemen – the most vociferous among them being the Stalinists – reluctantly admit now, that as between the Democratic and Republican parties the workers are choosing between the devil and the deep blue sea. Yet they are opposed to an independent labor party, based on the trade unions. Such a party, they say, would isolate the workers from the rest of the population and therefore insure defeat at the polls. Hence what is needed, they conclude, is a “Third Party” to be headed by the “Progressives” from both capitalist parties, by men like Henry Wallace, Ickes, Morgenthau, Pepper, LaGuardia and others.
 
Don’t Want It Now
The strangest thing about the self-appointed leaders of the “Third Party” is that not one of them favors its creation now. Wallace, Morgenthau, the newspaper PM – pride and joy of the millionaire Marshall Field – are all against it today. The Stalinist Daily Worker says talk of its immediate creation is “a plot of Trotskyists and reactionaries.” All of them are lecturing the workers that there is still a good apple in the rotten barrel, that labor must remain loyal to the Democratic Party.
All of them are hanging on to the Democratic Party for dear life: this despite the fact that the Democratic Party – like the Republican Party – is just another way of saying huge profits, high prices, lagging wages and anti labor-laws: another way of saying Wall Street. But in their own way, Wallace and Co. are right. They see no fundamental difference in program between the so-called “left-wing” of the Democratic Party and that of a Third Party.
The criticisms of the millionaire Morgenthau are a good example. He condemns Truman for betraying Roosevelt’s, program and as a result failing to curb inflation and to stop strikes. What is this but a choice of one anti-labor program over another? Every housewife knows that skyrocketing prices began during the war under Roosevelt. Every worker knows that Roosevelt froze wages by the device of the “Little Steel” formula. Every profiteer knows that the “Big Steal” began under Roosevelt.
Morgenthau is bitter against Truman because he disbanded the War Labor Board and therefore could not prevent strikes. But the workers were bitter against Roosevelt because he created the War Labor Board which denied wage demands, buried grievances and throttled strikes. The difference between Morgenthau and Truman is one of how best to hamstring the labor movement. Truman wants to do it openly by means of Congressional action. Morgenthau wants to pull the wool over the workers eyes, and then do the same thing as Truman by presidential decree and presidential boards.
 
How Labor Wins Support
In essence these are the differences between the “Third Party” and the Democratic Party, and the so-called “progressives” can see no reason for the present why these differences cannot be reconciled within the framework of the Democratic Party.
But can labor go it alone? Doesn’t it need the support of the poor farmer, the shopkeeper, the insurance salesman and the bank clerk? True enough – no sane person could deny the need. How is this support to be won?
First: by recognizing the real community of interest that exists between the workers and the lower middle class. Both classes are oppressed by the same tax burden they have to carry to pay the cost of capitalist wars. Both classes suffer at the hands of the monopolies: factory workers receive low wages, the poor farmer pays exorbitant prices for machinery. Sixty families revel in a golden paradise that is made possible by the blood, sweat and tears of the worker, farmer and small businessman. Middle class and working class have one enemy: monopoly capitalism. They must unite around one program whose aim will be to drive out of power the government of bankers and industrialists and to establish a government of workers and farmers.
Second: This program requires the power of organization. And this power exists today in the trade unions which stand in the front lines of the struggle against monopoly capital. The farmer and the small businessmen are in the nature of things isolated one from the other and not easily organized. They can only be politically effective by supporting the political party of the working class – the Labor Party. It would be the height of folly to disorganize and disfranchise 14,000,000 workers in a “Third Party” when it is possible to give organization and strength to the middle class through a Labor Party.
The support of the middle class will never be obtained by labor surrendering its independence and its program in a “Third Party” dominated by Wallace, Ickes and Co. These gentlemen do not represent the middle class, they are impostors whose roles is to deceive workers and farmers alike in the interest of Big Business. They denounce labor’s struggles because, they allege, the middle class will be offended. By thus artificially dividing the workers from their natural allies, they only weaken and, if successful, eventually defeat, the common front of both classes against the common enemy – Big Business.
 
Not a “Third Party”
In a “Third Party” the middle class would be pampered and flattered. But it will be just words, words and more words. Without a real struggle against the monopolies – led by the workers – inflation and black market will ruin the merchant, concentration will drive the small businessman to the wall, debts will plague the poor farmer. And the worst of it all will be that the cowardice and betrayals of the. “Third Party” will turn the wrath of the middle class not against Big Business, but against the workers where the fascist demagogues will direct it.
All attempts to create a separate middle class party in the past have proved abortive, with the party ending its life in one of the two major parties. The Populist movement, at the turn of the century, was finally interred in the Democratic Party. The Wisconsin Progressive Party, once a national party, which polled 5,000,000 votes in 1924 for President, surrendered the ghost to the Republican Party three months ago. There is no independent road for the middle class. If it does not follow the labor movement, it will be driven into the arms of Big Business.
There is only one reason why the siren tunes of the “Third Party” lack in volume today. The movement for an independent labor party is not yet powerful enough to constitute a threat to the “friends of labor” and the labor leaders who are still running the old skin game of two-party capitalist politics.
To be forewarned is to be forearmed.. The “Third Party” is not the labor party wrapped in a more attractive package. It is the old capitalist party with its face lifted and its name changed. Don’t be fooled by substitutes. The real fight is the fight for the independent political party of labor based on the trade unions and supported by the poor farmers and the small businessmen.
 



“Yes, it is true that labor needs its own party, but it is still too early to form it.”
This argument comes from trade union leaders who are now compelled to recognize that the workers have been driven Into a blind alley by capitalist politics. It is their last stand against the growing demand for the creation of a labor party.
“Practical” as this argument may appear at first glance, one thing it is not: it is not new. Almost as long as there has been a labor movement in the United States, there have been champions of the labor party in the trade unions. And for almost the same length of time bureaucrats have opposed the labor party with the argument: “Now is not the time.”
Prior to the organization of the CIO they said it was premature to form a labor party because the trade unions were too weak. Only the skilled workers enjoyed union protection; in the mass production industries company unions and the open shop prevailed. The main task was the organization of the unorganized. But this task itself was made more difficult because the state and national legislatures controlled by the capitalist parties gave legal protection to company unions, company spies and strikebreakers breaking strikes with injunction laws, state troops and deputized thugs.
 
Always “Too Soon”
After the great CIO drive which swept steel, auto, rubber, glass, aluminum, packinghouse into the union ranks, it became patently ridiculous to speak of the “weakness” of the labor movement. Now it was too soon to form labor’s own party because a “great friend of labor” had moved into the White House and had brought with him into Congress and the state capitals many other “friends” from the Democratic Party. According to the myth, so carefully built up by union bureaucrats and Stalinist bureaucrats, Roosevelt virtually organized the CIO singlehanded and all of the concessions and pro-labor legislation won in this period were handed to the workers on a silver platter by the man in the White House. It is difficult to argue against a myth. Nevertheless the facts are clear.
Wherever the workers won, the victory was due to their own strength and their own militancy. Wherever they lost, they could thank the “friends ot labor” upon whom they relied. The “Little Steel” strike was broken in 1937 by Democratic governors elected by CIO votes in Pennsylvania, Ohio and Illinois. When Roosevelt was asked to speak out against the use of the National Guard, he belted the steelworkers in the face with his infamous declaration: “A plague on both your houses.”
Despite these sharp lessons, Murray, Hillman and the Stalinists continued to hold the halo over Roosevelt’s head. Naturally, a labor party would be premature as long as a saint sat in the President’s chair. The facts, however, are different. Although with diminishing enthusiasm the workers continued to follow Roosevelt until his death, they had meanwhile turned their backs on the Democratic Party. Not all the artful demagogy of Roosevelt could make the party of the Wall Street gang, the big city bosses, and the polltax Congressmen attractive again for the organized workers.
 
“Non-Partisan League”
To elect Roosevelt, the trade union leaders were compelled to organize the workers into a separate political body: Labor’s Non-Partisan League in 1936 and the Political Action Committee of the CIO thereafter. In form both of these organizations were labor parties: they were relegated bodies representing the various CIO unions and membership organizations consisting of workers and their families. But in aim and program they were not labor parties at all.
Although LNPL and PAC drafted their own programs they had no means of demanding action since the Democratic politicians, guaranteed support in advance, felt free to act as they pleased – rather as Wall Street pleased. The best LNPL and PAC could hope for was a few crumbs. A few crumbs for the millions of votes that decided every major election since 1936! Not only was the time ripe for a labor party but without organizing the workers independently; without bartering the combined millions of union votes, without betraying the deepest aspirations and interests, the Democratic administrations in Washington for the past 10 years would have been impossible.
The crowning argument of those who keep postponing the labor party to some time that never comes is the theory of the “lesser evil.” It is true, the more honest admit, that Roosevelt was becoming less friendly to labor all the time. But what was the alternative? If the trade unions ran their own candidates they would split the Democratic vote and a Republican like Landon, Willkie or Dewey would be elected. And to make the bogeyman even more terrifying they never fail to recall the odious memory of Herbert Hoover.
But one little fact punctures this argument completely: there were less than three million organized workers during Hoover’s administration. He could slug the workers’ movement without fear of counter-action or reprisal. Today any president must count with the largest, the most conscious and the most powerful trade union organization in history. There is no way, short of establishing an outright dictatorship that would permit even the most reactionary President to ignore this formidable, organized power.
 
What Counts Is Power
Now suppose for a moment that to the organized economic power of the trade unions there is joined the organized political power of the labor party; suppose that the labor party in its first presidential election polls only one-third of the popular vote – 12,000,000; suppose that the labor party wins one-third of the seats in the Senate and the House of Representatives and an equal number in the state legislatures. (This is not at all far-fetched; if anything it is an understatement of the electoral power of the union members, their families, friends and supporters they will receive from all the nation’s poor.) Can anyone conceive of a Republican President and a Republican House acting in the style prescribed by Hoover under such conditions?
Henry Ford was a friend of Hitler and he acted like Hitler to the auto workers until they shut down River Rouge and made him sign a union contract. What counts in politics as it does in union business is NOT promises, gratitude or good will – what counts is power. Weakness permits “progressives” to act like reactionaries. Strength makes reactionaries pause many times before they yield to their natural impulses.
When indeed will the time be ripe for the formation of a labor party? This question the slippery-tongued gentlemen always evade. We need not wait any longer for their evasions and ambiguities, for their procrastination and delays. We have seen how they postponed, blocked and sabotaged the labor party through the depression, then through the days of the great rise of the CIO, then through the war, and now in the midst of the gigantic postwar struggles they are still not ready.
But the enemy is not waiting. Acting through its lackeys in Washington, the fist of Wall Street is crashing down on the working population: the FEPC is slaughtered; the open sky is fast becoming the ceiling on prices; fact-finding boards cut the wage demands of striking workers; plants, mines, railroads, entire industries are seized by the government to force the workers into unequal battle with the state instead of individual employers; now Truman is preparing to go into the strikebreaking business in a big way by using the army, navy and coast guard to smash the projected maritime strike; meanwhile Truman and Congress are vying with each other to see who can place the worst labor-crippling laws into the statute-books.
Shall we wait, politically paralyzed, politically disarmed, politically impotent until organized labor is bound and gagged? Shall we wait until the unions are beaten, defeated and cut to pieces, robbed of their treasuries, persecuted by capitalist courts and capitalist laws, tied hand and foot by arbitration, crushed by armed forces? Shall we wait until Wall Street brings down the iron heel of military dictatorship?
The time for waiting is over. The time for action is now. The Labor Party must be organized immediately. The unions stand at the peak of their strength. They represent a formidable power. The workers have emerged from every strike undefeated – every strike but the railroad strike. And there the setback has tom the blinkers off the eyes of the entire working class population. It is alert, militant and eager to repel the attack of labor’s enemies.
Great victories are possible – on one condition: the knot must be untied that binds the political arm of labor. The independent political party of the working class and the poor farmers – the labor party – must be built now!
 



Every worker must be troubled by a paradox which stares him in the face today. He sees the trade unions at the peak of their strength, numerically stronger and more powerful in action than they have ever been, and yet, at the same time, these unions appear practically helpless before the offensive of Wall Street’s President and Wall Street’s Congress.
One after another, the biggest monopolies in the countries were paralyzed by great strikes and then forced to concede substantial wage increases. Neither propaganda nor threats could weaken the strike front. For the first time in American labor history, scabs and strikebreakers played a negligible role against the solid array of strength built by the unions.
Yet this unprecedented power appears practically impotent today before the offensive of the capitalist government. After a series of effective and successful strikes that began last winter, the situation has been turned upside down in the one short week that followed the end of the railroad tie-up. Spearheaded by President Truman, Congress is driving through the most reactionary, labor-crippling laws seen in this country since the open shop days that followed the first world war.
The entire labor movement is alert to their terrifying effects. From every union, from every shop a great outcry is heard for resistance and action against the offensive Big Business has launched from the White House and Capitol Hill. But to date this swelling shout appears to be a voice crying in the wilderness. 14,000,000 organized workers, invincible yesterday on the picket lines, today give the impression of trying to stop an on-rushing tank with shouts of protest.
 
Labor Is Unprepared
The simple truth is this: the labor movement is unprepared and unarmed. During this critical phase of its war against the profit-greedy billionaires, organized labor finds itself without political weapons. For as long as the memory can recall, the labor leaders have beguiled the workers with the fiction that the government was the impartial umpire between the classes, that the umpire was even inclined to stretch this impartiality to the point of friendliness with the labor movement. When the blindfold began to slip a little during the war under the pounding of Roosevelt’s regimenting decrees, the Hillmans, Murrays and Greens quickly pulled it back into place again. They assured everyone that the great friend of labor in the White House had been misled by bad advisors, and in any case that these were only emergency measures that would die with the termination of hostilities. As uneasiness began to grow in the ranks and opposition to their surrender policies mounted, the political program of the trade union leaders became restricted to one plank: no independent political action of the unions, no labor party.
Thus in a series of tragic but inevitable steps the criminal, cowardly leaders of labor led the workers into the gigantic trap openly prepared by the monopolies. At the rim of the trap, waiting for the blindfolded workers, was Truman, “the friend of labor,” armed with the big anti-labor stick prepared by his predecessor Roosevelt, also “a friend of labor.” The great pains suffered by the workers came not so much from the injuries themselves as from the fact that they were inflicted by a “friend of labor.” Everywhere workers are asking: Why are we so strong on the picket line and so weak before Wall Street’s puppets in Washington? What next?
The clear, unavoidable answer is that labor must have its own party, a labor party based upon and controlled by the trade unions. Unless such a party is built, and built rapidly, unless such a party takes control of the government, the Wall Street gang will use the present repressive legislation as the first iron hoops of a military dictatorship. The danger is grave. Let no one mistake it.
The time is rotten-ripe for the organization of a labor party. The -trade union movement is prepared for it. What then blocks the road? The very same trade union bureaucrats and the very same Stalinist bureaucrats who have blocked the road up to now and led the workers into their present peril. They are like the Bourbons of old: they learn nothing.
They have no program of action, no solution to the crisis, no plan for organizing the formidable power of 14,000,000 organized workers and their families in the political arena. Instead they bemoan “the accident” of Truman’s accession to office: they call for a return to Roosevelt’s policy. Truman has “betrayed” Roosevelt. By thus conjuring up the ghost of Roosevelt the bureaucrats are trying to keep the labor movement wandering in the graveyard of capitalist politics, continuing to support capitalist “friends of labor.”
Did Truman, betray Roosevelt’s policy? This is not only a lie, it is a stupid lie. There was in reality no such thing as a “Roosevelt policy.” There was only a Wall Street policy to which Roosevelt like Truman faithfully adhered. It is true that Roosevelt was wiser and more skillful than Truman in applying this policy. But then Roosevelt did not face national strikes in auto, steel, packing, coal mining and railroad in quick succession. Nothing that has been done by Truman is original – practically every link in his anti-labor chain was forged under the Roosevelt administration.
 
Forged by Roosevelt
The seizure of struck plants and industries was inaugurated by Roosevelt during the war-time mine strikes.
The run-around, and kick-around of the railroad workers’ demands began under Roosevelt in 1943.
The “cooling off” provisions of the Case Bill are borrowed from the “cooling off” provisions of the Smith-Connally Bill to which Roosevelt objected only on the ground that it would be ineffective for preventing strikes.
Truman borrowed his labor draft directly from Roosevelt who wrote to Congress on June 25, 1943:
“I recommend that the Selective Service Act be amended so that persons may be inducted into non-combat service up to the age of 65. This will enable us to induct into military service all persons who engage in stoppages or other interruptions of work in plants in possession of the United States.”
The record is clear, Truman learned his anti-labor political arithmetic in Roosevelt’s school, Truman was personally chosen by Roosevelt as his successor. Truman did not betray Roosevelt, but the trade union and Stalinist bureaucrats betrayed the labor movement by supporting the capitalist “friends of labor.” By advocating the same policy today, they continue this betrayal under far more dangerous conditions.
 



SYRACUSE – This wide open-shop industrial center is all primed for big war-time production. General Motors, Crucible Steel, Solvay chemicals long ago “adapted’’ themselves to the “strain” of war.
War means open-shop wages. Syracuse anticipated this general condition by many years. A skilled tool and die maker in Brown, Lipe & Shapin (GM affiliate manufacturing steering, gears, headlights, etc.) makes less than a dollar an hour tops. In the unionized plants of GM the same work calls for $1.25 to $1.40 an hour. Naturally, proportionately worse conditions obtain for the unskilled.
And while wages trail far behind unionized plants, and hours are long and working conditions bad, Syracuse workers already have the bad smell in their nostrils – the smell of the pre-war depression that will be the postwar panic.
 
The “Democracy” They Enjoy
Over 9,000 families are on relief, according to Leon Abbott, county welfare commissioner. At least one out of every seven persons receive relief – which is a sure sign that at least one out of every six are unemployed.
These families, fortunate enough to be on the relief rolls, received $6.32 on the weekly average. Estimating the families at an average of 4 persons, the relief cannon-fodder of Syracuse enjoy the princely sum of 90 cents a day for food, clothing, shelter, fuel and the other necessities of life. They will probably be branded “Fifth Column” if they don’t get too hysterical about the Morgan-DuPont-Roosevelt war for “democracy,” “civilization” and “the good life.”
Not very long ago the local newspapers and the Chamber of Commerce were engaged in a big crusade against “Bolshevism.”. The “Bolshevism” consisted of a low-cost housing project that succeeded in providing the tremendous number of 800 apartments. (There are almost 10,000 slum families in Syracuse.) But even this “wild-eyed Bolsheviki” project was not entirely unprofitable for the solid citizens of the community. It appeals that the slums were cleared for the project in NOT the poorest section of the city. These homes – of course! – were heavily mortgaged to the local banks, who were not entirely unhappy to relieve themselves of this property, at nice fat interest charges.
 
Workers Are Militant
With the exception of the militant truck drivers and a few of the minor trades, Syracuse is unorganized. There are a few weak SWOC lodges in the Crucible mills, a few of the smaller plants and mills under contract. And that’s about the size of organization. But don’t get the impression that Syracuse workers lack in militancy. For months on end the Remington-Rand workers battled as vicious a company terror as workers have seen anywhere. They didn’t win – the labor movement was to weak and the company too powerful. But the real story is told in the fact that the only way Remington-Rand could defeat the workers was by closing down the plant.
“Hell will pop in this town one of these days,” a worker told me, “and when it does we’ll be fighting our own war where it should be fought.”
* * *
The SWP is ready to move ahead in Syracuse. With several workers joining the party during my stay here, it is only a matter of time before an active, promising party organization is constituted.
 



ROCHESTER, N.Y. – I should add a few words of correction to my previous description of the anti-war sentiment among the workers. The war hysteria is being pounded into the consciousness of the people by every streamlined device of capitalist propaganda and with a fury of a “blitzkrieg.” This “blitzkrieg” has in a few weeks been able to decimate vocal “peace” and isolationist sentiment almost as completely as Hitler’s dive bombers and tanks destroyed the opposing armies.
The first reaction among workers whom you engage in a discussion on the war consists almost universally of the emotional outburst: “Hitler is going too far. Something must be done to stop him.” The uniformity of this statement uttered by so many people makes it clear that this reaction has been compounded out of passionate and justified hatred of the fascist dictator – and fear whipped up by the capitalist press.
Yet one need only scratch a little deeper to discover that beneath this hysteria there is an understanding of the war and its causes which is based on far more substantial material. No other term can better describe this understanding than ANTI-CAPITALIST.
The ten years of depression and misery have by no means been eradicated from the minds of the masses by the poison gas of Roosevelt’s war barrage. The suspicion that the millionaire Hitlers of American finance and industry will use the war to rake in billions of dollars in profits is everywhere prevalent. The well- founded idea that the ruling plutocracy will utilize this slaughter to “blitzkrieg” all social legislation, will hike up hours and bomb hell out of wages and crush the trade unions – this idea has penetrated into millions of minds.
“The privileged princes of the new economic dynasties” – as Roosevelt once called them – will utilize this war against Hitler to establish a Hitlerite dictatorship in the Untied States. Workers don’t say this in exactly so many words today, but it is not difficult to see that it will not be long before they find their way to a clear formulation of this idea and then translate it in terms of action.
 
A Veteran Talks
Too many victims of World War 1 are still in circulation for the good of the multi-millionaire criminals who are dragging us into World War II. I talked to one of them here, a counterman in a small lunchroom. The conversation began along the lines I described above. But soon he began to break through the first emotional reaction. He handed me my coffee and began to talk:
“I served four years in the Canadian army on the western front. Most of this time we were up in the front lines. I’ll never forget the battle of Vimy Ridge [as he was talking this battle was happening all over again for the second time – G.C.]. It was a horrible sight. I was up in the front with a machine-gun crew. As the Germans came on we mowed them down like blades of grass. It was not that you wanted to do it – you had to, it was your life or theirs. And besides you were half full of rum.
“I have never been the same since the war. And that goes for most of us that were lucky to come back in one piece. People would laugh when a veteran would jump six feet out of his seat in a street car when he heard the sudden screech of the brakes. But it wasn’t so funny. Something inside of us was all twisted up.
“And what did we get out of it? We went over there determined to get Kaiser Bill. But Kaiser Bill got a swell shack for himself in Holland after the war. Yes, and I see that’s one place neither side shoots up in this war. But we didn’t even get our jobs back. Then after we did finally land something, the depression came along and blew it all away. And now they’re starting the same thing all over again!”
He stopped for a minute to take care of his coffee urn. Then he came back.
“Boy,” he said looking straight at me, “this is one time when I don’t envy a man for his youth.”
* * *
Workers Regain Party
The public forum arranged that evening consisted with one or two exceptions of an audience entirely composed of workers. After the meeting a group of them remained to discuss further. It developed that this group – trade union militants and fighters for the unemployed – had been literally driven out of the party about a year ago by the petty-bourgeois element that then dominated the party in Rochester. When I explained to them the significance of the split with Burnham & Co., they could hardly restrain their expressions of delight. We had a lengthy discussion and they promised to return to the party. These additions to the S.W.P. are certain to give our Rochester organization new drive and help it for the first time to sink its roots in the workers movement.
* * *
BUFFALO – The war hysteria is making swift headway. But as frenzied as it may seem on the surface, there is one thing it can’t do. It can’t get people too enthusiastic about putting on a uniform and getting their heads shot off to fatten up J.P. Morgan and John D. Rockefeller.
 
Youth Seek Escape
I spoke to a group of young people here just out of high school and they all were devising special schemes to go A.W.O.L. when M-Day came along. Most of them had their eyes on some kind of special job that would keep them out of the army. They weren’t entirely certain they could get away with it but they were hoping ... After they listened to me explain how rigidly the M-Day plans were set up, they weren’t so confident of their little schemes any more.
What I was trying to tell them – and I think the point got over – was this: If you can’t get a job now, or if they won’t give you one when production is beginning to zoom with war orders, what chance do you think you’ll have after the war is over when there will be no reason to producing tens of thousands of airplanes and other war equipment? You don’t have anything to gain out of this system except a bellyfull of bullets. And if you don’t like the set-up the Big Shots will go after you in a way that will make Butcher Hitler look like a 100% democrat.
 
The Workers’ War
It’s time to start thinking – and doing – about the workers real war, the war against Wall Street and its fuehrer in the White House, the war for jobs, hope and opportunity for the young people who have skill, ambition and intelligence enough to rebuild this country ten times over. And that war will be your war – you won’t have to be thinking about A.W.O.L. then. There will be a reason to fight.
* * *
Hundreds of copies of the special steel workers edition of the Socialist Appeal were distributed to the workers at the huge Lackawana Steel Works, affiliate of Bethlehem Steel, and in the company town of Lackawanna. Everywhere the slogan of the six hour day at eight hours pay was favorably received. If the SWOC ever intends to organize Bethlehem steel, they had better wake up and start fighting for the six-hour day at eight hours pay. That’s the only way to force money-bags Eugene Grace to sign up.
 



1939 was a big bonanza year for General Motors.
According to the corporation’s report on February 7, the coupon clippers cleaned up a cool $183,000,000. The DuPont crowd took $35,000,000 of the swag.
Let’s break down these big numbers and see just how the profit was made:
For every one of an estimated 225,000 employees the corporation took approximately $814. The corporation received a profit of over 50 cents for every dollar paid out in wages. A profit of roughly $119 a car was made and shareholders received $4.04 per share of common stock outstanding. This compares with $2.17 received by shareholders in 1938. Par value of GM stock is $10 per share.
These big numbers smell like prosperity. Yes, indeed. Plenty of gravy for the fat parasites whose function in production is sunning their hides on swanky yachts in Florida or rebuilding the ruined fortunes of some broken-down European count to make him a good match with one of their dissipated daughters.
It smelled like prosperity to be sure – but all the wage slaves on the assembly lines, in the press rooms, the die shop and the foundries – the men whose sweat and skill and muscle made the $119 profit on the Chevrolets, Buicks, Cadillacs, Lasalles, Pontiacs and Oldsmobiles – all they got was the smell.
 
What the Workers Got
Most of the 225,000 workers employed by General Motors in Detroit, Pontiac, Flint, Saginaw, Lansing and in the plants of General Motors from Tarrytown, N.Y. to Los Angeles, who average on the conveyor belt almost a car a minute, didn’t make much more in wages for an entire year than the $814 that the corporation made in profit out of each man.
The corporation makes big propaganda out of the alleged “high” wages paid to its employees. But the workers of Michigan, Ohio, Indiana and elsewhere know differently.
 
The “Lucky” Workers
Lucky is the worker who puts in nine or even eight months of the year working. Lucky is the worker who can get through the year without having his car, his radio and often his clothing repossessed by the finance corporation for failure to make payments. More often, the auto worker feels himself extremely fortunate if he can get through the year without spending several months on the relief rolls. It’s a “rich” auto worker that can keep shoes on his kiddies so they can attend school the year out.
 
The Other Workers
Even so, these are the “favored” employees. They don’t include more than one-fourth of the industry’s workers who have been pushed out of employment by labor-saving devices, new machinery and speeded-up production. The only smell they get of the “prosperity” is the curt “no” of the personnel manager day in, day out, at the employment office.
As far as General Motors is concerned these men are through. If they can get on the relief rolls, well and good. Otherwise, its none of the corporation’s business!
 
The Union’s Responsibility
But it is the business of the auto workers. Underpaid auto workers mean suffering, semi-starvation, insecurity, malnutrition for the children, unsanitary housing conditions. Unemployed auto workers mean a constant threat to the wage scale of the employed – a steady reserve army of potential scabs and fascists. It is the business of the auto workers. It is not a hopeless problem – something (can and must be done about it!
The United Automobile Worker, from which most of the figures for this article are culled suggests that $200 more be paid the employed auto workers annually “and still leave profits above $150,000,000. This is a profit figure that only one or two corporations in the world, aside from GM, have ever been able to touch.”
A very modest suggestion. Just contrast the fabulous profit of GM for 1939 with the miserable wages of its workers, and you begin to get an idea of how modest this suggestion is. Then contrast the present annual wage of the auto worker with the minimum set for security by the U.S. Department of Labor and the modesty of the CIO suggestion becomes appalling.
$183,000,000 profit for General Motors coupon clippers for the year 1939! And how the parasites squander the millions made for them by the workers – gold-plated bathtubs, twenty-five dollar a plate dinners for monkeys rigged up in swallow-tailed coats, $40,000 for a coming-out party for some bourgeois brat, thousands for sleek nags and sleeker stables – money to burn for pleasure-mad plutocrats.
 
What Could Be Done
Just suppose this $183,000,000 were turned into wages and jobs for the auto workers:

Hours could be reduced to 30 hours a week;
 
75,000 new workers (one-third more) could be added to the payroll at $1,500 a year;
 
225,000 present employees would work thirty hours per week for the same wages they now receive for forty hours’ work.

Is this “reform” necessary’ Every General Motors worker will agree – it is more than necessary, it is imperative.
But is it possible? Here there will be hesitation and doubt. It seems a stupendous undertaking.
 
It Can Be Done!
Yes, but the unionization of General Motors seemed as big a job in its time until ... Until the workers of Flint sat down in the plants, barricaded them against cops, vigilantes and tin-horn soldiers and swore to remain in the plants until the last stretcher carrying the body of the last man was carried out. Then even Frank Murphy became a “friend”. He didn’t send the National Guard in after the strikers only because Sloane, DuPont, Knudsen and Co. feared lest their precious machinery be scratched by indignant workers. General Motors went down on its knees. The plants were unionized.
That was three years ago! The spirit of ’37 must return! The auto workers have bigger stakes to fight for in 1940. Timid officials will wail: “It is impossible”. No! Everything is possible! The rank and file must organize for action – with determination, audacity and courage the gains of 1940 will make the triumph of 1937 pale into insignificance.
 



The Executive Council of the American Federation of Labor has
finished its grave deliberations under the warm Florida sun. It
labored and labored and produced – a mouse that even the rodent
family would be ashamed to claim its own.
With good whiskey and mellow cigars plentiful, the punjabs of
America’s craft unions leaned back in their plushy hotel chairs
and pondered the state of the nation. They found
conditions deplorable. The depression is still with us after ten
years – lingering on like a bad dream. Capital lies idle by the
billions in the banks. Business stagnates, there is no expansion,
factories are idle. Ten millions are unemployed. And with it all, the
nation teeters on the brink of war.
In other words, which no one can deny: America remains in the
death grip of the most intense social crisis in its history.
Patch-work schemes won’t work any more. This is a time,
obviously, for bold men with bold programs. The leaders of 4,000,000
workers, who are most seriously affected by the crisis, should call
out the might of organized labor for immediate aggressive action.
They should, yes – but the old, old men of the Executive
Council have another idea of what should be done and how. For them
the proverb “discretion is the better part of valor” is a
hoary principle frozen in their bones. To the waiting world they
uttered solemn words:
“Unemployment still is the most acute domestic
problem of the nation ... the American Federation of Labor refuses to
accept the idea of chronic or permanent unemployment ... We believe
that a democracy owes a basic obligation to its Citizens to provide
them with opportunity to work and achieve a progressively higher
standard of living ... The AFL calls upon both political parties to
incorporate in their platforms this year a constructive program for
the elimination of widespread unemployment.”
And what is this constructive program ? “... find out the
facts and face them courageously ... Ascertain just how many men and
women willing and able to work are unemployed through no fault of
their own ... Find out the extent of unemployment among our youth and
among middle aged workers.” In short: take a census. The
government should easily comply with this demand as this is census
year. Cut a notch in the Council’s belt. The victory is already
won.
But what then? “... provide jobs for the unemployed in
private industry.” Noble thought. But how, when in the
words of the Council “... there are not enough jobs to go
around”?
“We demand,” the Executive Council
whispers meekly after Tom Dewey and Senator Vandenberg, “that
those in authority take whatever steps may be necessary to restore
business confidence. We urge that all government actions that tend to
discourage business expansion cease ...”
Yes, yes, we heard that before. The Republican National Committee,
the National Manufacturers Ass’n, the American Chamber of
Commerce has been dinning that tune in our ears for a decade. But
what about the unemployed, the jobs, the idle factories? “...
we urge Congress to create a national advisory council on
unemployment which would have representatives of government,
business, labor and consumers. Such a council could bring about unity
of purpose and unity of action on a constructive program.”
But suppose the members of the council couldn’t agree among
themselves? Suppose labor is voted down by “business” and
“government”? Suppose labor doesn’t like the
program? Suppose there is a lot of speeches and no program? Ah, well!
A fine effort but perhaps the times are not auspicious for “unity
of action” and “unity of purpose.”
Patience! There is something positive.
“Organized labor has long felt that the shorter
work week without decreases in pay provides a positive and
progressive offset to the natural displacement of workers by the
introduction of labor-saving machinery.”
How is this most necessary step to be obtained ? Action, strikes,
demonstrations? Take it easy, brother! This is the Executive Council
of the American Federation of Labor. “The AFL will continue
to press for the five-day week and the six hour day.” And
that’s that.
Four days later, apparently slowly recovering from the shock of
this radical declaration, ten leaders, led by Hutcheson and Wohl,
unlimbered 5,000 solid words of Republican indignation on the New
Deal. The statement bears the startling title: A Call for United
Action.
There has been too much “tinkering” with business.
Public confidence has been destroyed. The poor banks have been forced
to finance the government. This unrestricted “experimentation”
has provoked strikes and labor strife. Taxes are much, much too high
– in fact the suffering Sixty Families are being bled to death.
Too many g——m radicals, too much “innovating.”
On the question of war, the Council was united. “The US
(must) maintain strict neutrality and keep out of European wars.”
Not a word, however, about Roosevelt’s hurried moves towards US
entry into the war, not a word about turning the US into an Allied
arsenal, not a word about the American zones of continental
influence, not a word about the huge armaments programs, not a word
about the M- Day plans to strangle the labor unions.
But there was “condemnation of Soviet-Nazi imperialism”
– in line with the ideological preparations for intervention on
the side of the Allies. There was an exhortation to the government to
extend a loan to Finland to purchase arms and war materials in this
country. Green and Co. join with both feet in the anti-Soviet
crusade.
A touch of progressivism was added to the deliberations by the
strong onslaught on Thurman Arnold, who was condemned in bitter terms
for invading the independence of the trade union movement.
Nevertheless, the statement shied away from placing blame where it
properly belongs – Franklin Delano Roosevelt, initiator and
instigator of the “anti-trust” prosecutions against the
unions.
* * *
That’s the story of another AFL executive council meeting.
The one potentially progressive act that took place was the fight
between Dan Tobin and the arch-reactionary Hutcheson. All the
newspapers report is that Tobin challenged Hutcheson’s right to
the No. 1 seat on the council, and that it nearly came to a fist
fight. Undoubtedly, however, other issues are involved, which may
become public at next week’s meeting of the executive board of
the international Brotherhood of Teamsters. Tobin is reported
threatening to take the teamsters out of the AFL. That step,
considering the enormous power of the teamsters, might under certain
conditions weigh the scales decisively in favor of the CIO. It’s
a pity that Hutcheson and Tobin didn’t actually come to blows,
as Hutcheson did with Lewis at the San Francisco convention over the
CIO issue.
 



BOSTON – Big black headlines scream at you in every railroad station, every crowded square, every street corner. They all tell the same tale: the “horror” of the invasion; the atrocities of the Nazis; the outraged feelings of decent civilization.
But the big scoop of the week is the news about the shrinking of the Atlantic Ocean which brings the Heinkel bombers within hearing distance. “Preparedness!” “Preparedness” they all shout in chorus. “Track down the Fifth column,” – “keep the beacons trained overhead for Nazis popping out of the skies in parachutes.” “Wipe the Germans out,” shouts the Boston Herald: “If Allied planes should lay waste scores of German cities and use the technique of the Germans, our people would rejoice.”
But the American worker is not rejoicing at the slaughterhouse that is Europe. He passionately hates the Nazis. Yet he wants no part of the war. Few and far between are the expressions favoring a new A.E.F. The nightmare of Morgan’s last war is still too vivid in the popular consciousness and it serves temporarily to block the road of the war-made jingoes in the White House.
The anti-war feeling is strong enough to find expression even on the tongues of some public mouthpieces of big war-boom corporations. Boston’s Mayor Tobin, of American Tel. & Tel., Du Pont affiliate, said to 5,000 people gathered on the Boston Common for a “Mother’s Day” celebration: “The day on which America mobilizes for war, that is the day which means the end of representative government.” Other speakers – all of the hypocritical tribe of “isolationists” who will soon become virulent “interventionists”- drew cheers from the audience when they urged America be kept out of the “war for imperialism.”
The crowd on the Common did not at all signify some special occasion. Large numbers of people are congregating on this public square since the war broke out in the Low Countries. They are heatedly discussing the war, America’s chances of entry, listening to radical speakers, reading periodicals and literature of all types on the war.
 
Soldiers Listen Too
Abnormally large numbers of uniformed sailors, soldiers and marines are in evidence these days, especially around the Common. Some of them, cocky with the new thrill of wearing a uniform attempt to heckle and disrupt Socialist Workers Party antiwar meetings. But many others are more thoughtful, they know at least part of the score and they listen quietly, ask pertinent questions and remain after the meeting to argue and discuss. Where will they fight? Why? and for whom? These questions are becoming more wide-spread even among the unemployed young workers and farmers in uniform.
The anti-war message of the S.W.P. is penetrating slowly but deeply into the ranks of the industrial proletariat. A small but enthusiastic group of workers came to the party meeting where I spoke and applauded vigorously when it was proved that American workers have been the victims of a devastating “blitzkrieg” for over a decade by their real enemies, the Sixty Ruling Families, the billion-dollared corporate interests – that the only war for American workers is against “the enemy within our gates” and not overseas for World Empire for Morgan-DuPont & Co.
* * *
LYNN – Living in what was once the “world’s biggest ladies shoe center” but is now rapidly becoming a “ghost town,” Lynn workers have too keen an appreciation of so-called American democracy to be eager to sell that shoddy commodity overseas at the point of bayonets.
Interest at my meeting here was sustained and the question period unusually lively. One worker was troubled by the question, “What if Hitler comes here?” There were many nods of approval when I exposed this old, old shell game:
“In World War I, we were threatened with Kaiser Bill coming over here. Instead, we went ‘over there’ after him. The German workers bounced Kaiser Bill off his throne. But American and British politicians found him a summer resort in Holland. Then Allied capitalists made it so tough on the German people that they began to prepare a revolution. This scared the wits out of the Chamberlains, especially since the Revolution would make it pretty hot for them at home. So they financed and backed Hitler to put down the revolution. Now that Hitler has grown strong enough to poach on their precious profits, they want us in again. Not to end dictatorship, no, but to put Hitler out and put someone else in who wouldn’t poach so hard on their profits.”
An older worker put the question better when he, said: “Last time they sent us over to throw Kaiser Bill out. This time they’re sending us over to put him back in again.”
There wasn’t much explaining necessary for the workers present concerning the fiasco of the New Deal. They knew it in the kind of statistics that you feel: idle factories, jobless months and years, stinking private charity and public welfare, canned bullybeef for supper and clothes from the Salvation Army.
Between 1929 and 1940 Lynn sank to 37th place in shoe manufacturing. Profit-hungry bosses staged an exodus out of this city for the paradise of open-shop, low-wage towns in the South and West. Employment in shoe dropped to 3,000 from 8,000 in 1929. The welfare rolls shot up like a thermometer under a desert sun. One out of every six persons in Lynn pounds the streets, unemployed.
 
Workers Stick to Union
The bosses and their political stooges shouted: “It is the unions fault.” But the workers knew better, and they have held tight to their unions and organized the unorganized. Not for nothing did the Lynn workers establish a tradition of militancy.
Teamsters, shoe workers, leather workers, textile workers are well-organized. Outstanding among these is the powerful CIO union in General Electric with a membership of 7,000 strong; next are the teamsters, a husky and vigorous organization.
An Industrial Union Council with 14 affiliated unions in Lynn, Salem, Peabody and Beverly counts 25,000 members. A successful News Guild strike against the Daily Evening Item helped to strengthen its forces.
A resolution calling for the establishment of the 30-hour week at 40-hour pay was adopted unanimously at the Leather Workers convention held in Boston, April 26–28.
 
Stalinists Losing Ground
Comrades canvassing house-to-house in workers’ neighborhoods report enthusiastic response for the Peoples’ Referendum Against War. A resolution along these lines was cut to pieces at the Leather Workers convention, dominated by the Stalinists. Thus, the C.P. “struggles against war.”
Stalinist influence in Lynn is steadily losing ground. In recent months they have abandoned their hall and removed the party organizer who had been employed by them for 3 years. No one replaced him.
On the other hand, rank and file C.P. workers have become more friendly with our worker comrades. The lies of the Stalinist misleaders are making less of an impression on the rank and file than heretofore.
 
FBI in Lynn
The FBI is allowing little to get by its hawkshaw eyes these days. The American “Gestapo” is everywhere.
The SWP discovered this in Lynn when it found out why it had been banned from holding meetings on a city square, traditional public open air forum for 15 years.
An ex-marine, now retired, had constantly been heckling SWP speakers and attempting to provoke a riot. He then went to the Mayor and demanded speakers be barred from the Square. The Mayor said he had no authority to take such action. So the exmarine wrote to Washington which went into action at once. The U.S. Marshall was contacted in Boston with orders to instruct the police chief in Lynn to stop all meetings in the Square. The police chief didn’t have to be “blitzkrieged” into action. Now meetings must be held in back alleys, or not at all.
Another grand victory in the “war for democracy.”
 



The drive to restore the Two-A-Week Socialist Appeal, begun spontaneously at the convention amid great enthusiasm, has been formally launched by the National Committee of the Socialist Workers Party.
The drive is scheduled to begin on May 1st and continue for 60 days ending on July 1st at which time the Two-A-Week Socialist Appeal will commence publication.
Branches of the party and comrades throughout the country have been primed for the campaign and have been awaiting only the opening gun to get under way. As previously reported in the Socialist Appeal pledges were made, at the very first suggestion at the convention banquet, totalling more than $4,000. Since then other pledges have been coming through. A complete list of these pledges will be given in an early issue of the Appeal.
Already $500 of these pledges have been redeemed and word is reaching us every day that more is on the way. Quotas are being assigned to all branches of the party and, as in the first twice-weekly Appeal campaign, there is every indication that we will go over the top in record time. Prizes will be awarded those branches which top the list in speed and amounts.
Preparations are being made to contact all sympathizers of the party to enable them to cooperate with us in this campaign. From reports of those who have visited party friends, it appears that results from this work will be highly gratifying. The revolutionary and class conscious workers have been hard-pressed in this permanent depression, but there is still money among them to back the work that is speeding the Socialist Revolution in the United States.
All that need be done is to go and get it!
Do you need arguments for those who are not already convinced of the necessity of the Two-A-Week Socialist Appeal? Then tell them this:
The flames of the European war are already licking at the front door of the United States. Roosevelt is breaking his neck to get us into the slaughter in double-quick time. There is little time left for openly spreading the message of Revolutionary Socialism to the American workers. But there is time enough to reach the workers in the auto plants, the steel mills, on the ships and the docks, the truckdrivers, and the rest of the proletarians who keep the wheels of industry going. Only these men can smash the plans of Wall Street and bring peace and security to this country. They must be contacted now. They must be contacted frequently.
They must be contacted with a Two-A-Week Socialist Appeal. What class conscious worker will say no to this argument? How can he ? Every word of it is truth, demonstrated and demonstrable.
How about it? Let’s hit the ball and keep going until the Two-A-Week Socialist Appeal begins to roll off the press!
 



Flushed with its recent electoral victory the Democratic Congress opens in Washington once again to do the bidding of the master. The master is not Roosevelt or the so-called sovereign people. The guiding spirits of the nation sit not in Washington but; many miles to the north, in the man-made canyons of New York. It is the interests of Wall Street the legislators will serve.
The entire history of the New Deal is alive with instances proving the old maxim that the government is but the “executive committee of the ruling class”. Roosevelt and a willing Congress took hold of the political reins of American capitalism, just as it was being steered into the ditch, and brought it back onto a safe highway. An unofficial spokesman for the administration, Raymond Moley, says flat-footedly: “Basically the New Deal was an effort to save capitalism.”
 
Ungrateful Wall Street
Big Business may appear ungrateful to Roosevelt for the helping hand he gave it when in need. But if Wall Street has been grudging in its compliments, this is no indication that Roosevelt and his congressional majority have stinted in their grants. The actions of the President when the banks were on the verge of collapse and the six billion dollar blood injection into the prostrate financial and industrial institutions of American capitalism speak louder than compliments.
Capitalism has reaped a lucrative harvest under the benign administration of Mr. Roosevelt. The Journal of Commerce reports that over six billion dollars in the form of corporative interests and dividends have flowed into its coffers for the year 1934.
These fabulous profits have not been gained in an era of well being and prosperity for all. The economy of scarcity amid abundance is as striking a fact under Roosevelt as under Hoover.
 
Promises
The promises of Roosevelt to the stricken working class groaning under the full weight of the mounting years of economic crisis have been remarkably prolific. But even as these promises gained in ozone volume they receded in real substance. The talk of recovery has yielded little to the workers. Unemployment, according to the notoriously conservative A.F. of L. figures, shows an increase of 550,000 from October 1933 when the number of jobless stood at the figure of 10,122,000 to October 1934 when it has risen to 10,672,000. The past year has seen an increase of over one million families on relief. Richberg himself estimates that by February 1935 more than 5,000,000 families or over 22,000,000 persons will live on relief pittances.
”No one shall starve,” said Roosevelt, and his Democratic Congress cheered him to the echo. The meaning of that promise is now clear. It has meant that death from starvation should be avoided to avert an explosion of discontent stored up for more than five years. Its corollary, however, has been that wages and relief levels must keep the masses on the border of starvation. The recent decree of relief administrator, Harry Hopkins, slashing work relief wages from 40 to 30 cents an hour is a veritable dynamite cure for those suffering from New Deal promises.
 
Employed Workers
Employed workers have fared no better than those on relief doles The process of levelling the wage of skilled workers has been a high point of accomplishment under Rooseveltian codes. Its counterpart has been a standard of minimum wages slightly above the government handouts. And these standards have rarely been enforced. How significant is the fact that thousands of Detroit automobile workers, ostensibly living under a paradise of capitalist paternalism, would rather depend on relief checks than on the abominable wage of General Motors or Henry Ford!
On the other hand food prices have risen 28 percent over the figure for April 28, 1933. But payrolls have actually dropped 5.2 percent for the third quarter of 1934. When the working class tried to bridge this yawning gap, the New Deal has thrust its elbow in the way. Strikes have either been prevented or, once under way, pulverized by a multitude of arbitration boards. And now, the crowning stroke is the so-called truce proclaimed by Roosevelt with the direct collusion of William Green and the manufacturers. With the help of its Judas leaders labor has been crucified on the cross of the National Run Around.
According to many noted Tories in banking and industrial circles the measures taken by Roosevelt and his Congress have been the very essence of Bolshevism. Now, however, they are rubbing their hands with satisfaction. Roosevelt, they say, is moving to the right.
If what they mean is that left implies more promises and right fewer promises there is probably little truth in what they say. For this is no time for Roosevelt to cease his promises. Especially when Virgil Jordan, economist for the National Industrial Conference Board declares to a gathering of business men that “We are little, if any, nearer recovery than we were two years ago ...”
The speeches of Roosevelt and the willingness of his last Congress have been a bone in the throat of the working class and a boon in the pockets of the plutocrats. The Congress soon to open bodes nothing better and probably much worse. The big planks in the new “new deal” program are widely advertised as a comprehensive “Social Security” program. But the recent social security conference was hardly under way when it received a warning from Roosevelt that he would tolerate no “wild” ideas. The “bright” feathers in this plan are loans to home owners, public works and unemployment. Gems of deception.
It is sufficient merely to review the previous history of this plan to understand who profits by Roosevelt’s altruism. Of the $200,000,000 expended by the Home Owners Loan Corporation more than 90 percent has gone to banks, insurance companies and realty agencies. The ballyhoo about clearing out slums and building homes for the poor has become in reality a building program for people with means. The poor cannot afford the rents demanded by government housing.
 
Public Works
All this is intimately associated with the famous public works program which it is reputed Roosevelt, with the certain consent of his Congress plans to extend. The past speaks eloquently on this matter. Of the $2,711,000,000 in PWA allotments almost two hundred million dollars went in subsidies to railroad companies. Large dips in this pork barrel were taken by the army, the navy and the air force. Relatively few men were given jobs through this method. Some time ago the Nation reported that only a few thousand men were employed on such an enormous project as the N.Y. Triborough Bridge which called for millions in expenditure. The one way public works can start employment even on a modest scale is by entering into competition with private industry. And the very idea of such a thing is sacrilege to Roosevelt and company.
The last and probably most important measure, which seems assured of adoption in the new Congress is some form of unemployment insurance. Relief has proved to be very costly. Bankers and manufacturers have been howling for as speedy an end of it as possible.
But since unemployment shows no real signs of decreasing and since a permanent jobless army reaching well over the seven million figure is here to stay, some permanent, and less expensive method of keeping Potters Field from filling up too quickly must be found. Roosevelt no doubt has a solution in an unemployment insurance scheme where the largest part of the receipts will come from the miserably paid workers and where the unemployed will receive this insurance for a few weeks of the year on the condition that they accept any sort of job, at any wages offered, even a strike-breaking job.
Congress opens with the New Year prepared to repeat its services of the last year – not for labor, which it can never serve – but for capital which it must serve. Its legislation will remain two-sided – new deal and raw deal, with the workers on the short end of the stick.
 



The Stalinists have been walking a tightrope in the unions
since the Hitler-Stalin pact. We said that in the Socialist Appeal
two months ago on the occasion of Lewis’ announcement of the
CIO purge. In the last two weeks several prominent Stalinist
performers have fallen off the tightrope and into the net of the
official bureaucracy.
First is the case of John Brophy. A few days ago Brophy turned
up at a convention of the CIO United Retail and Wholesale Employees
in Detroit and denounced the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany in the
same breath. Speaking as a representative of John L. Lewis, he
said:
“We condemn the brutality of a Nazi Germany on
the march and we condemn a Soviet Union turned imperialistic.”
 
Brophy’s Record
Brophy was one of the leading Stalinists caucus engineers in the
top circles of the C.I.O. The job of replacing good progressive
organizers with incompetent and bureaucratic Stalinist agents was one
of his special assignments. The defense of Communist party
dictatorships in the CIO unions against the revolt of the rank and
file was another little duty he performed. It was Brophy who
engineered the appointment of Harry Bridges as west coast CIO
regional director which resulted in driving out the progressive
Sailors Union, splitting the labor movement there wide open and
plunging it into the most violent internecine struggle.
Brophy’s defection is a major blow for the Stalinists. For
the progressive rank and file, however it can only mean the weakening
of the Kremlin bureaucracy and the strengthening of the
Roosevelt-Lewis bureaucracy. Brophy, as his jingo statement
indicates, will be no less faithful in the service of Lewis than he
was in the service of the Stalinists.
 
South Bend Sours on C.P.
The second defection is that of the South Bend CIO Industrial
Union Council. A resolution was presented by the Studebaker Local 5,
United Automobile Workers of America, and unanimously carried by the
Council on Dec. 6. denouncing Stalin’s invasion of Finland,
urging that the Communist Party be removed from the ballot in state,
county and Federal elections and prohibiting any “known member
of the communistic party from holding office in any St. Joseph county
CIO local or any CIO affiliate which may exist in said county.”
The chickens are coming home to roost – with a vengeance.
South Bend was a stronghold of the Stalinists almost since the
inception of the CIO. The Studebaker local was considered their
private property. Now in the mass revulsion and disgust with
Stalinism, the movement is catapulted in a reactionary direction.
Beginning with justified indignation against Stalin’s criminal
methods in Finland, the resolution concludes, however, with a
denunciation of the Soviet Union in the same words as the reactionary
capitalist press: “the ideological brothers of the maniac
Hitler and his crew of gangsters who now rule Germany ... a policy of
unlimited aggression and imperialistic methods.” And finally
the resolution reaches the reactionary conclusion of the Dies
Committee: outlaw the Communist party.
Stalinism waged a war against militants find progressives in the
trade unions. Its methods and policies fed the most reactionary
barrage. But we warn the progressives not to hop from the Stalinist
frying pan into the reactionary fire.
A third blow for the Stalinists was the defection of the top
leaders of the Communist Party fraction of Local 22 of the
International Ladies Garment Workers Union in New York. Expelled from
the Communist Party were: Ben Gerjoy, Sol Lipniak, Hyman Grossman,
Meyer Kravetz – all business agents; Morris Rosenberg,
executive board member and Abe Pell and Isidore Gross –
adjustors.
The official C.P. statement on the expulsion accuses the expelled
of “wavering in the face of the war danger.” The
statement of the expelled counters with an accusation that the
Stalinists demanded they put their party interests over the interests
of the union. Neither statement tells the story.
 
End of the “United Front”
The statement of the expelled says nothing about the Stalin-Hitler
pact, nor about Stalin’s invasion of Finland, nor about their
stand on the pro-ally resolution of the American Labor Party. But
their opposition to the Stalinists is a direct result of these
events. Up until the Stalin-Hitler pact and the new turn of the
Communist party the expelled business agents, following the Stalinist
line, were in a united front administration with the Lovestoneite
manager of the local, Charles S. Zimmerman. They were preparing a
united front slate again with Zimmerman prior to the Stalin-Hitler
pact. Under the conditions of the “new line” they were
instructed to break with Zimmerman and go into opposition. They
balked. Hence the expulsion.
Zimmerman says in a statement that the “new line” of
the Stalinists “is most injurious.” True. But was the old
line, the rotten popular front that made the unions an adjunct of the
War Deal Roosevelt administration any less injurious? Or is the mere
fact of unity with the Zimmerman administration sufficient to “make
them (the business agents) more welcome to the dressmakers”?
 
Which Way Now?
By breaking with the Stalinists, the business agents took a step
in the right direction. But that was an easy step at a time when
Stalinism is as popular as a crateful of skunks. The question is:
where do they stand today? Obviously, their denial of the infamous
Stalinist charge is true. The C.P. charged they had “deserted
to the camp of the Lovestoneites, Trotskyites, and Social Democrats,
the pro-war, Redbaiting stooges of the bosses and the Dies Committee
against the best interests of the working class.” Only an
Egyptian contortionist could possibly get into all those camps at the
same time – and even he would have his difficulties.
Having denounced the Stalinists, the expelled business agents owe
the class conscious workers an answer on their position towards the
social patriots of the I.L.G.W. administration. Have
you broken with the Stalinist war camp to join the camp of the
Allies and Roosevelt? Or have you joined the Third Camp of struggle
against imperialist war?
The progressive workers will judge all those who break from
Stalinism by their answer to these questions.
 



The agreement signed by the Chrysler Corporation and the United
Automobile Workers (CIO) ending the 54-day “lockout”
represents a major development for the American labor movement. The
calamity-howlers, who have been predicting the death of the CIO and
its proudest acquisition, the auto workers union, received a major
disappointment. Confronted with a major attack by one of the “Big
Three” of the auto industry, the UAW-CIO emerged from the
conflict a formidable power.
The Chrysler Corporation entertained some extravagant illusions
regarding the union. The auto barons believed – they hoped –
that the union had been weakened and disintegrated by years of
internal struggle and unemployment. Hence, they concluded, if we lock
the workers out at a time when production is high, the workers will
desert their organizations and even march through picket lines to get
in a few months of steady pay.
The corporation was prepared to lose millions in profits at the
peak of the season if the backbone of the union could be broken. The
infamous Mohawk Valley formula was trotted out of the dusty files.
Every faucet of propaganda was turned on full force. Full page paid
advertisements appeared daily in the local press. Business and
professional men were circularized by mail with a wad of lies about
the alleged crimes of the union. Chrysler dealers were squeezed into
a denunciation of the UAW. The fascist spielers, Coughlin and Gerald
L.K. Smith, were amply provided with funds to pour their venom
against the workers over the radio. A huge meeting was called to
organize fascist gangs. A back-to-work movement, with Homer Martin
and his scab AFL outfit in the leadership, was launched several
times. Misguided Negro workers were led through the picket line in an
attempt to provoke a race riot. Even doddering Governor Dickinson was
dragged off his knees long enough to threaten National Guard
assistance to strikebreakers.
 
Company Plans Break on Union Rock
And yet – all of Chrysler’s plans went wrong. The
union remained solid as a rock. Despite five weeks of privation,
denied unemployment insurance by a Chrysler stooge committee, denied
relief except in the most miserly allotments, the ranks of the
Chrysler workers were unbreakable. Every rumor of scab movements
brought thousands of workers to the picket line before the Dodge main
plant. Only a few days before the agreement was signed, 10,000
workers formed the largest strike line ever seen in Detroit. Fifty
thousand auto workers jammed Cadillac Square when it appeared the
corporation would take aggressive strikebreaking steps.
The frontal attack of the auto barons was smashed decisively by
the Chrysler workers. Unanswerable proof was given in this battle
that the lesson of unionism has been burned so deeply into former
“hillbillies” and “farmers” that only a
veritable civil war can bring a return to the open shop days. The
automobile workers union is a tower of strength after the Chrysler
strike and no boss in the auto industry will henceforth lightly play
with the notion that he can break the union by “old-fashioned”
methods.
The defeat of Chrysler plans is a great positive achievement. The
agreement resulting from the struggle, on the other hand, cannot be
viewed in such unqualified terms.
 
What the Union Actually Got
What did the union get? How close did the union approach these
demands after 54 days of the lockout? When considering the settlement
it must be borne in mind that a union very rarely gets everything it
asks for in a strike. But the extent of the compromise is usually
determined by the strength of the union at the time of the
settlement. The ranks of the UAW were intact in the Chrysler
“lockout”, the picket lines were the largest ever seen in
Detroit on the eve of the settlement.
The corporation granted a general three cents an hour wage
increase. The union had demanded a 10 per cent wage increase. Only a
few classifications received this increase.
The corporation granted sole collective bargaining to the UAW. The
union asked for the “union shop”. It had already won
“sole collective bargaining” by the huge majority vote it
polled in the NLRB election before the lockout.
The corporation conceded an improved grievance procedure whereby a
committee of two from the management and two from the union are to
render decisions on grievances within 30 days from the time they are
submitted. The union asked for a voice in setting production
standards. The company rejected this demand and returned the
procedure described above which union leaders claim rectify previous
abuses.
The new agreement abolishes the “no-strike” clause.
Under its terms a strike may be called five days after the union has
complied with all the steps of the grievance procedure. This is a
decided advantage from a propaganda point of view. In the past the
corporation could charge the union with “irresponsibility”
and violation of the agreement when the company made a strike
inescapable.
 
No Gains on Seniority Issue
The union did not get the six weeks seniority clause. New workers,
mostly young militant elements, have little opportunity to establish
the six months seniority required by the agreement as it stands now.
This will not enhance the popularity of the union among thousands of
young workers who attribute – falsely – their failure to
get steady jobs to union regulations.
The union did not get the “war seniority” provision.
It did not get the vacation with pay. This gain had been won by
smaller and weaker local unions, in the Bohn Aluminum and Packard
plants, through a two and one- half per cent yearly bonus.
To summarize: the union gained some substantial improvements in
bargaining procedure and some slight concessions in wages. And that’s
all.
 
Leaders Frightened by FDR Pressure
It is clear from a comparison of the terms of the settlement with
the original demands that Philip Murray, Frankensteen and Thomas
traded too much of the workers’ demands. The leadership of the
union was frightened by the pressure of the War Deal administration.
Murray rushed into Detroit to conclude any kind of settlement quickly
so long as only a few concessions could be gained to justify it in
the workers’ eyes. The workers were ready to fight. The CIO
leadership was prepared to capitulate. The ranks were not organized
to push the leadership. Hence the settlement on poor terms, far below
those’ which might have been gained from the struggle.
Why, then, did the workers vote in their local unions with such
unanimity for the acceptance of the agreement? It is not enough to
say that they lacked leadership of their own. Spontaneous resistance
would have certainly arisen under other circumstances. In these
conditions lies the significance of the Chrysler strike from a
broader standpoint.
The workers did not feel that the demands pressed by the union
leadership over the conference table warranted a continuation of the
struggle. The workers wanted the thirty-hour week at forty hours’
pay as they so overwhelmingly indicated at the UAW convention last
April. Conditions of permanent unemployment for a large section of
auto workers and only intermittent employment for those more
fortunate, put the 30-hour week at the very heart of the auto workers
struggles. The UAW leadership has not lifted a finger – besides
a few articles in the United Auto Worker – to fight for
this demand – since the convention.
The auto workers wanted a substantial increase in wages. This
demand was buried for almost the entire duration of the “lockout”
and finally raised towards the last few days in the public press but
only in a horsetrading manner. To force a ten per cent wage increase
for the Chrysler workers it was necessary to organize a militant
strike. The UAW leaders surrendered this policy for the dubious
advantage of unemployment insurance. Which the workers didn’t
get.
The real demands were lost in the loud publicity of the union for
a union shop and a voice in control of production. But the workers
were completely baffled when, after a few days, the negotiating
committee publicly announced that they had withdrawn both these
demands.
 
The New Strategy of the Bosses
What then was the struggle about? That was precisely the question
the corporation was attempting to get the workers to ask. The same
strategy was used in the General Motors strike early last summer. The
workers were out on strike for several weeks. They got only a few
minor concessions in the agreement – and for that matter the
original demands did not represent the basic improvements required by
the workers.
The corporations are laying the groundwork by this strategy for a
mass revulsion against the unions. They throw the onus for the long
weeks of privation on the unions, and at the conclusion when they
refuse to grant decent concessions, they ask the question: what do
you get out of the union but a swift kick in the teeth?
It is a futile business at attempt to counteract this propaganda
by foaming at the mouth at company lies. The workers want results.
They are willing to fight, but they want their fights to be fruitful.
They are ready to be defeated, if necessary, if only the struggle is
organized on real basic demands.
The corporations are preparing a tremendous debacle for the auto
workers. The union leadership by its weak, vacillating and
capitulationist policy is facilitating the game of the auto Barons.
Only a rank and file progressive organization of auto workers can
force the UAW leadership to organize the auto workers’
struggles on the basis of bold demands, can carry the struggles
through militantly and defeat the bosses on the major issues of the
day.
The rank and file must begin.
 



The New York and New Jersey State CIO conventions meeting last weekend adopted unanimous resolutions favoring a third term for President Roosevelt. Exactly one month was required for the top CIO leadership to clarify its non-committal position at the San Francisco convention and to jump on the Roosevelt bandwagon in double-quick time.
There is little doubt that an attitude of open hostility on the part of John L. Lewis to the third-term campaign would have made the passing of these resolutions at the state conventions difficult if not impossible. What happened in the month to give Lewis a change of heart is not known. The deal that Lewis made with Roosevelt – trading CIO support to the president in return for miserly concessions in war-time? – has remained the property of secret conferences. All we know is that in the disagreement in CIO top circles on the third-term, Hillman’s point of view appears to have prevailed.
Whatever happened in the secret conclaves with Roosevelt – certainly nothing of benefit to the labor movement – there is not the slightest plausible reason for the trade unions to back Roosevelt in 1940. This is said entirely aside from the general proposition that labor commits hara-kiri every time it supports a capitalist candidate. Specifically, Roosevelt’s record in the past year has been viciously anti-labor.
 
Roosevelt Attacks the Labor Movement
The heaviest blows the labor movement received in the past year came from Washington. In a single shove, a million workers were flung off the WPA rolls at the command of Roosevelt. In his own words: “We must and shall finish with this business of relief.” With his blessing, the Woodrum Bill drove an axe into all WPA standards by equalizing the differential between North and South, and slashed at union wage standards by increasing the monthly hours to 130 at the same rate of pay. It was a gentle hint to private industrialists to chop down the wage scales of skilled workers.
When a half a million workers rose in strike action throughout the country against the starvation, union-busting decree, Frank Murphy, Roosevelt’s Attorney General, made the Hitlerite pronouncement: “You can’t strike against the government!”
When they did nevertheless strike against the government, Roosevelt’s WPA administration fired the WPA strikers for remaining away from work five days. In Minneapolis, where a powerful labor movement stymied such quick strikebreaking, the G-men were turned loose on the workers as agent provocateurs. The frameup trials and convictions of WPA workers in that city on the charge of “conspiracy” is the direct work of Roosevelt’s Department of Justice. The vicious onslaught now being carried on by the G-men against the teamsters movement of the Midwest is part and parcel of Roosevelt’s anti-labor drive, as are the Department of Justice’s prosecutions of building trades unions throughout the country.
In the same period the personnel of the National Labor Relations Board was transformed to meet the demands of the National Manufacturers Ass’n and the Chamber of Commerce. So utterly hostile to labor’s interests is this new Labor Board that the CIO national convention advised its affiliates to go before the labor board as little as possible. It was Roosevelt who engineered this change in the labor board.
 
Roosevelt Prepares for Dictatorship over Labor
Side by side with these overt actions against labor came measures more subtle but even more inimical to the trade unions. Billions of dollars were appropriated for the super-armaments program for America’s imperialist intervention in the war. Roosevelt’s War Department staff worked out the last details for the military strait-jacket to be tightened around the unions when he openly enters the war. In the commanding position of the M-Day dictatorship over labor were seated its worst enemies, appointed by Roosevelt: three lieutenants of the firm of J.P. Morgan and the fourth a scion of another of the Sixty Families.
In face of Roosevelt’s record, the support tendered him by the New York and New Jersey CIO bodies can be characterized as a monstrous betrayal of the interests of labor, callous and scornful in its disregard of the rank and file workers of the CIO unions. The leadership of the CIO is riveting the chains of a reactionary War Deal administration around the ankles of the workers. And by this fact, it is in advance committing the American unions to supporting Wall Street’s imperialist war. By this action, the CIO leaders become a partner to the M-Day dictatorship plans of the Roosevelt administration.
 
Stalinists Meet Issue Facing Both Ways
The resolutions for the third term at the New York and New Jersey conventions were adopted unanimously. The Jersey resolution was made unanimous after a vote of 96–66 carried it. These unanimous votes included the delegates from the Stalinist-controlled unions. Have the Stalinist trade union officials bucked the party line of opposition to Roosevelt, laid down by Earl Browder in his Boston speech? Browder said in that speech:
“The President and his Administration succumb more and more every day to the greed for profits by American monopoly capital, and makes use of its former prestige among the masses to secure their acceptance of the program of Wall Street.”
That the president fed “the greed for profits by American monopoly capital” since the day he took office – Browder cannot say. Only yesterday, as everyone recalls, the President was still the White Hope of Browder and Co. Browder no longer backs Roosevelt only because Roosevelt’s foreign policy is no longer consistent with Stalin’s foreign policy. Hence the decree to the party members and all its trade unionists to go into opposition.
In the New York CIO Convention, Michael Quill of the Transport Union and Irving Potash of the Fur Workers, as well as other Stalinists, voted for the Third Term resolution. In New Jersey 66 delegates, most of them Stalinists, at first voted against the Third Term resolution. How is this to be explained? Confronted with the acid test of going into outright opposition to Lewis, Hillman and the Roosevelt administration, Quill and Potash backed down. They had too much to lose by fully supporting the position of the Kremlin bureaucracy. In New Jersey, on the other hand, second line union bureaucrats could make the gesture of opposition – and then join in the unanimous vote – without facing the consequences that would be in store for top leaders like Quill and Potash at the hands of Lewis.
 
Stalinist Speeches Show Party Line Hypocrisy
The speeches of Quill and Potash, qualifying their support of Roosevelt are perfect examples of how spurious and hypocritical is the new “radical” line of the Stalinists.
“We believe,” said Quill, “that endorsing a third term at this time is correct. But we are dealing with the President’s record only up until now. From now on labor has no right to predict what the President will do. And while we now adopt this resolution and support him, we remind and warn the entire labor movement that it should look out and see that President Roosevelt and any official of the American government should never attempt to drive the American people into war. We are against war.”
Potash spoke in a similar vein.
How can anyone say he is against war, and support the “president’s record only up until now”? “Up until now” the president has made his biggest strides towards plunging the US into the war. “Up until now” a five-billion-dollar armament program has been passed. “Up until now” the United States has been turned into an armory for the Allies under the new Neutrality Law. “Up until now” the president’s public declarations on the war have been indistinguishable from those of the belligerents. “Up until now” the President has used the Department of Justice and the FBI as a political police to frame up and smash the labor movement. “Up until now” the President has taken almost every step in the war game but the actual declaration of war.
That Quill and Potash, who, have been accomplices in every step in the preparation of war, will balk at the final step, the declaration of war, is a fairy tale to deceive little children. But that they were able to support Roosevelt “up until now” is just another way of expressing the Stalinist line: so long as Roosevelt and Stalin were in the same war camp, the “president’s record” was good enough; but now that Stalin has jumped into the Hitler camp, we must “be vigilant and watch everybody from Washington down ...” as Potash put it.
It isn’t exactly consistent to call Roosevelt an agent of “monopoly capital,” to urge distrust and “vigilance” on the one hand, and on the other support him for a third term. It isn’t consistent, indeed, because the Stalinist policy is a fake from beginning to end. That’s why there is not one word of criticism of Quill and Potash in the Daily Worker. The Stalinists are not mobilizing the masses against Roosevelts war policy; they are merely trying to frighten Roosevelt into coming to terms with the Hitler-Stalin war camp. The Stalinist opposition to Roosevelt is just as fraudulent as is the Lewis-Hillman defense of the workers against Roosevelt.
* * *
The CIO organizing drive two and three years ago became a crusade of effective strike movements only because the workers, the third camp, seized the handle of opportunity in their own hands.
The CIO today needs a third camp again. This time to beat back the war-mongering Lewis-Hillman supporters of war-monger Roosevelt and the Stalinist war-mongering supporters of war-mongers Hitler-Stalin.
A third camp of the rank and file from the shops and factories against the war and against capitalist reaction at home! That is the need of the hour.
 



When a medicine man “makes a pitch,” as they say in the circus vernacular, his one hope is that the crowd has changed from the day before. After all, the poor sucker who purchased a bottle of colored water to cure diabetes or an Indian herb to cure a skin infection, is not likely to give the fakir a friendly reception, certainly he won’t bite the second time.
But when the greatest medicine man in the history of our times, the Stalinist leadership, brazenly set up shop at the same old stand for a second time, a lot of people either through ignorance or through design pass off his wares as the real article. And the commodity being peddled here is not some harmless patent medicine, but a poisonous policy that has delivered the workers into capitalist slavery on every continent of this planet.
We are not addressing ourselves here to the officials and leaders of the Communist party. They know better. They not only know what the policy was before this recent turn and before that change of line, but they know what the policy of the Communist International was under Lenin and Trotsky, when the International was revolutionary. These Stalinist officials are cynical and corrupt. They are bought off at so much a week and they know how to serve the boss. They try to alibi a defeat into a glorious victory; they seek to make the foulest of treachery look like heroic revolutionary action. We won’t waste our time with the pitchman, but we’d like to talk to his audience.
Thousands of revolutionary workers in the Communist Party sincerely believe that after Molotov’s speech in Moscow and Browder’s speech in Boston, the Communist International has made a genuine turn toward a revolutionary policy. They believe that now the Communists will wage an uncompromising struggle against capitalism and for socialism.
 
The “New Line” Is Old Stuff
What most of the new followers of the Communist Party do not know is that the current wares of Stalinism were peddled once before to the workers of Europe and America – with fatal consequences.
The year 1929 marked a complete gyration in the line of the Stalinist International. Capitalism, they announced, had entered its “third period,” and was breathing its last gasp. The workers were engaged in a vast “revolutionary upsurge.” The task of the Communist Parties was set forth as the conquest of power.
Germany, it was declared, was at the very center of this revolutionary struggle. An official resolution declared that “of exceptional importance to the fate of the revolution in Europe and the whole world is the revolutionary upsurge in Germany.”
And that was a true enough statement. The new economic crisis that broke loose in 1929 hit Germany most of all. German economy had never fully recovered from the depression it had sunk into following the war. Millions were unemployed. The middle class was discontented and restive. Cabinets were made and remade in quick order. The labor organizations, the Social Democratic and the Communist parties, piled up huge votes running into six and seven millions each for the workers’ parties. Each election saw a greater swing to the left. It was true – there was a revolutionary situation in Germany. How did the Stalinist party meet this situation?
 
What Stalin Did to the German Workers
The fate of the German workers was clearly in the hands of the Communist Party. No class conscious worker expected anything but compromise, betrayal and defeat from the Social Democratic Party.
But still millions of workers followed the Social Democratic Party. Their party numbered a million members. The trade unions under their control almost 5,000,000. They polled up to 7,000,000 votes in the elections. Before the workers could establish their own rule in Germany, it was indispensable that the influence of these corrupt leaders over the labor movement be broken.
The issue was at hand. German labor was menaced with destruction by the rising fascist hordes of Hitlerism. The workers clamored for unity and for a struggle to the death against this menace. The Social Democratic leaders had nothing to offer but the pious hope that “Germany was not Italy” and an armful of resolutions “deploring,” and “viewing with alarm.”
The Communist leaders had the magnificent opportunity to force the bureaucrats of the labor unions and the Social Democrats to the wall with a concrete program for united action against the fascist gangs. The course of this struggle on the immediate issues would have soon brought the whole labor movement squarely before the issue of who was to rule in Germany. It would have smashed the Fascists like an eggshell – as Goebbels later admitted could have been done without difficulty.
But the Communist leaders did nothing of the kind. Everything they did was designed to divide the workers, to pit communist workers against social democratic workers. In no case to unite communist and social democratic workers against the fascists.
They began with the insane theory that social democracy was the twin-brother of fascism. From that it followed that the main enemy of the workers was not the fascists but the social democrats. They pronounced Trotsky’s program of united front “counter-revolutionary,” and expelled from the party anyone who advocated it.
 
The “United Front Only from Below”
In the trade unions, the workers were abandoned to the tender mercies of the bureaucrats. All of the militants were withdrawn into a pure “revolutionary” trade union organization dominated by the Communist Party. The inevitable result was the division of the labor movement, the Social Democracy dominating the trade unions and therefore the employed workers in the factories. Only the unemployed followed the Communist Party.
On the streets and in the actions against the Brown Shirts, the movement was divided as with a knife. The social-democratic workers were called upon to quit their organizations and join a “red united front from below.” (Dimitrov now revives this slogan.) Naturally they did nothing of the kind although they would have eagerly. entered a common front that respected their organizations.
Then, as if deliberately intended to enhance the distrust and suspicion of social democratic workers in Communist leadership, the Stalinist gang joined with the fascists in 1931 in Prussia in what came to be known as the infamous “red referendum” to oust the social-democratic Prussian government.
While the Fascists grew in numbers and in boldness, the Stalinists continued to play into their hands by their divisive tactics of “Social fascism.” The Social-Democratic leaders could hamstring the struggle of the workers against fascism by citing the record of the Communists. And the record was rotten. In the Reichstag, Remmele, the Communist fraction leader, made his notorious speech: “We are not afraid of the fascist gentlemen. They will shoot their bolt quicker than any other government.” Let the fascist take power, we will come next! This was how the loud “revolutionary” line of Stalin worked out in practice.
Disoriented by the tactics of Stalinism, the workers remained passive and quiescent in face of the fascist threat. Hitler’s Brown Shirts grew in strength, unmolested, like a snowball rolling downhill. They became more arrogant, more ruthless. Until on a fateful day in January 1933, Hindenburg – the hero of the social democrats – called Hitler to the chancellery.
The Fascists had arrived. This was the last chance for the “revolutionary” action the Stalinists had prated so loudly about. Soon the fascists would ride over the skulls and bones of the German workers. But the Stalinists lifted not a finger of resistance! The leaders had their passports. The workers were abandoned to the fate of concentration camps. The Communist Party collapsed like a house of cards.
The cold fact was that Stalin had helped Hitler to power. As Trotsky put it: “Stalin held the stirrup for Hitler to mount the white horse.”
Now the medicine man is back again with the same kind of poison in his bottle. Yesterday’s poison with a revolutionary label on the bottle gave the German workers the worst reaction history has ever known. Today’s poison, label the same, will give the workers, if they swallow it, reaction on a world scale.
 



John L. Lewis’ announcement that the CIO will clean house of “Communists” means in simple English the beginning of the end of Stalinist power in the American union movement.
The authoritative story of Louis Stark in the N.Y. Times (Oct. 17), reporting the coup of John L. Lewis in the Executive Board tersely states the plan:
“John L. Lewis is determined to rid the Congress of Industrial Organizations of all Communist influence in the next year, according to reports here today concerning the crusade which he set in motion at the meeting of the Executive Committee which followed the close of the CIO convention in San Francisco.”
Stark goes on to report the replacing of the Executive Committee of forty-two as the policy-making power within the CIO by a board of eight. The Executive Committee of forty-two members was heavy with Stalinist supporters, half or more of whom being members or fellow-travellers of the Communist Party. The new board of eight is composed of individuals openly known to be anti-Stalinists. Harry Bridges was left off the board and his power as Regional Director of the West Coast curtailed to include only the State of California. Just an entrée to the main course still to be served.
 
Stalinists Done For
The “crusade” will now begin in earnest. Lewis’ long experience in slugging his opposition out of business in the United Mine Workers can very well serve as a preview of the events to come in the CIO. In every International Union, city and state CIO Council, in every local union the Stalinist union officials will feel the mailed fist of the generalissimo of the CIO. They will either renounce their former affiliations and scurry like rats for cover – as most of them will – or find themselves on the outside looking in. Where they make any attempt at organized resistance, their charters will speedily find themselves in the wastebasket, or the officials and bureaucrats placed on war-time rations without benefit of the fat CIO subsidies.
The calamity is upon the Stalinists. There is neither retreat or escape for them. They are finished in the CIO.
 
Union-Wreckers
What has brought them to this sorry pass? Why has Lewis suddenly brought his long-standing alliance with the union-wreckers to an abrupt termination?
Ever since the inception of the CIO revolutionists, radicals and progressives have warned day in, day out of the disastrous effects Stalinism would have on the most promising union movement to arise in this country for decades. These predictions and these warnings were confirmed every inch of the way. Stalinist infiltration into the SWOC helped weaken the eventually lost “Little Steel”strike. Stalinist operatives almost devitalized the great auto workers union by a debilitating faction struggle. Stalinist bureaucracy, high-handed and arbitrary action drove from the CIO the Southern Tenant Farmers Union, and the office workers in New York and San Francisco. They plunged the West Coast labor movement into bitter internecine warfare. They walked through picket lines, broke strikes, organized a fistful of paper unions, helped keep the CIO chained to a company union political policy. The Stalinists stymied in its tracks the further growth of the CIO after its initial tumultuous upsurgence.
 
Penetrated CIO
Lewis was not ignorant of their union-wrecking role. His information came through a thousand sources and a thousand protests. The evidence was piled mountain-high. But nothing could disturb the idyllic nuptials. The marriage was undisturbed by differences because no fundamental differences existed. And the Stalinists brought all the relatives and friends to live in the Lewis household. Lee Pressman handed down the law to recalcitrants from the sanctum of Lewis’ own office in Washington. Len de Caux doctored the news in the official CIO paper. Organizers whose only two virtues were incompetence and Stalinist affiliation were saddled on every CIO union and Stalinist office girls in every office that would take them.
In their bureaucratic and dictatorial methods, Lewis saw only a worthy continuation of his own methods. In their belly-crawling before Roosevelt, in the “democratic front against Fascism,” Lewis could only see an alliance based on common principles.
 
Break on War
As Stark points out, the complaints of Murray and Hillman over increasing Stalinist influence in the CIO had little effect until now. Until –
“... the recent Hitler-Stalin pact led to the sudden abandonment of the Communist fight against fascism and nazism, and affected the Communist policy in the trade unions where they were influential.”
The conflict between Lewis and the Stalinists has drawn to the sharpest point over the question of war. Not, to be sure,between a pro-war and an anti-war policy. Far, far from that. It is a conflict between two camps of war-mongers; Lewis supporting the camp of Roosevelt and his “democratic” allies and the Stalinists backing the Hitler-Stalin combination, both of them in hostile opposition to the real interests of the workers on the question of war. The issue of the war makes the divorce final and irrevocable.
Will the patriots of the Stalin-Hitler alliance resist Lewis’ purge? On what ground? On the grounds of bureaucracy, on the grounds of the invasion of local and International autonomy by Lewis and Co.? What a pitiful song for them to chant after they established themselves beyond the slightest doubt as the champions of the bureaucratic intervention of Hillman and Murray in the factional struggle in the United Automobile Workers Union. They are not likely to get much attention from the rank and file of the CIO unions, who are quite familiar with their records, on such a program. The rights of minorities, the right to hold political opinions, in a word, inner-union democracy – this is the very last program on which the Stalinist wreckers, bureaucrats and dictators can expect to get even the slightest hearing.
Union militants and progressives who will fight to the end against any manifestation of bureaucracy can have little sympathy for the Stalinist wreckers themselves. The Stalinists are reaping the harvest of the rotten seeds they have been sowing in the CIO movement. Their conflict with Lewis is in no way progressive – it is a conflict between two imperialist flags.
 
Compliance Certain
But this prediction may be made safely. There will be more compliance than resistance from the Stalinist union bureaucrats. Confronted with the choice between the flesh-pots of the Lewis machine and all the power and popularity of being on the right side of powerful American imperialism on the one hand and the “foreign,” “alien” G.P.U. apparatus of Joe Stalin on the other – there will be little doubt assailing the minds of the Stalinist crowd, from Bridges, Curran, Quill down to the lowliest business agent.
Lewis gave them a little word of advice, says Stark:
“He is said to have bluntly told those in the room [the executive committee meeting] that there was no room for promotion in the CIO for any one who was affiliated with or tried to carry out the Communist party’s policies. Any one hoping for a labor career, he said, should not become a member of the Communist party.”
This ukase will wreak havoc with the Stalinist forces in the CIO movement. Not only will the leaders know which side their bread is buttered on – but the supporters, members and fellow-travelers of the C.P. In the unions will fall away like chaff before the wind. All the young hopefuls, the career boys who hopped on the C.P. bandwagon to get a job, will hop off with very indecent haste, all the fellow-travelers who wanted to be on the “right side” will become the most rabid opponents of the Communist party. The air will reek with disclaimers – more people will “deny” affiliation with the Stalinists than most people ever believed belonged to them.
The decapitation of Stalinist influence in the trade unions will cleanse it of a virulent poison. The method of their elimination, the issue that provoked it, unfortunately will not strengthen militancy and democracy – it will strengthen the hand, for the time being, of the war-mongering Lewis clique. But only for the time being. The real struggle of the rank and file will rise with greater force in the days and months to come.
Class conscious militants must take care not to line up with either of these imperialist camps expressed in the struggle between the Stalinists and the Lewis bureaucracy. Their duty is clearly indicated. It is the formation of the third camp against imperialist war and its recruiting sergeants in the labor movement. The purge of the Stalinists – by all means!But class conscious workers will organize to extend this purge to the other camp as well, the Lewis-Hillman gang. And that purge can only be carried out with healthful effects for the union movement when it is carried through by democratic means which brings the rank and file into action.
 

