

The Worker in an Affluent Society
F. Zweig
Heinemann, 25s.
Mr. Zweig is inexhaustible. This, the latest of his surveys of the condition of the working-class, is more refined in its techniques of study than was his celebrated Pelican of a few years ago: but even though it has its selection of tables scattered (at random ?) through the text, the interpretation to which these are subjected is as idiosyncratic as ever. There are useful things in the book: the section on shift-work, for instance, or even the one on housekeeping allowances; but the general picture is fogged, cramped, botched. Mr. Zweig seems to be blinded by the brightness of his own light, which perhaps helps to explain why there isn’t much of it left to point a way through the gloom for the rest of us.
A sample of the finesse with which Mr. Zweig’s mounds of completed questionnaires are treated will show something of the theoretical quality of his work: ‘In the five works I visited I could say that there was very little sign of what is often called the “alienation” of the workman from his work ...’ we are told on page 69. On page 84, we follow on: ‘“Home and work don’t mix” this is a phrase which often circulates among working-men’ ... and more, ‘Men would say: “I never mention work at home, otherwise I could never relax.”’
On page 199 we are informed that:
‘Often when I asked, “Do you like your job?” a generalisation was put forward such as “No one really likes his job”; or to a question, “Do you work only for money; does the job give you something else apart from money?” the answer might be, “We all work for money, there is nothing else in the job.”’
At this point we may be forgiven for recollecting without surprise that on page 22 we had already learnt: ‘men rarely had ambitions for themselves, but a great deal of ambition for their children.’
You pays your penny, and you takes your choice (in library fines rather than bookshop bills, if you are wise).
 







Ken Coates is a regular contributor to International Socialism. Reference to his biography attached to his comment on Cardan (IS 5) and his article on Cuba (IS 6) will discover his full career: from miner to extra-mural lecturer in Nottingham University. He was active in the YCL, the National Union of Mineworkers, and, subsequently, the National Association of Labour Students (Secretary, 1959) and the Labour Party.





Alasdair MacIntyre’s Rejoinder to Left Reformism raises an important question which needs to be discussed further. Rightly, MacIntyre reproaches Henry Collins for not adequately understanding that beliefs about the capitalist system, engendered by it, play a role within it; and that this role is to be explained by the fact that men’s social relations, which shape their beliefs, ‘are capitalism’. The ideological nature of thought in capitalist society binds all classes: ‘a definite social relation between men ... assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation between things’. This is why Marx included in the very first chapter of Capital a most difficult section on the fetishism of commodities, in an attempt to decipher the hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of our own social products. It is also why he had to urge Trade Unionists to struggle not for a fair day’s pay for a fair day’s work, but for the abolition of the wages system. This confrontation of slogans charts in the most graphic possible way the path forward from ideological thinking.
Yet today we are less preoccupied with the abolition of the wages system than ever, and this fact stamps itself as a hallmark on the enslavement of our socialist movement to snivelling attempts to mollify inhuman social relations whilst preserving them intact. The old cry for a fair day’s pay echoes itself time and again in our modern ears: in Nottinghamshire the miners have a word that sums it up: ‘fairation’, The notion of fairation, of fair crack of the whip, is at once a stimulus to protest and a curb upon it. It is fairation which prompts many a strike, because someone has been ill-used or sacked; but it is equally fairation which gets Colin Hurry and Mark Abrams their anti-nationalisation scores when they poll the public conscience to patch Mr. Gaitskell’s trousers. All those working class respondents to such pools who accept the reproach ‘how would you like it if someone came and took away the business you’d worked to build up?’ which is implied in so much propaganda for the status quo, are revealing their bondage to the maxim ‘property is the first reality of freedom’, which is an ideal type for the ideological notion in our time.
The number of people in the labour movement who harbour such thoughts is larger than many of us think, and some of them are by no means anti-radical. If all this is true, then the major problem for socialists here remains that of breaking through these imprisoning prejudices which stalk militants through every battle and police demonstration more effectively than any constabulary. That is why the actions of workers and the growth of socialist thought feed one another, and why at the same time the working class must to ‘liberate itself. With all respect to brainwashers, no-one else can. Social-engineering blueprints fail, not because social engineers can’t draw, but because the rules of perspective they are forced to adopt are distilled from the practice of the very structure they wish to make away with, and the application of blueprints so designed can only reinforce that structure. This is the peculiar nature of class ideology as it was understood by Marx. Lenin, who used the word ‘ideology’ neutrally to describe any coherent system of ideas, was not following Marx, who always used it to denote this kind of ‘false consciousness’. The false consciousness of bourgeois society was not seen by Marx as something simply mistaken. On the contrary, it was internally consistent, logically correct: measured by its own standards it could never be faulted. Only when judged in the light of social existence, did it fail, and then because it could not meet the human promise it had itself stated. More, such false consciousness can be said to be historically necessary, since it is the ladder which we must climb, before we can kick it away.
Alasdair MacIntyre clearly follows Marx in his use of the term ideology, and not Lenin. All the more astonishing to read in his article that Soviet Marxism has all the features of a class ideology. This seems to me to be a most dubious proposition, and I should like to see the evidence for it. It certainly cannot lie in the fetishism of the plan which Dunayevskaya has invoked; to parallel the fetishism of commodities in her model of ‘state capitalism’: for, far from being contained in a hieroglyph, the nature of the plan is clear to every Soviet citizen, even if not in the way that some of the planners would appreciate. The plan does not lie unquestioned outside the realm of fairation, as a structural assumption of the thought of the Russian people. On the contrary, the very real arguments about whether it should be made this way or that, whether there should be more consumer goods or not, have entirely different content from the demand for a fair day’s wage under capitalism. Press the latter to its logical conclusion and the workers will be arguing about each other’s lack of self-denial while their betters relax and take the confident airs of welfare capitalism. Pursue the former arguments, and you are at once debating the whole question of political democracy in Russia. This question goes very near the bone indeed.
To be sure, the Russian bureaucracy argues in a contradictory and temporising manner, and wears its ‘Marxism’ in different fashions to suit the weather. But it has proved manifestly incapable of developing an ideology in the marxian sense of the word: indeed, I have already shown that Marx does not conceive of ideology as conscious falsification; and, revealing though the unconscious slips of bureaucrats may be, they certainly betray very little consistency, and exhibit virtually no mass-appeal whatever. The ragbag of quotations from Lenin and Marx which are sewn into Mr. Khrushchev’s speeches are not ideological, since they are neither consistently false nor even consistently falsified; and one can hardly assume that they are ‘historically necessary’. In fact they reflect a constant process of manoeuvre between the world socialist movement and world capitalism. In his tortured combination of blindness and insight, with his unbelievably philistine programme of advance, Mr. K. surely conjures up a parallel with the British trade union functionaries who recently called several conferences on Democracy whilst they frantically stuffed the ballotbox, and in between times led a strike or two. These men behaved very badly, but they were not capitalists, old style or new.
Workers who opposed them had no built-in fetishes of their own to purge before they could come to grips with them: the only ‘mystification’ they had to overcome was one of lies, deliberately told. Their hesitations in doing battle were not mystical in origin, but entirely rational: they feared to weaken their own organisation in the face of its enemies, if they did not take care in their struggles.
It seems to me that Alasdair MacIntyre himself has not entirely discarded what he calls the ‘illusion that one can characterise a contemporary state in isolation from its world situation’. I can see no reason why he should want to insist on the dogma that Russia is a class society, different in no essentials from the capitalist bloc, if he were free of this illusion. In any event, I think he should develop his argument about the Russian ideology before it is accepted and I do not think he will find this as easy to do as he seems to imagine.
 



The Miners in Crisis and War
R. Page Arnot
Allen & Unwin. 42s.
This is the third heavy volume of Mr Page Arnot’s history of the Miners’ Union, and with it he brings his story up to the beginning of the year 1945. It is a masterly work of compression.
On page 144, for instance, we are given a table of the main colliery disasters which happened between 1914 and 1942. It lists 41 entries. Only one of these, that at Gresford, is extensively treated. All the mutilating greed of the coal-owners, and all the painful helplessness of the defeated miners, is made explicit in these pages, which speak of murderous contraventions of the most elementary safety-precautions, pitiless speed-up, brutal intimidation and victimisation.
‘There is no language’, said an MP after the event, ‘... in which to describe the inferno ... There were men working almost stark naked, clogs with holes bored in the bottom to let the sweat out ... the air thick with fumes and dust from blasting, the banjack hissing to waft the gas out of the face and into the unpacked waste, a space 200 yards long and 100 yards wide above the wind road full of inflammable gas and impenetrable for that reason.’
The book is not all defeat, though. Towards the end of the ’thirties the tide began to turn. The battle against company unions, especially against the Spencer Union of Nottinghamshire, marked out the beginnings of better times. The chapter on the epic dispute of Harworth, which killed the independent organisation of Spencer, if not Spencerism, is long and valuable.
But the book does not say everything that needs to be said, because this is an official history, and traces the surface appearances more faithfully than the undercurrents. One learns more from Arthur Horner’s reminiscences about the struggle against company unions in Wales, with all his emphasis on the strategic conduct they called forth, than can be gathered from Arnot’s impeccably documented pages on Harworth. This is not to say that he is wrong about the heroism of Mick Kane and the other Harworth Martyrs: indeed his account does much to set right the shabby record of neglect for the memory of Harworth. Yet the real problems of the conduct of the dispute are not adequately explained here, while the bitter arguments to which it gave rise are not covered.
But there is no doubt whatever that Arnot has written an important book, which will remain important for a long time to come.
 



I am in no position to write a full-scale obituary of Peter Fryer, since I lost touch with him a long time ago and had only fragmentary knowledge of his doings after that time. But for a brief while we were fairly close, and indeed he lived in my house during the traumatic months in which he broke his relations with Gerry Healy.
The background to this episode could be said to begin with the assignment given to Peter to cover what became the Hungarian Revolution in 1956 for the Daily Worker.
Peter had joined the Communist Party in Britain in 1942, and became a member of the staff of the Daily Worker in 1948. The following year he received his first assignment in Hungary, to report upon a show trial of the eminent Hungarian Communist, Laszlo Rajk. This was one of a series of purge trials which were calculated to put the impress of Soviet control over the so-called people’s democracies in Eastern Europe. These both insisted upon Russian hegemony, and continued the frenzied vilification of President Tito and the Yugoslav Communists. In Hungary it was Rajk, in Czechoslovakia it was Slansky, in Bulgaria, Traicho Kostov. The similarities with the infamous trials in Moscow before the Second World War were all too evident to all but the true believers.
Peter dutifully wrote the official story for the Daily Worker and gathered plaudits for his loyalty, and the raw material for a tortured conscience, as the truth later dawned on him. Rajk was apparently promised his life and a secure retirement in Russia, provided only that he perjured himself in the Court in Budapest. Needless to say, the promise was broken, and he was apparently garrotted when the sentence was finally carried out. Huge posthumous ceremonies later celebrated his life.
Peter was sent off to Hungary again in July and August 1956, to write more articles about the events in Hungary. To his astonishment he found himself witnessing a full-scale revolution, and he wrote truthfully about what he saw. Far from being delighted with their scoop, the Daily Worker rushed to suppress it. The editor not only suppressed the contents of Peter’s stories from his newspaper, but even withheld them from the other members of the paper’s staff. On his return to London, Peter was shocked to find what had happened to his despatches, and felt that he had no alternative but to resign from the Daily Worker. Subsequently, he was expelled from the Communist Party.
Meantime, there were hundreds of other recently lapsed Communists who were agog to hear what he had to say. One of these was my friend, John Daniels, through whom, I am very sorry to say, he got in touch with Gerry Healy, the leader of the most strident of the several Trotskyist groups in Britain.
British Trotskyism was undergoing a very difficult passage. By 1956 there were three main groups, but none of them had more than fifty members. The largest group followed Gerry Healy, who had aligned himself with the French Lambertistes, whose most celebrated member was Lionel Jospin, later to become the Prime Minister of France, and with the American Socialist Workers’ Party led J.P. Canon and Joseph Hansen. Two other groups counted something like a dozen supporters each. One was led by Tony Cliff and published the newspaper Socialist Review, while the other proclaimed its loyalty to the Fourth International based in Paris and Brussels, under the leadership of Michel Pablo and Ernest Germaine (Mandel). In Britain this group was led by Ted Grant, who had a handful of followers in Liverpool and East London.
Healy was quick to seek support from the melt down among British Communists, and recruited John Daniels as the first of a number of influential Communist intellectuals. This group was to include Tom Kemp, Cliff Slaughter, Peter Cadogan and Brian Pearce. Healy persuaded Daniels to become the editor of a journal called Labour Review. In the beginning Daniels was very useful, in that he could prevail upon a number of his friends in the Communist Party to contribute to the journal. When they began to contribute unorthodox thoughts, Daniels was first demoted, and then dismissed. But by then, Peter Fryer had moved into the orbit of Labour Review, and within a short time had been offered the editorship of the Newsletter, a weekly broadsheet, which rapidly gathered influence for Healy beyond the milieu of Communist intellectuals, and recruited Brian Behan, and a variety of active and capable trade unionists.
In the beginning Peter Fryer was in constant demand for his stories of the Hungarian Revolution. He must have spoken to dozens of public meetings, and to a very large audience of Communists and ex-Communists who hung on his every word. But as he became identified with the Newsletter, Peter found that this reportage was an insufficient basis for his new reputation. He edited a pretty dreadful book on the then predominant view of the Healy group, called The Battle for Socialism or some such title, in which he spelt out some sort of party line. In the beginning, the Newsletter had reflected the thinking of the new left in Britain, and reported on the movement of socialist forums in different cities. It carried sympathetic accounts of the visit of Claude Bourdet to England, for instance. But inexorably the line hardened, and dissident opinion was treated with greater and more rasping intolerance.
By now Peter was editing Labour Review as well as the Newsletter, but dependable old generation Trotskyists were carefully shadowing him. John Daniels was precipitated into outer darkness. The process by which this happened was quite tumultuous. Having greatly expanded its circle of acquaintances, the Healy group began to encounter more and more unorthodox opinions. True old timers would not have been surprised by this. But true old timers among the Healy circle were hard to find. Most had been fairly innocent recruits from the left wing of the Labour Party, and quite thoroughly insulated from the blasts of doctrine, heterodox or otherwise. A fairly basic party line was deemed to be sufficient for them.
Then, suddenly, there arrived a much larger core of supporters, whose curiosity had been stimulated by the traumas of the collapse of piety in the Communist Party. One such was Martin Grainger (Chris Pallis), who later helped to establish the broadsheet called Solidarity. He turned up at Labour Review meetings to make the perfectly sensible suggestion that the journal should seek an interview with C.L.R. James. James was by far the most distinguished independent Marxist within reach in London, and so his proposal aroused considerable curiosity, even among the less audacious of Healy’s old guard. But the alarm bells which were set up by this proposal did not brook hesitation. Healy had no-one on call who could match James in argument, and his standard method of polemic in such circumstances required a facility for common abuse. Developed though this was in his case, he now had a following which was more sophisticated. The time had come for the proclamation of a more ferocious orthodoxy.
There followed other earth-shattering polemics. Among them was the row about the Fourth International, which rumbled on over the years. The Fourth International sought to square the circle by developing a species of pluralism. The right of tendency, providing space for a variety of factions within a common political commitment was never easy to practise, and could be incredibly difficult in groups which were poor in human resources.
By the time that Peter Fryer was mastering the Healy orthodoxies on such matters, the Fourth International had nurtured a formidable faction around the Latin American Trotskyist, Posadas. This was convinced that the Third World War was inevitable, and drew a variety of unappetising conclusions from this premise. The largest mass movement in Britain at this time was the movement for nuclear disarmament, and young people who were coming in to some form of political activity were all touched by it. Gerry Healy’s conspicuous attempt to translate the commitments of CND into orthodoxy was based on the classic syndicalism which is intricately embroiled in the history of British Communism, and therefore of British Trotskyism.
“Black the bomb, black the bases” was the Healy group’s contribution to the anti-nuclear debate. More sophisticated arguments against nuclear weapons and nuclear warfare were available, so that the scope of this slogan to provide leadership to the anti-nuclear movement was severely restricted. But the pluralism of the Fourth International deprived it of the advantages which it could normally have anticipated in this discussion, because the thesis of the coming World War would inevitably be seen as a parody, and could not be taken seriously as a foundation for political organisation.
Much of this argument did not directly engage Peter Fryer in his editorial role in the Newsletter and Labour Review. I cannot remember the precise issues about which he fell out with Gerry Healy, and put into jeopardy his tenure of the editorial chairs. In any case, I was not privy to these arguments, which were internal to the then Socialist Labour League, which was the current embodiment assumed by Healy’s group.
Undoubtedly Peter had become disillusioned with the frenetic pace of political life in that group which consisted of endless campaigning, and ceaseless selling of newspapers. He wanted to follow a more rationally ordered trajectory, with time to think, not to say study. But every dispute with Gerry Healy had a tendency to go nuclear. Very quickly, Peter found himself threatened, and surrounded by intimidatory cadres who would skilfully impugn his every motive. There began an intense phase of denunciation which unsurprisingly led directly to Peter’s withdrawal from the field.
At this point began a nightmare of intimidatory threats. Gerry Healy proclaimed his determination to bring Fryer to book. He would not escape, Healy warned, “We shall search every rail terminal, and every airport”. This heady mixture of paranoia and megalomania was quite adequately forbidding, and Peter duly got the message. He fled to Nottingham, and the counsel of John Daniels. That was how it came about that he stayed in my house for a few months, together with his companion of the time, Pat McGowan. During these months he wrote another book, describing these strange days. It was entitled Twice Bitten. I do not know whether the manuscript survives in Peter’s papers, but I do remember it as being quite a hilarious text. Hand on heart, I could not be absolutely sure that it was intended to be as funny as it was. Healy had that kind of effect on people. More agnostic intellects would laugh, but many very decent citizens were quite liable to be scared out of their wits.
From that time on Peter was committed to earning his living from his writings. After staying with me, he went off with Pat McGowan to Portugal, where they produced a book which is still readable, and a good bit more than a travelogue. There followed a string of other works, about which others will write better than I can.



Trade Union Officers
H.A. Clegg, A.J. Killinck, and Rex Adams
Basil Blackwell. 32s 6d.
This book is indispensable to any student of Trade Unions in Great Britain. It is an enquiry into the structure of trade union administration, which is adequately described by its subtitle: A study of Full-Time Officers, Branch Secretaries, and Shop Stewards in British Trade Unions.
Whatever else is to the credit of the authors of this book, their attempts to make accurate estimates of the numbers of people working for and on behalf of trade unionism must rank among their greatest merits. According to their calculations, there are some 80,000 stewards, whose numbers are augmented by something like 10,000 branch negotiators. They estimate that there are about 2,500 full-time officers, or a ratio of about one to every 4,000 members. Of these some 30% hope to be promoted, although the ambitious are unevenly scattered: 49% of the T&GW’s full-timers are ‘aspiring’ officers, while in the skilled unions the figure falls to as low as 12%. More than half the officers would like their sons to follow in their footsteps. The officers who want promotion tend to rate their social status as being lower than do those who are not seeking advancement.
Interesting though these findings are, the findings about stewards are more interesting. Stewards average some eleven hours a week on union business, six of them in working-time. Most of this time is spent treating with management, from foreman-level up. Four-fifths of those studied lost no earnings because of their union work, although five percent lost over £1 a week. Nearly a third would like to be elected to a full-time job, and two-thirds thought that their social standing would rise (as well as their earnings) if they were elected. Personnel officers would far rather negotiate with stewards than with full-time officials – or at least, the 72 big-firm, multi-plant personnel officers who answered the authors’ questions would. ‘This and other evidence’ say the authors, ‘leads us to suppose that the power of shop stewards in British industry has been fostered by management.’
There are very many other important things to be found in this book. Missing is any attempt to get to grips with the structure of the shop stewards’ movement, as opposed to the trade union hierarchy: but this is a vast subject which requires at least a book on its own. We need to know how stewards organise themselves, raise funds, how widespread are effective links between stewards’ committees in the same firm and in the same industry; and the answer to such questions as these does not emerge from this account. The collection of information about particularly lively stewards’ committees is not just an interesting job for the historian: it is an indispensable part of the struggle to generalise the most efficient shop-floor organisation, and to help in the political development of what is still the most significant rank-and-file movement in this country, for all that it is not yet a socialist movement. But though we must go beyond Clegg and his collaborators, both in our researches and in our vision and activity, nonetheless we should thank them for a clear and accurate picture of a field that is commonly fogged by prejudice and wishful thinking.
 



The Bargainers
By George Cyriax and Robert Oakeshott
Faber, 21s.
Mr Cyriax works for the Economist, and Mr Oakeshott for the Financial Times. This book, then, is by Insiders: and it turns out to be a short introduction to the great, and partly tamed, Outside; the world of Trade Unions. ‘Trade Unionists’ might have been a reasonable title: instead, it’s called ‘The Bargainers’. True the authors have some strange ideas about working people, as for instance the notion that a major obstacle to job-mobility is the necessity it imposes on workers to sell their houses. But for the most part the world that Cyriax and Oakeshott inhabit is recognisable, even if they have drawn it upside down. The colour of their views can be neatly expressed by sentences like this one. ‘As their bargaining power has increased under full employment, so has their moral fervour, the birthright of the under-privileged, declined.’ Does this mean that Messrs Cyriax and Oakeshott are nostalgic about the attrition of moral fervour? Not a bit of it. As they say, ‘attitudes must be adapted to the affluence of the times’, and only by becoming less morally fervent, more pliant of the bureaucratic buttock, can Trade Union leaders ensure that ‘the image of trade unionism be brightened’. The trouble with the Unions is that they aren’t businesslike enough. The NUVB, for instance, has old-fashioned ideas of democracy, fervent morals, which actually leave some power in the hands of branch members. Clearly this must be power which ‘has never been properly transferred to the centre.’ Again, the Unions don’t pay enough organisers: BC Roberts’ on the ratio of organisers to organised in various Unions is quoted with the added stricture:
‘an efficient business would expect to have to employ up to fifty times more staff per member than do the unions.’
No doubt moral fervour would completely collapse under the weight of such a burden: but that is not all. An ‘efficient business’ would also reward the people who ‘softened their attitudes’ far better than do the stingy moralists of the working class movement. This could be remedied by the workers digging deeper into their pockets in order to compete with efficient business in maintaining the new members of the Establishment in manner fitting. Ultimately the nirvana of affluent amorality would be attained, and harmony would reign. But Cyriax and Oakeshott have done more in this book than incite our Gadarene brethren to accelerate their pace down the slopes of affluence. They have also kept a wide eye open for the suspicious and disruptive carriers of ‘moral fervour’.
Accordingly, Ted Hill gets his share of tolerantly delivered side-slashes with the pen. Clive Jenkins is urbanely associated with the Trotskyists, on the impressive grounds that some printing has been done for him on a press which also prints for Trotskyists. Briggs shop-stewards are accused of racketeering because they ran an efficient fund-raising scheme, raised £7000-odd in a few months, and spent it on
‘a variety of dubious purposes – such as supporting other strikes, printing leaflets, and paying for the publication of a militant stewards’ journal The Voice of Ford Workers.’
(Racketeering is a nasty word, yet this list of ‘offences’ is all the evidence that is offered to substantiate the charge.)
Even without the aid of Communists, Trotskyists, Ted Hill, or any other morally fervent comrades under the bed, the two writers will surely get plenty of new stories to convince them that not all the workers accept that attitudes must be adapted to the Times. Some of us would like to adapt the times for a change.
 






Readers will recognize Ken Coates as one who has had a varied career. A miner for nine years from the age of sixteen, he won a state scholarship for a prize winning essay on Sean O’Casey, which took him to Nottingham University to study English. He now lectures in sociology in the university’s extramural department. While a miner he was on the Executive Committee of the Young Communist League and was active in the National Union of Mineworkers. He left the CP in 1953 to rejoin later as an opposition member. He left it finally in 1956. At university, he was secretary of the National Association of Labour Students’ Organizations, editor of its paper Clarion, and a major force in revitalizing that body. He has been excluded more than once from the Labour Party.





Said they, you must go over the Valley of the Shadow of Death, where the hobgoblins are, where the light is darkness, and where the way is full of snares, pits, traps and gins.
– Mr Valiant, Pilgrim’s Progress
Most socialists do not need to be persuaded that it is a good thing to expropriate the United Fruit Company. Not many socialists are violent partisans of Latifundists, or of illiteracy, or of slums and prostitution. Accordingly, when the Government of Cuba nationalized foreign imperialist holdings in its territory, carried out a sweeping land reform, set up a virtual monopoly of Cuba’s foreign trade, and, in October 1960, nationalized almost all domestic private industry, few tears were shed in the British labour movement. True, the clause-four revisionists were content to preserve the silence of the grave which they were assiduously digging for themselves, but elsewhere the noises that could be heard from England were nearly all approving. Even the New Statesman raised its scarred bottom from the railings to give a feeble cheer for the new Cuba. Into this dismally unamerican situation, at the eleventh hour, was launched Mr Kennedy’s ultimate think-deterrent, Theodore Draper, Mr Valiant-for-the-all-American-Truth. [1]
Encounter chose wisely, when it entered Mr Draper as its contender against Castroism. Liberal, painstaking and learned, Draper is widely respected among socialists as the conscientious historian of the American Communist Party. We lined up at the kiosks with our three-and-sixes, expecting scholarship, detachment, and a spectacular change of front on the part of Encounter. As usual we were wrong. Mr Draper, not Encounter, had confounded our judgment. There had previously been a number of accounts of the Cuban Revolution. Huberman and Sweezy [2] had described the events of the revolution, and its first year’s achievements. Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir had returned from Cuba vividly impressed with the new State and its leadership. [3] Paul Johnson had written a rave notice to the New Statesman, and lastly, but perhaps most impressively, that most significant of American Radicals, C. Wright Mills, had produced a sympathetic and persuasive statement of the Cuban case. [4] The only significant anti-Castro contribution to the discussion that had appeared in the English Language was an illiterate piece by Nathaniel Weyl, which might perhaps suffice to neutralize the New Daily to an uneasy acquiescence in US policy towards Cuba, but would be little use in any attempt to disarm anyone more exotic in his politics than, say, Mr Stephen Spender. Against all these fearful literary hobgoblins Mr Draper launched his first essay.
The two who received the fullest treatment were Huberman-Sweezy, and Mills. Against all of them, in spite of their partisanship for the right side, Draper scored serious points. All had had something to say about the class-character of the Cuban Revolution. Sartre and Huberman-Sweezy had described it as a ‘peasant’ revolution, while Mills had suggested that ‘the decisive forces were the intellectuals and the peasants, with the former in total command’. For Draper, these statements were all untrue, and we were prepared to learn, until we get his version of what was true: the Cuban Revolution was a middle-class revolution, which Castro betrayed. It is necessary to test this statement fully, if the revolution is to be understood at all.
First, was the middle class decisive? Certainly there is a lot of evidence that the middle class, like the overwhelming majority of the population, found life under Batista unbearable. Draper documents the development of middle-class resistance reasonably well in his article, and it would be silly to deny that ‘the movement of the 26th July originally included important representatives of middle-class radical opinion. But Castro himself has had something to say about his supporters. When asked by Claude Bourdet whether the Cuban Revolution was not part of the ‘worldwide revolution of youth’, Castro answered: ‘Certainly the youth, but above all the workers, the peasants, the victims of colonialism, all the exploited.’ [5] Indeed, the backbone of the revolution was above all the class of agricultural workers, the rural proletariat of the plantations, the refineries, and their ancillary transport systems. These people worked only three months of the year, as wage-labourers, and then, in the tiempo muerte, starved. Englishmen who want some insight into their condition could do worse than read the Australian play The Summer of the Seventeenth Doll, mentally setting it in conditions of festering poverty rather than affluent drift. Only a quarter of the Cuban ‘peasants’ were individual landholders, and they mostly scratching the harder wilderness for their livelihood. The remainder were immune to peasant slogans and aspirations for title-deeds: their psychology was a worker-psychology, responding to such political demands as the cry for full-employment. Add to these the 700,000 unemployed, and the 60,000 young men who each year came on to a glutted labour market to find all prospects of usefulness denied them, and you have a picture of the need for social as well as political upheaval. Given that in this situation the middle-class were unhappy about Batista, that the agricultural-workers, led by intellectuals, fought him, and that the urban workers staged the general strike that made it possible for Fidel to enter Havana in 1959, Draper’s oversimplifications lose any advantage that they may seem to have over those of other people.
But was the revolution betrayed? It seems fair to assume that no Government this side of the celestial city could satisfy all the divergent interests represented by these various classes. We might therefore expect some Cubans to be disappointed. Indeed, they were. Draper’s reproach to Castro the Betrayer rests on a promise (originally made in the speech History Will Absolve Me [6], in which Castro defied the executioners of Batista in their own Courts) that the Rebels would restore the Constitution of 1940. This promise seems to have been made seriously, for, as Draper shows, it was repeated several times. But so were several others. Promises were also made about Agrarian Reform, about the condition of the poor, and sundry similar matters. Have they been betrayed? The most one can legitimately say about this matter is that Castro and his entourage were not at all times precisely clear about the implications of their promises: they did not foresee that their commonsense approach to Cuban politics might be impeded by the larger nonsense of the world of power in which even Cuba was contained. But if they erred in this way, they are not alone. Other revolutionary leaders have been smitten with similar disappointment.
Cromwell, in 1647, expressed himself about the King in these terms:
I have just witnessed the most touching spectacle, the interview of the king with his children; no one has been more deceived than I about his Majesty; he is, I am now sure of it, the best man in the three kingdoms.
’According to him’, Guizot reports, ‘the officers were all convinced that if the king did not resume his rights, no man in England could enjoy in security his life and property.’ In 1648 Cromwell’s opinion had changed. Nearer home to Mr Draper, the First Continental Congress, assembling in 1774, informed the king:
Your Royal authority over us, and our connection with Great Britain, we shall always carefully and zealously endeavour to support and maintain.
Almost every leader of the American Revolution was guilty of similar innocent perjury: and one could continue this list through almost every dramatic social upheaval between that day and this. Castro and his entourage could do nothing to meet the demands of their real followers, the unemployed and underemployed, the landless, the poor, without going past the politics of parliamentary democracy into those of social revolution. His revolution having become Permanent, he will be more than ever dependent on those strata of the population which have borne him and the revolution past the rule of private property. Draper’s history is too selective to appreciate these matters: Mr Valiant and Encounter’s pilgrim-band are nodding:
they were got to the enchanted ground, where the air naturally tends to make one drowsy.
The airs that have chloroformed Mr Draper’s sense of judgement are the hot and spicy blasts of parliamentary bullshit, an enchanted atmosphere which has nobbled more pilgrims than one since men began to set out in search of better things.
No better example of what happens to social revolutionaries who stray after Mr Draper can be afforded than that of the Guatemalans. The Arbenz regime set about reforming the ills to which Cuba was until recently a prey. Elected in 1950, by 1952 Arbenz had promulgated an Agrarian Reform Law, and in 1953–4 his Government expropriated about 70 percent of the lands of the United Fruit Company.
On the strong advice of the Communist Party, all parliamentary niceties were observed. No old soldiers were disarmed, and no workers were armed. Full compensation was offered to United Fruit, on the basis of their own tax-returns. But when Eisenhower decided to send ambassador Peurifoy to the rescue, it only took an army of 150 hired men to frighten the Generals and the Guatemalan bigwigs into deposing Arbenz and putting all radical notions about feeding the hungry out of mind for ever. Castro made no such detour into the enchanted grounds of parliamentarism. He not merely damaged, but dismantled, Batista’s state machine. The old army was wound up, and its barracks converted into school-rooms. Five-hundred thousand militia-men were trained from among the workers and peasants, by the remaining radical wing of the rebel army. The peasants were in no state of confusion and doubt, as had been the case in parliamentary Guatemala, but were drilling with arms in hand in between spells of housebuilding, school-construction, and the like.
This is not to say that we can afford to be complacent about democracy in Cuba. Draper sees only one kind of democracy as possible, and never troubles his head for a moment about the possibilities of soviet forms of democracy, of power in the hands of workers’ and peasants’ councils. Consequently he sees the gains of the revolution as losses, and proves incapable of facing any of the real problems of power in Cuba today. Yet even if Draper cannot meet the dangers of the Cuban Revolution, dangers there are: and first among them is the danger of bureaucratic paralysis. This is not a question which can be discussed in the hysterical manner of Draper, however. By far his most pressing concern is the extent to which he sees communists permeating the apparatus of administration throughout Cuba. Wright Mills has adequately described the attitude of the Cuban Communist Party, showing beyond doubt how, far from initiating and driving forward the revolution, it had
never dreamed we could go so far so fast – in overthrowing the tyrant, in industrialising, in the land reform, and all the rest of our revolution.
As Mills’ fictitious Cuban goes on to say ...
the plain fact is, our revolution has outdone the communists on every score. From the beginning up till today, always at every turn of policy, the revolution is always faster than the Cuban Communist Party, or individual communists. [7]
Yet clearly if the Cuban Revolution is forced to retreat, if its arteries begin to harden, we can expect the CP to be a keen promoter of bureaucratization. But Draper tells us nothing that enables us to judge about so vital a matter. He documents the extent to which individual communists get important jobs, but he has nothing to say about the context in which this happens. We are told about the stalinization of the Cuban Trade Unions, but not about the Fidelization of the Cuban CP. In fact that party is far from the monolithic burrower under freedom that Draper describes: it is fiercely split, being governed by a Maoist faction with a captive Stalinist (muscovite) general secretary. Recently it wound up its youth league, which appears to be very much out of control. Obviously the fact of the revolution has had a major effect on the bearings of individual communists in Cuba, and old dogmas are ten a penny in the circumstances. About the Fidelistas, Draper quotes the saying of Sartre that nobody in Cuba is foolish enough to strive to link her with the Eastern bloc, against Guevara’s welcome for the Moscow declaration of support for the Cuban Revolution. But he reports Guevara as endorsing not this statement, solely referring to Cuba, but the manifesto of the eighty-one communist parties, about which Guevara said nothing. (Although here in England Tribune did, which looks bad for Michael Foot when Draper gets round to sorting us out.) Certainly we might expect unpleasant pressures to be brought to bear on the Fidelistas, both by the Russian bureaucrats, and those of Cuban supporters who have not been given seriously to think by the events they have lived through. But Cuba is not Spain. The colonial revolution is advancing, not retreating: Latin America is by no means the safe place for reaction that Europe was in the 1930s. Already demands for soviet democracy, for government by workers’ councils, have been advanced in Cuba, by the journal Voz Proletaria. This has had to run the gauntlet of communist party interference, but it has survived, and conditions are propitious for its growth.
Against this, weighs the disturbing news that the Fidelistas are discussing the formation of a parti unique embracing all revolutionary groups including the communists. Dangerous though this may be, Draper’s gloom is by no means vindicated by this development. There is no guarantee that any such party can become a monolithic party, and indeed the prospects for monoliths anywhere in the world are distinctly bleak. Still more, there is no guarantee that the armed people will embrace a monolithic party even if attempts are made to form one. But socialists who have supported the Cuban revolution have the right to be concerned about these matters. Draper has not: he has already moved from criticising the revolution to this:
No anti-Castro Movement can resist Russian tanks and Czechoslovak machine-guns with sympathy alone. It would be more honest and more humane to advise any movement not to resist than to resist with bare hands. Castro’s opponents have the right and the duty to obtain arms where they can, as Castro did, and as other revolutionary movements have done. [8]
Too much to ask Draper to ask himself about those Czech guns: a moment of thought would have persuaded him already that they do not shoot themselves. Castro has no standing army. If his militia deserts him, he is sunk. For those who regret the passing of Theodore Draper, radical, it seems that the prospect of real and lively democracy in a situation like this are better than perhaps anywhere else in the world: if they are defeated it will be largely because of the actions of the nasty forces with which Draper has aligned himself. In this parody-of-a-pilgrim’s progress, it is sad to record that our Mr Valiant-for-Truth
passed over, and all the trumpets sounded for him on the other side.

Footnotes
1. Theodore Draper, Castro’s Cuba, Encounter, 90, March 1961; Disaster in Cuba, Encounter, 94, July 1961.
2. Huberman and Sweezy, Cuba – Anatomy of a Revolution, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1960, pp. 207, 25s. This edition includes a postscript to the original Monthly Review paperback, written at the end of 1960. Huberman has also published a further article in Monthly Review, this year, and the same journal has issued a pamphlet, Reflections – on the Cuban Revolution, by P.A. Baran.
3. See New University, 4, December 1960.
4. Castro’s Cuba, by C. Wright Mills, Seeker and Warburg, 1960, pp. 190, 16s. Published in the US under the title Listen Yankee.
5. Bourdet, France-Observateur, Sept. 29, 1960, p. 7.
6. Fidel Castro, History Will Absolve Me, Liberal Press, NY 1959, quoted to Mr Draper’s annoyance in Hubermann-Sweezy, pp. 30–48.
7. Mills, p. 105.
8. Draper, Encounter, 94, p. 77.
 



The Drums of Father Ned
Sean O’Casey
MacMillan, 8s 6d.
Father Ned’s drums (rolling to a measure set by Haydn) are Sean O’Casey’s latest symbol for the Ireland which lies, tormented by bigotry, blistering in clerical hells of intolerance. In his dedication to previous drummers for Father Ned, O’Casey cites Dr MacDonald of Maynooth, Dr Morgan Sheehy, ‘banished for defending a Parish Priest against a Bishop’, and, of course, Father Michael O’Flanagan, who bade his flock, ‘shivering through a black winter, go to a private-owned bog, and take from it the turf they needed.’ Already we have an inkling that clerical intolerance is not the only, nor even the main, butt of this ‘Mickrocosm of Ireland’.
‘No man has the right to be proud of an institution, though there’s many an institution has the right to be proud of a man’, said O’Casey once, after a visit to Cambridge University. In this play he returns to this very important theme, already developed in the Bishop’s Bonfire, his last play but one. The fact that he chooses a half-truth for a theme does not detract from the play: it is an important half of the truth, and one that is given added bite by the fact that the play which tells it has already been savaged by the forces it condemns. O’Casey’s new play, while certainly not his best, is one which far outshines most of the things currently running in the West End, including some of the supposed ‘new theatre’, upon whose bandwagon more than one drivel-gusher rides his craven way. But we haven’t seen it there yet. Come to that, how many of O’Casey’s other plays have been given competent performances in England in the last twenty years? Not the least of the sins of omission of British socialists is the way that we have allowed this great talent to go neglected, struggling on in lonely exile even from his chosen place of exile.
People should read this play, and ask to see it staged. But they should also lobby for an O’Casey revival in general: in the theatre, and, why not, the cinema? Will they? Or are we to allow this great old man to die amongst us, in the same callous indifference that we have accorded him throughout his life? The loss would be ours, and there is no need for it. Small use to complain of dearth of socialist art, while O’Casey is left to the Academics or, worse, the Bishops.
 






Ken Coates has had a varied career. A miner for nine years from the age of sixteen, he won a state scholarship for a prize winning essay on Sean O’Casey, which took him to Nottingham University to study English. He now lectures in sociology in the university’s extra-mural department. While a miner he was on the Executive Commitee of the Young Communist League and was active in the National Union of Mineworkers. He left the CP in 1953 to rejoin later as an opposition member. He left it finally in 1956. At university, he was secretary of the National Association of Labour Students’ Organizations, editor of its paper Clarion, and a major force in revitalizing that body. He has been excluded more than once from the Labour Party.





Paul Cardan, in his article Socialists and Capitalism [1] has lamented the lack of discussion among socialists about socialism. He has grounds for this lamentation, and I would like to take issue with him for the dual purpose of undermining both his lamentation and some of his arguments. This is a difficult task, because there are many things in his article with which one is glad to agree, a few which cause the hairs on one’s neck to bristle, and far more that seem to lurk like hostile icebergs, with clean pure lines above the water, visible, and god-knows-what beneath, obscured, but menacing. It is always possible to misunderstand someone, and in parts I may have misunderstood Cardan, so I would like to begin in a rather simple way by sketching out what seems to me to be the basis of the argument. Cardan talks about ‘traditional marxism’ in his article, and represents it rather differently than I would, so I think it appropriate to say what I think traditional marxism is about. Rightly, Cardan is concerned with the disruptive and destructive effect of the division of labour in modern factories; So too was Marx. But what he had to say about the matter is perhaps most simply grasped by looking at what he appropriated from others who faced this problem before him and alongside him.
Classical political economy begins with a treatise on the effects of the division of labour on productivity. The very first pages of Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations consider how
The greatest improvement in the productive powers of labour, and the greater part of the skill, dexterity, and judgement with which it is anywhere directed or applied, seem to have been the effects of the division of labour. [2]
Adam Smith pointed to three basic ways in which the division of labour tended to increase productivity: it increased individual dexterity, cut out wasted time in transferring from one operation to the next, and opened up the road by which mechanization entered working life; to ‘abridge labour, and enable one man to do the work of many’. He also pointed out the limitations which beset the application of the division: in particular, he noted that the size of the market set the bounds to, and the pace of specialization; in that the smaller the market, the less incentive, indeed the less opportunity, to separate out tasks in the general production. With all their refinements, later economists had little to add to this basic insight on this matter.
For the moralists, however, it was quite another story. Adam Smith had begun his exposition with his famous parable of the pin-makers.
A workman ... could scarce make one pin in a day, and certainly could not make twenty. But in the way in which the business is now carried on ... one man draws out the wire, another straights it, a third cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the head; to make the head requires two or three distinct operations; to put it on is another business, to whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by itself to put them into paper ... [3]
... and so on. But the same story was seen very differently when refracted through the prisms of a de Tocqueville, a Melville, or a Ruskin:
We have much studied and much perfected, of late, the great civilized invention of the division of labour; only we give it a false name. It is not, truly speaking, the labour that is divided; but the men – divided into mere segments of men – broken into small fragments and crumbs of life; so that all the little piece of intelligence that is left in a man is not enough to make a pin, or a nail, but exhausts itself in making the point of a pin, or the head of a nail. Now it is a good and desirable thing, truly, to make many pins in a day; but if we could only see with what crystal sand their points were polished – sand of human soul, much to be magnified before it can be discerned for what it is – we should think there might be some loss in it also.
And the great cry that rises from all our manufacturing cities, louder than their furnace blast, is all in very deed for this – that we manufacture everything there except men; we blanch cotton, and strengthen steel, and refine sugar, and shape pottery; but to brighten, to strengthen, to refine, or to form a single living spirit, never enters into our estimate of advantages. [4]
A more general version of this complaint was given by Emerson: ‘Things are in the saddle, and ride Mankind’. In our own century, it has been taken up again and again, as witnessed in this heartcry of Norbert Weiner:
it is a degradation to a human being to chain him to an oar, and use him as a source of power, but it is an almost equal degradation to assign him to a purely repetitive job in a factory, which demands less than a millionth of his brain capacity. [5]
Whom then do we choose: the moralists, or the economists? Marx’s own answer, and surely it is the right one; was, Neither: and both. [6] The division of labour is the key to progress, yet it is the source of all that is retrogressive in human society at the same time. Classes themselves are merely a hardened case of the division; the great division between mental and manual labour. The dilemma is plain; to choose Adam Smith without Ruskin’s insight would be brutish, inhuman; yet to reject him for Ruskin would be to reject the possibility of producing a Ruskin who could see what was wrong. Even so, the fact that low impotent moans come from the moralists is itself a great thing, for ‘mankind always takes up only such problems as it can solve,’
For Marx the problem was, then, to overcome the division of labour, on the basis of expanding needs, that is to say, without retreating into monastic self-denial and puritan self-stultification. It was not, as Cardan suggests it was, to ‘use the productive apparatus of capitalism’ towards the end of ‘satisfying the needs of the masses’, unless one puts a much wider interpretation on these words than he seems to, and excludes the implied meaning, which seems to be simply an equation of needs with material goods. Further, once one understands needs in this broader sense, one would have to see the ‘use’ of capitalism’s productive apparatus as involving the transcending of that apparatus, which is precisely the creation of the very division of labour which is to be overcome. Cardan takes issue with Marx quite explicitly on this matter, condemning the notion that ‘the realm of freedom’ will be established through ‘reduction in the working day’. This seems to me to be a matter of cardinal importance, and one which needs to be thoroughly discussed yet again, if people like Cardan find themselves in doubt about the matter.
Clearly, the business of transcending the division of labour is not a matter of issuing decrees to the effect that people must ‘hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon, and become critical critics in the evening.’ Such decrees are quite worthless in all conditions in which the general productivity, is not ripe to uphold them, and unnecessary in any condition in which it is. When men find it convenient at the moment to be either hunter or fisherman or critic, it is because the state of the market, of the economic organization of society, decrees it to be so. These agencies are somewhat more powerful than any group of legislators: indeed, ‘laws’ on this matter would not merely be worthless, but probably destructive into the bargain. Even assuming the quixotic attempt to legislate, a race of universal men into being, and the requisite policemen to uphold the law, the only conceivable result would be a race of universal morons. The only way men can become free is by freeing themselves: and this they can only do in obedience to an accurate understanding of the sources of their unfreedom. Accordingly, Marx did rightly look to the area of leisure in a society in transition to socialism as the growing point of freedom. Cardan finds this distasteful. So it may be, but that cannot help us if it is true.
If we leap ahead for a moment, and take a look at one of the factories in which Cardan will have us celebrate our socialist freedom, what shall we find? There will be a division of labour, or there could be no factory. It will be ameliorated. People will choose collectively what jobs to do: that is to say, as individuals they will contribute to collective decisions on this matter. Similarly, they will have a say on such questions as what and how much shall be produced, and when. For their say to be effective it will be necessary for them to have a say also in the factories of other groups of workers: and this will involve them in surrendering this right to those other groups, in their own factory. Up comes the whole apparatus of planning: and set around as it must be with democratic safeguards, still power will rest in the hands of real men, not fictions. ‘Autonomy’ is invoked by Cardan as such a safeguard. Either it will be a placebo, conveniently protecting the minutiae of factory customs, or it will wreck the whole elaborate set-up, if those against whom it is exercised are foolish enough to let it. People in this factory will doubtless make away with many, if not most of the institutions of supervision which irk present-day factory workers. But will they be free? Well, they will be freer than they are today. But a collective decision, even at factory level, and still more at plan-level, is not necessarily my decision. True, my desires and needs are socially-formed, but they may and will diverge at many points from those of my socially formed neighbours. Freedom, as Lenin said, echoing Hegel, equals subjectivity. The division of labour, however, is solidly objective, standing firmly in the ‘realm of necessity’. We can only expand our free personality to the extent that we gain the technical ability to subdue Nature more and more effortlessly.
‘Work’, Cardan tells us, ‘is agony because the worker is subordinated to an alien and hostile power.’ Good. ‘This power has two faces: that of the machine and that of the management’. Again, just so. But which face is which? Eliminate the manager’s face, and the machine’s is still there. Control it democratically, and other men will still from time to time vote you down. This is a mighty advance on being ruled without a vote, but ruled you still are. Democracy, in this case as in all others, is not freedom, but the road to it. This is a painful road to travel, but it is not made any more delectable by the sight of great pools of Cardan’s thought in full flood across it, and of the snouts of herrings, red as revolution and large and ravenous as sharks, muzzling through the surface with ominous ill-intent.
‘No British capitalist’, we are told, ‘could ever introduce into his plant a machine which would increase the freedom of a particular worker or of a group of workers to run the job themselves, even if such a machine would increase production.’ But this just isn’t true. Countless examples are available to the contrary: examples of technological improvements accidentally giving rise to greater control of the workers over their jobs, and even examples of managements consciously going out of their way to help just this to happen. [7] Collective contracts exist fairly widely spread over British industry; and have recently been given quite a fillip in the mining industry by the introduction of such machines as trepanners. The teams on some trepanner faces dispose of the necessary jobs between themselves, and elect their own chargehands who are subject to ‘instant recall’ if the team so desires. All this is very nice, but what sort of freedom is it? It seems quite like the freedom of a laboratory mouse to choose which treadmill to run and when to run it, which cheese to bite and when to bite it, on the sole unstated condition that it forgets the vast universe of choices that might exist outside its cage. Given enough treadmills, enough cheese, and room in the cage, a quite bright mouse might never form an inkling of the disconcerting world of potentiality outside.
I do not wish to be misunderstood. The power to regulate and dispose of one’s labour through a collective decision is a valuable one: but it is for a socialist merely a necessary part of the trek to socialism, which is the abolition of labour. Anything which can be done to humanize the conditions in which labour is performed will be welcomed by any socialist: but the whole case for the democratic control of these conditions of labour rests on a more fundamental one, of which the assumption is that true humanity lies on the far side of the division of labour. Forget this, and you forget what you wish people to be conscious for, the reason why the irresponsibility, anarchy, and pointlessness of working life seem to us to be such a cruel denial of what is potential in men. Once the goal is forgotten, whether you are a revolutionist or not, the effect is the same; you are compelled to see through blinkered eyes in treacherous twilight. Adjustments in the conditions in which the division of labour operates become not only the transitional but the ultimate demand. The end of this road is either conformity, or a dedication to the impossible, attempting to legislate community in conditions which forbid it. Socialism is about the creation of a race of individuals who can find fulfilment only in embracing and comprehending their whole society, breathing and enriching its whole culture. Titans like Beethoven and Marx must be commoners in a socialist society; and certainly men who cannot reach up to these peaks in human culture are not capable of striding into human society, where the State has joined the Bronze Axe in the Museum.
This means that at all times the relations between workers on the shop-floor must be judged in relation to the creative culture of the whole world. The distance between the one and the other is at least as far as the distance between here and socialism.
Cardan seems to think that the regulation of their working conditions alone will liberate the workers. Of course, it is the indispensible first step. But that is all. If men are engaged in making colanders all day, even if they have complete control over the operation, we shall still be forced to measure them as men in terms of their activity outside colander making. Indeed, this is the way that they will measure themselves. If colander-making absorbs over-much of a man’s lifetime, he will, as Ruskin saw, be good for little else. In a world where there is music, where there are books, where other men are probing the universe, to encourage a man to be mainly an expert colander-maker is to encourage him to geld himself. But, Cardan tells us, ‘Leisure as such is empty’. An American worker, he thinks, would agree with a French one that working class Sundays reflect all the misery of the working week. This is to be doubted. If workers really thought like this about their leisure then they would be far more ready to listen to socialists than they are. In fact they find their weekends so free that when Monday morning comes, they say ‘roll on Friday night’. [8] But their freedom is a pale, limp little thing on Sundays? Maybe. If so, it is because the division of labour has produced special men, weak and warped: and you won’t wake them up to splendid socialist Sundays, let alone work-weeks, within its frame work - in fact, you will be far more likely to invigorate life in the workshop with men awakened in leisure, in free activity, than you will to inspirit Sunday solely from the experience of the shop-floor, colander bases, department B. Of course, the truth is that one activity will feed the others, and that men’s lives will grow in richness to the extent that they collectively push back the demands of the division of labour, multiplying their area of free-time and free-activity.
We have at this point begun to step outside the crude antithesis between leisure and work within which so much of Cardan’s thought seems to run, in spite of his protestations to the contrary. Cardan finds Marx guilty of equating freedom with leisure, which Cardan in turn seems to equate with slothfulness. A few words from Marx himself are appropriate on this point:
The true economy, saving, consists in the saving of labour time ... but this saving is identical with productivity. Therefore, not renunciation of enjoyment but development of power, of the faculties of production and thus of the faculties as well as the means of enjoyment. The faculty of enjoyment is the condition for enjoyment; consequently the primary means for enjoyment. And this faculty is the development of individual ability, productivity. Saving of labour time is increase of free time, that is, time for the full development of the individual. This is the greatest productive force, which in turn reacts on the productivity of labour... free time – which is leisure time as well as time for higher activity – transforms its possessor into a different subject. [9]
But there are other matters of which Marx was considerably aware which seem to have escaped Cardan. Not only does he not appreciate that Marx speaks of dead labour and living labour in order the better to prepare for the abolition of both of them, that free time is ‘the greatest productive force’, and that both these suppositions are a far greater menace to the ‘factory as it now stands’ than even Cardan’s most radical proposals: but he does not seem to have met any of Marx’s reasoning about the shape of ‘necessity’ in the force of the market. ‘Workers’ management’ he tells us, ‘will mark the end of labour’s domination over man’. What on earth does this mean? Will it mark the end of wage-labour? Certainly not, for Cardan himself tells us that he wants ‘equal pay for all who work’ which he sees as one of the first rules a socialist society will have to apply. But the traditional view of a socialist society has always been of one in which pay just doesn’t happen, one which Marx saw as emblazoning on its banners the slogan ‘from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs.’ This slogan is more subtle than it looks. Both ‘need’ and ‘ability’ in this context are not things that are determined ‘objectively’. They are determined by the socially-engendered individual himself, not by the state, nor even by the workers’ council. Freedom equals subjectivity, again. On the other hand, equal wages, like any others, are very objectively determined. They are determined by the backwardness of social production.
But let us grant that Cardan is seeing equality of wages as a transitional stage along the way to socialism. Even if we remained within the context of Stalin’s ‘socialism in one country’, outside whose bounds Cardan never seems to tread, a very high degree of compulsion would be required to enforce the most rudimentary compliance with such a measure. Imagine the situation which would exist when one of Cardan’s factory communities needed, say, a patternmaker it hadn’t got. Where to find him? Train him? Yes, but what of the meantime. Direct him from another factory? But perhaps he doesn’t want to come, or they can’t spare him. Share him. He may have his own ideas about that. In fact there are two ways of directing scarce labour, and they are called policemen and grease-in-the-palm. I see no great moral superiority in policemen. Step for a moment outside England or France, and think of world socialism, which is the only socialism there is, and the difficulties become immensely more obvious. Equal wages for the Birmingham tool-maker and the Egyptian farmer? At the Birmingham level, universal joy and the prospect of the supersession of the whole wage-system tomorrow. At the Egyptian level, insurrection in Birmingham, or supernaturally heavy forces of (Egyptian) socialist policemen in very heavy tanks. We must strive for equality, not by Cardan’s Procrustean method of stretching and lopping the workers to fit the bed of the economy, but by changing the bed, by abolishing the market, step by step, not with laws but with abundance. A regime transitional to socialism will progressively whittle away the power of money, by abolishing its use wherever possible; from the establishment of public Water Boards to the steady abolition in turn of electricity bills, rents, fares, payments for food, and so on.
Cardan’s attitude to consumption is of a piece with his approach to equality. Shades of Erich Fromm flit across the page as we read that there is a ‘serfdom of man – in consumption itself’. Men are apparently alienated by motorcars, refrigerators, television sets. Well, I’m not. Nor, I think are many other people who haven’t got them. Motor cars always have a strange way of alienating people. They always alienate the men who’ve got them, not because they’ve got them, but because ‘everybody else’ has. For sure, we could manage with less cars than we have now if we weren’t governed by our present norms of property owning: one might well serve a whole group of people. But to rail against the effeteness of man the consumer in this way is to move a long way along the road to setting up a model man who serves as the yardstick of a normative humanism, the humanism of lopping and stretching, whose patron saint is once again Procrustes. This humanism means very well, but insists on stripping its subjects of all sorts of manifestly human, but ‘bad’ characteristics. Fromm is a clever chap at it, but I don’t think he succeeds in integrating it into the mainstream of the socialist tradition. [10] The question which Cardan must answer is, ‘who is to say whether our wants are “less and less real ones”?’ Truly, a new culture can be expected to produce new needs, and in the process old ones can be expected to wither away. To stand in judgement on the ‘goodness’ or ‘badness’ of the desire to have a car is to place oneself temporarily outside the growing aspirations and changing moralities of the very men whose consciousness of wider potentialities you are trying to awaken. [11] If people feel they need this or that article of consumption, this is simply one of the facts about society which has to be met, good, bad or indifferent though it may seem to people who don’t feel the same needs. Socialism is about opening up roads to satisfaction of needs such as these, ‘good’ or ‘bad’ though they seem to some socialists. It is also about opening up other roads, which at the moment interest the merest minorities of the population. But it won’t prosper the spiritual development and awakening of people one iota to don hair shirts and walk when we can fly in nylon.
Finally, Cardan has some interesting things to say about the road from here to there – about the nature of a workers’ party and its relation to the working class. These are somewhat difficult to discuss, because there are mixed together in his argument all kinds of sensible notions and questionable nostrums. For instance, he is very cross with the Trotskyists for some reason. I don’t doubt that they have annoyed him from time to time, but it seems to me churlish not to appreciate that Trotsky himself made most of Cardan’s useful distinctions between workers’ management and control, and met most of his arguments in favour of Cardanarchy, in his section on workers’ control in What Next? [12]
Although he doesn’t clearly appreciate the real sources, as opposed to the effects of the division of labour in the life of society, Cardan does seem clearly enough to be very concerned about the division of labour in the socialist movement. But again he fails to appreciate its sources. If there were no leaders in the working class movement, this would either signify that it was inert, dead, or that the working class was already conscious of itself as a class to a degree unprecedented and inconceivable. Cardan accepts this to the point of conceding the need for a party. However, once that step has been taken, more must follow. The party leads the class. Somebody leads the party. The price of efficiency is specialization with all its attendant evils, and the price of inefficiency is uselessness. Indeed, the contrast here is not sharp enough, for however slackly organized and decentralized a party may be, it remains in existence to the extent that it pays the toll of division of function, specialization.
The question then is not how to draft rules which overcome the division of labour by denouncing it, which must invariably mean seeing the mote in another’s eye whilst staggering under the perplexing weight of an unseen beam in one’s own; but – ‘how do we face this fact?’ One can only face it and remain a socialist by waging a relentless war on it: by striving all the time to make leadership redundant in the same way that a teacher and his pupils try to make themselves redundant to each other. Alas. This is a war that can never be won. But if it is not constantly waged, it will most certainly be lost, and with it any prospect of living a useful life.
Cardan seeks a black-and-white solution to this multicoloured problem, and he has written one. But to my poor eyes it seems to be black-and-white. We are told that local organs must have the greatest degree of autonomy compatible with the unity of the organization. But that is just how much autonomy they will have anyway, and it may not be a lot. Similarly with Cardan’s other points: they are either so general as to be meaningless, or they are retrogressive. At bottom his assumption that the party should reflect the new society is an impossible one, because it has to organize in this one. The new society exists only in what is potential, in the minds of men, and that is the only place it can be reflected. Alongside this Utopian demand, though, goes a firm misapprehension about the nature of this society. The division of labour in society has produced classes, and with them ideas. But the ideas in worker’s heads are not normally socialist ones: how could they be? To be class-conscious in the full sense, to have socialist consciousness, is only possible when one has a glimpse of the whole of society, of the ruling-class as well as the workers, and of their ideas as they mesh through the lives of rulers and workers alike. The fish is only caught because it cannot see what lurks at the other end of the line. When on the hook it resents it, and will surely try to get free. The workers try to get free, too, but unlike the fish they won’t in any circumstances be able to do so until they see beyond the hook that chafes them to the sources of their discomfort, which are laced through their own ideas again and again. These mind-forged manacles are infinitely tougher than those from the smithy, and have the advantage of being welded on by the wearer himself.
Really the concession Cardan gives us, that he needs a party to propagate his socialism, establishes this fact. If socialist consciousness welled up spontaneously among the workers, they would never need a party. There’s no point in forming a party if it isn’t out to change people’s ideas: and if it is, then it must prepare for the task, and dispose of its forces rationally so as to economize their efforts. In this connection some sort of ‘vanguard’ notion seems inescapable. The shape of a vanguard will depend on its approach. Cardan is right to deprecate efforts to manipulate workers into positions which are supposed to entail socialism. Clearly the demands of a party must be calculated to arouse deeper understanding in the workers, to awaken socialist consciousness within them. But Cardan’s proposals as to how this can be done are scarcely helpful. He is anxious to support rank-and-file movements, and while nobody is going to oppose them (in the columns of IS), it is fairly obvious that in the rich history of these movements in Britain, there are no examples of any of them autonomously developing socialist ideas. Invariably they have been geared to the fulfilment of trade union functions. The busmen of the early thirties, like the dockers after the war, organized around the central slogan of a National Agreement [13]: a demand which if successful surely would far more seriously undermine ‘local autonomy’ than could any grasping clique of socialists. Some rank-and-file movements, like those of the Harworth miners, and sit-down strikers in Wales, have been gestures of support for sober trade unions like the NUM (MFGB) against company unions. Others, like the movement of dockers into NASD in the mid-fifties and the Garment Workers’ movement of the early thirties were movements out of the frying pan of one scarcely efficient Union into the fire of another still less useful breakaway. [14] It is all very complex, and socialists must try to follow the complexities and assist the workers who are involved in such movements: but none of it takes anyone nearer to socialism, by itself. What does one do when faced with such a movement? Attempt to carry politics into it? But how? The same workers who rebel today against bureaucratized trade unions find their political expression in the right-wing of the labour party: and that is as far as politics tied to the workbench will get them. All eyes are focused on the hooks, while the anglers play out the lines.
This does not mean that Cardan is wrong to stress that socialists must campaign on all questions concerning the conditions of work. It does mean that if they do only this they will make few socialists. The worker sees and resents the foreman, and can draw lessons from attempts to curtail his powers. But he does not see, or resent a fraction as much, the take-over-bidders, the merchant bankers, the war cabinet, the mainsprings of all the fear and misery of welfare capitalism. Until he sees society as the whole it is, he will not see it as the whole it must be. That is why Kautsky and Lenin were right when they spoke of bringing socialist consciousness to the working-class from outside. It is difficult to shape a party which can attempt to do this without being overcome by the insidious growth within itself of all the tendencies Michels has noted. [15] The one severe and implacable enemy of the tendency to manipulation, paternalism, oligarchy and betrayal is an appreciation of what socialism is for and about, wedded to a remorseless honesty about the world as it is and ourselves as we are. Only as this deepens and flourishes can the task seem possible, albeit with difficulty. But it will never be performed by wishing the difficulties away, for they are the way over which we must travel.

Notes
1. Socialism and Capitalism, International Socialism 4, Spring 1961.
2. The Wealth of Nations, Chapter I, Everyman ed., p. 4.
3. Ibid., p. 5.
4. John Ruskin, from The Stones of Venice, Volume 2, The Nature of the Gothic.
Alexis de Tocqueville: Democracy in America, Oxford World Classics ed., pp. 427–428.
Herman Melville: The Tartarus of Maids, Billy Budd and other Stories, Chiltern Library, pp. 113–125.
5. Norbert Weiner, The Human Use of Human Beings, Boston 1950, p. 16.
6. That this was Marx’s answer can be confirmed by reading the first section of the German Ideology, called Feuerbach, the opposition of the materialistic and idealistic outlook. (1938, L&W, pp. 3–78) and the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts – On the meaning of human requirements where there is private property and under socialism. (1959, L&W, pp.115-135)
7. See the forthcoming Work Organisation at the Coalface by E.L. Trist and H. Murray.
Also Anarchy – A journal of anarchist ideas, No. 2, 96, a special issue of workers’ control.
And H.A. Clegg, A new Approach to Industrial Democracy, Blackwell, 1960, Ch. XVI.
8. Anyone who doubts this and doesn’t want to get his hands dirty verifying it in the obvious way, should read Alan Sillitoe’s Saturday Night and Sunday Morning.
9. Marx, Grundrisse des Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie, Berlin 1953, p.599. quoted and trans. Marcuse, introduction to Dunayevskaya, Marxism and Freedom, New York 1958, p. 10.
10. Cf. Erich Fromm, The Sane Society, Routledge, 1956.
11. It is also to import into your theory external standards which are not accounted for in its basic conceptual framework. This seems unlikely to worry Cardan any more than it does Fromm, however. Fromm, too, talks of ‘productive’ and ‘unproductive’ ‘positive’ and ‘negative’, as being ‘good’ and ‘bad, without showing in any way how he derives these judgements from his theoretical principles. In fact he just smuggles them into his books from the general atmosphere of prevailing prejudice, and leaves his theory to burp around them as best it can.
12. Trotsky, What Next?, Pioneer Publishers, 1932, ch. 14.
13. Cf. H.A. Clegg, Labour Relations in London Transport, Blackwell 1950, Ch. IV.
Busmen versus the Combines, 1936, Section V, pp. 15–16.
The Dock Worker, Liverpool 1956, Appendix I.
V.L. Allen, Trade Union Leadership, Longmans, 1957, Chapters 11, 12.
14. Cf. Bob Pennington, Docks: Breakaway and Unofficial Movements, IS 2, Autumn 1960.
Shirley Lerner, Breakaway Trade Unions and the Small Trade Union, Allen and Unwin 1961, Ch. III.
15. In Political Parties, Dover Books, 1959. Few Marxists have bothered to meet Michels’ important arguments. Bukharin denounced them as anti-socialist at one stage, and commended them as accurate understanding of insidious social-democracy at another. Perhaps the most promising treatment of them is to be found in the notes and hints of Gramsci, From the Modern Prince, Lawrence and Wishart, 1957.
 



The Weekend in Dinlock
Clancy Sigal
Secker and Warburg, 197 pp. 16/-
Clancy Sigal has written a tragedy: but not the tragedy he thinks he has written, of Davie, the miner-painter who is torn into two opposing selves, worker and artist, and finally imprisoned by the very people who first awoke him to the prospect of a wider freedom. This tragedy is a non-starter: because he hasn’t drawn it from life but from the folk-imagination of New Left Art Critics and evangelists for a popular culture. The tragedy which Clancy Sigal has written is that of Clancy Sigal: of the idealist who wants people to grow into fully conscious human beings and to create (or preserve) a community, but who is stuck in a world where they don’t and he can’t.
It is easy to show that Davie’s story isn’t true. Enough to point out that the whole artifice by which Sigal’s narrator discovers that his hero has given up his art to return to the back-breaking exhaustion of coal-filling: an artifice on which the ‘novel’ of Dinlock depends entirely, is entirely false. The narrator, on a one day visit to the pit, is given leave to wander about the pit by himself (a freedom which would, if granted, cause the official responsible to be hung drawn and quartered under the appropriate subsection of the coal mines act), in order that he might discover that Davie, whose pit-clothes he had borrowed that very morning, while Davie was presumably in bed, is no longer an unemployed artist but one again a collier. Miners know that you don’t get set on as quickly as that: it takes at least a day or two to get over the formalities: but even if Davie had been given princely priorities, he couldn’t possibly have appeared on the same shift as the narrator if he hadn’t already applied for his job when the narrator began his plunge into “sheer impossible blackness”. Just as Sigal bends the practice of colliery routine to his creative will, so he twists the miners’ way of thinking to fit his own. His miners gossip about Stalinists, for instance. Now Clancy Sigal knows that Stalinism is a funny sort of communism: but when a miner tells another miner that he’s a communist, he’ll be called a communist. When I was a CP member in the pit, I was often called Stalin, in friendly banter: but never a Stalinist.
Yet it isn’t really fair to pull the novel to bits, because this book is a key document: a New Left view of the working class. Clancy Sigal, because he’s an egalitarian, because he wants socialism, wants also desperately to be accepted by the miners. He wants to fit, to prove that he can break down the barriers. And, because he’s a scrupulous writer, it’s clear on his own account that he doesn’t begin to fit. (He’ll fit even less if any miners read his book, because they’ll take great exception to his marginal remarks about their fondness for adultery and fisticuffs.) We see his obsession with being ‘accepted’ in his descriptions of his role in the incessant weekend booze-ups, in his reports of his conversations, and above all in his account of the visit to the pit. The minute he gets his eyesight when he arrives at the coalface, he seizes a pick to try for himself. He banters like an old hand as he goes: “I thank the men finally for the use of their heading and the pick, and they say, Any time.” (p. 168)
He obviously resents the way in which the Union man who accompanies him keeps rubbing it in that he doesn’t belong: so he says that he gets along with the men better: they tell him of jags and potholes while Union man lets him trip and bang his head. But the men tell him because he doesn’t belong, while the Union man, who a foot a piece in two worlds [sic!], is, it might be suggested, not so concerned about who belongs where. But even he wouldn’t be taken in by Sigal’s parting shot: when asked if he feels tired he says “Christ no. I could go down again right now.” True, we get the impression that this is a bluff: such a bluff only shows how far away he is from being assimilated. Even assuming that he was believed, what did he show that he was capable of having a look at a pit. He doesn’t seem to realise that “going down” means nothing in terms of setting the bounds to the Dinlock community: it is work that counts.
This is a sensitive book about what mining looks like to an outsider; but it is also also a book about the impossibility of community in our society, about the different species which our murderous division of labour has evolved side by side with one another. Clancy Sigal’s desperate concern to be as masculine as the many men he goes to live among may seem queer to many readers: if it does, this is sad indeed, it is human enough to want to fit in. But it is a fact of social life that people don’t make contact, don’t fit in to each others’ communities, which fact is only underlined by Sigal’s valiant attempts to undermine it. Yet the brotherhood of man must begin in the Dinlocks of the world, and the art of the new world will begin there. Tomorrow.
How many years away is that?
 



‘Sovereignty is less absolute than in earlier times. Just as we now consider it right to intervene in families to prevent domestic violence, so it has become normal to override state sovereignty in cases of large scale violations of human rights.’ [1] This is the rationale proposed by Mary Kaldor to justify NATO’s decision to bomb Yugoslavia. Ever since the Cold War ended, she claims, ‘the distinction between internal peace and external war, between a domestic rule of law and international anarchy that characterised the Westphalian era has broken down’. [2] Indeed, she continues, since the Second World War ‘there has been steady progress towards a global legal regime which deals both with the laws of war and with human rights, and which has been strengthened by bodies like Amnesty.’
And so we arrive at a new role for the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation: ‘benign or ethical imperialism’. NATO at 50 must ‘switch from defence of the West to upholding international law everywhere’. There are some pretty serious difficulties about all this. Firstly, there is not so much international law as Ms Kaldor believes. If the upholding of human rights were to legitimate intervention, then larger transgressions should mean brisker responses: but the truth is very far from this. More, a large part of the responsibility for the failure to generate such rights based law falls on the leader of NATO, the US. It is the US which repeatedly refused to ratify the Convention on Genocide [3], until it gave way with the reservation that, before any dispute to which the United States is a party may be submitted to the jurisdiction of the court, ‘the specific consent of the US is required in each case’. It is the US which refused to recognise the competence of the International Court of Justice in The Hague in the case of Nicaragua, and which defied 15 specific judgements condemning the actions of the US government and awarding compensation to the Nicaraguan government. It is the US which is the largest defaulter on its financial payments to the United Nations.
In all these cases, senior American politicians have claimed that UN decisions must be set aside if they conflict with the interest of the US government. Admittedly, the American state is the most powerful at large in today’s world, so that when it stands off from the principles of international order as agreed by all the other states, by that fact alone it goes a long way to neutralise such principles. Noam Chomsky gives us a much better guide to the real legal position. There is, he says, a regime of international law and order, based on the United Nations Charter, and on the resolutions of the United Nations, together with the decisions of the World Court. This regime rests on the doctrines of national sovereignty, and outlaws the use of force, or even the threat of force between states, unless this has the express authority of the security council. In parallel, there is a Universal Declaration of Human Rights which guarantees the rights of individuals against states, but which provides no legal mechanism for upholding such guarantees and offers no guidance on how the UN Charter can be amended or suspended to provide for its enforcement. To be lawful, any attempt to reconcile this contradiction would need to be based upon consensus. Conquest could impose a solution to the problem, but would itself be unlawful under this system.
‘Benign imperialisms’ could only make law if they conquered everyone and then proclaimed a new law. Even the potent US might balk at this task, which would involve the generation of active government on a forbidding scale. It would surely militarise the economy and thus be inimical to the freedom of enterprise, or at any rate market sovereignty. Short of such highly improbable conquest, consensus is the only way to international law.
Ms Kaldor thinks that we can derive a formula that will help us from Immanuel Kant. She is right that Kant can help us, but he will offer no support whatever to benign imperialism. His proposal was to secure perpetual peace among states, and so, unsurprisingly, like the United Nations organisation, he considered states to be the foundation of the international order. A state is a society of human beings, Kant tells us, that no one other than itself can command or dispose of. Regarding conquest, of which he disapproves, Kant has a simple remedy: standing armies should be abolished. Kant’s fifth principle is that ‘no state shall forcibly interfere in the constitution and government of another state.’ The right to perpetual peace, then, will depend upon reforming states in such a manner as to provide them all with ‘republican’ or constitutional governments. Once they became similar, or sufficiently alike, they could then embrace federalism in a League of Nations which ‘need not be a state of nations’. In this, as in other matters, Kant’s essay is prescient, and its echoes are still resounding.
Certainly the present United Nations has not evolved sufficient congruities among its members to induce them voluntarily to accept such federalism, which might indeed provide for the agreement of enforceable human rights. The question does not arise, although the problem can clearly be seen. The enforcement of human rights today depends, as much as it ever has, on the development of public opinion, both within states and between them.
This was the foundation upon which we tried to build the Russell Tribunals which investigated the abuse of human rights, first of all in relation to torture and violent oppression in Latin America, and later considering other abuses, such as the mistreatment of indigenous peoples. In a number of sessions, key witnesses were interrogated, and the evidence of abuse was evaluated. The findings of the tribunals were widely reported in the press. The tribunals became necessary because, in the words of Lelio Basso, ‘human rights are at the same time proclaimed and left unprotected, devoid of international or national safeguards’. But when Basso gave his authority to upholding human rights in Latin America in the 1970s, the science of spin was in its infancy. Today public opinion is almost a department of state, so that it becomes ever more difficult even to imagine what justice might be. Mary Kaldor is right to say that the work of Amnesty International has powerfully assisted in the creation of a public opinion which now both sustains and feeds on a wide variety of more specialised human rights agencies.
But, without the reform of the international system, there is no law to justify the intervention of any state or group of states, or to support the use of force to uphold human rights in any other state. Ms Kaldor implies that humanitarian intervention is a matter of opportunity because, although there are many cases in which it is not possible, ‘that is not a reason to stand aside’ when it is possible. The condition thus described has nothing whatever to do with law. It would fit, perhaps, the primitive rules which guarantee circumscribed security in gangland. Certain types of crimes will be punished if they simultaneously offend one or other of the principal gangsters. Other victims of arbitrary misbehaviour need not apply for such ‘justice’. But law gives equal treatment to all cases, so all victims are entitled to equal redress. Discriminatory treatment is the antithesis of law.
Numerous commentators have compared the repression in Kosovo before the US bombardment with the sustained and ferocious military action of the Turkish state against the Kurds in south east Turkey. In fact, repressive legislation against the Kosovans had rightly aroused sustained opposition elsewhere in Europe since 1989 [4], but it was nothing like as bad as the more comprehensive repression, indeed slaughter, of Kurds in Turkey. As repression fomented rebellion, massacres became more common and more bloody. And yet Kaldor’s benign imperialism recruits one set of oppressors from Turkey, under the flag of NATO, in order to redress the complaints of another set of oppressed in Kosovo. Justice would require that an impartial hearing be granted to both Kosovans and Kurds, and their separate complaints adjudicated within the framework of even handed fidelity to the law. If it is possible to bomb Belgrade in pursuit of justice, it is equally possible to bomb Ankara. The logistics involved are not the problem. The problem is that the bombardment of our Turkish ally is as unthinkable to NATO, as is justice for the Kurds. The Turkish establishment are our own oppressors, and it is necessary to be evil minded to see any equivalence at all between their behaviour and that alleged against Yugoslav Serbs.
Of course, in reality, bombing from outside is no more conducive to the defence of human rights in Kurdistan than it was in Kosovo: in both cases the remedy was or would be even worse than the original disorder. But we are not engaged in a plea for benign imperialism. It is not necessary to list the fearful roster of gross violations of human rights around the world to see that the only pretexts for intervention which concern benevolent imperialism are those in which some material strategic concern already exists. But the law does need to be reformed, because proxy wars, destabilisation and direct manipulation are more and more common in the modern world, and indeed are frequently found to be happening under the tutelage of the US or other NATO allies.
Until comparatively recently the European allies would quite normally have sought diplomatic release from the more bellicose US projects by a very simple device. They would have brought in an appeal to the UN in order to find a diplomatically acceptable way of getting out of the unwanted Yugoslav confrontations. Why did they not do this in the case of Yugoslavia? They could then have relied on Russia or China to veto the bombardment and thus escaped the responsibility for blocking the US project themselves. But by arranging to bypass the security council and its veto, the European allies have achieved a number of very undesirable results, most of which damage them far more than their possible adversaries.
Firstly, they have given the US hegemony over some important future decisions in the Balkans and further afield, which they are likely to find rather embarrassing and quite difficult to modify. Secondly, by breaching the rule of unanimity among the Great Powers represented by the veto, they have not secured any better mechanism for avoiding serious collisions of interest. The US and China can come into fierce conflict, and the possible beginnings of this can already be seen in Taiwan and even Kashmir. The veto was a poor instrument for the maintenance of peace, and no doubt it would be possible to improve on it. But to kick it away before any alternative has been devised will not be deemed very sensible by future generations.
China will presumably veto any ‘humanitarian intervention’, because it will not wish to welcome such an intervention into Tibet or Xinjiang. At this time, though, there is not much likelihood of Ms Kaldor’s freedom legions following her up the Himalayas. The Dalai Lama thinks that public opinion can still play an important part in moderating China’s behaviour in Tibet. Certainly he understands the limits of benign imperialism. During the Gulf War, after I had conducted hearings with him in the European Parliament, I wrote to him to ask if he could support the pope’s stance on that conflict. He replied by saying that there were undoubtedly some similarities between the cases of Kuwait and Tibet, ‘but unfortunately, so far as is known, in Tibet there is absolutely no oil whatever to be found.’ Perhaps that reinforces his view that, in Tibet’s case, the movement of argument and persuasion is more likely to be effective than military action of any kind.
But, yes, there needs to be a continuous effort to create a more civilised international regime, in which human rights may genuinely flourish. This needs to be a regime of law, and it is difficult to see how any progress towards this can be made by destroying the frail system that was created at the end of the Second World War. Back in 1945 destruction had raged across the world and focused the minds of governments everywhere. The impulse to avoid new wars was powerful enough to give us the UN Charter, with all its faults and all its promises. Nobody can expect governments to suddenly improve and be made moral by their agreement to league together in a United Nations. But they are not worsened in this effort either.
The problem which has been created by the actions of benign or ethical imperialism is, of course, that it has seriously undermined the UN. That the most powerful state can lead its allies into a unilateral military onslaught, without the express endorsement of the security council, means that brute force alone now determines whether any other state or combination of states might take unilateral action in their own interests. Conflict zones abound around the world, and most of them engender fairly serious cases of human rights abuse. Ethical imperialism is supposed to sound quite innocuous. But what if there were to be several such imperialisms?
It is not likely that the UN machinery will disintegrate as a result of the war in the Balkans. But it has been undermined, and it may begin to give way to other alliances, calculated to ward off the hegemony of US ethics. The true face of these ethics was revealed by Mr Karl Bildt, speaking for the UN in a television interview on Newsnight on 28 July 1999, about the progress made in organising international aid for the reconstruction of those areas of Yugoslavia, including Kosovo, which had been devastated during the war. Mr Bildt maintained that it was difficult, if not impossible, to aid Serbia, because the economic system there was not conducive to receiving aid. That is how far the sovereignty of the market place has undermined that of ethics. Yugoslavia had established a form of market socialism with self management, which functioned adequately. But was it this unusual economic system as modified by the IMF, rather than any ethical judgements on its leaders and administrators, which informed Mr Bildt’s response to questioners? Or was it the war economy of Yugoslavia which could not be aided?
If ethical imperialism is driven by the need to assert the absolute domination of market forces over society, there will be other states which begin to find it tiresome. And the UN will have to contend with the ideological debates which ensue. In short, the Balkan War has established a new order of extreme instability and insecurity. That is why the parliament of the Ukraine voted recently for nuclear rearmament, because it felt that the security guarantees it had previously been given by the US were no longer valid. That is why the Russian government, caught in a very precarious political balance, encouraged statements to the effect that it was now abandoning its ‘no first use’ pledge. Ethical imperialism has thus begun the reversal of all the gains which had previously been made to limit and control the possibilities of nuclear war.
The ink on this article was scarcely dry when all the issues which it discusses were highlighted once again, in the savage tragedy of East Timor. East Timor was a classic victim of old imperialisms, which never pretended to be benign. The former colonial power, Portugal, was by far the most humane actor involved, however. The 1975 invasion by Indonesia was unbelievably brutal and murderous. The Western allies encouraged it. There is evidence that the US actively approved of it, and the British continued to supply a comprehensive range of armaments before, during and after the East Timor bloodbath, in which Indonesian forces killed more than 200,000 people.
The recent revolutionary upheaval in Indonesia, following economic collapse, loosened the grip of the Indonesian state on its East Timorese colony and produced an agreement for a referendum on independence. Now that the result of the referendum has been as decisive as every one expected, the Indonesian military are determined to prevent its implementation, and another terrible bloodbath is already beginning. But there is no benign or ethical face on the global imperialism which confronts this dreadful situation. Neither the US nor its British dogs of war are in the least bit moved to intervention by the worst human rights violations in the modern world.
The intervention in Kosovo showed how heartlessly great military power could be used. But the non-intervention in East Timor shows that it can be even more heartlessly not used.

Notes
1. The Observer, 18 July 1999.
2. A Benign Imperialism, Prospect, April 1999.
3. This convention was unanimously adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1948, and came into force in January 1951. It was signed by the US but not ratified by the Senate, on the grounds that it was poorly drafted and could allow intervention by other governments in US affairs. The Senate again refused to ratify in 1984, while supporting the ‘principles embodied in the convention’. It was finally ratified on 25 November 1988, with the reservation.
4. In the early 1990s I received Ibrahim Rugova and a group of leading Kosovans as chairman of the Sub-committee on Human Rights in the European Parliament. Although we obtained a sympathetic response from our colleagues, I cannot say that much was done to help redress the grievances of which Rugova was complaining.
 



The two items, by Paul Derrick and Colin Barker, which you published in your last issue, were most interesting. The booklet, Incomes Policy, Legislation and Shop Stewards, around which the discussion between Barker and Derrick turns, is a most useful exposé, which will prove invaluable to militant trade unionists in coming to grips with most of the essential arguments of the Government, and which deserves a mass audience. Certainly nothing I say will detract from this assessment: I believe that the book represents a considerable achievement for the comrades who wrote, produced and distributed it, and will produce a positive reaction from the workers who read it. Since the publication of the discussion articles by Derrick and Barker, the crisis of sterling has risen to a new high temperature, and the harassed surgeons of Mr Wilson’s administration, after haggling in a most unseemly way about whether to amputate limbs or inject large doses of sedatives, have decided to stop pretending about ‘planned growth,’ and retrench. Six million workers have entered a freeze of claims which had already been acceded to them, and sweeping general cuts, backed by serious legal sanctions, have been imposed in the worst deflationary attack to be mounted by any British Government since the war. The reaction will be swingeing: the significant split which opened up in the Cabinet with the Cousins resignation will form a channel up through which discontent will seethe; the TUC will be rent by fierce internal polemics; and if there were any seriously organised, coherent socialist movement on hand, the battles which will now open up could prove to be universities capable of producing a whole new cadre of socialist graduates in the unions.
The assumption that frontal struggles between capital and labour are necessarily attendant on overall crashes, slumps of the traditional pattern, is one which has befogged socialist thinking for a long time. The present conjunctural crisis has produced far more vigorous retrenchment, and has hit the working class far harder, than the Belgian Loi Unique of 1960-61, which, it will be remembered, triggered off a national general strike. Without predicting a similar reaction in this country, it does seem fair to suggest that there could be very fierce struggles. A fact which needs to be borne in mind constantly is that relatively small downward turns in the living standards of the working people can, in the climate of neo-capitalism, produce sharply combative responses. The alienation, which is deeply felt by masses of ostensibly ‘conservative’ workers, as they experience the numbing taste of consecutive years of neo-capitalist control, in which the system, far from apparent collapse, appears to be at its most efficient ‘best,’ can be transmuted into discontent, even into conscious rejection of the capitalist order, by relatively .small adversities, if these are joined with the perception of real alternatives. The last, and much less stringent, pay pause of Selwyn Lloyd, in 1961, produced a political answer to the problem of trade union containment. The swing to Labour mounted month by month, with a high point reached in early 1963, as the dole queues began to stretch somewhat over the half-million mark. Now, there is no obvious place to swing to. No alternative political force has grouped outside the Labour Party, and none is likely to do so. The result can only be a fierce intensification of the internal stresses in the Labour Movement. For these reasons, Paul Derrick is right to seek to find clearly defined political answers to the crisis, which place the transition to socialism on today’s agenda.
But many of Colin Barker’s points of rebuttal carry considerable weight. I should like to sketch out what I consider to be the synthesis of their arguments. This turns entirely on the question of what have traditionally been described as ‘transitional’ demands: demands which are not limited to the purely reforming level of a minimum programme, but which are, equally, not maximal prescriptions. The transitional demands which are necessary today must serve the purpose of revealing the practical, immediate possibility of socialist options, and the impossibility of any alternative course capable of avoiding wholesale onslaughts on the powers and the standards of life of the working population.
In Western Europe, by far the most general transitional formula of the past decade has been the call for ‘anti-capitalist structural reforms.’ This originated in the Left-wing of the Belgian socialist trade unions, and has been widely taken up, especially in Italy. Of course, like all transitional formulae, this call presents certain dangers: neo-capitalist rationalisation makes many serious demands for structural upheavals in old economic arrangements, and such rationalisations as the Beeching Plan to emasculate the railways, or the Robens decimation of the mining industry, are, in the abstract, quite capable of being coupled with other items of surgery, which might not exclude, for instance, the nationalisation of North Sea Gas, or the re-nationalisation of Road Haulage. (Unlikely as these measures are under the Wilson regime, it cannot be excluded that a modernising technocratic government might embrace them, and, of course, far from their constituting part of an advance to socialism, they could be additional burdens for the working class to bear.) There is, however, a simple answer to this dilemma: the campaign for structural reforms, like all transitional demands, must be seen essentially not as a demand for modification of the economy as such, but as a lever to move consciousness among the working population. This means that the question of transfers of power must lie at the centre of all such demands, and that they must be so constructed as to avoid the assimilation of working-class organisations into an alien power-structure.
Obviously, the current campaign for workers’ control quite clearly fits into such a strategy. Control, or supervision, superintendence, is a relationship between one human party and another. For this reason I use the term quite distinctly from that of workers’ management, which pertains in a socialised economy, in which private ownership has been eliminated. Control can be ‘encroached’ in the style of the old guild socialists: it is wrested, blow by blow, from reluctant and aggressive managements, every time that shop stewards gain control over hiring and firing, or limit the speeds of machines. No magic walls exist to limit this power of encroachment, but a number of physical ones exist: to wit, the frontiers between factories and industries, which have to a considerable extent been reinforced, during the past decade and a half, by the accession of strength to the shop stewards’ movement which came with the acceleration of wage drift and the decline of effective central control in some important unions.
It is at this point that the capitalist strategy of incomes policy can misfire: by forcing the workers to think, not in terms of profit and wages at plant level, or industry level, but in global, political terms, about the national sectors of wages and profits, neo-capitalism engenders an important forward movement in their thinking. It can force the development of class, as opposed to segmental, opposition.
Paul Derrick, then, is right, when he insists that workers should demand that controls should apply to all incomes: yet Colin Barker is right to assume that this is not a practical demand, since it applies to capital a medicine which was designed only for wages. But from there on, Colin Barker errs: he says that if this is an impractical one, it is Utopian and misleading to advocate it. This need not be true, although it can be, and usually is. When I was first grappling with this problem, two years ago, I formulated it in the same way as Paul Derrick. I now consider this to have been wrong, and to have earned the reproaches which Colin Barker and others showered upon it. But the reproaches put out a useful baby with all the bathwater: and the sense in Paul Derrick’s proposal can easily be seen if we formulate it in this manner: ‘Until controls apply to all incomes in the same way, and until we have effective means of verifying that they do, we cannot participate in your plans for incomes policy in any way.’ This is no longer impractical. It says, ‘we will talk about what sorts of policy we want, when only you give us the same powers over capital that it presently has over us.’ In the event of the powers not being forthcoming, no talks, no incomes policy. In the event of the powers arriving, if not in Colin Barker’s vision, Utopia, at any rate, dual power. If the books are open over all the territory of capital, then workers may not only negotiate their own rewards up, but they can also negotiate their employers’ down. The employers understand this, as does the Government, and this accounts for its reluctance to embrace this very moderate measure. Until this year, this central argument was largely untested. But in the course of the very first major battle which was triggered off by the Incomes Policy, it was triumphantly vindicated. After beer at number ten Downing Street and cakes made by Mary herself had failed to entice the Seamen back to work, Mr Wilson appointed the Pearson Committee to investigate the dispute. This distinguished itself by producing its findings without taking’any steps at all to investigate the ability of the shipowners to pay. After the Union’s National Staff had failed to rebut Pearson, a group of militants in Hull took on the task themselves. Here is how they presented the demand:
Much has been made, in the Press, in die Inquiry, and elsewhere, of the supposed low levels of profits in shipping. No-one has seriously attempted to substantiate this; the seamen and the labour movement are expected to take all this on trust. Why this should be considered a reasonable thing to do, when the basis of the owners position is that they can’t afford to pay, is hard to understand. Is it so unreasonable to DEMAND as we do, and as of right, that a full scale Inquiry into shipping ownership and profits be carried out? The owners know all about our wages; we know very little about their profits. We are constantly hearing the figure of 3% quoted as the sort of return which the owners get on their capital. The Government has “accepted” that the owners have nothing to give away ...
The tie up with banking is particularly significant, since, as is well known, banking companies are allowed to maintain, perfectly legally, hidden reserves. What is not so generally realised is that A SIMILAR RIGHT IS ENJOYED BY THE SHIPPING COMPANIES. Even with normal company accounting, the scope for concealment is huge, as most progressive accountants now recognise. It is particularly so in a maze of interlocking companies which the shipping industry is. On top of this, we have the industry legally permitted to conceal its true profits position. This gross privilege has however, recently been challenged by a Committee which was set up by the Conservative Government – the Jenkins Committee on Company Law, which reported in 1962 ... In view of the Jenkins Report findings, there are two main objections which can now be made by the NUS.

It is impossible to assess how much or how little the shipowners offered until the NUS obtain access to the full shipowners’ accounts. It is impossible to judge the reasonableness or otherwise of their offers.
When the shipowners claimed to represent “the national interest” in their evidence to the Jenkins Committee, that Committee indicated the divergence between the owners’ commercial interests and the national interest, and recommended the revoking of the 1948 Shipping Companies Exemption Order. We now claim that since this Order has not been revoked, this constitutes at least one reason why the identification of the owners’ commercial interests with the national interest cannot be accepted. We can reject the Inquiry’s views of paragraph 40 on the grounds that they are based on seriously incomplete knowledge of the shipping companies accounts. The failure of the Inquiry to refer to the Jenkins Committee, or to the 1948 Order, are further examples of the gross bias written into the Inquiry. The Law, we now can see, as well as Inquiries, Government, and Press, is biassed in favour of the shipowners. From the point of view of this strike, the most important sentence in the Jenkins Report is the following:

“The exemptions are criticised on the ground that ... they prejudice the bargaining position of employees, and that they can make it possible to conceal inefficiency of management.”
According to the 1948 Shipping Companies Exemption Order only the Board of Trade and the Ministry of Transport have access to the shipowners’ “confidential information.” Under point 5 of this same Order the Board of Trade can obtain from a shipping company “such information with regard to its accounts as the Board may require.” Apparently, the NUS like the general public is legally debarred by this 1948 Order from receiving information either from the Board of Trade or the Ministry of Transport about the full shipowners’ accounts. The NUS view should be that the 1948 Shipping Companies Exemption Order gives the shipowners a dangerous power over Government departments and prohibits the Government from acting impartially in industrial disputes in the shipping industry. The Board of Trade and the Ministry of Transport are bound to treat shipping company’s information as “confidential.” The Government should revoke the 1948 Order immediately, as Jenkins recommended, and as a first step to full Union access to the Companies’ accounts.
This appeal was taken up throughout the Seamen’s Union. The Union Executive endorsed it: 23,000 copies of the pamphlet containing it were sold all over the country. Here was a fascinating example: a classic workers’ control demand, applied to this crucial dispute, at once came to life when the struggle became real.
Woven with similar demands, into a strategic pattern of transitional, alternative measures, this call could flare up into a signal blaze in the confrontation which may well be impending. If workers have confidence enough to demand power in their own hands, their struggles take on new and dramatic forms. The shallow and deceptive determinism which postpones all possibility of speaking this language, and all likelihood of its being heard, until some distant and abstract Nirvana, is itself one of the most obstructive fetishes which the Labour Movement must overcome in order to reach forward to its freedom.



Raymond Challinor’s attack on the Workers’ Control Conference (IS, June/July 1969) Is really quite disgraceful. To deal only with the factual matters in it, is to confront so low a level of polemic honesty that it is difficult to remember any journal of the left, leave alone IS, having sunk beneath it.
To speak about ‘conference rigging’ at Sheffield is a complete travesty of all the facts. The Conference arrangements committee had full charge of the Conference, subject to the approval of the Conference itself. It consisted of six people, three of whom were nominated by the Institute for Workers Control, which organised the Conference; and three of whom were elected by the full Conference during its first quarter of an hour. The three IWC representatives were carefully chosen to represent a fair cross-section of opinion within the Institute, and included one IS sympathiser. The reason that they could not include an IS member is that the IS members we approached all declined to join in the work of the Institute, sometimes in spite of repeated invitations. The three representatives from the floor were all rank-and-file trade unionists, none of whom had any factional axe to grind. From the moment that committee took over ‘Coates and Co.’, far from manipulating’ the conference, were as completely in its hands as was Ray Challinor. This was so much the case that, although I personally had the very deepest reservations about one or two points in the final resolution, the fact that the Committee presented it meant, that I had no option but to speak to it as it was. I do not mention this fact in order to complain, but in order to establish what really happened.
Apparently this committee could not find time to discuss a motion submitted by Challinor on what he was pleased to term ‘Ford’s Sell-Out’. This is regrettable: but there was a representative contingent of Ford’s Shop Stewards at the Conference who not only did not complain about the decision of the Conference arrangements committee, but who apparently had never been consulted by this Lancashire teacher as to whether they wished Conference to consider any such motion or not. As for Challinor’s charges about resolutions, they are absolutely misleading. Such Conferences have never considered large numbers of resolutions, because they have been primarily discussion gatherings, hinged around a whole series of industrial seminars. These seminars are and always have been the hub of the whole weekend’s work, and they are totally self-regulating. Anyone can call for seminar time, and there has never been a single case of it being refused. More: the seminars discuss papers prepared in advance, and anyone can submit such a paper. All the papers which have ever been submitted in time have been duplicated and circulated to all conference participants. Needless to say, Challinor has never submitted a paper. It is perfectly obvious that no one could personally agree with all the vast volume of papers which have been circulated: but at the same time that he charges us with lack of democracy, Challinor reproaches us for publishing material he does not like. What should we do in such a case: suppress it?
It is a plain, bald, and disgraceful lie that ‘the rank and file found their time limited to an hour’. It would be nearer to the truth to say that there was, during the whole weekend, about an hour of platform time. Nearly all Saturday’s deliberations were in seminar, at which the rank and file had all the time. Sunday morning consisted of reports from seminars and discussion in plenary session of those reports. The ‘platform’ took note of that time. Sunday afternoon consisted of a speech by Hugh Scanlon, and a debate on the general resolution. Challinor reveals his total contempt for the democratic process when he says that this amounts to ‘an hour’ of rank-and-file discussion: what it means is that he doesn’t count the seminars as being rank-and-file discussion, because they talk about real problems, and not about what Challinor wants them to talk about.
For him, since he embodies ‘the revolution’ the only true rank-and-file time is that spent listening to himself. The internal democracy of the IWC, and of the Workers’ Control Movement, compares more than favourably with that of IS, or any of the other socialist groupings I have, encountered, in a rich experience of such bodies.
Challinor’s political points are almost equally dishonest. He misquotes Topham, or puts words into his mouth which he never wrote, and he takes quotations of mine totally out of their internal context, never mind their historical setting. Challinor cannot reproach me in ‘the slightest degree for my resistance to Wilsonism: my record is plain, and will stand comparison with that of any comrade in IS. Indeed, was it because IS was in the vanguard of the resistance to Wilson’s politics that I was expelled from the Labour Party, while Challinor and many other IS comrades, both militant and less than militant, were given a continued licence to prattle harmlessly on?
The basic political point Challinor makes is that he is against the fight for left unity. When Danny McGarvey attacked In Place of Strife, he deserved support in doing so, whatever criticism he had earned the day before. Criticism of such leaders as Jack Jones and Hugh Scanlon is perfectly in order, but it must be based on informed understanding and not witch-hunting prejudice. If Challinor really wants to help the working-class movement he should learn to distinguish between mistakes in leadership, which even he would make, and betrayals.
His quotations from Trotsky would be more impressive, if he explained why it was that after 1940, when further reforms were pronounced impossible (’the objective conditions leave no room for any serious and lasting reforms’) we then entered into two decades of the triumph of reformism, in which more reforms were made than ever before. The sociology he commits himself to is unbelievably crude and stupid. Today, it is perfectly true that the bases for reform are more attenuated than they have been for the past 20 years, which themselves, according to scripture, never happened: and it is surely true that the old reformist strategy will therefore no longer work. If he would get his head out of the scriptures, and think a bit, Challinor might be able to help us evolve a meaningful strategy of socialist struggle to meet this situation. At the moment, however, he would rather sprinkle holy water and hunt witches. Where does this neurotic search for conformity lead? After having cut the throats of the left centrists and social democrats, poisoned the Stalinist betrayers (by which he’ll mean the Wigan YCL) and opened fierce battle with the Pablo revisionists, what will he do next? Undoubtedly the logic is very simple: he’ll begin to purge the evil-doers and traitors within IS itself. First target will be all those comrades who have been trying to grapple with the real problems of productivity bargaining, in much the same terms as we ourselves in the IWC. After this, who knows? What is clear is that at the end of this great drive for purity, what he will confront is not the organised revolutionary working-class, agog for action, but something very different: his own sorry caucus, in which the only true reliable member will be the Challinor family dog.
The truth is that a working-class socialism, as opposed to a beatnik socialism, can only grow up in discussion and action within the factories and trade union branches, which can never be ‘purified’ in the way Challinor wishes. Drive out the unspeakable Coates, and you will still face the problem: the IWC talks with more workers than all the sects combined, because it carries a very minimum of preconceived ideas, and relies on the creative drive and imagination of the workers themselves: it learns from the Communist Manifesto, that
’the Communists do not form a separate party opposed to other working-class parties. They have no interests separate and apart from those of the proletariat as a whole’.
Instead of trying to wreck such work, IS comrades should be participating in it, for all they are worth.
 

