

OUR symposium tonight occurs while the American Left is in the throes of soul-searching. And that is hardly surprising. American radicalism has practically hit rock bottom. In the era of the crumbling of capitalist power around the world, and the disintegration of imperial empires, the socialist movement in this country has never been weaker. One has to go back to the years immediately following the Civil War for any comparable period of socialist isolation.
People got into the habit of assigning the blame for this humiliating condition to inexorable forces outside our control and beyond our reach. There is this much truth to the proposition: It is no simple matter to build a socialist movement in a country that is rich, whose economy is booming, and whose rulers still have an enormous hold on the thinking of the people. But it is finally dawning on many of us that we can’t put all the blame on history, or sociology; that a good part of the fault lies right inside the Left, that the finger of guilt points to the Left’s own derelictions, its own mistakes, its stubborn blindness, and its colossal stupidities.
We cannot avoid an inquest into the past; not in order to rekindle old quarrels, but to clear the ground for the present and future.
For two decades, in the thirties and forties, American radicalism was dominated by the Communist Party. This movement possessed an incomparable asset: It had a membership that was fanatically devoted and extraordinarily energetic. They did a lot of worth-while things in their heyday. They were the first to organize the unemployed after the 1929 crash, they pitched in on the early battles of the CIO, they fought against Negro discrimination at a time when the Negro did not command the wide support that he enjoys today.
But the good work, the militancy in labor battles, the zeal on behalf of the oppressed, were all vitiated – worse than that, turned to ashes – because the Communist Party rested on a big lie. It pretended to be a party of the American working class, run by its own membership. But, as is now admitted, it was not run by the membership at all; and its policies were brazenly manipulated from the outside.
 
TWICE in its history, its national leaders were unceremoniously given the gate, like office boys. Jay Lovestone in 1929, Earl Browder in 1946. Was the membership dissatisfied with their stewardship? Was that it? No, the membership had nothing to say about it. On both occasions, the dismissals were triggered by a signal from abroad.
This represented a startling innovation in the socialist movement. The history of socialism has recorded the existence of right-wing parties, left-wing parties, democratically run parties, bureaucratically run parties, but it had before given birth to a party that did not own its soul, and whose leaders could not tell you from day to what their program was going to be. For five years after 1929, the Communists proclaimed that Socialists were social fascists, that the AFL leaders were fascist; they went in for united fronts, but only from below, in order to blow up the other organization.
Then, Dimitrov made a speech in Moscow, and the Communist Party flip-flopped, and became the tail end of the Democratic Party, and former deep-dyed enemies of the working class were now transformed into progressive leaders of mankind.
Five more years went by, and they were defending the Stalin-Hitler Pact, Molotov informed us that fascism was a matter of taste, and ‘The Yanks Weren’t Coming.’
Two years later, Hitler attacked Russia, and like all converts, the Communists became holier than the Pope. They denounced Lewis for the war-time coal strikes designed to secure some justice for the miners, they attacked A. Philip Randolph’s March-On-Washington which aimed to get jobs for the Negro people, they advocated piece work and speed-up inside the unions.
 
WELL, the word finally got around that the Communist Party was just a big hoax. It wasn’t a matter of mistakes having been made, or mistakes being corrected. None of us are free of error. But how can you deal with leaders who aren’t really there, who are figments of somebody’s imagination? How can you deal with a party which doesn’t do its own thinking?
When this fact sank in among a lot of American people, the Communist party was finished – and, I may add parenthetically, everybody else on the Left got dragged down in the process. The party leaders and members only woke up to this fact after the Twentieth Congress, and have been doing a lot of breast-beating since. But, as discussion shows, they can’t jump out of their political skins – and it’s awfully late now, anyhow. The party is too disgraced and tainted to make a comeback. Its future is strictly behind it.
I think the chap in the Nation who proposed to the Communist Party that it dissolve, and let its individual members – yes, and leaders – play a constructive role in a new radical movement, was giving them good advice. And from what I am told, a good many are taking that advice.
But the fact that the Communist Party is behind the eight-ball doesn’t solve the problem of the American Left We have to face up to the reality that the whole radical movement has disintegrated until only a number of splinters remain. The rock on which this radical movement split and split and split, and finally foundered – was Russia. This is a towering fact, which we have to digest, which we can’t simply deplore, or exorcise out of existence.
What we have to ask ourselves, I think, is this: Is it possible now in the light of the dolorous experience of American radicalism, and the greater knowledge we possess today of the Russian experiment, is it possible to look at Russia from higher vantage ground, and from the viewpoint of our own American needs even if we have some differences in our precise appreciations? Can the Left free itself from unthinking idolatry and the whitewashing of Russian crimes against socialism; and, on the other extreme, from the embittered hostility which misses the epic movement of historic progress, and can see in the Soviet bloc only the anti-Christ of our time.
 
IN other words, I am making a plea for sanity, for more mature judgement, for deeper historical insight, for an end to Left bigotry and Babbittry, for a ceasefire in our own cold war, for an effort at cooperation, and where possible, reconciliation.
If we do not regroup our effectives, if we cannot integrate our work, then it may be that the present radical movement in this country, from one end of the spectrum to the other, will go under in the flood, and a new generation will have to build a socialist organization from the ground up.
If we can find the inner resources to unravel this knotty riddle of our lifetime, then we have the chance to reconstruct the movement on sturdier foundations and along more mature lines, and the challenge of democratic socialism, compelling and clear, can again be flung into the market place – where it has unnecessarily been absent far too long.



A basic undercurrent of change in US economy, showing itself in the trends of automation, mergers, runaway industries, threatens the union movement with a new situation, which it must learn to face.
There is a silent revolution going on in America today, inexorable, unremitting, pitiless, and it is twisting lives of the laboring people more harshly than many a battle fought on the field. Union after union, grown accustomed to a familiar routine, has suddenly found itself grabbed by the scruff of the neck, with all the complacency shaken out of its officers as they face the specter of loss as of members, and years of hard-won achievements in the way of contracts, seniority accumulations, health and pension funds get knocked from under them. Who is this implacable enemy that has appeared in our midst, and is spreading disaster in his wake?
The local newspapers of the auto union speak of ‘automation.’ The publication of the garment union is alarmed by the runaway shop. The textile union is worrying about mergers and the wiping out of small companies. As a matter of fact, the changing pattern of American industry combines all these manifestations, and confronts the unions with radical alterations now in process in the economic structure which imperiously demand a new approach and tactic on the part of the labor movement.
The outward signs of the shifting trend are a spree of mergers and ‘shaking out’ of smaller firms, the growth of the billionaire class of corporate aggregates, automation and increased mechanization, the building up of new industrial centers in the Southwest and elsewhere.
The trend toward concentration of industry in fewer and fewer hands is a long-term one of our economic system and has been documented in innumerable government studies and investigations. The most recent report of the Federal Trade Commission records that the process is still going on, that while in 1935 the largest 200 manufacturing concerns accounted for almost 38 percent of the total value of all manufactured products, in 1950 they accounted for almost 41 percent.
These government figures only go up to 1950. But 1953-54 has probably broken all previous records. The Institute for Business Planning refers to the recent period as one that ‘economic historians will call an era of merger and concentration,’ and estimates that the number is now running at over 1,000 a year. Last year alone, 20 companies with stocks listed on the NY Stock Exchange were consolidated into 10 larger units. Not only is the ‘merger and acquisition trend intensified,’ to use the wording of the Institute for Business Planning, but ‘the concentration movement in manufacturing and distribution will continue,’ according to Dr. Marcus Nadler, economist of the Hanover Bank.
Many companies that used to be considered ‘Big Business’ just a few years ago, can now barely stand the pace, and either have to merge, or sell out to the behemoths of the industry. When the US Steel Corporation was formed in 1901, it was the one and only billion dollar concern in the United States, and represented a milestone pointed towards concentration of wealth and monopoly growth. By 1919, at the end of the first World War, there were 6 corporations with assets of over one billion dollars. When the country entered the second World War, there were 31 billionaire corporations with assets of 66½ billion dollars. By the end of 1952, the ‘Billionaire Club’ had 66 members with assets of over 174 billion dollars. These 66 are only one-hundredth of one percent of all corporations, but they hold over 28 percent of total corporate assets.
The pyramiding of great wealth is an enduring trait of American capitalism, but in the second World War period it attained unprecedented dimensions. When this element was added to others, the resultant flux triggered the process of reshaping the economic structure. What happened at the end of the war was that the American plutocracy had accumulated this towering treasure of capital, but the world was too unsettled, with vast areas in the grip of revolutionary upheavals, for private industry and banking to invest abroad on a scale commensurate with its surplus funds. It was difficult to find outlets for super-profits abroad; but at home labor costs were high. Unions had become housebroken, and the plunderbund had begun nibbling away at wage standards, hut it was still afraid to go too far in provoking labor.
Writers describing the industrial revolution that occurred in England in the Eighteenth Century showed how time and again necessity was the mother of invention. Given the set of circumstances that confronted American capitalism after the second World War, it was inevitable that the continual trend toward mechanization of industry should take on a breathless pace, and what with American engineering genius, explode into a new revolutionary technology.
Everyone has heard of ‘automation’ by now and knows it is a new giant stride in the elimination of human labor in production by the use of automatic machinery, electronic computers and feedback controls. Few factories are as yet built on complete ‘automation’ lines, which in its strict scientific definition describes electronic or magnetic-tape control of complete sequence operations. Partial use of the new technology, however, is already becoming common. In continuous-flow-process industries, such as petrochemicals, many plants are on the verge of complete automation. Fortune magazine analysts believe even more startling changes may come in the white collar field with the introduction of high speed ‘memory’ and computing machines such as ‘Univac’ or IBM’s No.702.
Professor Norbert Weiner of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, author of the book, Cybernetics, the pioneering work in this field, who probably knows more about the subject than any other one individual, sees America entering a distinctly new economic era. He writes:
‘This country is on the threshold of a catastrophic second industrial revolution brought about by the use of the automatic machine. Unless we prepare ourselves for it, our industrial cities face a vast decentralization process, and a shifting of population to rural districts brought about by unemployment ... The rapid development of the automatic machine in industry will, within the next decade, or sooner if hastened by another war, completely wipe out the assembly line and in its place substitute a complicated electronic machine which will do the same work faster and better. Whereas an assembly line contained a hundred workers, with the automaton, this same line will resemble the emptiness of a huge power plant, with only a skeleton maintenance crew to service the machine.’
When you consider the great savings per unit with the new automatic processes once you pass break-even point, and that capital goods costs are up only 85 percent from pre-war as against manufacturing labor costs which are up 130 percent, you get a pretty good clue as to why a wave of mergers is taking place in the automobile and other industries. The industrial giants are blazing away revamping their production plants; but these new machines and units are so expensive, they require such enormous capital outlays, that even companies that were considered big 10-20 years ago are unable to raise that kind of money today. Many will survive only by permitting themselves to get absorbed by the shrinking number of giants.
Even in industries such as textile where the new technology plays little role as yet, and mechanization or improved organization of the work-process takes place along classic lines, mergers or absorptions are proceeding apace, and the little fellows who came in during the lush years are getting bounced out in the contracting market. The September 4 issue of Textile Labor mourns that ‘A tide of corporate mergers has engulfed more than 150 textile companies employing more than 50,000 workers, since July 1953. Its continuing rise threatens many more with ‘a similar fate.’ Big mergers are also underway in coal, chemicals, armaments and munitions, and basic steel.
This economic transformation, which has still to reach its apogee, and the full consequences of which are still to be felt by the labor organizations, has already resulted in the wiping out of many local unions by the shift of plant operations to new unorganized areas. Textile Labor feels that the merger movement ‘forebodes a more concentrated attack on wage standards and working conditions, both through further runaways from unionized areas and more scientifically-stiffened resistance to organization.’
In the auto industry, probably 60 thousand work have been permanently eliminated, and the end is not sight. In coal, where there has been very heavy mechanization and a shrinking market, many old local unions have seen the mines under their jurisdiction closed down entirely. Other members are working only two or three days a week. Westinghouse has just opened a new $10 million plant in Raleigh, N.C., which will be operated, according to its plant manager, so that the workers ‘will not need a union.’ At the same time, half of the workers at the unionized Newark plant have lost their jobs. Other big plants that are moving south to new modern establishments and leaving the union members holding the bag include the Alexander Smith Carpet Works of Yonkers, N.Y.. American Safety Razor of Brooklyn, N.Y., Motor Products of Marion, Ohio, Du Pont in Yerkes, N.Y., and Westinghouse Meter of Newark, N.J.
How are unions meeting this threat? What is the program of the ‘labor statesmen’ to protect the workingman’s equity in his job, his seniority and pension rights? How do the officers who head the big labor federations visualize the union’s role in the changing economy, and what new strategy or tactics have they devised to safeguard labor’s position and sustain labor’s strength? If you are looking for an answer to these questions from the labor leaders, you have come to the wrong place. They have no answer. All their elaborate research and legal staffs and economic advisers notwithstanding, the union leaders are as bewildered as the man on the street. Their actions thus far have been a combination of panicky retreats and defensive strike improvisations.
Last year, the AFL executive council, in voting support to the strike against the Hat Corporation of America, which was moving most of its production from Norwalk, Conn. to the South, announced that its action was the opening gun of a national campaign against the runaway shop. That was the beginning and end of the ‘campaign.’ Nobody has heard of it since.
Walter Reuther, CIO President, who in the past was never at a loss at whipping out a plan, whether it was the subject of converting automobile plants to aircraft production, or feeding the natives of Patagonia, is now strangely reticent on problems far closer to home. The auto union leadership is still talking glibly about big schemes for the 1955 contracts, but in practice the union is in full retreat before the corporations, as a consequence of the acceptance of wage cuts in Willys, Studebaker and some of the parts plants. Local has been pitted against local, and one locality is vying with another to bid for the employers’ favor.
The ladies garment union, led by statesmen from away back, is resorting to the meanest and most unsubstantial palliatives. After getting soundly trounced trying to organize a runaway plant, with all of the striking workers out on the street, the union proceeded to buy a plant in Appomatox, Virginia, leased it on very favorable terms to another boss, who in return agreed to hire all the strikers. Dubinsky can practice this kind of statesmanship in one or two cases, but as an answer to the runaway shop problem, it’s worse than useless. The AFL hat workers union pulled a similar stunt when it had its workers make a loan to a boss who was facing bankruptcy. As for the textile unions, both the AFL and CIO organizations are so overwhelmed by the proportions of the problem, they are simply hoping, like Micawber, that something will turn up.
On the wage front the picture is a dismal one. ‘If any single generalization emerges at mid-year from 1954 wage negotiations,’ Fortune magazine gloats, ‘it is this: labor lacked aggressiveness and management was firm.’ According to the Bureau of National Affairs, the wage rise was between 4 and 9 cents per hour in 60 percent of new wage contracts. The steel union settled for a nickel an hour and fringe benefits. The CIO electrical union settled with GE for a wage increase of 2.68 percent, also approximately a nickel an hour, and no fringe benefits. The CIO maritime union signed a contract with no wage increase, simply a few minor concessions. In textile, the CIO union permitted American Woolen, the pace-setter of the industry, to cut wages 9½ cents per hour, and reduce fringe benefits by another 6½ cents per hour.
Many unions have been forced out on long strikes, in order to finally get settlements of 5 to 7 cents. The rubber union signed for an average 6½ cent increase with Goodyear after a hard-fought 7-week strike. AFL and CIO lumber and sawmill workers have been striking since June 21 for a 12½ cent increase, with a number of locals going back in the past two weeks with no increase at all, and the CIO settling with the biggest one, Weyerhaeuser Lumber Co., for a 2½ cent increase. (Some locals won the full demand from the smaller companies.)
The workers are so demoralized by the job uncertainty, unemployment, moving of plants, and apparent weakness of the unions, that they breathe a sigh of relief when their leaders get them a nickel increase without their having to strike for it. Labor sights and goals arc getting cut down drastically in this period of reaction and retreat.
But giving up rights won after years of hard struggles is no solution to anything. Labor cannot even hope by these methods to stabilize itself on a lower level. Wage cuts and more speed-up are not a prelude to happier labor-management relationships, but to new demands for more wage cuts and still more speed-up. Obviously, the labor movement has hit a blind alley; it is badly in need of a thorough-going reappraisal of its policy, and of a ‘new look’ in its strategy. The business of letting each local union fend for itself in time of trouble, the tactic of taking wage cuts in order to make companies ‘more competitive,’ the complacency in the face of unemployment, the constant retreat before reaction on the political front – all this has to be stopped in a hurry. Else, it will not be too many years before labor will know catastrophe.
Labor cannot afford to mark time and just hope for a turn of the wheel for the better. What is required is a new program of action that will fuse the membership into an embattled army fighting to advance, not reconciled to retreat. As our Detroit correspondent suggests, the securing of industry-wide agreements and the campaign for a shorter work week are trade union musts today. To this should be added the plank for a major organization campaign in the South, to cut across the runaway shop problem and frustrate the attempt to play one section of labor against another.
It may be asked: How are you going to win these far-reaching objectives when labor has to wage long bitter strikes today just for a couple of pennies? How are you going to organize the South in the face of Taft-Hartley and the reactionary climate that prevails? The answer to these questions is that none of these tasks are primarily administrative ones. On the basis of the present outlook, methods and organization, not one of these objectives will be attained. Remember, it took a new type of organization, spirit, outlook, program to organize the mass production industries twenty years ago. The AFL, with its craft psychology and methods, could not do it. Similarly, the philosophy and methods of the present leaders of the big labor federations are inadequate for the job at hand. They cannot inspire the ranks, they cannot weld them together into an army with banners. They breathe the spirit of bureaucracy, not labor militancy. They inspire complacency and conservatism, not sacrifice and struggle.
The long retreat was halted and labor started going places two decades ago when the CIO was first set up. Now, labor is in a pocket again, and needs a new militant unionism integrated with a political labor organization to tackle the job.



Despite its institutional strength, the union movement has been on the defensive for a decade. What are the weaknesses behind the powerful facade?
THE American scale is big and the trade unions have grown up to the same measure. The American trade union movement towers above all other trade union organizations as American industry towers above British, German, or Scandinavian. The British and Swedish unions have organized a larger percentage of the work force than the American, but the very breadth of the American trade union structure – with better than twice the membership of the British, with its 125,000 signed contracts, its approximately $500 million a year dues income and a roughly equal amount in local and district treasuries, its 650 weekly and 250 monthly publications, its 15,000 full-time national officials, organizers, and staff technicians and additional thousands in the localities, its million dollar buildings and office establishments – place it in a class apart. In terms of manpower, resources, and bureaucratic machinery, the American trade unions are the most powerful in the world – facing also the most powerful adversary in the world.
The very massiveness of the structure gives the labor movement social weight and latent powers of resistance, excellently shown in labor’s contrasting fortunes in the two post-World War reactions. It is part of the historical record that after the nation won the wars for democracy, once in 1918, and again in 1945, labor, on each occasion, had immediately thereafter to face a sustained onslaught. Gompers’ AFL did not have what it takes and succumbed to the attack: the steel strike of 1919 was crushed; the miners retreated under threat of government injunction; the packinghouse victory was quickly dissipated and the industry resumed open shop operations; the railroad shopmen’s strike went under the knife. Company unionism was on the rise and the AFL lost its war-time membership gains and slid back to below the three-million mark. The unions stagnated during the twenties, surviving as isolated enclaves on the fringes of the economy. It was a far different story with the labor movement forged during the New Deal. The 1945-1946 strike wave was victorious all along the line, and came up with the first round of post-war wage increases. True, the employers had more success after they shifted their offensive to the political field and secured passage of the Taft-Hartley law. But even in the ensuing ten-year retreat, the unions continued to expand their membership with the growth of the labor force, and even bettered their percentage slightly. The membership stood at about 12¾ million in 1945 and 17½ million in 1956. If we divide the latter figure by 51,878,000 non-agricultural employees, union strength in 1956 would be a third of its theoretical potential. If we eliminate a number of virtually unorganizable categories, we get the official union calculation – 40 percent of its theoretical potential. Union membership is a slightly higher percentage of the labor force than ten years ago, and four times the percentage of 1930.
 
AS Leo Huberman indicates in his article after reviewing some of the testimony before the McClellan Committee, the struggle against unions is going on today as it did before the advent of the CIO. We have only to mention Kohler, Perfect Circle, Square D, Louisville and Nashville, Southern Bell, Westinghouse, to recall that embittered strikes are also not unknown in the fifties. But overall, the struggle has assumed generalized political forms in an attempt to housebreak and contain the unions. Many of the biggest corporations cannot operate any longer on an open shop basis. Outright union-busting now takes place mostly in the unorganized sectors.
The union movement has held its own as a bureaucratic structure, even if it has not displayed much prowess in carrying the attack to the opponent. In the economic field, the unions are a substantial institution of a different order of power from the twenties. In the old AFL, labor unions were usually able to raise the wages of their members above the general level, but their wage rates set no pattern for the country as a whole. With the unions now bargaining for such a sizable part of the work force, amounting to 100 percent in some of the country’s basic industries, the major wage agreements set a pattern that is followed to one degree or another throughout the business community.
 
IN the political field, the “reward your friends, and punish your enemies” policy is likewise practiced on a qualitatively different scale. The unions have built a considerable machinery in the form of political action committees in the localities, positions of strength within the Democratic Party in many industrial centers, and a network of alliances with liberal political figures on the city, state, and federal levels.
The bureaucratic front looks solid, substantial, and even imposing. But behind the facade resides a creature wracked by disease. Despite its institutional strength, the trade unions movement has been on the defensive and in retreat for a decade. The unions showed more political muscle inside the Democratic Party and the legislative halls twenty years ago when they were a third of their present size. Rather than mount a campaign to repeal the Taft-Hartly law, the unions have had rained on them an unending stream of hostile rulings from the National Labor Relations Board (the most recent consequences of which have been the setback in the department store field in Toledo, and the breaking of the O’Sullivan Rubber strike), the ICC attack on the “hot cargo” clauses in Teamster contracts, the passage of “right to work” laws in 18 states, and a renewal of unfavorable court judgements. (The recent Supreme Court decision permitting scabs to sue unions in the Sate courts has perilous implications.) The very idea of a labor counter-offensive is forgotten. Union officials are busy tying to fend off additional punitive legislation. Even social security legislation enacted during the New Deal has been permitted to erode. For example, unemployment insurance benefits – the most touted of the “built-in stabilizers” of the new peoples’ capitalism – have been steadily chipped away so that by now employers have cut their tax rates by two-thirds and reduced average benefits to about one-third of weekly earnings compared to about half in 1935 when the law was passed.
 
THE new organizational campaigns announced at the time of the AFL-CIO merger have been stillborn. There is no substantial organization of new fields in progress. The South remains the haven of the open shop and runaway plant. Chemicals and textiles are largely unorganized. No inroads are being made among white collar workers. The breakthrough into new fields took place during the CIO crusade from 1935 to 1941. The next big membership gains came during the war when the established unions mushroomed out in their jurisdictions under the “maintenance of membership” clauses that they secured from Roosevelt’s War Labor Board in return for the no-strike pledge and the wage freeze. Their expansion of the work force in the unionized industries.
Traditionally, the American trade unions have not been front-line fighters for civil liberties. The craving for respectability and approbation of official public opinion has led the average conservative union official to shun associations with radicals, or those who might be tagged as radicals – even though such aloofness would endanger civil liberties, which are necessary foundation stones of free trade unions. But the labor record of the past decade has probably plumbed new depths in opportunist short-sightedness and bigotry. CIO officials got involved in the witch-hunt by themselves employing McCarthyite tactics against Communist opponents. The crooks and panderers in the AFL found anti-Communism a superb patriotic shield for their sordid transactions. Other more disinterested officials were animated by anti-Communist attitudes no different from those of officials in the American Legions or Chamber of Commerce. The labor movement has scarcely lifted a finger in the specialized sphere of government industrial security regulation, an area which directly endangers union contractual procedures. Even when the independent West Coast Longshore Union was able, through court action, to breach the Coast Guard blacklist, the decision was promptly sabotaged by the AFL-CIO maritime unions. Apathy, timidity, drift, as well as small-tie opportunism-officials are able to rid themselves of opponents or potential “trouble markers” by getting them dismissed as “security risks” – these are the determinants, rather than the welfare of the labor movement as a whole.
The role of the unions so far as the transcendent questions of our time are concerned – war and peace, the H-bomb, nuclear testing, co-existence, colonial freedom – has been equally undistinguished. During the war, labor officials accepted appointments to various advisory commissions and boards. Some of the more socially alert labor officials got big notions of labor’s coming role in foreign policy making. At the time, there was a considerable amount of criticism of “striped pants diplomacy” in the labor press, and demands by people like Irving Brown, Victor Reuther, and George Balkanzi, that labor officials be appointed to authoritative posts. Of course, these soap bubbles were quickly pricked after the war, and labor has relapsed into its traditional position as the object, not the subject, of foreign policy. The truth is most labor officials are too provincial to have informed opinions on these matters. The membership rightly feels that it cannot receive guidance in this complicated sphere from union officers. Recently, there have been a few token gestures of progressivism, as when Walter Reuther and Jacob Potofsky signed citizens’ declarations calling for a halt in nuclear testing, but in the main, labor has been a faithful servitor of the cold war, while George Meany and a group of official have been at pains to identify themselves with its most reactionary and uncompromising advocates.
 
IT might seem visionary to berate a labor movement for its indifference to civil liberties, or its support of the cold war, when it has permitted some of its leading unions to become sinkholes of peculation and corruption. Many might think it more important first to install better locks on the treasury boxes, and devise improved procedures for voting on union contracts, before we get unduly exercised about unionizing unorganized industries, or defending civil liberties of radicals. For forty years, labor students and sociologists have analyzed the causes of labor corruption. The most recent study (Corruption and Racketeering in the Labor Movement, by Philip Taft, Ithaca, New York, 1958) comes to roughly the same conclusions as previous investigations:
“Basically, racketeering in labor unions appears to flow from a general slackness in American society, an emphasis upon material gain, and practices prevalent in many areas of the business community.
“As employers in some trades will buy off inspectors, so they will make collusive bargains with a business agent. When American influence recently became marked in Western Germany, some of our labor mores apparently got transplanted, as well.
“Labor representatives out of contact with their fellow workers and functioning as an organ of management on the codetermination boards have shown themselves avid spokesmen for the employers. The ‘bonzen,’ [bosses] as they are called, forgot their origins and became inordinately concerned with the problems of management.” (pp.33-34.)
But explanation is not justification. The labor movement has arisen not to mirror the corruptions and exploitations of our acquisitive society, but to eradicate them. To the extent that unionism succumbs to the practices of the business world, it loses its raison d’etre. The very employers who make use of corrupt labor officials induce their political spokesmen to expose the corruption in order to discredit and undermine the labor movement. In the midst of the worst post-war depression, labor officials are preoccupied with undoing the damages of the McClellan exposures. It is startling how little has been done by the government in ten months of depression to alleviate the plight of the unemployed and how ineffectual and tame has been the response of this big labor movement. Its few feeble attempts at mass demonstrations turned into pep rallies for the Democrats. It has proven helpless even to secure passage of an improved unemployment compensation bill.
To sum up, the labor movement is not a leader in the nation today. It does not evoke an image as the protector of the underdog, the champion of progress, the advocate of the brotherhood of man. It is, in the mind of the general public, another “special interest.”
 
BUT the unions have attained a numerical strength and a social weight where they can no longer limit themselves to their role of the past. Even if we assume that Gompers’ narrow semi-syndicalist job-consciousness was the last word in statesmanship for a trade union movement of 1½ to 2 million, parceled out in craft jurisdictions, such a program is still unworkable for a labor movement of 18 million entrenched in the major industrial strongholds of the economy. Whatever historic role we assign the unions, whether the classic Marxist idea that they are the training grounds for socialist struggles, or the current sociological theory that labor is one of the important “countervailing forces” in a pluralistic society, or the liberal conception that the labor movement is a key institution for safeguarding democracy in a slowly evolving society, we would have to conclude on the empirical evidence that the labor movement’s moral standing is declining and that it is not making adequate use of its powers. C. Wright Mills called the labor leaders “the new men of power” in 1948. His recent conclusion in The Power Elite (New York 1956) fits the facts more accurately:
“For a brief time, it seemed that labor would become a power-bloc independent of Corporation and State but operating upon and against them. After becoming dependent upon the government system, however, the labor unions suffered rapid decline in power and now have little part in major national decisions. The United States now has no labor leaders who carry any weight of consequence in decisions of importance to the political outsiders now in charge of the visible government. Well below the top councils, they are of the middle levels of power.” (pp.262-263)
The result has been a working class pushed off its perch of the thirties and reduced again to a submerged layer of society. The working class has been kept reasonably contented, however, like the proletariat of the Roman Empire, with bread and circuses. While the union organizations have solidified themselves as bureaucratic edifices, and élan and glow have gone, and the outlook of the ranks has grown philistine.
The more understanding of the labor intellectuals who follow union events closely recognize this state of affairs. They deplore the shortcomings and derelictions and offer suggestions for improvement. But they feel that, realistically, one cannot demand very much more from trade unions than they are doing, that unions are a functional institutionalism in our society which by its nature cannot go beyond the specific job of rendering a business service. They hold that criticisms made from the assumption that labor ought to remake our society, or be a decision-maker in the existing society, are intrinsically utopian, corresponding neither to the temper of the country, nor the wishes of the union membership. It was this sober administrative realism that led Selig Perman and the Wisconsin school in the twenties to embrace Gompers’ brand of business unionism and to ridicule the radicals. It is this same outlook that motivated J.B.S. Hardman and many labor experts in the forties and fifties to tailor their thinking to the existing labor movement.
 
AN empirical approach is often very effective in describing the existing situation, or estimating a slowly modifying one. But it falls down in anticipating “leaps” and “crisis” in a historical development (as David Herreshoff describes in his discussion of the Wisconsin school) and is poor at orienting itself in a fast-changing period. Even if an historical estimation contains errors, it is still more fruitful in furnishing a working hypothesis for purposes of long-range orientation and policy-planning that a merely descriptive sociology. Is this meant to suggest that the trade union movement will soon face a period of swift change as did the AFL in the early thirties? Or are the unions up against a typical round of difficulties, some of which will be eliminated by small modification of their practices, and some of which are the usual problems that inevitably attend all organizations and human endeavors?
Beneath the general slough in labor affairs, a considerable organizational and power re-arrangement is now in progress. The unity of the AFL and CIO two years ago was a threadbare, formal affair. It was further compromised y the disproportionate weight of the AFL in the policy-making Executive Council, and the consequent submergence of the CIO, which had in the past been the more militant and democratic labor body, and which even in 1955 was the cleaner and more virile organization. But the CIO had little bargaining power. It was by that time less than half the size of its rival. The expulsion of the Communist-dominated unions had been part of the process of its loss of momentum. When afterwards, McDonald of the Steel Union started a clique battle against Walter Reuther of the Auto Workers, the CIO was in danger of disintegration and had to take the best terms available from the AFL. Inside the common federation, the industrial unions appeared to be facing an uphill journey. The crafts started to aggressively push their jurisdiction claims. The Teamsters were perfecting a series of private alliances with other unions. And the Teamster-Building Trades bloc was holding up unification of the main state and city bodies. It also seemed at the time that the employers and politicians were going to throw their influence behind the business unionists of the Beck-Hoffa stamp. (Witness the deal with Montgomery Ward, and Senator Goldwater’s declaration that he hoped Hoffa’s philosophy would prevail against that of Walter Reuther.)
 
THE McClellan Senatorial hearings transformed the picture. As an unforeseen by-product of the disclosures, the AFL-CIO hierarchy was driven to make far-reaching alterations in its internal dispositions. The Teamsters Union has been forced out of the federation. The other big wheel, the Carpenters, has its officers under a cloud as well as an indictment. The revolt of the Building Trades petered out at the 1957 Atlantic City convention; President Meany, resting on a new power bloc, told them off in words that no one would have dared employ two years ago. New, more effective machinery to arbitrate jurisdictional conflicts was subsequently adopted by the Executive Council, and under the whip of public scandalization, a degree of centralized power has been assumed which would never have been tolerated by the International chieftains in Gompers’ day. The executive weight in labor’s councils-for the time being at any rate-has shifted to a combination of the industrial unions and the semi-industrial AFL unions like the Machinists, Electricians, Railway Clerks.
The McClellan disclosures have forced through the adoption of the so-called ethical practices codes and the squeezing out of a number of the more compromised officials. The atmosphere around the labor movement is very different from the time when Joseph Fay slugged Dubinsky at the New Orleans AFL convention for the latter’s speech against racketeering, and Dave Beck was the honored speaker at businessmen’s luncheons. The unions are now under heavy pressure to clean up their more flagrant administrative abuses in order to be able to present a defensible front to the public. But the McClellan disclosures produced no revolts in the ranks. The men and women who pay the dues were voiceless. The reform was a purely top affair and therefore of restricted scope. The AFL-CIO leaders run bureaucratized organizations and had neither the capacity nor the desire to appeal to the ranks to stage internal revolts within their unions. Hence, they had no alternative course but to drop the recalcitrant unions and to sacrifice those union officials who had been caught red-handed. The cleanup campaign will eliminate a few crooked leaders and will institute some improved procedures, but the character, leadership, and direction of the present union movement will be little altered; neither will it stop the decay or retreat. For that, other methods and forces are needed.
 
A BASIC redirection of union policies can be visualized only as a consequence of an insurgent mood sweeping the nation, and finding reflection in union ranks. It is hard to see the unions as initiators of such a change. They will, rather, be beneficiaries of it. Left to their own devices, the union officials will perpetuate themselves in office and continue to follow the lines of least resistance. But the mass mood has see-sawed in the United States every few decades, and there is no reason to suppose that the pendulum will not swing again in the opposite direction from the present. The time intervals vary depending on a whole series of circumstances, but the oscillating process goes on.
Any new upheaval inside the unions will necessarily assume different forms from the upsurge of the thirties. The unionization wave that came with the NRA hit a predominantly unorganized and leaderless working class. The old set of AFL officials feared the mass production workers and were in any case unequipped to cope with the problems of mass unionism. They weren’t even up to protecting their organizations’ interests in the code setups, as the exasperated comments of Mrs. Perkins and other friendly New Dealers attest. Consequently, the political radicals were able to play a unique role in the early stages of unionization as they possessed the special skills that were at a premium at the time. They partially filled the existing vacuum of leadership. Now, however, the union movement is, in a technical sense, an excellently organized machine, and disposes of a wide network of skilled personnel. The present union officialdom constitutes a formidable bureaucratic power. New bodies of workers will be absorbed, as they are organized, into the existing organism (as they were in the more alert unions like the Miners and women’s and men’s clothing workers in the early thirties) rather than form a rival power center, as did the CIO. Radicals will play an independent role inside the unions again to the extent that they represent the sentiments of sizable segments of union ranks. Their militancy and self-sacrifice will be appreciated as they were in the thirties. But they will be operating this time in a union movement headed by an entrenched and seasoned officialdom, and their technical skills may very well be inferior to those of the administration forces.
Such a trend is all the more likely because of the collapse of political radicalism in the fifties. There is no sizable cadre of men and women ready to step into the breach. At the time of the AFL-CIO merger, when there was talk of launching an ambitious organization campaign, Fortune magazine voiced skepticism that it would come off, and gave as one of its reasons the absence of a group of radicals able and willing to handle that kind of work. This same collapse of radicalism explains the absence of rank and file initiative in response to the McClellan exposures. It is the other side of the coin of the prevailing apathy in the unions, reflecting the listlessness in the nation at large.
 
NOWADAYS, labor writers ignore the essential tie-up between union democracy and radicalism, probably because radicalism is currently viewed by the academic community as something alien which intellectuals or fanatics seek artificially to inject into the bloodstream of the labor movement. There have, of course, been innumerable instances of radicalized intellectuals or intellectualized radical workers, seeking, in a wise or unwise manner, to influence conservative labor movements in the direction of their ideas. Such efforts have met at different times favorable as well as unfavorable responses, because radicalism and conservatism are varying aspects of the workers’ aspirations for a better life under capitalism; now one, now the other, coming into prominence, depending on conditions. Both are endemic to the labor movement, as any reliable text of American labor history will quickly reveal. Radicalism, however, is intimately connected with union democracy for two special reasons.
First, internal union life becomes vibrant only when workers are in motion. In such times, the ranks are interested in alternative lines to official policy, and seek to participate in decision-making. This may lead them to break through, or attempt to break through, the bureaucratic crust. Ordinarily, union proceedings are pretty humdrum, and only a tiny part of the membership participates. The most recent study of a group of medium-size industrial local unions showed that attendance at meetings typically ranged from 2 to 6 percent. Naturally, controversies of any nature can excite the passions of the members and impart vigor to union proceeding. The existence of a two-party system and the waging of hard-fought election campaigns in the Typographical Union is a case in point. But it is a historical fact that democratic participation and spirited controversy occur most commonly when the membership is in a militant state and anxious to realize substantial social objectives, or to change the union personnel, or both.
Second, a rank and file group is helpless when confronting an entrenched union administration unless it has leaders and some kind of organization. Even where the administration does not seek to apply pressures, threats, or sanctions against the dissidents, the democratic process is reduced to paltry and primitive proportions where its implementation depends on a scattering of unconnected individuals who attempt to pit their proposals against those of a well-oiled machine commanding all the resources of office. That is why when union ranks are in upheaval and seriously resolved to enforce changes, they inevitably throw up new leaders from their midst and form at least some kind of rudimentary caucuses or working groups. Where upheavals spread through a number of unions, and reflect broader social issues rather than passing grievances of a strictly local union nature, such native union radicalism tends to fuse, to one extent or another, with political radicalism-whatever the precise mechanism by which the fusion is realized.
 
SOCIOLOGISTS have analyzed the process by which a labor union becomes conservatized as it gains responsibilities and power, how the agitator of yesterday becomes the bureaucrat of today, and how a fighting membership settles down when it wins some improvements in its work conditions. This evolution is by now a familiar story and has been repeated in the trade unions of every country in the Western world. Within severe limitations, Michel’s “law of oligarchy” operates with fidelity. But the life cycle of the labor movement does not end with the conservatization and bureaucratization of once militant and democratic movements. Capitalism does not furnish labor unions with that kind of a stable foundation. New crises arise, which breed new upheavals, and start a new cycle-at times, on a higher basis. The American labor movement didn’t get fixed for eternity, or even for a very long time, with Gompers’ triumph over the Knights of Labor. And the present AFL-CIO, stemming from the New Deal, is not the last word on the subject, either. But today’s absence of radical ginger groups around unions, and the prostration of organized radicalism, means that new moods of insurgency will find expression more slowly. It will take more time for the ranks to throw up new spokesmen. Internal union changes will rest for some time to come in the hands of the present officialdom, sections of it reflecting at times progressive currents.
Over forty years ago, John R. Commons wrote:
“It doubtless has appealed to some people who consider the employer’s position more powerful than that of the union, that the employer should be compelled in some way to deal with unions, or at least to confer with their representatives. But if the State recognizes any particular union by requiring the employer to recognize it, the State must necessarily guarantee the union to the extent that it must strip it of any abuses it may practice.” (US Commission On Industrial Relations, Final Report, Washington 1915, p.374.)
These remarks have a prophetic ring today. During the New Deal, labor officials started to lean on government boards and depend on government mediation machinery. The CIO officials embraced the alliance without qualm or inhibition. The AFL hesitated for a few brief moments, but soon forgot old Sam Gompers’ admonition that “what they give, they can take away,” and followed suit. The labor leaders have grown accustomed to using crutches and their walking limbs have atrophied. When the government turned its scowling side on the labor movement and passed the Taft-Harley law, John L. Lewis proposed that the union bypass the law and rely on their economic strength. But the labor hierarchs found this too strong meat for their stomachs. They decided to live with the law. The unions are now enmeshed in a tangle of legal regulations, NLRB rulings, and court decisions, which have made unionism a happy hunting ground for lawyers. With each new decision, the unions sink deeper into the quagmire of legalistic red tape and restrictive regulation. The hiring of more lawyers, more statisticians, more lobbyists, is not the unmixed blessing that many labor writers imagine. It is by no means exclusively a sign of maturity. Up to a point, it is the inevitable concomitant of big unionism dealing with vast corporations and a swollen government bureaucracy. But it is also testifies, in part, to the flabbiness of labor unions which have permitted themselves to be sucked into the maw of capitalist government, and have consequently surrendered a part of their hard-won independence. Whatever be the fate of the new batch of laws now before Congress and the State legislatures, this is a process which will most likely continue and deepen, given the forces at play on both sides.
 
THE unions are not only caught in the coils of government regulation, but will time and again be faced with punitive edicts which will represent real dangers to their functioning and interfere with their growth. That is why the impulse to enlarge their political influence will grow with each new harassment. The authors of the Taft-Hartley law feared such a reaction and tried to forestall labor politics with crude proscriptions. But labor is strong enough to surmount these and future obstacles thrown in its path if it has the will to political power. Very likely, labor’s political experimentations will eventually culminate with the establishment of some kind of labor party. Whatever its institutional form, however, it appeared to be labor’s manifest destiny to emerge on the political scene in another decade with at least the comparable effectiveness of its British cousins.
The process gives every indication of proceeding along the lines of slow, ponderous change-except for the fact that the United States capitalism, as the twentieth century empire builder, is caught in a crisis of monumental proportions, and absorbs the crisis of every part of the so called free world within its won system. What the precise impact of the crisis will be on the labor unions is difficult to gauge. A lot depends on the economic situation at home. An armaments prosperity bolstered by credit buying has up to now acted as a powerful soporific, effectively doping the working people and nestling intellectuals in clouds of euphoria. But the current depression is breaking the hypnosis. It is not the maintenance of any special level of living standard that determines the political mood. Given a certain minimum level, it is the feeling of security that makes for conservatism and acquiescence, and the feeling of uncertainty that provokes anxiety and impatience. Because the unions are being pushed irrevocably into the volatile sphere of politics, they will react with increasing sensitivity to coming atmospheric disturbances. And the signs point to a stormy decade ahead.

Capitalists employ labor for the amount of profit realized and workingmen labor for the amount of wages received ... This is the only relation existing between them; they are two distinct elements, or rather two distinct classes, with interests as widely separated as the poles. We find capitalists ever watchful of their interests – ever ready to make everything bend to their desires. Then why should not laborers be equally watchful of their interests – equally ready to take advantage of every circumstance to secure good wages and social elevation?
If workingmen and capitalists are equal co-partners, composing one vast firm by which the industry of the world is carried on and controlled, why do they not share equally in the profits? Why does capital take to itself the whole loaf, while labor is left to gather up the crumbs? Why does capital roll in luxury and wealth, while labor is left to eke out a miserable existence in poverty and want? Are these the evidences of an identity of interests, of mutual relations, of equal partnership? No sir. On the contrary they are evidences of an antagonism. This antagonism is the general origin of all “strikes.” Labor has always the same complaints to make, and capital always the same oppressive rules to make and powers to employ. Were it not for this antagonism, labor would often escape the penalty of much misery and moral degradation, and capital the disgrace and rin consequent upon such dangerous collisions. There is not only a never-ending conflict between the two classes, but capital is in all cases the aggressor. Labor is always found on the defensive because:
Capital enjoys individual power and in the exercise of that is given to encroach upon the rights and privileges of labor.
Labor is individually weak and only becomes powerful when banded together for self-defense.
Capital knows no other commercial principle than that ... which ways “buy in the cheapest market and sell in the dearest” but which if applied to labor means “keep down the price of labor and starve the workingman.”
If there is a mutuality and oneness of feeling, I ask, sir, what means this universal uprising of the workingmen of this continent who are rushing together as with the power of the whirlwind, towards one common center – a union of workingmen?
– William H. Sylvis, Speech to the Ironmolders International Union Convention, 1864



Argentine Upheaval
by Arthur P. Whitaker
Frederick A. Praeger, New York, 1957, $3.50.
THE author is described in the dust-jacket as a professor of Latin American history at the University of Pennsylvania and ‘one of the most eminent Latin American historians of era.’ Possibly this last is a bit of an overstatement, though he is clearly acquainted with his subject matter but like so many of his colleagues in the scholarly world, he has enrolled as a technician of the American Empire and discusses, without the tremor of an eyebrow, the most intricate social problems of our time, from the insular assumptions of our State Department politicos and the vested interests of our corporate bureaucrats. Indeed, Mr. Whitaker has been so roughly conditioned in this sort of outlook, he does not even feel it necessary to elucidate why egotistic American interests should be protected, or justify US interference into the affairs of a country six thousand miles away. No sir, Mr. Whitaker is no fusspot. He has a job to do, namely, the unraveling of the tangled skein of Argentine politics to enable our decision-makers to more effectively formulate policies, and Mr. Whitaker doing his job without needless circumlocution, rhetoric, or philosophizing.
He certainly writes of Argentine affairs with an expert’s competence. But as his focus is delimited by his specialized commitments, it is quite difficult for the general reader to discern the broad play of social forces underlying the sequence of events that led to the military revolt of September 16, 1955 which unseated the dictator, Juan Peron, and installed in power a new military junta.
The Peron decade is something that has to be looked into. Argentina, the leading Latin American country both culturally and economically, is destined to renew its challenge to the United States for leadership of the South American continent, as it did under Peron, and his type of dictatorship is endemic to many semi-colonial countries of today and excellently portrays the complex social and political tangle of their affairs. American journalists have glibly described Peron as another fascist fuehrer whose sympathy was with the Axis partners during the war. This gives a totally false picture of the dictator both in his internal and international roles, but it is a first-class illustration of the success of American journalism in utilizing democratic jargon to make our public see the world through the cockeyed spectacles of the State Department. The Peron-type regime is a new proposition peculiar to the underdeveloped world, and we have to know something of the social makeup of the country to understand it.
 
ARGENTINA occupied traditionally the position of a semi-colonial country under Britain’s suzerainty, although United States investments continued to grow after the first World War until they almost equalled Britain’s on the eve of the second. The dominant wheat and meat oligarchy – semi-feudal landowners of fabulous latifundia – ran the country. In recent decades, there grew alongside, a class of native capitalists, which, while lacking capital by Western standards, was nevertheless the strongest of its kind in Latin America and began to play an increasingly aggressive role in the country’s affairs. This class decided to push its opportunity for all it was worth when both Britain and the United States had their hands full with the war. Britain had for years spread the propaganda that Argentina lacked resources for the development of basic industry, but no sooner was she unable to supply the country with steel products than the Argentine capitalists drove ahead to exploit the coal and iron ore deposits of Salta and Jujuy. YPF, the government oil corporation, went into an ambitious expansion, and extensive road and rail construction was rushed. A frenzied industrialization boom was on. At the same time, the Argentine government made use of its blocked sterling credits in England to buy back its bonds so that by 1947 the country was free of foreign debt.
Argentina was the only country in South America that felt strong enough not to get into the war on the Allied side, but to maneuver between both war blocs for maximum concessions (and to make sure to wind up on the winning side). This was not because Argentina was more dictatorial-minded than the other Latin-American countries, as it has so often been represented, but because it was in a position to practice an independent policy – neutralism. It is true that the army was German-trained, and both Mussolini and Hitler had many admirers, especially among the higher officers. But naked, calculating, national self-interest, not ideological preferences, determined Argentina’s stand. (It had been neutral in the first World War, as well.) In 1943, the army put through a coup d’etat, as it had done in 1930, ousted a corrupt and discredited government, and a military junta, which included Colonel Peron, took over.
 
THUS far, we are dealing with a familiar set of components of a semi-colonial country trying to extricate itself from the grip of foreign imperialism. There is the entrenched landowning aristocracy with strong ties to outside imperialism and united with the latter in keeping the country as an agricultural preserve. There is the growing middle class which aims to lead the nation in its anti-imperialistic aspirations, but which unlike its counterparts in Europe in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, is not a social revolutionary, but a conservative class. Coming so late in the historical calendar, it finds itself subject to too many contradictory canceling pressures. It hates the rich and powerful imperialist outsiders, but it fears to lay strong hands on their property lest it upset respect for its own property rights and ambitions. It wants to use the mass nationalist sentiments to blackjack concessions from the imperialist powers, but it fears the growing ambitions of the working classes. It is often in conflict with the landowners over tariffs and other economic questions, but this is over-ridden by the community of interest in maintaining social stability. Consequently, the middle classes are animated by the philosophy of a Mirabeau, not a Marat. Because the nation is thus fragmented, and no class can rise above its parochial interests and command all-national support, the upper class military officer cliques take over time and again as self-appointed arbiters of national conflicts. They have stepped in on more than one occasion to run the government show.
As neither the industrial middle classes nor labor have been strong enough to take charge of the nation’s destiny, Bonapartist figures have arisen in a number of the more advanced under-developed countries to fill the vacuum of leadership. Such a figure was Peron. (Similar types were Vargas in Brazil, and now Nasser in Egypt.) His political technique consisted in manipulating the contending classes. His social policy was a forced march toward industrialization. His foreign affairs were directed toward a more assertive challenge to imperialism. Here was not simply another Latin American ‘strong man’ pressing down the lid with a bayonet while rifling the treasury. This was the emergence of a social dictator who tried to realize the country’s aspirations by modernization and anti-imperialism without an internal social overturn.
 
HOLDING the twin jobs of Minister of War and Secretary of Labor and Social Welfare in the 1943 junta, Peron introduced something new in Argentina politics. He proceeded to build up the labor unions under government tutelage and eventually as semi-government organizations. From a membership of some 260,000 embracing mainly skilled workers, they swelled under his patronage until they finally numbered practically the whole wage-earning force. When the military clique grew panicky at the new empire he was carving out and tried to dump him in 1945, it was already too late: the descamisados publicly flexed their muscles and triumphantly restored him to power.
For the next ten years, the confederation of labor (CGT), with its derivatives, the Peronista party and Peronista women’s party, plus the military, were to be his principal institutional bases of power. Deftly, he seesawed between one and the other of these hostile forces utilizing one to keep the other in check. He tried to keep a firm hold on both by staffing the labor organizations with his faithful servitors, and by purging the officers’ clique time and again to ensure its loyalty. This Bonapartist technique was made possible by Peron’s aggressive program both at home and abroad.
The previous efforts at building native industry appeared pale in comparison to his own. He bought out the British railroads and utilities, the IT&T, the ports and grain elevators. He boosted tariffs, instituted monetary controls, altered shippings rates and created an important merchant fleet. He nationalized foreign trade in farm products using profits to promote state and private industries. Such a program called for war on the old feudalistic aristocracy, and Peron waged it, symbolized by his suppression of the Jockey Club and his seizure of La Prensa owned by the richest landholding clan – although war may be too strong a word for it. While his policies favored the industrialists, he never touched the latifundia, and agrarian reform never got very far during his rule. The social status quo was never upset
Industrialization and urbanization have been headlong in Argentina. The last national census showed over 60 percent of gainfully employed in manufacturing or services, 10 percent in government bureaucracy, and only a quarter in farming, forestry and fishing. In the decade 1943-53, industrial production increased 40 percent, with industrial output accounting for roughly half of national production as compared with 40 percent contributed by agriculture and livestock. Although Argentine industry is primarily light, beginnings have been made in manufacture, metals, machinery, vehicles. And as is true of other colonial countries, there is a strong trend toward nationalization of sectors of the economy, because native capitalists are too weak and lacking in capital to be able to finance the industrialization projects. It case of Argentina, the nationalized sector includes the central bank, railways, air services, merchant marine, oil, telephone, port facilities, grain elevators, Buenos Aires transport and gas works. The government also runs military factories and DINIE, a group of expropriated German metallurgical, chemical, and pharmaceutical plants factories.
 
IN the course of this forced marched, Peron gave the labor masses more than just demagogy, although to be sure, there was plenty of that. Especially in the first few years before inflation took its heavy toll, the workers made important strides in higher wages and social security benefits. Furthermore, even under the Peron-dominated CGT, labor won a sense of strength, dignity, and influence which will have an important bearing on the future history of the country – and which survived the dictator’s fall.
Utilizing the special circumstances of the war and Argentina’s extraordinary boom, Peron gave the country’s traditional anti-imperialist policy several additional twists. He asserted Argentine leadership up and down Latin America and challenged United States hegemony both in economic and political matters. It was this pretension to leadership that aroused the righteous indignation of our State Department, not Peron’s affinity to European fascism.
Peronism – essentially a pragmatic maneuvering between social classes at home and between rival powers abroad, concocted into a pseudo-ideology by grandiloquent rhetoric and noisy demagogy – contained a hard kernel of nationalist achievement, material progress and social reform. That is why Peron managed to split every party and political formation from the extreme Catholic Right to the Communist Left and line up the dissidents behind his banner. As Carleton Beals wrote, his leading opponents had nothing to offer except to complain of the lack of civil liberties. Their cry for freedom was somewhat suspect, however, as they had never respected it when in office.
Any half serious study makes clear that it is apocryphal to call the Peron dictatorship fascist unless one decides to promiscuously dump any and all dictatorships into a pot labelled ‘fascism.’ All dictatorships, whether of Czar Nicholas I or Diocletian the Emperor, Pope Julius II or Genghis Khan, Hitler or Stalin, have certain similarities. But it is only in the consideration of the different social backgrounds, class purposes and political aims that is illuminated the makeup of the regime and the history of the period.
The fascist dictatorships of Germany and Italy came to power through the deadlock of labor and capital, by mobilization of the lower middle class elements, and with the benign neutrality or outright support of the propertied classes. Once in power, they smashed, first, all Left and labor organizations; then, all independent political and social formations – to rule society as an omnipotent police regime. Peron, in contrast, took power in a more or less legitimate election in which he won a majority, and his ensuing dictatorship rested on the twin pillars of a government-controlled labor movement, and the army; with the regime oscillating between these two essentially hostile forces. Monopoly capitalism strengthened its grip on the economy under both Mussolini and Hitler while social difficulties continued to be solved by a combination of repression and war preparations.
Under Peron there took place the growth of a variety of nationalized state capitalism, an elimination of foreign investors through staying out of the war and bargaining with both belligerents. Nationalism was used by Mussolini and Hitler as a handmaiden of imperialism. It was used by Peron as a weapon of anti-imperialism. Fascism could be said to represent the rule of modern condottieri who slipped into power with the backing of the big monied interests to safeguard the status quo by the rule of the sword. Peronism was the rule of a Bonapartist dictator imposing his will by manipulating the social classes on behalf of industrializing an underdeveloped country and challenging dominant American imperialism. In a word, there is a substantial difference between the two types of dictatorship, and it muddles our comprehension of important lines of social cleavage to identify the two.
 
DESPITE its considerable elan in the first few years, Peronism pretty much exhausted itself by 1953. The country was starved for capital with which to follow through its expansion. Inflation took on runaway proportions, wiped out the gains of the wage earners, and was cutting into living standards. After the war, the United States mounted an implacable offensive which in rapid order swept Argentina out of its economic bases on the South American continent. Pretty well stymied on all fronts, his popularity in heavy decline, Peron, by 1953, was swinging away from the CGT, whose ranks were growing disgruntled, and rested increasingly on the military. His crusade against el imperialismo yanqui had also pretty much ground to a halt and he was by this time trying to fix up a new deal with the United States to get much needed capital and loans. This capitulatory swing was climaxed in his last year with the attempt to sign away oil rights in Patagonia to a subsidiary of the Standard Oil Company of California, which would have created an independent state in an area three times the size of Massachusetts. Many believe that this attempted agreement which outraged Argentine public opinion was as important as any other cause in bringing down Peron. When the military cliques moved against him in 1955, Peron tried to overawe them with a repetition of the performance of ten years before. But his deals with the United States had tarnished his reputation as the nationalist Sir Galahad, and the descamisados were no longer the enthusiastic supporters of yore.
The military cliques have always had close ties with the landowning nabobs and the new military junta headed by Major General Aramburu has tried to swing things back in their favor. The junta has returned La Prensa to its former owners. It has modified some nationalist regulations. It broke several general strikes last year. But it is no simple matter to turn the clock back to the status quo ante. The new industrialized Argentina is a fact. The CGT remains a power that no government can ignore. And the pervading anti-imperialism can be flaunted by any government only at its own peril.
After much hedging and several postponements, elections are finally scheduled for late February. The country is in for hectic times, as the economy is starved for capital, and the Wall Street crowd hasn’t changed its spots (even though it has jazzed up its public relations). It will not unloosen the old purse strings until it gets its pound of flesh – first of all, the cancelled oil concessions. The prolonged inflation has made Argentine labor restive, the Socialists and Communists are making strong progress again, and Peronismo remains a potent political force two years after the dictator’s exile.
The Peron regime has to be viewed as a stage in the battle of Latin America for economic independence. It did not realize its proclaimed goals, nor could any regime that left the oligarchic social structure of the country undisturbed; but it could boast of some achievements. The next attempt will start from this higher ground.



WHAT has come out of the year’s churning? In terms of organization and social influence, very little. In terms of intellectual quickening, something of importance. As explained by our British correspondent in the October American Socialist, an immediate outgrowth of the mass exodus out of the Communist Party was the so-called forum movement, and the periodical, the New Reasoner, an offspring of the Reasoner, which was the opposition journal inside the CP.
The socialist forums held a two-day conference in April of this year at Sheffield attended largely by recent CP members to try to figure out what had brought on the catastrophe and how to go about reconstructing a philosophy for the movement. As was only natural after a sudden release from an intellectual prison-house, the gathering brought forth a remarkable babel of music in which every possible instrument of the orchestra was represented. Some thought Marxism remained unimpaired. Others believed Marxism had proved ‘a defective tool.’ One delegate wondered whether there weren’t after all absolute humanitarian values. Another held out for proletarian values. Some wanted to go ahead and build a new Marxist party. Others thought the forums should not try to become a new center of political power but stimulate a new climate of socialist opinion.
Nothing could be more indispensable for the political hygiene of the ex-CP members, of course, than to purge themselves of accumulated poison. But as a catharsis, the forums had a necessarily limited function. The dilemma was well expressed, if not resolved at the conference by Michael Segal, one of the editors of the journal, Forum, when he said ‘that there was danger of having nothing at all within a couple of months if they did not organize. On the other hand, if they adopted a program and formed a party there was a danger of becoming one more little sect,’
The second conference of the forums which was just recently held in London saw a hectic debate between those who wanted to adopt a political platform and those who wanted to keep the forums as a wide-open discussion center, with the latter viewpoint winning out. But the impression is that the forums have already passed their peak and are now in a state of decline, and have become a bit of a hunting ground for some of the sects. The forums served a purpose at first when lots of bewildered CPers were looking for guidance. But many, possibly a majority, have already joined the Labor Party, and are caught up in new associations and routine.
 
ONE of the forum organizers proposed that the forums should become ‘a left-wing version of the Fabian society.’ This is a familiar thought. A while back we advocated a similar project in this country. But its realization is clearly beyond the forum’s powers, as it proved beyond the powers of the American Left at the time. It has to be kept in mind that the original Fabian society, for all its casualness, was not an intellectual free-for-all, but had a very definite political outlook and promulgated very specific ideas, concepts and projects. It also had a number of figures who were eminently capable, not merely of hollering for discussion, re-thinking, and new approaches, but brilliantly carrying through with a series of noteworthy pamphlets and books. The Forum movement is not equally well situated on either count. As for maintaining an organization merely to exchange opinions, people tire of that after a while, and besides in England other vehicles serve the purpose better.
The New Reasoner understood more clearly what it was about and what it conceived as its job. The editorial of the opening issue succinctly explained its approach:
‘Forty years of desperate emergencies, wars, and factional conflicts have reduced the creative body of ideas once known as Marxism to the state orthodoxy of "Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism" on the one hand, and to its stunted opposite, dogmatic Trotskyism on the other. But revulsion against these orthodoxies has strengthened the traditionally pragmatic and anti-theoretical bias of the British labor movement, and has narrowed its internationalist outlook and diminished its revolutionary perspectives.
‘The career politician, with his inevitable pre-occupation with maneuvers and expediencies, dominates the political field. And the vigorous Left movement, expressed in the main around Tribune, has itself tended to fight shy of theoretical discussion or extended analysis, preferring to trust to the robust intuition of Mr. Bevan. In doing so it has failed to win the complete confidence of that great body of socialists who desire not only to act but also to understand the context and aim of their actions. The energies of the labor movement have been weakened by the snapping of links between socialist intellectuals and those who bear the brunt of the practical work of the movement.
‘The New Reasoner hopes to make some contribution towards re-establishing these links and regenerating these energies. In the political field, we take our stand with those workers and intellectuals in the Soviet Union and East Europe who are fighting for that return to Communist principle and that extension of liberties which has been dubbed “de-Stalinization”; in Britain with those socialists of the left wing of the Labor Party, or unattached to any party, who are fighting under very different conditions, for a similar re-birth of principle within the movement. We have no desire to break impetuously with the Marxist and Communist tradition in Britain.’
E.P. Thompson, one of the magazine’s leading spirits, who is a university lecturer and biographer of William Morris, has made a notable contribution to the present British discussion in an article on Socialism and the Intellectuals that appeared in the first number of Universities and Left Review and which elicited in the following number a spirited discussion contributed by Mervyn Jones of Tribune and several university lecturers.
Thompson argues that the circuit by which ideas are transformed into effective social energies has been broken by the withdrawal of the intellectuals on one side, and the bureaucratic structure of the labor movement on the other. He doesn’t think the solution is for intellectuals to simply join the Labor Party.
‘I think that the greatest need of the moment is for a new, vital, and principled movement of socialist ideas, a new two-way flow of ideas and experience between the younger generation of technical, professional, and in particular industrial workers. After the spiritual impoverishment of the past decade, I think that the star of the imagination is likely once again to be in the ascendant. And, further, that for the time being at least it will be to the great advantage of any such movement if it takes place entirely independently of the organizational machinery of either Transport House or King Street. Specifically, I am thinking of books, pamphlets, and journals; discussion groups and forums; poems and novels; a re-awakened student movement; and cultural activities ...’
 
IT is naturally outside the purpose of this review to subject the various articles and positions to detailed critical analyses. I am trying rather to fit the different views and periodicals into a coherent or at least discernible pattern. Thompson is obviously trying to re-establish the figure of the Marxist intellectual as a personality of independent integrity and special skill who has a distinct contribution to make to the cause by practicing his trade, not by laying it aside in favor of so-called practical activities, or prostituting himself as a technician in the service of the machines. He is trying to open up the channels of intellectual exchange. His is a ringing ‘call to arms’ to intellectuals, and may have an important influence especially on those with Communist background.
The weakness of the New Reasoner appears to be that most of its writers are still unduly pre-occupied with the world from which they have so recently broken, as evidenced in the subject matter which claims their attention, the problems that continue to dominate their thoughts, and the people to whom they are primarily addressing their writings. Moreover, trying to continue to rest on the Communist tradition by restoring it to its original pre-Stalinist pristine purity strikes me as a quixotic venture. Communism is bound by historical associations of a quarter of a century that neither god nor man can eradicate. To try to restore Communism to the meaning that it possessed in 1917 or 1848 is like trying to take Christianity away from the Catholic, Lutheran, and Calvinist churches of today and restore it to the simple virtues of the Biblical Apostles. It is a subject matter for literary exercises. It has no use as a workable tradition for the Left in Britain, much less, in the United States.
The periodical which seems to be most sensitive to the thought processes of the new generation and involved in making socialism a living, challenging movement again in a country like Britain is the Universities and Left Review. In part, it starts from similar premises as the New Reasoner. But its editors have had more success in freeing themselves from parochialism, their range of vision is wider, and they have a better feel to whom their message should be addressed. Their introductory editorial shows that a group of people has finally come along who know what the problem is, at any rate. Here is part of their opening statement:
‘The post-war decade was one in which declining political orthodoxies held sway. Every political concept became a weapon in the cold war of ideas, every idea had its label, every person had his place in the political spectrum, every form of political action appeared – in someone’s eyes – a polite treason ... Between the high citadel of Stalinist Russia, and the "welfare-state – no further" jungle of the mixed economy, there seemed to be nothing but an arid waste. In the tight compartmentalized worlds, buttressed by bans and proscriptions, suspicions and fears, supported by texts from Lenin and Stalin, mottoes from Burke and Bagehot, protected by massive armies with nuclear stockpiles and mutually exclusive military pacts, British socialism suffered moral and intellectual collapse ... It was inevitable that the post-war generation should identify socialism, at worst with the barbarities of Stalinist Russia, at best, with the low-pressure society of Welfare Britain ... The debate between those who clung to the slogans of the thirties and those who embraced the new orthodoxies of Welfare Britain, a debate which evaded the critical problems and the main frustrations of post-war society, appeared monstrously irrelevant to the post-war generation.
‘What is needed, therefore, is the regeneration of the whole tradition of free, open, critical debate. The socialist tradition ought to be the most fruitful and the most stringent of the intellectual traditions ... Those who feel that the values of a capitalist society are bankrupt, that the social inequalities upon which the system battens are an affront to the potentialities of the individual, have before them a problem, more intricate and more difficult than any which has previously been posed. That is the problem of how to change contemporary society so as to make it more democratic and more egalitarian, and yet how to prevent it degenerating into totalitarianism ...’
One can complain, of course, about all these declarations, that while they give the questions, they don’t supply the answers. It seems to me that the political mistiness, in these cases, arises not necessarily from personal failings, but the intrinsic difficulty of the times: the realization that while the old socialism – both Stalinist and welfare-statist – has reached a blind alley, a new detailed program cannot simply be sucked out of a few editors’ thumbs, but will have to come more organically through sustained efforts, exchanges, and experiences, and that a new dogmatism must be shunned. That does not mean that the Universities and Left Review is a vacuum. It would not have elicited the favorable response that it had if it did not represent something beyond the mere plea to have a discussion. By its statement of the problem, by its tone, by its very selection of writers and subject matter, it is carving out a political approach, which explains why it has struck a responsive chord and been able to constitute itself a veritable avant-garde socialist institution.



Theorists have long juggled with the notion that some kind of an elite must rule the world, as the masses cannot rule themselves. Has socialism got the answer to this claim?
THE most telling attack on the Marxist system was not the holes that economists may have exposed in its economic theory, which neither Marx nor his disciples had fully plugged up; it was not even that Marx had misread some of the directional signposts, and had miscalculated the speed with which history would play out its themes; and it was certainly not the incidental correction of factual data which later investigators were able to introduce. It was not any of these, important though some of the criticisms and new data have been to modify and supplement the system, and above all, to bring it up to date. The most basic criticism, however, has remained, and that is that Marx succumbed to the very utopianism that he was battling when he imagined that communism would bring an end to the class struggle and usher in a new classless and stateless society of free brotherhood.
Long ago the most astute of the middle-class thinkers understood that Marxism was not just another intellectualistic exercise of a German philosopher, which, while astounding the mind by its virtuosity, nevertheless had no immediate application to the mundane affairs of man. Long ago many of them concluded that Marx with the prescience of genius had caught the essential trends in modern history, and what was even more diabolical from their point of view, had devised a program of how to organize modern labor movements and hasten the historical trends along. In other words, they accepted as scientific Marx’s proposition that the modern class struggle would lead to the downfall of capitalism and the creation of a new collectivistic society.
But they thought that at this point Marx said goodbye to his science and turned himself into another doctrinaire and dreamer when he avowed that proletarian rule would be the instrumentality to abolish the class struggle and eventually do away with domination of society by a privileged minority. “All that is going to happen,” the worldly-wise assured us, “is the substitution of the rule of the capitalistic oligarchy by anew socialistic aristocracy.”
They rested their case on an admittedly powerful argument: all hitherto known societies have been dominated by ruling aristocracies, and since it has always been that way, a case can be made out for thinking that it always will continue to be that way. Or, as the positivists stated it, all talk of a future classless society is outside the realm of scientific discourse. Since we never saw it, we can’t know about it.
 
IT is necessary to return to this question as the rise of Soviet Russia and similar states in China and Eastern Europe, rather than resolving conclusively the theoretical problem, have merely transferred it onto a more specific arena of conflict. The theoretical question, moreover has assumed burning importance in everyday politics as the capitalist ideologists and propagandists are warning the peoples-not without successes-that the evidence proves that Communism represents merely the rule of a new elite based upon state ownership of property; that this new ruling class is more tyrannical and ruthless than the capitalist-and that the exchange would therefore not be in the popular interest.
We socialists are up against the fact of life that a new generation, especially in America, has to be convinced afresh that socialism does in fact represent a superior system for the peoples, that Marx’s idea of the eventual withering away of the state is not a pipedream, but a realistic if very rough sketch of the future state of human society. New cadres for socialism will be created only when young people believe these things again, and only be cogent reasoning and intellectual demonstration can we hope to convince them. They will certainly never be won by repeating the old, tired shibboleths, or by casuistry, or socialistic cant.
To return to our subject. At the very height of the era of Western democratic parliamentarism, liberalism, and social reform, when the idea of gradual and unlimited progress was accepted as an axiom of political life, there arose important exponents of a neo-Machiavellian school of political science. This development, running counter to the prevailing intellectual winds, would seem at first glance inexplicable on any materialist ground, until we remind ourself that Gaetano Mosca, Wilfredo Pareto and Robert Michels pursued their studies under the impact of the burgeoning mass socialist movements of Western Europe and the gathering war clouds on the international horizon. For these political students, trying to grasp the underlying meaning of what was going on around them, the apocalyptic visions of Marx did not seem far-fetched at all, but rather the basic substance of the true direction of events. Possessing greater insight than many of their philistine colleagues, they sensed the coming breakup of existing capitalist society. But as ideologists who identified themselves with the middle classes, they were inevitably propelled to blend parts of Marx with Machiavelli, Nietzsche, and in the case of Michels, even Rousseau, each arriving at the end at either a cynical or exalted variety of misanthropic Tory sociology.
 
WHAT interests us here is not a detailed exposition or critique of these writers, but the common conclusion that they all reached and believed to be a veritable law of the social process, namely, that in all society there is and must always be a ruling minority that grabs all sorts of special privileges for itself, and the ruled majority, whose destiny is to be directed and controlled by the minority and to toil on its behalf. This remains true whether the society is feudal, capitalist, slave, or socialist, or whether its form be monarchical, oligarchical, or democratic, and this will always remain the situation because the majority cannot rule itself.
Mosca insisted that the representation system under a so-called democracy inevitable leads to the people choosing from among two or three persons picked by organized minorities. The stratification of societies into rulers and ruled is therefore universal and permanent, and cannot be otherwise. Pareto analyzed various revolutions throughout history and concluded that all that was involved was a “circulation of elites.” Even where masses enter into the fray, nothing is changed, because masses can only succeed when the have leaders, and these soon install themselves as the new elite. So, while revolutions are sometimes necessary in order to pep up an old worn-out elite, or replace it entirely with a new vigorous elite, it does not and cannot change the basic law of minority rule.
This conception is by no means foreign to this country. Actually, beneath the facade of democratic rhetoric, it is a commonly accepted proposition on the part of both the rich and poor: The smarter, tougher, wilier, trickier, luckier, will always get to the top and live off the fat of the land; the rest will form the gray mass below. Charles A. Beard, who mirrored the spirit of this country in more ways than one, rested essentially on this same proposition although conceived and expressed in American business terms. He said: “ The grand conclusion seems to be exactly that advanced by our own James Madison in the Tenth number of the Federalist.” (James Madison there wrote: “Those who hold and those who are without property have ever formed distinct interests in society. ‘The regulation of these various and interfering interests forms the principal task of modern legislation’.”) In alluding to the developing inequalities and stratifications in the first years of Soviet Russia, Beard was scornful of the leaders’ promises: “Of course, they said that this was all temporary, and merely an introduction to the postponed millennium. That may be, but viewing politics from the standpoint of an experimental science, we cannot take into serious account dreams unrealized.” Beard concludes: “ In other words, there is no rest for mankind, no final solution of eternal contradictions. Such is the design of the universe.”
 
THE underlying note of a narrow pragmatism strongly permeates Beard’s impatience with what he considers as visionary schemes and pie-in-the-sky utopias. But at least he tries to understand the social process. Despite the scientific pretensions of Mosca and Pareto, their writings don’t go beyond intricate rationalistic constructions around power mechanics. Both give innumerable illustrations from both modern and ancient history, but the outstanding fact of their writings is the absence of a historical approach, and the determination to ignore the effects of social organization upon the mechanics and physiognomy of political struggles. When you get all through with the elaborate constructions, you are back to the proposition that beneath its various disguises, history has always operated that way and always will. As Beard said, “Such is the design of the universe.”
Actually, this hasn’t gotten us too far beyond the proposition that it is so because that’s the way human nature works. Regardless of the common-sense strictures that there must always be a small group of bosses on top and the mass that is bossed below, it is a fact that human society has made vast advances from the time of Moses and the Pharaohs to the present, not only in scientific knowledge and material enrichment, but in the altered status and growing power of the mass of people in relation to their rulers. At the very least, one must admit that the universal elite theory is barren in explaining and elucidating this evolution.
 
A MORE fruitful contribution to this question was made by the German sociologist, Max Weber, and his pupil, Robert Michels, both of whom wrote their major works in the immediate years preceding the first World War. Weber is considered by present-day sociologists as the founder of the systematic study of bureaucracy, and his writings are the subject matter of much annotation in university circles. As in so many other of the big questions confronting modern social science, the true farther of the discussion on bureaucracy, although it is no longer considered good form in the colleges to say so, was Karl Marx. He formulated the matter before others even knew of the problem’s existence. In studying the class struggles of France since the 1789 revolution, Marx came to an understanding of how the centralized state power of modern capitalism came to be organized. Here is the picture he drew with characteristically broad strokes:
This executive power with its enormous bureaucratic and military organization, with its artificial state machinery embracing wide strata, with a host of officials numbering half a million, besides an army of another half a million, this appalling parasitic growth, which enmeshes the body of French society like a net and chokes all its pores, sprang up in the days of the absolute monarchy, with the decay of the feudal system, which it helped to hasten. The seigniorial privileges of the landowners and towns became transformed into so many attributes of the state power, the feudal dignitaries into paid officials and the motley pattern of conflicting medieval plenary powers into the regulated plan of a state authority, whose work is divided and centralized as in a factory. The first French Revolution, with its task of breaking all local, territorial, urban and provincial independent powers in order to create the bourgeois unity of the nation, was bound to develop what the absolute monarchy had begun-centralization, but at the same time the extent, the attributes and the agents of governmental authority. Napoleon perfected this machinery. The Legitimist monarchy and the July monarchy added nothing but a greater division of labor, growing in the same measure that the division of labor within capitalist society created new groups of interests, and therefore, new material for state administration. Every common interest was straightway severed from society, counterposed to it as a higher, general interest, snatched from the self-activity of society’s members and made an object of governmental activity, from the bridge, the school-house, and the communal property of a village community to the railways, the national wealth and the national university of France. The parliamentary republic, finally, in its struggle against the revolution, found itself compelled to strengthen, along with repressive measures, the resources and centralization of governmental power. All the revolutions perfected this machine instead of smashing it up. The parties that contended in turn for domination regarded the possession of this huge state edifice as the principle spoils of the victor.
From his observation that the state bureaucratic machine survived intact in France during both the 1830 and 1848 revolutions which saw various shifts in capitalist rule, Marx concluded that a genuine peoples’ revolution will have to break up this bureaucracy and replace it with a new state mechanism of its own. He thought that the short-lived Paris Commune of 1871 indicated the outlines of how the new socialist society would operate to make the state apparatus a servant of society instead of its master. The Commune filled all posts – administrative, judicial, and educational – by election on the basis of universal suffrage of all concerned, with the right of the electors to recall their delegates at any time; and all officials, high or low, were paid only the wages received by other workers. Lenin in 1917 considered this the realistic course on which to run a socialist regime, which would gradually eliminate bureaucracy and eventually usher in a new society free of state compulsion.
 
FROM his entirely different end, Max Weber took off from Marx’s proposition about bureaucracy and proceeded to generalize it into a new universal institutionalism transcending social systems and class specifics. The urge to utter universal truths which spread across all human history from the times of Hammurabi to our own is well nigh irresistible to many an intellectual. We are confronted with discussions of bureaucracy in Egypt during the period of the New Empire, in the later Roman Principate, in the Roman Catholic Church since the end of the thirteenth century, and in China from the time of Shi Hwangti. All this weaving back and forth across the centuries and continents gave Weber a chance to show off his vast erudition, but it is doubtful that it shed much light on the question at hand. His attempted deepening of Marx’s proposition into the generalization that an existing bureaucracy will survive revolutionary changes hasn’t withstood the test of time, as witness the destruction of the Czarist bureaucracy after the 1917 revolution, and the old Kuomintang bureaucracy in China after the civil war.
What probably accounts for Weber’s vogue among a number of present-day sociologists is his concentration on the subject of bureaucracy. (He had an excellent model to work from in the Prussian state and military bureaucracy, which he apparently admired as an example of efficiency and rational organization.) His notion that there is a tendency toward bureaucratization of modern societies strikes a respondent chord among many students of society today, who think he caught the trend of the times when he said: “For the time being, the dictatorship of the official and not that of the worker is on the march.”
 
IF the student of sociology concludes that Weber’s speculations have been too diffused to have brought us very far along, he would probably be right. It was left to his co-worker, Robert Michels, to supply a semblance of proof for Mosca’s proposition that majorities are congenitally incapable of ruling. In his brilliant work, Political Parties, first issued in 1911, he subjected various political structures, particularly the German Social Democratic Party and the mass trade unions, to a truly searching analysis. In rapid order, he demonstrated that the modern capitalist-parliamentary state and the traditional conservative parties are not genuinely democratic. That is why he concentrated his attention on the mass socialist movement where democracy presumably should be in full swing.
Michels showed with a wealth of proof that in the socialist organization the same mechanics are at work that breed bureaucracy in the state and other political organizations: the necessity for a division of labor, the inevitable rise of a professional leadership, the conversion of the leaders into masters of the organization rather than its servants, because of their control of all the levers of power. Michels drew the general conclusion that there is an “iron law of oligarchy” which operates in all social movements and all manner of societies, and that the democratic ideal is consequently impossible. Society cannot exist without a dominant ruling group even through its elements may be subject to frequent renewal.
“The social revolution would not effect any real modification of the internal structure of the mass. The socialists might conquer, but not socialism, which would perish in the moment of its adherents’ triumph.”
If Michels had in truth demonstrated the universality of his law of oligarchy, then socialism would indeed be utopian, and the socialist conquest of power merely the prelude to a new circulation of elites. Let there be no misunderstanding: Michels’ analysis of the bureaucratism of the pre-war German Socialist movement was exceptionally cogent, and as far as it went, accurate. Its weakness and limitation is the general weakness of all followers of the elitist school: they blandly ignore the social relations upon which all political structures necessarily rest, and they cannot grasp that the mechanics of political struggle are subject to change under different social conditions. That is why all the elitists fall back finally upon an untenable cycle theory of history according to which, humanity, without sense or reason, continues to wage its fruitless struggles over and over again, with society ever revolving around the same series of stages.
 
MICHELS had certainly penned an invaluable sociological study of the German Social Democracy; moreover, his mechanics of mass organizations have considerable validity under various conditions of democratic capitalism and the present going levels of material and cultural attainment. Michels couldn’t see, however, that where he was describing the general apathy of a membership, he was talking not about a universal condition of mankind outside of spatio-temporal considerations, but a condition arising from the lack of leisure of the masses, and their consequent lack of time and energy for larger affairs – and that the same was true for all his other so-called innate laws of organization. He didn’t understand that he was describing working rules that operate only for a certain structure conditioned by specific social and political forces.
At any rate, the question stood on a purely intellectual plane up to the World War I period. None of the elitist thinkers directly influenced the mass movement with their theories because they were cloistered scholars, but their ideas were picked up by a host of capitalist publicists and used for all they were worth against the socialist movement. In their practical political effect, they constituted one more capitalist attack on socialism, and were largely viewed by socialists as a philosophical variation of the “you can’t change human nature” argument.
The revival of elitist theories of power represented in a certain sense an anticipation of the decline of the capitalist order. But these thinkers first elaborated their theories while official public opinion still believed the system to be firm and durable. It was the mass carnage of the first World War, the Russian revolution of 1917, the German revolution the following year, and then the breakdown of Italian parliamentary capitalism and the rise of Mussolini, that imparted a new public interest to their speculations. The Italian events seemed on the surface to vindicate the theory of the circulation of elites, and, as a matter of fact, Italian Fascism embraced Pareto as one of its patron saints.
The subtleties of political philosophers notwithstanding, the man-on-the-street pretty well understood, even if not in a sophisticated form, that fascism represented some newfangled variety of capitalist reaction and dictatorship, and that its triumph did not affect one way or another the validity of socialism-although it might be a reflection on the tactical effectiveness of socialist movements that permitted themselves to be outmaneuvered and cut to ribbons by their enemies. What affected liberal and radical opinion far more drastically than Italian Fascism or German Nazism was the Stalinization of Soviet Russia-the first big experiment in socialism.
 
HERE, after the first few years of high idealistic equalitarianism, a new bureaucracy of vast proportions arose that definitely constituted a favored caste in relation to the rest of the population, and whose topmost rungs enjoyed living standards and privileges that were positively aristocratic compared to the mode of life of the average Russian. What was even more disturbing was that with the first successes of industrialization, the gap between the mass and the aristocracy seemed every year to be growing rather than diminishing; and that the state authority rather than softening, much less withering away, was constantly growing more burdensome and oppressive. The empirical evidence seemed, as far as the naked eye could observe, to add up to a crushing refutation of Marx and Lenin and their hopes that proletarian dictatorship would constitute the first step toward the eventual introduction of a classless society. By the same token, it seemed to reinforce the elitist theory that no society can get away from the domination of a privileged minority, as well as Weber’s general notion that the trend was toward the hegemony of the bureaucrats. This Soviet development poses in truth a serious theoretical problem which Marx could not have foreseen and which this generation of socialist scholars is called upon to study and unravel.
There are three main lines of thought that seek to explain the underlying meaning of the Soviet experience.
The Stalinist school explains the problem by denying its existence. The stratification of Soviet society is systematically ignored or denied, and the meaning of the rise of a swollen bureaucracy is treated as involving purely bad habits and psychological defects, which, like red tape, rudeness, inattentiveness to complaints, etc., have to be eradicated by greater watchfulness and stronger administrative measures. The Twentieth Congress admitted the existence of tyrannical abuses but shied away from any social explanation to account for the rise of a bloody dictatorship. It put the blame on one man having gained too much power and turning megalomaniac. How the working masses can be the ruling class when they don’t even enjoy ordinary political rights is explained be a combination of empty rhetoric and a pointing to some of the profound difficulties facing the Soviet leaders in trying to build a new social system.
 
THE second main line of thought holds that a new minority ruling class has gotten ensconced in Russia. Some think it is a state capitalist class, others call it a new bureaucratic class. The relation between this alleged new class to capitalism on the outside is most often left up in the air. We are not told whether this new class has a universal character and is destined to replace capitalism on a world scale, or whether it’s some kind of a unique mutation, with only local significance. The most ambitious recent attempt to give the concept a theoretical expression was that of James Burnham and his European counterparts, who denominated Russian society as being ruled by a new class of managers destined to supplant decaying capitalism, and that the Soviet development was just one manifestation of world-wide movement in this direction, Nazi Germany and the New Deal in the United States representing different aspects of the same phenomenon.
Burnham’s managerial theory was the most brash attempt to set down what had been hinted and implied by Western writers from Max Weber to Thorstein Veblen. Unfortunately, for him, two of the alleged managerial states got crushed in the war, with old-style parliamentary capitalism taking over again; while in the Soviet Union, the managers and bureaucrats still have no right of tenure in the new system of nationalized production. The benefactions they draw from their positions cannot be passed on to their descendants (except for secondary personal property); and the bureaucracy as a whole lacks the necessary legal sanction and standing to permit its consolidation and insure its continuity that would warrant calling it a new class formation. These latter objections, let it be noted, do not appear impressive to those who define classes by how much political power they wield, or who deny the existence of classes altogether, and divide society into elites and non-elites, and subdivide them into status groups in accordance with whom they meet for lunch.
 
IN 1936, when the theories of a new bureaucratic class were traveling the rounds in intellectual circles, Max Nomad wrote an article for Calverton’s Modern Monthly which achieved a local fame at the time. It was called, Masters – Old and New. Nomad tried to splice together Pareto and Marx, and to combine the former’s elitism with a note of revolutionary fervor. Back in 1905, Nomad’s old teacher, the semi-anarchist Polish revolutionary writer, Waclaw Machajaski, had written that Marx himself was guilty of deliberately shielding the bureaucracy with his formula in Capital that higher or more complicated labor has a higher value than unskilled labor. Machajaski went on to accuse the socialist movement of giving aid and comfort to the intelligentsia, and that with malice aforethought it was not fighting to abolish all exploitation. Nomad now came forward in 1936 to announce that it’s worked out just the way it had been planned all along. The new bureaucrats and office holders have taken over in Russia and the workers and peasants have become their menials and serfs; although Nomad believed that the new system represented an advance historically over capitalism, and would be the next world form of the new exploitative society:
The abolition of capitalism, the result of the “final revolution” championed by the various political parties of the underdog, eventually leads to the establishment of a new class rule, of a new exploitation of man by man. That new form of class rule must naturally call forth a violent dissatisfaction both among the down-trodden manual workers and among the step-brothers or poorer relations of the new bureaucratic masters. There arises the urge towards a new “final revolution” in which the old process is repeated under the guise of a changed vocabulary. For whether they call themselves left communists, syndicalists or anarchists, the victorious rebels against the bureaucracy of a socialized form of exploitation cannot help establishing a new bureaucracy, a new ruling aristocracy – in other words, follow the example of the Russian communists. For the process of revolution is always the same: Seizure of power; organization of a new revolutionary government; its defense against the reactionaries at first; and then its consolidation against the masses as well as in the interest of a better paid aristocracy of office-holders, technicians, and other members of the educated layers of society ... That process knows of no millennium when full harmony has been achieved once for all eternity. There is no “happy ending” just as there is no “final revolution” that will eliminate all further class struggles.
As can be seen, we are back with Pareto’s endless circulation of elites, although Max Nomad gives the process a shrill anarchist-revolutionary tone, and injects into Pareto’s cycles the element of a spiraling upsweep. Whichever variation of the new ruling class theory we were to accept, it is difficult to see how we could avoid the conclusion that the socialist program, which was to inaugurate the rule of the majority for the first time in history, has been proven a utopia; that given the opportunity, the working class demonstrated its incapacity to rule, and necessarily exuded out of its midst a new exploitative elite.
 
IT may be held that this conclusion follows regardless of the nature of the explanation once you maintain that a privileged minority has taken over. Those who hold that the socialist program nevertheless retains its validity got around this difficulty by explaining the Soviet dictatorship as an abhorrent relapse that was due to straighten itself out in the course of historical development. This third line of thought on Soviet Union developments is commonly associated with the theory of Leon Trotsky. He believed that a privileged bureaucracy had arisen not because of universal characteristics embedded in leadership, or in the nature of society, but because of the backwardness of Russia.
“The basis of bureaucratic rule is the poverty of society in objects of consumption, with the resulting struggle of each against all. When there is enough goods in a store, the purchasers can come whenever they want to. When there is little goods, the purchasers are compelled to stand in line. When the lines are very long, it is necessary to appoint a policeman to keep order. Such is the starting point of the Soviet bureaucracy. It ’knows’ who is to get something and who has to wait. The poverty and cultural backwardness of the masses has again become incarnate in the malignant figure of the ruler with a great club in his hand. The deposed and abused bureaucracy, from being a servant of society, has again become its Lord.”
According to his analysis, because of the antagonisms between workers, peasants and bureaucracy, and the isolation of the country within a hostile capitalist world, a Bonapartist-like dictatorship was elevated to act as the supreme arbiter of the conflicting claims and to eradicate opposition by police repression. Trotsky held that the bureaucracy was not a new class because it had not worked out any new relationship to the nationalized mode of production, but simply represented a parasitic caste which had been thrown up because of the specific difficulties, and which would be undermined when those specific causes disappeared.
He accused the bureaucratic regime of a host of crimes relating to internal and international policies, but he thought that the sociological character of the Russian state had remained as it had been established by the Russian revolution because of the nationalization of property, planned economy and the monopoly of foreign trade. What was involved was a degeneration of the Soviet state and not its transformation into a different kind of state. As he saw it, when the laboring masses regained their strength and revolutionary ardor, they would put through a political revolution to remove the Bonapartist regime and restore Soviet democracy in all phases of government, planning, production, etc., but they would not disturb the existing economic foundations. He believed that the tendencies of bureaucratism which can be seen in the workers’ movement in capitalist countries will show themselves everywhere even after the socialist revolution, but that they will not prove so crude and unmanageable as they did in backward Russia.
 
ISAAC Deutscher, the noted writer on Soviet affairs, has introduced several important modifications into this conception, and in part, has drawn it out into the post-Stalin era. Here is his own summation:
Any realistic analysis of the Stalin era and of its conclusion must draw a balance of the Soviet industrial revolution of the last twenty-five years, the revolution by force of which Russia has from one of the industrially most backward nations become the world’s second industrial power. This process was accompanied by vast educational progress, into which the bulk of Soviet society has been drawn. Stalinist despotism and terrorism drove the Soviet people to carry through this industrial revolution, in part despite themselves, at an unprecedented pace, and in the face of unprecedented difficulties. The “primitive magic of Stalinism” reflected the cultural backwardness of Soviet society in the formative years and in the middle stretches of the Stalin era. From this argument I concluded that with the progress achieved in the 1950’s, the Stalinist terrorism and primitive magic had outlived their day and were coming into conflict with the new needs of Soviet society. The higher level of industrial and general civilization favored a gradual democratization of Soviet political life, although a military dictatorship, of the Bonapartist type, might also arise amid mounting international tensions. Both these prospects signify an end to Stalinism. An attempt to galvanize the Stalinist regime and orthodoxy was still possible and even probable; but it could hardly meet with more than episodic success.
We cannot say beforehand to what degree the privileged groups may resist any democratic-socialist and equalitarian trend emerging in Soviet society. It may be that they will defend their privileges tooth and nail and fight any such trend with stubborn cruelty. But it is at least quite as possible that the “class solidarity” of the privileged minority should prove weak, that its resistance to the democratic-socialist trend should prove half-hearted and ineffective, and that the first impulse for quasi-liberal reforms should come, as it has already come, from the ranks of the bureaucracy itself. This is not to say that one ought to expect democratization to be brought about exclusively by reform from above: a combination of pressure from below and reform from above may be necessary. Yet at a certain stage of development it is the quasi-liberal reform from above that may most effectively spur on a revival of spontaneous political action below or create the conditions under which such action may become possible after a whole epoch of totalitarian torpor.
One or more points remain to be made to conclude this introductory exposition. From Hegel on, bourgeois writers have been prone to view the bureaucracy as an autonomous body with ultimate power over all classes. Max Weber thought that “Generally speaking, the trained permanent official is more likely to get his way in the long run than his nominal superior, the Cabinet Minister, who is not a specialist.” Marxist writers, in contrast, have held that only classes rule, and classes are defined according to their relations to social production, which under conditions of civilization, have invariably embodied their special property rights in a legal code of law. The bureaucracy, consequently, no matter how big and powerful, remains an administrative arm of the ruling class. If this theorem applies to the Soviet bureaucracy as well as the capitalist bureaucracy, the political dispossession of the working class, which in legal fiction is presumed to be the ruling class of Soviet society, can only be given rational explanation on a theoretical level by an analogy with Bonapartist or Caesarian regimes in past history. These, while operating as dictatorships over all society, retained nevertheless their characteristic as representatives of slave-owning, feudal or capitalist classes by the forms of property that they safeguarded. If this applies to Russia, it would signify that the Soviet dictatorship retains its socialist character because of the socialist property forms that it safeguards.
 
THE experiences with socialist governments have not yet been conclusive, especially because both Russia and China started their revolutions as largely feudal countries, and because of their backwardness, were or are preoccupied in the first phases of their existence with the solution of pre-socialist tasks. Nevertheless, enough has taken place, especially when coupled with the existing bureaucratization of the trade union, Social Democratic, and even Communist movements in the West, to conclude that bureaucratism – that means the elevation of a specially favored caste-is the problem of problems facing the workers’ movement, both in its struggle for socialism and after it has succeeded in setting up a socialist government. The workers will be cheated out of their victory if while the Socialist Constitution declares them to be the salt of the earth, they continue to be oppressed in actual life. The difference between a class and a caste may have commanding importance in the theoretical sphere, but for the living generations, it makes little difference if they are kicked around by capitalist entrepreneurs or arrogant bureaucrats.
Finally, socialism will justify its boast of being a science only by its capacity to encompass the accumulated experience of the recent decades. It is necessary to subject the problem of bureaucratism both in the Soviet-bloc countries and the labor movements of the West to a scientific investigation and analysis, as a preliminary to devising the best safeguards against the menace. Scientific socialism has to become a tool again for going to the roots of existing social problems and pointing the way to their solution. If the tool is to be employed for apologetics and special pleading, it will surely be relegated to the museums with other tools of Man which in time became useless, or obsolete.



I WAS absent from our office for almost a month beginning with the middle of March, during which time I lectured in Detroit, Chicago, Berkeley, San Francisco and Los Angeles, and, in addition, participated in a great number of house meetings attended by anywhere from fifteen to a hundred people. A brief rundown on some of these meetings has interest beyond house-organ commentary, as they mirror the trend of some of the Left activities in the country’s main centers.
I lectured in Detroit to an audience of about 130 under the auspices of the Detroit Labor Forum. This is a non-partisan forum organization in which quite a number of unattached radicals are participating. It was set up about a year ago through the efforts of supporters of the American Socialist and independent radicals and has by now become the most impressive institution in town for the organization of forums, debates and general discussion. Because it is genuinely non-partisan, attempts to address itself to the independent radical, and seeks solutions to the great problems of our times rather than devoting itself to the intra-mural bickerings of small sects, it has won a position and attracts larger audiences than Detroit has seen in the past decade. As will be shown, this development is not unique with Detroit.
One other little sidelight is of more than passing interest. My lecture was attended by a scattering of Auto Union people as well as a group of students from Ann Arbor, and I had a two-hour discussion with the latter at a house gathering after the forum. There was a reason for the attendance of each group. The UAW in Michigan is seething with grievances and nervousness as a result of unemployment, speed-up and the shift of plants to other parts of the country. We are still a long way from socialist consciousness or even interest, but as always, a pool of social discontent produces a freer atmosphere, and numbers of isolated individuals begin thinking in more fundamental terms and get interested in more basic discussions. As for the students, I cannot be sure as to the full meaning, but I have observed in a number of spots that small radical grouplets are sprouting up on a number of campuses. I think the general picture drawn in the Nation some weeks back is eminently right, but I also think that the political atmosphere is slightly balmier, and that consequently intellectual discussions are reviving in isolated corners of some of the larger campuses among the few who are unhappy at playing Babbitt and are choking in the climate of conformity.
They have a Eugene V. Debs forum in Chicago that is very similar to the Detroit proposition, operates on pretty much the same conception, and attracts a similar audience. What brought me to Chicago this time, however, was the third anniversary reception for the American Socialist. It was a gala affair in every respect. All of us are indebted to Harvey and Jesse O’Connor for offering the use of their home and for their splendid help. The cordial greetings sent to the gathering by Paul Sweezy of Monthly Review, I.F. Stone, Joseph Starobin and others were cherished by all. And finally, thanks are due to the large group present for their financial contributions. Everyone had a good time. The atmosphere was festive. The food and drinks were superb. And the speeches were pretty good.
 
IN San Francisco an almost identical development has taken place as in Detroit and Chicago. George Hitchcock, well-known figure in San Francisco both as a playwright and political activist, decided several months back that the town needed a central discussion center. He called together some of his friends and they set up ‘The Independent Socialist Forum of the Bay Area.’ Their first public meeting featuring Carey McWilliams attracted a good-sized audience. I was the second speaker and addressed an audience in the neighborhood of 175. It is noteworthy that Hitchcock and his friends had come to the same conclusion as others in different parts of the country: That what is required is a discussion of the big problems of our times and addressing ourselves primarily to the unattached radicals and people who are first becoming interested in socialist thought.
Incidentally, my lecture in San Francisco must be considered a historic event as it was delivered on the day of the biggest earthquake that the city experienced since 1906. I had thought that the meeting would surely be cancelled or postponed, but the arrangements committee went right ahead. Obviously it takes more than an earthquake to ruffle the hardy San Franciscan pioneering stock (some of it recently transplanted from New York). The quake pointed up the great American genius for organization – tinctured with ballyhoo. I turned the radio on within a matter of minutes after the big jolt at 12:13 noon. The Mayor was on the air giving us the lowdown on the situation and the considerable arrangements that were in full operation (and incidentally putting in a plug on how he was right on the job). In two minutes I had a picture of what was transpiring throughout the area, what the experts thought, what the public authorities were doing, and what safety steps I was expected to take. After a couple more city officials filled in details, a chorus came on to soothe my jangled nerves, singing, ‘Don’t take my love, my dear, unless you really care.’ Everything was under control.
What with the successful forum, the several house meetings with trade unionists and others, the student forum I addressed in Berkeley, and the half hour radio interview over Station KPFA, I feel that the American Socialist is much better known in the area, and our circulation there ought to go up appreciably.
The symposium at the Embassy Hotel in Los Angeles, addressed by Vincent Hallinan, Dorothy Healey, William Warde, Carl Marzani and myself, and chaired by Reuben Borough, was attended by over 1,000. It made a big impact on radical circles. The first impression of this type of meeting is invariably favorable, audiences react initially (before the thing is overdone), in the hope that a new approach can be found to revive radicalism in our day. Here, I found a strong sentiment for the establishment of an independent forum, and likely, the Embassy meeting will serve as a preliminary for such a project. In Los Angeles, I had my biggest round of receptions, house gatherings and the like, and have big hopes that the American Socialist will now enjoy substantial support.
 
MY overall impression is that the Communist movement has had its authority destroyed, is disintegrating apace and nothing is able to take its place yet. The various sects have no attractive power, and they have never demonstrated this so conclusively as this past year. The various Left periodicals, groups, or what-have-you, lack either the know-how, or substantial enough acceptance to be able to step forward as the new leading center to bring order out of the chaos and purposefulness out of the disorientation. Hence, the indescribable confusion and babel of voices. Everything is up for grabs. For a period of time, discussion, clarification, formulation of socialist premises, and a sorting out of people will remain on the of the day – and all attempts to rush organization are still premature and prove stillborn.
Out of the discussion and churning will come sooner or later a new intellectual center that will enjoy the authority to enable it to take the lead. It will not about through organizational hocus-pocus. Such a center will only be created – and the year’s experiences bear out this out – through a general acceptance of a program on the matters that count today. The formulation and acceptance of a program is not a matter of reeling off six or eight planks on civil liberties, integration or shorter hours of work, or by utopian attempts to fuse quarreling sects.
We face a big job of intellectual labor, of re-orientation, of broad acceptance of a new world outlook and set of tactics, of the creation of a new morale. It will take place only when there is an ideological breakthrough, and when there is a consensus of outlook established on the part of significant numbers of American radicals, dissenters, free-thinkers. That is what we have to work for. That is how the new American Left will come into being. The American Socialist – herald of the New Left – has to rededicate itself to this effort.



The outbreak of the second world war did not catch us by
surprise. We knew that without successful socialist revolutions, it was
inevitable. We knew it was coming. We predicted it. And by our whole
rounded political struggle, for our principles and our organization, we
had steeled a cadre. We had prepared for the imperialist war. We were
ready.
But right in our own party, the strongest, the best organized
Trotskyist party, with the most tempered and experienced leadership,
right in our own party, the Shachtmanite petty-bourgeois section of our
leadership and membership buckled and folded up under the pressure of
bourgeois public opinion the minute war broke out; unceremoniously
abandoned the program to which they had promised to remain loyal and
true and for which they had promised to fight come what may; abandoned
the program of the Fourth International and attempted to engineer a
split throughout our movement. We survived the fight with the
petty-bourgeois opposition and emerged out of that fight stronger,
healthier, more homogeneous, a more disciplined, a more effective
party. Comrade Trotsky and we fought that fight as the steward of the
whole International movement. We were able to assume this
responsibility because we still enjoyed a measure of democracy, and
could conduct the struggle in thorough-going fashion right to the end.
We went into the war period with no illusions, with our eyes wide open.
We knew that we, like the other Trotskyist parties, would be
temporarily isolated. And we attuned our tactical orientation, we
adjusted our tactics for the uphill pull in our political propaganda,
our literary and organization activities, our trade union work. We
didn’t change our program, we didn’t alter, much less abandon our
principles. We merely adjusted our tactics, as realistic
revolutionists, as Leninists always do. We knew that the fumes of war,
the hypnotic spell of “national unity” would not long prevail. While at
first, the war may halt the radicalization of the masses, may adversely
affect the revolutionary process, it would soon impart to it a powerful
impulse. Trotsky pointed out to us again and again that this war was
not merely a continuation of the last one; that many factors were now
more favorable from the point of view of the revolutionary vanguard;
that the economic position of all the imperialist states, including the
US was infinitely worse today; that the democratic and pacifist
illusions of the last war were to a considerable extent absent; that
the experience of the first world war did not pass without deeply
affecting the masses.
We were able to proceed in our revolutionary work with patience,
with tenacity, with confidence, because we kept our perspective, we
kept our heads. We did not lose our nerve. We knew that life was
working in our favor.
In this, our movement was unique. I am not referring here to the
sell-outs of the Social Democrats and the Stalinists. In contrast to
the last war, nobody was surprised or caught off-guard by the betrayal.
We had anticipated this treason and had taken it into account in
formulating our plans. I am now referring to the petty-bourgeois
hangers-on, to the fellow travelers of the revolution. The retreat of
the left-wing intellectuals from Marxism was converted into a
precipitous flight. They madly rushed onto the bandwagon of the
imperialist war. Darkest pessimism reigned supreme in all the left-wing
intellectual circles, as well as the emigré groups.
Some thought that Hitler’s victories were definitive; that Europe had
slipped back to the dark ages; that the revolutionary movement had been
irretrievably defeated; that Europe, that all suffering humanity would
have to begin the long, painful climb over again. Others saw in
Hitler’s victories proof that a new class of managers, of bureaucrats,
had emerged; that the new form of society superseding dying capitalism
would not be socialism, but bureaucratic collectivism, the managerial
society, that the Marxist program had proved a Utopia.

 
A Feeling of Blackest Pessimism
In all these intellectualistic petty-bourgeois circles
there reigned, as I said, a feeling of blackest pessimism. The picture
was all dark and hopeless. And, of course, the petty-bourgeois quacks
and fakes of the Shachtman group, veering like a weather vane in
response to the pressure and mood of bourgeois intellectualdom, these
fugitives from Bolshevism proclaimed in their turn that the clock of
history had been set back so far that the political scene in Europe
would be dominated by the fight for national liberation and bourgeois
democracy. We were back in the nineteenth century! This pressure was so
strong, this mood of defeatism was so pervading, that it found its way
even inside the ranks of the Fourth International. A group of German
refugee comrades published a document called the Three Theses,
a thoroughly revisionist document, a thoroughly anti-Marxist thesis,
which took for good coin Hitler’s boasts that his “New Order” would
last centuries. They too thought that Europe was thrust back a hundred
years, that the working class had lost its preeminent role and must
dissolve itself in the middle class in the fight for “a national
democratic revolution.” Stripped of its verbiage and theoretical
 “profundities,” what was implied here was the necessity of new Peoples’
Fronts to fight for “bourgeois democracy.” We decisively rejected this
defeatist, this revisionist, this liquidationist “theory” at our last
convention in 1942. We set our course on the perspective of the rise of
the proletarian revolution.
The disorientation, the defeatism, the abandonment of the Fourth
International program on the part of the German emigre comrades came
about because they had lost all revolutionary perspective. They
proclaimed the battle that had not yet started, already lost. We base
ourselves on the rising working class revolution. They consider the
European revolution already defeated.
We knew that out of the war would come a gigantic revolutionary
explosion, above all in Europe, and we were confidently preparing for
it. And less than a year after our 1942 convention, Italian fascism
crashed to the ground. We saw in the downfall of Mussolini and the
beginning of the Italian revolution the most striking confirmation of
our analysis and program, and by the same token, an annihilating
refutation of all the theories and speculations of our enemies. We
immediately proceeded in our press to subject the Italian events to a
thoroughgoing analysis and point to the road ahead.
We found no special difficulty in writing our plenum resolution on
the European revolution, its perspectives and its tasks, any more than
we found any special difficulty in analyzing the Italian events in our
press. Do you know why? Because we were proceeding from a fundamental
analysis. The Italian revolution represented for us merely the last
link of a long chain that we had already wrought. We didn’t have to
hunt for some new formulas. We didn’t have to devise new principles. We
didn’t have to improvise, or proceed empirically from one step to
another. We knew the answers ahead of time. I don’t mean the answer for
every concrete problem that came up from day to day. There are no
blueprints of that kind. But we had the general strategical answer and
we understood the general trend and direction and meaning of the events.
Lenin, Trotsky and others established 30 years ago that capitalism
on a world scale, and that European capitalism in particular, was no
longer expanding but contracting. Its absolute decline had begun. In
addition to the internal decline, the capitalist states of Europe were
suffocating, because every one of them was hemmed in behind tariff
walls and artificial state boundaries. The huge standing armies were
eating up the substance of Europe’s wealth. The national state had
become a reactionary fetter upon the economy of Europe. The first world
war was itself testimony that European capitalism was in a blind alley.
The war destroyed Europe’s hegemony, it impoverished the continent, and
left it weak and debt-ridden, accelerating its decay. Economic hegemony
had definitely passed into the hands of the richer and more powerful
American imperialism. The war further disunited and dismembered Europe,
further exacerbated its trade rivalries. The Versailles treaty created
17 new national states, raised up new gigantic tariff walls and further
increased the standing armies.
The blind alley into which European capitalism was thrusting the
peoples was answered by the October revolution of 1917, which wrenched
one sixth of the earth’s surface out of the grip of capitalism and
opened up the revolutionary era in Europe. The fierce, sanguinary,
class struggles that swept Europe from one end to the other further
weakened capitalism, further hastened its decline.
In contrast, American imperialism was still rising. Wall Street
which had entered the war as a debtor emerged as a creditor. In
addition to its tremendous material preponderance over Europe, American
imperialism still enjoyed “national unity” at home. As against a Europe
torn by revolutionary struggles, the US was the home of class
collaboration par excellence.
Now all this is not some new revelation which our National Committee
thought up just the other day. This analysis was made by Trotsky 20
years ago and was adopted at that time as the official position of the
Communist International. Trotsky wrote:
 “... the staggering material preponderance of the US
automatically excludes the possibility of economic upswing and
regeneration of Capitalist Europe. If in the past it was European
Capitalism that revolutionized the backward sections of the world, then
today it is American Capitalism that revolutionizes over-mature Europe.
She has no avenue of escape from the economic blind alley other than
the proletarian revolution, the destruction of the tariff and state
barriers, the creation of the Socialist United States of Europe.” 
And further:
 “American Capitalism in driving Europe more and more
into a blind alley, will automatically drive her onto the road of
revolution. In this is the most important key to the world situation.” 
It is this fundamental twin concept: Lenin’s concept
that we live in the epoch of wars and revolutions and Trotsky’s
analysis of the relationship between America and Europe that has guided
our struggle all these past years.
By 1923, the revolutionary wave, evoked by the October revolution of
1917, receded. The defeat of the revolution in Germany in 1923 marked
the turning point, and made possible the stabilization of Capitalism in
Europe. The US came in with its Dawes plan, its loans and credits, and
buttressed the shaken Capitalist system. But this very stabilization
and the upturn in European economy that followed was on a far lower
foundation than before 1914. This so-called stabilization proved of a
not very enduring nature. This very stability was extremely unstable.
Only six years later, a catastrophic economic crisis struck US
imperialism, the largest, the strongest, the “healthiest” imperialist
power of the whole world.
And it was not very long before all of Europe—all of the world —
was again writhing in the grip of crisis. For ten years Europe was
gasping and choking. The consuming economic crisis was only interrupted
now and then by pitiful cyclical rises followed by new depressions. But
the crisis itself was never overcome. The crisis again sharpened the
class struggles, first of all in Germany, which was thrust into a new
revolutionary situation. The question was sharply posed: either Fascism
or Socialism. There was no third alternative. Through the base
treachery of the Stalinist and Social Democratic leaders, the
revolutionary situations were all dissipated and the potential
revolutions aborted, one after another, first in Germany, then Austria,
then France, then Spain. The Capitalists were permitted to regain the
upper hand; the path was cleared for their plunging the masses of
Europe and soon all humanity into the bloody maelstrom of the Second
World slaughter.
And even super-powerful, super-rich, super-stable American
Imperialism—the US—where they thought they had exorcized the class
struggle, where they thought Marx had been refuted by Henry Ford, even
this colossus writhed and twisted and shook for ten years in the toils
of terrible economic chaos. For ten years Wall Street tried every
device to overcome the crisis, but found that it could not extricate
itself from the contradictions of decaying world capitalism. Finally it
too plunged into the war with the aim of crushing its rivals and
establishing its own world domination. It sought to solve the crisis by
its exploitation of the peoples of Asia, of Africa and even of Europe;
by making Wall Street the center of world tribute. American imperialism
had reached its heydey and was already moving into its period of
decline at a far faster tempo than any previous imperialism.
The crisis at home gave birth to the modern trade union movement,
the largest, the best organized, the most volcanic trade union movement
in the world. The class struggle, far from having been exorcized,
emerged in America in full fury. Its young militant working class had
not tasted defeat; it was vigorous, full of confidence and moving
leftward.
In the last war, Europe lost its hegemony to America. But Europe is
losing its very independence to America in this war. Europe’s decay was
accelerated as a result of the first world war. But Europe is prostrate
and ruined as a result of this one. America could stabilize Capitalism
in Europe after the last war on a lower foundation and could permit its
revival within sharply defined limits. American imperialism can enter
and is entering Europe today with no other program but its
dismemberment, its despoliation, to prevent Europe from reviving to a
competitive level, to reduce Europe to a semi-colony, a vassal of the
Wall Street banks ... (Here follows a discussion of Wall Street’s
political program, bourgeois democracy, and the position of Morrow and
Logan. See Frank’s Speech in December 1944 Fourth International.)
Once we understand the trend of events correctly; once we have a
correct analysis of the European situation, a correct understanding of
the nature and role of American Imperialism, a correct appraisal of the
European revolution, then our answers, our programmatic tasks, fall
into their proper place. They are properly guided.
Our program for the European proletariat is the program of the
October revolution, the program of Lenin and Trotsky in 1917, the
program of the Socialist revolution, of the dictatorship of the
proletariat, of the Soviet power.
Our central unifying slogan is the Socialist United States of
Europe. This is the revolutionary answer, the only alternative to the
imperialist scheme of Balkanizing Europe and enslaving its peoples. It
corresponds to the experiences and needs of the European masses, who
are learning that it is necessary to destroy the reactionary and
outlived state boundaries, and that only through the economic
unification and socialist collaboration of the free peoples of Europe
can the menace of recurrent devastating wars be abolished and freedom
and economic well-being assured.
Our instrumentality to lead the revolution is the Bolshevik party.
Lenin taught us the kind of party the working class must have to make
the revolution.
Our basic tactics to mobilize the masses and lead them forward to
the revolution we have likewise learned from Lenin and the October
Revolution. These tactics have been carefully studied by our movement
over a great number of years. They have been enriched and refined
through the study of their application, or more often, their lack of
application, in the revolutions in Germany, Austria, Italy, France,
Spain, China and elsewhere.
This work of careful preparation and training, of mobilizing the
Trotskyist cadres for the revolutionary tasks ahead was crowned in 1938
with the holding of the Founding Conference of the Fourth
International, right on the eve of the second world war. This
conference adopted a world program for the present epoch. It is not
merely a restatement of socialist doctrine and fundamentals, but the tactical

program showing how the Fourth International must proceed to mobilize
the masses for revolutionary purposes and win them to the banner of the
Fourth international.
Trotsky, the author of this document, approached the whole question
from this point of view: economically, he said, the world is
ripe and over-ripe for the proletarian revolution, for Socialism.
Capitalism in every sphere is disintegrating and sees no way out. The
proletariat, in millions of masses, again and again moves onto the
revolutionary road. But each time it finds itself blocked by its own
conservative leadership. The crisis therefore is one of leadership.
A new leadership, adequate to the revolutionary tasks at hand, must be
created. This means the Fourth International, this small cadre, must
find its way to the worker mass.
But how? By a program of transitional demands. The present
epoch, said Trotsky, is distinguished not for the fact that it frees
the revolutionary party from day-to-day work, but because it permits
this work to be carried on indissolubly with the actual tasks of the
revolution. We do not discard, said Trotsky, the old “minimum” demands;
we defend the democratic rights and social conquests of the workers,
but we carry on this work within the framework of our revolutionary
perspective, and that is why the old minimum program is now superseded
for us by the transitional program, the tasks of which lies in systematic
mobilisation of the masses for the proletarian revolution.
Now the job today in Europe is to take this program and apply
it. In our opinion it is not necessary to hunt around for some new
program, or new tactical schemes. We need only apply the Transition
Program of the Fourth International. Of course, a program
is not a blue-print, it is not a cure-all. You cannot become a master
strategist of the revolution merely by memorizing a lot of slogans and
rules, any more than you can become a master surgeon by memorizing the
best text book on surgery. Other things are necessary. You must have
experience. You must have talent. You must have the ability to
correctly gauge and appraise a situation, to know what it is necessary
to do at the particular moment. You must have the courage and heart of
a revolutionary fighter to withstand all pressure and attacks from the
camp of the enemy. You must have all of these things. But many of these
things are beyond the scope of resolutions and cannot be supplied or
imparted by resolutions. A resolution has got to provide a line.
If it does that, if it provides a correct line, it is a good
resolution, it does the job.
 
The Transition Program
The revolutionary party will win the confidence of
the masses by its struggle for the program of transitional demands. Our
transitional program does not have a propagandistic character but is
invested with burning importance in Europe today. That means that the
bridge to the fundamental slogans can be more or less rapidly crossed
and that all immediate, minimum, democratic demands are of necessity
intertwined with the transitional ones, the essence of which is
contained in the fact, explained Trotsky, that they are directed ever
more openly and decisively against the very bases of the capitalist
regime ...
The revolutionary party that today has the firmness and strength to
fight for its principles; to resist the pressure of bourgeois public
opinion, which inevitably bears down in merciless fashion on the
revolutionary vanguard; the party which resists the “temptation” to win
the masses “the easy way” by watering down its program, will on the
morrow have the opportunity of becoming the revolutionary leader of the
masses. Because the masses want a decisive change, because they thirst
for a genuine revolutionary leadership, because the catastrophic crisis
is driving the masses ever more fiercely onto the revolutionary road.
And as they grow disillusioned with their present misleaders, they will
turn to the parties of the Fourth International.
* * *
We don’t have to say anything new about our programmatic
position on the Soviet Union. That question was so thoroughly discussed
and so magnificently illumined by Comrade Trotsky during our debate
with the Shachtmanite petty-bourgeois opposition, that it retains all
of its validity to this day in its basic, in its fundamental
features. The Trotskyist position on the Soviet Union, an integral part
of our world program for the world revolution, is the only position
that has been vindicated by the events, that has proved its correctness
in the struggle that provided correct guidance to the revolutionary
vanguard through all the mazes, twists and turns of capitalist
diplomacy, of war, of changing alliances and the like. All the other
programs on the Soviet Union have already been consigned by events
themselves to the dust heap.
Take as an example the most pretentious of the theories on the
Soviet Union—Burnham’s theory of the managerial society. Burnham’s
book, The Managerial Revolution, you may recall,
enjoyed a passing vogue among capitalist executives, government
bureaucrats and renegades from Marxism, both in the United States and
England. Burnham told us that the proletariat did not possess
sufficient inner strength to reorganize society on socialist
foundations and that a new class of “managers” was emerging which would
supersede dying capitalism and take over the helm to form a new
exploitative class. On the basis of this theory, Burnham had no
difficulty in foretelling that Stalin and Hitler, the two main
representatives of this new class of “managers” which was destined to
emerge all over the world, were united by an “affinity of ideologies” 
and had joined together “to drive death wounds into capitalism” . Hardly
had the Professor spoken his prophecy, than Hitler threw his armed
might against the Soviet Union and staked everything on crushing it.
Burnham’s “theory” proved no more enduring than the Stalin-Hitler Pact.
Two years later, Mussolini, the very pioneer of Burnham’s “New
society” , was deposed, more correctly dismissed, just as an employer
dismisses his plant superintendent, when his services are no longer
required. The precursor of the “new society” proved to be no more than
a common adventurer and cutthroat in the service of the Italian
bankers, monopolists and landlords. The Fascist regime simply fell
apart like a rotten apple.
Today, Hitler’s “new order” in Europe has already collapsed under
the double blows of his military opponents and the struggles of the
insurgent masses. And the downfall and total destruction of the Nazi
regime is not far off.
That is how events themselves have dealt with this bit of
pretentious humbug which for a few years “cut a big swathe” in
capitalist “cultural circles” and in the editorial offices of petty
bourgeois intellectualdom. And this “theory” , let it be remembered, was
the only half-serious attempt to counter-pose some sort of unified
logical conception to Trotsky’s Marxist analysis of Fascism as well as
his analysis of the Soviet Union and the Stalinist bureaucracy.
So much for Burnham’s theory and its inglorious fate. Little need be
said at this date of his shamefaced pupils and imitators of the
Shachtmanite variety with their pathetic attempts to discover a new
 “managerial class” but limited solely to the Soviet Union. In a new
form and in a different connection, this is a recreation of the
anti-Marxist idea of national exceptionalism, with a vengeance.
It is an elementary tenet of Marxism that a class is not an
accidental phenomenon, but emerges as an inevitable and necessary
vehicle of a given stage of production. Every ruling class has in its
own way represented a historically necessary and unavoidable

stage of social development and could be overthrown only when it had
exhausted its historical possibilities. Marxism knows of no
historically unnecessary classes and certainly knows of no classes that
are limited to “one country” . History has annihilated Burnham’s
 “theory” of the new bureaucratic class. It has disposed of his anemic
Shachtmanian imitators in passing.
Now I said that our question on the Soviet Union is an integral part
of our whole program of world revolution. It does not stand apart from
it. From our political characterization of the Soviet Union as a
degenerated workers state, we drew the conclusion that we must defend
the Soviet Union unconditionally against any and all imperialist
attacks. Now that program retains its validity. We don’t have
to change it. But we always defended the Soviet Union in our
own way, by our own methods, which had nothing in common with the
methods of Stalinism. Only those methods, we said, were permissible
that were not in conflict with the world revolution. Stalinist defense
was carried on under the slogans: For the Fatherland! For Stalin! Our
defense was carried on under the slogans: For Socialism! For the World
Revolution! Against Stalin!
While our basic position retains all of its validity, naturally, we
do not give equal emphasis to all sections of our program at
all times. We invariably push to the fore that section of our program,
that tactic, that slogan, which has the greatest application, which is
required by the general political situation. That is the art of
politics: to apply to the conditions of the day that part of your
policy which has the most immediate, the most burning urgency. When
Hitler attacked the Soviet Union, we began hollering at the top of our
voices for the unconditional defense of the Soviet Union. That was the
most important problem of world politics: save the Soviet Union from
imperialist attack. That was a key position in protecting and advancing
the revolution, which we knew would inevitably emerge out of the war.
 
A Different Situation
Today, however, we face a far different situation. The Soviet Union
is no longer in immediate military danger. The Nazi attack has been
successfully repulsed. Hitler’s “New Order” has already been destroyed.
The Nazi regime faces imminent collapse. The continent is now in the
process of military occupation by the armies of England, the United
States and the Soviet Union. The European masses are in revolutionary
ferment. The European revolution is rising and the Anglo-American
imperialists have entered into a conspiracy with the Kremlin
bureaucracy to strangle the revolution and to prop up decaying
capitalism. That is the true picture of Europe today.
Under these conditions, it would be the height of unreal-ism, it
would betray a complete lack of revolutionary generalship to keep on
shouting the slogan of yesterday: Defend the Soviet Union. We do not
alter our program; we do not discard this slogan which at a later date
may possibly again acquire importance. But in the present situation
this slogan recedes to the background and we push to the fore that
section of our program which today has greatest importance; that
section compressed in the slogan: “Defend the European Revolution
against All Its Enemies,” against the imperialists, against the Kremlin
bureaucracy, against all its agents and agencies. As I said, we do not
change our program, but we very definitely are shifting our emphasis
today, in conformity with the needs of the situation, in conformity
with the changed relationship of forces, in conformity with the new
requirements.
As a matter of fact, we haven’t made this shift in our emphasis,
this tactical adjustment, just today. Some nine months ago our
committee discussed this very problem and came to the conclusion that
it was necessary to change the emphasis of our propaganda because of
the new conditions in Europe. The discerning reader will have noticed
that we conducted our propaganda in this spirit for a good many months.
We propose now to incorporate this tactical prescription in our
resolution, in order to make unambiguously clear to all, the nature of
our tactical adjustment and the reasons for it.
The Stalinist bureaucracy, which emerged about 20 years ago, lost
faith in the European revolution and proclaimed it realizable to build
socialism in the Soviet Union alone. Today the process of degeneration
has proceeded so far, this bureaucracy is so hated by the Soviet
masses, it is in such conflict with the nationalized economy and its
requirements, that it dreads, it mortally fears and opposes the
European revolution which is now rising. That is why Stalin has rushed
headlong into the arms of Roosevelt and Churchill, that is why he
conspired with them at Teheran to crush the revolution and to uphold
capitalism throughout Europe. That is why the Red Army, an instrument
of the counter-revolutionary bureaucracy, is used to prop up capitalism
in Rumania, Bulgaria, etc. Stalin is preparing to repeat his hangman’s
work in Spain on a Europe-wide scale.
Internally, we know that the bureaucracy has practically effaced all
the basic political conquests of the revolution; it has destroyed the
Bolshevik Party, the Soviets, the trade unions; it has murdered the
generation of leaders who led the Russian revolution; it has
reintroduced a savage despotism; it uses the Red Army as a gendarme of
capitalist property in Europe. Politically, the bureaucracy has
virtually gone the limit in its headlong drive toward reaction.
Economically, nationalized property and planned economy, these basic
conquests of the October revolution, still remain.
We know that the Kremlin bureaucracy does not represent a new class,
which has a historic function to perform, but is a parasitic caste,
thrown up because of a purely exceptional conjuncture of events, a
caste that is transitory in nature.
Now if we assume that the Kremlin bureaucracy allied with the
imperialists, succeeds in definitively crushing the European
revolution, then the fate of Europe is sealed. It can only become the
helpless vassal, a semi-colony of the Anglo-American brigands, a doomed
continent. And sealed also is the fate of the Soviet Union.
Because the path will be immediately cleared for the
reintroduction of capitalism in the Soviet Union, either by internal
counter-revolution or by external military intervention or by a
combination of both.
If, on the other hand, the workers’ revolution emerges triumphant in
any country, we can assume that it will more or less rapidly penetrate
and make its influence felt among the Soviet masses and the Red Army
troops. Once the Soviet masses are lifted to their feet, the very first
thing they will proceed to do is overthrow the dictatorship of Stalin
and his bloody henchmen and restore the Soviet Union on the principles
and teachings of its founders—Lenin and Trotsky. In either case
the Kremlin bureaucracy is doomed. The Soviet Union is in a
transition period and that transition cannot too long endure. It is
either: forward to Socialism or backward to Capitalism. It cannot
indefinitely remain in its present form. And it is clear that its
whole life is bound up with the fate of the European revolution.
That is why we came back again to the same proposition: the fight to
protect, to defend, to extend, to deepen the European revolution is in
essence, and coincides with, the true defense of the Soviet Union
itself ...
* * *
American imperialism, by its unbridled expansionism, by
its attempt to displace all rival imperialisms—not only Japan and
Germany, but also the defeated allies, such as France, and even its
partner-in-arms, British imperialism—is destroying every semblance of
stability in the Orient as well as in Europe, is exacerbating all the
inter-imperial conflicts and is becoming the irritant provoking new
revolutionary explosions. American imperialism, the greatest
counter-revolutionary force of the whole world, with its program of Pax
Americana, before which the ambitions of all previous imperialisms
pale, with its mad schemes of dominating all the continents and all the
seas, will become the very instrument of destroying the old equilibrium
and provoking new rebellions of the exploited masses ...
We are going to have to pay a lot of attention to our international
obligations in the period ahead. The revolution is rising and we must
be prepared to aid our co-fighters in every possible way. We have
already done quite a bit. But that is only a good beginning. The next
period will see the extension and growth of the Trotskyist movement,
especially in Europe, and our assistance will have to keep pace with
the opportunities and the needs of the struggle. We must stand ready to
give all possible help to our comrades who are on the firing line.
But the greatest aid that we can give our co-thinkers, the greatest
of all contributions that we can make is to perfect our movement,
strengthen our forces and redouble our fight against this predatory
beast of American Imperialism, this international marauder, who would
rob and subjugate the whole world.
We know the power of this Wall Street crew. We know that this gang
of Wall Street freebooters is prepared to wade through rivers of blood
to save its infamous rule. We know its armed prowess and its
counter-revolutionary designs. But we are also aware of its insoluble
contradictions. We know that our enemy will grow weaker and that, we
will grow stronger and will conquer in the end.
The power of a revolution is a mighty power. Before its
hot breath armies have been known to melt away and thrones come
crashing to the ground. The flames of the European revolution which,
once started, will surely spread throughout the continent like a
prairie fire, will make their effects felt even here across the
Atlantic. They will give a strong impetus to the process of
radicalization of the workers that is already beginning, and they will
inspire the coming class struggles here at home ...



The developments in Italy are deserving of the closest
study. The unfolding Italian events provide an important preview of the
revolutionary temper and power of the European working class, the
status and role of the capitalist class and a virtual blueprint of
Anglo-American war aims, methods and plans.
This war is of course a continuation of the first World War, but as
the experience of Italy has already made amply clear, the developments
arising from this war are by no means mere replicas of the last one.
All the contradictions of European capitalism that reached supreme
acuteness after the last war twenty-five years ago, are now at a
breaking point. New contradictions have piled up in the interim.
Economic devastation has reached unheard of proportions. Political
decay has followed suit. Internally, no serious force remains to guard
capitalism in Europe except the scum of the upper class society—the
decrepit monarchs with their coterie of stark reactionary militarist
aristocracy, the Vatican, the cliques of the monopolists, the bankers
and their retinue. The reserves of capitalism in Europe are indeed
lower than they have ever been before. The field for capitalist class
maneuvers is far narrower than was the case a quarter of a century ago.
After the catastrophic defeats of the Italian army in Greece, North
Africa and Sicily, mass strikes swept over North Italy and the army
itself began disintegrating. The Allies were sure that Italy would soon
be knocked out of the war. They were prepared for a capitulation and
had plans in readiness for the occupation of Italy.
 
The Secret Plans
Kingsbury Smith, semi-official spokesman of the US State
Department, in an article written just before Mussolini’s downfall and
published in the American Mercury of August 1943, Our
Government’s Plan for a Defeated Italy, reveals in somewhat
guarded language the plans and perspectives of the US State Department:
 “We will help the Italian Army, Navy, or the people
to overthrow Mussolini’s regime, but we will nevertheless demand that
the country be handed over without any strings attached ... High
Italian army officers known to have the respect of the people will be
the group from which the United States and Great Britain will demand
the surrender of the nation ... Establishment of an allied military
government in Italy under American command is planned following
occupation of the country. Some United States Army Civil Affairs
officers who are slated for occupational administrative work in Italy
already have arrived in North Africa. Others are being trained as
Italian Administrators at the Army School of Military Government at
Charlottesville, Virginia ... Strict control will be exercised over the
Italian press and radio during the period of allied military rule ...” 
Gaetano Salvemini, a forthright analyst of Italian
policy, bluntly stated as early as December 1942, on the basis of a
study of Allied policies, that:
 “The royal House of Savoy, the army and the Pope are
being kept on ice by Mr. Churchill and President Roosevelt as the
legitimate authorities entitled to speak for Italy ...” 
In their book, What To Do With Italy,
Gaetano Salvemini and George LaPiana, predicted before the fall of
Mussolini:
 “As far as the American public can judge from what
has leaked out about the plans being secretly and discreetly concocted
in high circles, our diplomats in Washington are determined to supplant
Mussolini with an Italian Darlan or Petain ... If such a plan is
carried out, the Savoy monarchy will remain as a guarantee against any
radical revolution. A coalition of former leaders, the big business men
and clericals supported by the Vatican, would take up the government of
the country under the protection of the American and English armies of
occupation ... Every road leads to Rome, they say in Italy. And
everything we gather about British and American plans concerning Italy
leads us to the same conclusion. What the British foreign office and
the American State Department want to set up in Italy is a fascist
regime without Mussolini ...” 
The Anglo-American imperialists, it is obvious, did not
blunder into the Italian situation, did not improvise their policies,
nor leave the important political decisions to be made by military
field commanders on the spot. As Kingsbury Smith makes clear, and as
has been since corroborated by scores of correspondents and observers,
the Allies had a carefully worked out plan, a definite strategy and
policy and had prepared a trained personnel to execute their program.
But there is a gap between plans and reality. Events did not proceed
as smoothly as the State Department may have envisaged. The Allied
imperialist leaders expected a capitulation on the part of Italy. They
even anticipated local outbursts of the Italian people against the
Fascists. But they did not anticipate the great revolutionary
conflagration that actually swept Italy after the removal of Mussolini.
There was the specter of the Russian revolution and of the Italian
events of 1920 reappearing again! A feeling of anxiety and apprehension
swept through the government bureaus at Washington and London.
Churchill immediately warned Parliament that
 “We certainly do not wish to reduce Italian life to a
condition of chaos and anarchy, and find ourselves without any
authority with whom to deal.” 
For Churchill, the Russian revolution, it must be
remembered, was the rule of “chaos and anarchy.” 
A few hours after Churchill’s speech, Roosevelt, in a press
conference, demonstratively denounced the OWI broadcast which attacked
Badoglio and King Victor Emmanuel. Several days later, on July 30,
Roosevelt told newspapermen at his press conference that he “did not
care with whom we deal so long as he was not a member of the Fascist
government and could get the Italian troops to lay down their arms and
could prevent anarchy. It might be the King or a Prime Minister or a
Mayor who serve these ends.” 
Mr. Kingsbury Smith, in his foregoing semi-official article, after
citing the Anglo-American propaganda of urging the Italian people to
revolt against Mussolini, patronizingly wrote:
 “We are not opposed [how magnanimous!] to the Italian
people carrying out a blood purge of the fascists who have terrorized
and oppressed them for the past twenty years. But we believe they
should have the courage to do so before and not after
the Allied armies have occupied the country.” 
The leaders of the two great “democracies” however
greeted the Italian revolution once it actually started with fear, with
a gnashing of teeth and with frenzied attempts to bolster the
makeshift, reactionary Badoglio government and to aid it in its
attempts to throttle the heroic struggle of the Italian workers who
were engaged in extirpating the Black Shirts, and fighting for freedom
and a workers’ government of their own choosing. All through August,
the Anglo-American propaganda machine was inundating the world with
propaganda which all added up to a political build-up for the
government of Badoglio and the King. The Anglo-American forces were
already in control of Sicily, and their armies stood poised ready to
invade the mainland. The invasion was, however, delayed for weeks, in
deference to Badoglio and the King, in an attempt to give the new
military dictatorship an opportunity to put down the popular revolt. So
cynical and unabashed did Allied propaganda become that Amgot openly
announced that Italian officials would be permitted to remain at their
posts,—while the Italian people were warned that no political
activity would be tolerated. The Anglo-American program of reaction was
revealed with such a lack of ambiguity or disguise that even the
thoroughly housebroken liberals were embarrassed. They began
whimpering, in the general vein of I.F. Stone’s article in the August 7

Nation:
 “I am beginning to feel that while we are ready to
make deals with any crooks at the top except full-fledged, fully
labeled Nazis and Fascists, we are out to demand ‘unconditional
surrender’ of the peoples of Europe to what must begin to seem to them
Anglo-American imperialism. The Europe that Amgot would restore is not
a Europe in which the Four Freedoms could be achieved.” 
But the Badoglio government was being torn apart by its
unsolvable crisis. Threats, repressions, martial law, promises of
reform, and concessions had availed nothing in the face of the rising
revolutionary tide. The Badoglio government was obviously impotent to
hold back the revolutionary advance. Its resources were dwindling by
the hour and its regime hung by a hair. The Italian army meanwhile was
fast melting away; discipline was breaking down, the authority of the
officers was on the wane and in the North, the Nazi armies were
preparing to advance and in the South the Allies stood in Sicily,
poised for the invasion of the mainland.
The Italian capitalists, behind Badoglio and the King, decided their
best chances for survival lay in throwing in their fate with the Allies.
 “All legitimate hope—I do not say of victory, but even of
resistance—had vanished,” Badoglio truthfully stated in his
declaration to Hitler, announcing his government’s capitulation to the
Allies.
At this point occurred one of the most brazen betrayals of a people:
between Badoglio and the Anglo-American imperialists a conspiracy was
hatched to betray the Italian proletariat in the North to the Nazi
beasts, to drown the revolution in blood while foisting in the
allied-occupied territory in Southern Italy the Quisling government of
Victor Emmanuel and Badoglio.
Secret conferences between the Allied imperialists and Badoglio were
in progress all through the latter end of August and beginning of
September. While the terms of the armistice and Italy’s “unconditional
surrender” were being drafted, the Italian workers of the industrial
north were clamoring for arms to defend themselves against the Nazi
hordes. But neither Badoglio nor the Anglo-American “democrats” were
interested in defending Northern Italy against the Nazis. They were not
interested in organizing the workers and the revolutionary soldiers to
fight the Nazis: they had already reconciled their plans to the Nazis’
marching in and subduing the revolutionary proletariat.
 
The Secret Conferences
On September 3, the armistice between the Badoglio
government and the Allies was signed. It was made public only a week
later on September 11. Discerning commentators had no difficulty in
establishing the fact that another, more cynical “Darlan deal” had been
contrived, that the Allies were preparing to prop up a reactionary
clique of monarchists and capitalist politicians whose hands dripped
with the 20-year crimes of the Fascist regime.
The September 4 dispatch of Herbert L. Matthews, New York
Times correspondent, stated that:
 “The AMG experience in Sicily would seem to
strengthen Marshal Badoglio’s chances of continuing in power after the
Allies enter Rome. He could prove highly useful and that was the
criterion in the case of Admiral Jean Francais Darlan.” 
Libera Stampa, Italian anti-fascist
newspaper, published in Lausanne, Switzerland, revealed the whole
treacherous conspiracy in its October 1 report. According to Libera
Stampa as soon as Turin learned the news of the Armistice:
 “The workers through their leaders suspended work in
the big factories ... to assume ... the armed defense of their city
(against the Nazi troops). But they needed arms. Representatives of the
Turin workers therefore called in the Commander of the Turin garrison,
General Adamirossi, (one of Badoglio’s appointees) and asked for arms
to repel an eventual attack on the part of German armored troops which
they knew were advancing on Turin.
 “The workers’ representatives assumed full
responsibility for the distribution of arms to their organized
supporters, promising not to give them to suspicious elements.
 “General Adamirossi courteously asked them to be
patient during the few hours necessary for transportation and delivery
of the arms.
 “However, a tragic betrayal was being prepared: the
workers’ leaders were handed over to the Germans who had arrived in the
meantime. The time which General Adamirossi had demanded for the
delivery of the arms was used by him to conclude an agreement with the
Germans for the surrender to them of Turin.
 “General Adamirossi apparently has already paid with
his life, at the hand of a worker, for this treachery.” So it was
throughout the northern cities. Like the workers of Turin, the workers
of Bergamo demanded arms. The Associated Press reported on September 12
that the military commander stalled them off with the pretext “that
only a few outmoded rifles were available.” 
In Milan, the betrayal took a different form. The
workers and soldiers, by their own actions, succeeded in wiping out the
Nazi forces stationed in the city. General Reggiero, Badoglio’s
commanding officer, frightened to death by this success, hastened to
proclaim the city as surrendered to the Nazis at a time when the Nazi
army had not even reached the outskirts of the city. He reached an
agreement with the Nazi commanders and proceeded to maintain “order” in
the Milan area for the Nazis! The workers continued their resistance;
two days later the Nazis took over the counter-revolutionary work
themselves.
The Anglo-American imperialists did not limit themselves to mere
moral encouragement of Badoglio and his generals in this butcher’s
work. They made no attempt to impede Nazi forces from pouring into
Italy. As a matter of fact, they facilitated their entrance through the
use of the Allied air force. Gaetano Salvemini voiced his indignation
at their brutal counter-revolutionary work in a special interview
published in PM on October 10, 1943:
 “America sent bombers to bomb the people of Milan,
Genoa, Turin in August to smash the revolution. There were
demonstrations in the streets, but instead of bombing the Brenner Pass,
through which the German army was pouring in, America bombed the
Italians. Badoglio’s soldiers wouldn’t shoot Italian demonstrators: So
we sent bombers—American liberators.” 
This saturation bombing of the revolutionary centers was
so scandalous, it showed so unmistakably that the political war of the
Allies, the war to destroy the European revolution took precedence over
the imperialist war with Germany, that even some of the British
laborites like Anuerin Bevan protested in the British Parliament,
bluntly accusing the Churchill government of being
counter-revolutionary.
Thus, in the very midst of the imperialist slaughter, the
imperialist leaders reached out across the battle lines, to establish
collaboration, and each in his own way and in the manner available,
rained blows on the first large-scale attempt of the European workers
in the second World War to throw off the yoke of despotism, to break
out of the bloody ring, and to take their destinies into their own
hands.
It was only towards the middle of September, only after the Nazis
had occupied most of Italy, only after the Black Shirts dared show
their faces in the streets again, only after the workers were hurled
back to the defensive, that the Allies breathed freely again. The
crisis, they thought, was over. The revolution had been crushed, they
thought, with the timely and blessed assistance of the Nazis, through
their conspiracy with Badoglio.
Today, thousands of American and British soldiers are dying in
savage battles in Italy. For what? In an attempt to win back the
territories that Churchill and Roosevelt helped Badoglio hand over to
the Nazis last September.
Only after the Anglo-American imperialists were convinced that the
situation was beginning to stabilize along “normal” lines and felt that
they could manipulate the political situation in their own imperialist
interests, did they proceed to launch the military campaign against the
Nazis.
The military strategy was obviously aligned in every detail with
their political aims and purposes. The Allies moved at a measured,
leisurely, and phlegmatic pace, solidifying each new position before
proceeding further not only from a military point of view, but what was
even more important from the political point of view. Even though Italy
is a secondary military battlefield of the second World War, and the
number of troops engaged is relatively small, the whole Italian
campaign provides a clear and instructive example of how military
strategy is subordinated and, as a matter of fact, determined by the
basic political aims of the ruling class waging the war. Just as
Salvemini had predicted, the Anglo-American imperialists now proceeded
to put into effect, step by step, their whole counter-revolutionary
program of converting Italy into a semi-colony and imposing on its
people a military dictatorship based on the monarchy, the Vatican and
the capitalist and landlord cliques.
Every upper class organization in Italy, the brass hats, the
Vatican, the church hierarchy, the monarchy, the big capitalists and
landlords had all thoroughly discredited themselves with the whole
of the Italian people, through 20 years association, support and
participation in the Fascist regime. Their hands were soaked with the
people’s blood. The only forces which could possibly enjoy a certain
credit, a certain support among masses of the population were the
Allies themselves. Unquestionably, in the first days, considerable
sections of the Italian people were fooled by Roosevelt’s and
Churchill’s professed aims of “liberation” and “democracy” and really
welcomed the Allied armies.
The Allies manipulated these illusions of the Italian people to wage
against them, as soon as they had cleared a given territory of the Nazi
forces, a virtual war, now masked, now open, to violate their wishes,
and to impose upon them a government of the self-same elements that
made up the warp and woof of the Mussolini regime.
 
 “Democracies” and Sicily
The Allies had already acquired a certain experience in
this dastardly work. In Sicily, the Amgot first went into action under
the chairmanship of Lord Rennell of Rodd, British millionaire banker,
partner of Morgan Grenfell, London affiliate of J.P. Morgan and Co.,
and bosom friend of Volpi, one of Mussolini’s financial backers.
Rennell and his gang of dyed-in-the-wool reactionaries proceeded to
install what Salvemini has designated as “fascism minus Mussolini.” On
July 18, a week before the fall of Mussolini, General Alexander, then
Allied Military Governor of Sicily issued a proclamation ordering the
dissolution of the Fascist party. The decree outlined the new
government in the following manner:
 “All administrative and judicial officials of
provinces and communities and all other government municipal
functionaries and employees, and all officers and employees of the
state, municipal or other public services except such officials and
political leaders as are removed by me are required to continue in
performance of their duties subject to my direction.” 
This of course meant that the Black Shirt set-up was
preserved virtually intact.
Herbert L. Matthews, New York Times correspondent,
described how this policy operated in practice. In the reorganized
government apparatus of Palermo, Sicily’s largest city, every official
included was a fascist and appointed by the fascists. Matthews explains:
 “There must be a great degree of leniency, because
every post, however insignificant, had been filled under Premier
Mussolini, by a fascist. To eliminate all the fascists would completely
paralyze every function of the government. The real anti-fascists here
do not like that so much. Apparently they had expected the whole
fascist set-up to be swept away, but that is impossible and will be so
throughout Italy ... Naturally the primary consideration was the swift
restoration of law and order. That could toe accomplished; only with
the help of the Italian police.” 
Amgot also announced that they were ready to bring the
blessings of democracy to the Sicilians and that “within the limits of
military necessity a free press and free speech is to be allowed, but
that no political activity of any kind will be allowed.” Salvemini
correctly demanded to know: “How can free speech and a free press exist
if no political activity of any kind is allowed?” 
Matthews summed up the Amgot method several weeks later in an
article in the August 22 New York Times Magazine.
There was first fear among the Fascists, Matthews explains, “that the
Allies would prosecute them because they were Fascists.” He then adds:
 “In Sicily we have demonstrated that we have no such
intention, for the obvious reason that something like 90 percent of the
administration in every walk of life is Fascist and to eliminate all
Fascists would mean complete paralysis and chaos ...” 
Matthews sums up: “Fascism is being destroyed—at least
on paper.” 
All the old, moth-eaten, cynical imperialist formulas were dragged
out once again to alibi this act of betrayal—“Military necessity,” 
humanitarian considerations ( “saving human lives” ), “no politics until
the Nazis are driven out,” etc., etc.,—all the hollow phrases that
had been employed before in North Africa in the case of the Darlan
Deal. But here even the pretext that allegedly existed in North Africa
was lacking, inasmuch as all military activities had ceased. Upon the
signing of the Armistice, the Allies had complete undisputed control of
the Mediterranean.
Once the full meaning of Amgot policy was understood, its effect on
the Sicilian population can easily be imagined. The disillusionment
must have been especially sweeping, after the revolutionary upsurge in
the mainland and the open Allied support of Badoglio and the King. An
article signed “A Combatant” printed in the British Observer

at the end of October 1943 depicted the disillusionment and despair
engendered by the cold blooded Amgot policy even among the Allied
soldiers themselves. This article stated:
 “The writer has personal knowledge of a case in which
two members of the OVRA—the Fascist secret police—were arrested,
sent off to the local Amgot headquarters, and returned twenty-four
hours later as qualified Amgot officials to the same town which they
had bossed for the Fascists.
 “Military expediency may provide a sound reason for
decisions taken in certain cases, but there is an unmistakable worried
feeling among the troops that something has gone wrong—even that they
have been misled.” 
Toward the end of October, four months after the
military occupation of Sicily and one month after the signing of the
Armistice, the Allied Military Government first issued its decree
restoring the Camera del Lavoro, the trade union Center in
Palermo.
This decree was at first hailed by several British and American
trade union bureaucrats as a restoration of the pre-fascist trade
unions. Once the actual decree was published, it was obvious that the
Allies were attempting to perpetuate Mussolini’s system of government —
sponsored company unions. The decree provided for:

The director and staff of the Center are to be appointed under
AMG supervision instead of elected by the union members.
Present wage contracts—negotiated by Fascist officials and
employers—remain in force.
All public meetings remain banned by AMG.
If any disagreements arise on wages or working conditions, they
are subject to compulsory arbitration. Strikes and lockouts are
strictly forbidden and will be punished.

This new trade union restoration was on a par with the
previous “restoration” of freedom of press and speech. It fully tallied
with Mark Twain’s aphorism that freedom of speech is something you’ve
got provided you don’t use it. Even the Sicilia Liberata,
the only newspaper permitted to appear in Sicily (Mussolini, too,
permitted that kind of freedom of press) came out with sharp criticisms
of the new decree.
In an editorial entitled Cards on the Table the newspaper
stated:
 “All positions of responsibility must be held by
proven antifascists. This is the appeal we made to the Allied
authorities. This is no time to take a middle course. To entrust
positions of authority to those who tomorrow would become our
executioners would be a grave and unforgivable error. The time has come
to assume the responsibilities for our own future.” 
It is easy to imagine the reaction of the Sicilians to
Allied occupation and Amgot policy when the only paper
permitted to appear speaks in terms of bitter complaint.
The vile hypocrisy with which the Allies carry through their
dictatorial reactionary policies is well illustrated by an incident
reported in the pro-Allied, pro-Roosevelt, pro-war, Daily
Worker of January 13, 1944. Charles Poletti, then military
Governor of Palermo, opened the new City Hall in the latter part of
November and hailed in his address the “rebirth of Italian democracy.” 
He elaborated on the “new era of dignity—the dignity of free men —
begins for the people of Palermo.” But it turned out that the new mayor
and city council had all been hand-picked by Poletti himself; they were
all either dukes, lawyers and men of wealth who had for 20 years
supported Mussolini. “Not a single anti-fascist was among them,” says
the Daily Worker.
Such is the democracy which the Allied military occupation
authorities have devised in Sicily. Freedom of press—with only one
newspaper permitted to appear; freedom of speech—with all public
meetings banned; freedom of trade unions—with all union officials
appointed by Amgot, and with the old contracts imposed during
Mussolini’s regime remaining in full force, with all grievances subject
to compulsory arbitration, with all strikes banned and severely
punished; the “rebirth of Italian democracy” —with all public
officials appointed by Amgot, from among the wealthy landlords and
capitalists, the bulwark of Mussolini’s Fascist regime.
This was the type of regime that the Allies aimed to impose on the
whole of Italy. But a regime of this type proved far more difficult to
force on all Italy than on small, predominantly agricultural and
backward Sicily. And what is more, much to Allied chagrin, a
revolution, not called for in their schedule, erupted on the mainland;
it was checked only with the greatest difficulty and only by turning
over the bulk of Italy to the Nazi butchers. The Allies could not
proceed on the mainland in the same crude manner as in Sicily, lest
they provoke armed clashes between their military forces and the native
population of every village, hamlet and city. They had watched Hitler’s
occupation methods and learned how difficult it is to subdue a hostile
population, by naked military force alone. Far more expedient is to
rule through a subservient native government, which bears the onus of
imposing “law and order” on the sullen and rebellious populace.
Churchill himself had made this thoroughly clear in his eloquent
speech to Parliament when the Italian masses first took to the streets.
On July 27, Churchill said:
 “Now that Mussolini has gone and the Fascist power
has certainly been irretrievably broken, we would be foolish to deprive
ourselves of any means of coming to a general conclusion with tie
Italian nation ... Past experience shows that in cases of great change
of heart and character in government of a nation very often one stage
is rapidly succeeded by another ... It would be a grave mistake when
Italian affairs are in this flexible, fluid and formative condition for
the rescuing power of Britain and the United States so to act as to
break down the whole structure and expression of the Italian state. We
certainly do not wish to reduce Italian life to a condition of chaos
and anarchy, and find ourselves without any authority with whom to deal
...” 
Churchill and Roosevelt after the signing of the
Armistice on September 3 were fully embarked on their campaign against
 “chaos and anarchy” and for the restoration of “law and order.” They
began to impose their counter-revolutionary regime step by step on the
Italian people by strengthening and buttressing the authority of
Badoglio and the decrepit monarchy, by strengthening the authority of
the Vatican and the church hierarchy, by attempting to provide the
discredited upper class scum, with a reconstituted military force.
On September 21, ten days after the Armistice had been made public,
Churchill came out flat-footedly for the government of Badoglio and
King Victor Emmanuel. In his report to the House of Commons, Churchill
stated:
 “It is necessary ... that all the surviving forces in
Italy’s national life should be rallied together around their
government and that the King and Marshal Badoglio should be supported
by liberal and left-wing elements ...” 
Roosevelt sent Adolph A. Berle, Assistant Secretary of
State to the Columbus Day meeting of the Italian-American Committee in
Boston, with a personal message calling upon labor to throw its support
behind the Badoglio government. Badoglio and Victor Emmanuel were
afforded the facilities of the Allied radio to broadcast their
propaganda to the Italian people, while everybody else was gagged and
anyone attempting to speak thrown into jail.
On September 22, Badoglio, feeling more confident, with the
Anglo-American bayonets propping his government, told the Italian
people over the Allied radio that “The King, the royal family are the
expression of the will of the Italian people.” On October 2 the King
ordered the people to obey Badoglio as “the interpreter of my will.” 
The King apparently had plans of staying on for a while to come:
 “Yesterday, as always, your King is with you,
indissolubly linked with the destiny of the immortal fatherland.” 
On October 1 the Allied armies entered Naples. There was
no military encounter with the Nazis. The Italian anti-Fascists had
just finished a savage four-day battle with the Nazi invaders; the
Nazis facing an Allied attack in the midst of this hostile and
aggressive population, decided the better part of valor was to retire.
Hal Boyle, the Associated Press correspondent received the following
description of the events from Umberto Franco, a local glass
manufacturer:
 “Street fighting broke out after the Germans ordered
the citizens to give up their guns and told 30,000 Italian men to
report for labor conscription on September 24.” 
Mme. Maleville, Secretary to the Naples Hospital,
reported that:
 “The civil war started last Saturday while the
Germans were burning and looting the city of everything they could
take. The people took up guns, knives and anything they could and
fought the Germans and the Fascists who still supported them. There
have been hundreds and hundreds of persons wounded.” 
Hal Boyle who entered Naples with the Allied troops
described the anti-fascists as “young Italian guerrillas, fighting with
collars open and no helmets, looked like something out of the French
Revolution.” Boyle states that “the whole (Naples) Battle was fought
without a single American casualty.” Herbert L. Matthews in his cable
to the New York Times on the Naples battle spoke of
the conduct of the Italian anti-fascists in rapturous terms: “an
episode of genuine heroism.” 
In a later dispatch Matthews reported:
 “When Badoglio’s government announced its armistice
on September 8, the people rose joyously. All that night and all the
following day they had the Germans on the run. The Germans were
surrendering their arms to Italians ... Had Naples been properly
organized ... it would have made all the difference. However, there was
no anti-fascist organization ... So the Germans quickly regained
control, but they did it with the help of fascist hierarchs and above
all many fascist Black Shirts. Those Black Shirts became marked men ...
When those days of reckoning came, everyone of those Black Shirts ...
met death at the hands of the citizens. They were willing to take the
Germans alive ... because after all they were doing only what they had
been ordered to do. But when the Italians caught a Black Shirt, he
died.” 
 
The Events in Naples
The Naples proletariat showed again that the Italian
revolution had not been crushed; it had been merely delayed. The Naples
proletariat revealed those traits that the workers have displayed again
and again in every real people’s revolution: their genius for
organization and their contempt for death. Unfortunately, they had not
had the time to organize themselves politically and build a leadership
that expressed their revolutionary aspirations and aims.
Matthews correctly states that the Neapolitan masses could have been
organized to drive out the Nazis when the armistice was announced. The
Allies were interested in just the opposite. They were determined that
the Italian proletariat remain disorganized and unarmed, and if
necessary they were willing to turn them over temporarily to the tender
mercies of the Nazi wolves.
What the Nazis were unable to accomplish, the Allies quickly
achieved: they disarmed the Neapolitan masses (after all, were they not
 “liberators” ?) and proceeded to restore “law and order.” They now
proceeded to carry through their perfidious program with the greatest
possible energy. Naples had been occupied militarily. It was now
indispensable to conquer it politically and convert it into a
solid bastion of reaction.
On October 13, one month after Italy’s “unconditional surrender” and
the imposition of armistice terms, reported by the correspondents as
harsher than those Hitler imposed on France, the Allies suddenly
announced that Italy was recognized as a “co-belligerent” and would be
a partner of the Allies, albeit a minor one. This time, Roosevelt and
Churchill had succeeded in having their counter-revolutionary schemes
underwritten by Stalin. The Mediterranean Commission, composed of
representatives of the United States, Britain and the Soviet Union, was
set up. From now on, the counter-revolutionary program in Italy was to
have the full endorsement of the Kremlin bureaucracy. Stalin fittingly
appointed Alexander Vyshinski, prosecutor in the infamous Moscow
frame-up trials, as his representative.
All correspondents freely admitted that the new Allied stratagem was
devoid of military significance. Its purpose was exclusively political
— to bolster the shadow Badoglio government and to provide it with an
ostensible military purpose for creating a new army.
Badoglio took the occasion to inform the Italian people that he was
going to stay on indefinitely as their minister:
 “The present government has clearly defined the task
of leading the country until peace has been won. With that its mandate
will cease.” 
From the day of the recognition of the Badoglio regime
as a co-belligerent in the Allied camp, dates a whole series of
incidents, suppressions, arrests, etc., in the systematic war of the
Allies and their Badoglio shadow government against the Italian people.
On October 21, Herbert L. Matthews suddenly revealed that three
prominent liberals of Apulia were jailed for printing and disseminating
an “unauthorized newspaper.” Matthews apologetically explains that he
is recording the incident “because it has created such a sensation and
such unhappy bewilderment in liberal circles here.” We learn that in
Southern Italy, as in Sicily, only one newspaper is
permitted, in this case the Gazetta del Mezzogiorno.
 “A group of important liberals who had suffered imprisonment under
Fascism say that they tried to get their ideas published in the Gazetta

but failed.” Matthews further revealed that on the same day, “A
communist named Senisi also was arrested for disseminating a sheet
called Civilta Communista.” 
In his next day’s dispatch Matthews reported that Count Sforza who
had just arrived from the United States was “saddened” by the “vestiges
of Fascism that cling to official life in Allied-occupied Italy and the
machinations of the court circle.” 
For an old monarchist politician to oppose the Badoglio regime so
demonstratively upon his arrival in Italy, to so sharply change his
tone from the statement he issued on leaving the United States when he
told newspapermen that it would be “almost an act of treason” to oppose
the Badoglio government and that loyal support should be given Badoglio
as long as he enjoys the confidence of the Anglo-American leaders —
this change of front shows eloquently enough what the political temper
of Naples must be.
But in spite of the mounting dissatisfaction and indignation of the
masses, the Badoglio regime for the first time began to breathe freely.
The Italian capitalists were finally resting on Anglo-American
bayonets. On November 3, King Victor Emmanuel, for the first time since
the downfall of Mussolini, dared show himself in public. The King rode
through the streets of Naples in what was intended to be a monarchist
demonstration. Matthews explained:
 “At present, as long as the Allied Military Mission
sits at the King’s side, he is immune ... Since the Allies are
preventing political agitation, whatever Marshal Badoglio and the King
decide will stand up.” 
A week later, Badoglio demonstratively announced that
the new political government to be set up in Rome would be “formed by
the King.” 
On November 9, it was reported that the units of anti-Fascist
volunteers, which had been set up in Naples, since the October days,
had been ordered disbanded, and that the men would be drafted into the
regular Italian army under General Basso, “one of the King’s generals.” 
Basso is a reactionary monarchist officer who served as director
general of Artillery under Mussolini.
It was further decreed that “the cross of Savoy over the left breast
pocket” was to be placed on every soldier’s uniform and that “all
vehicles are also marked with the cross of King Victor Emmanuel’s
house.” 
On November 22, Sir Harold R.L.G. Alexander, announced that he had
named General Basso as head of the new Italian Military Command “over
all Italian armed forces in Campania.” The appointment comes from “the
Royal Italian government with my approval,” General Alexander’s order
stated.
The drive to reimpose on the Italian people a naked military
dictatorship became so sustained, all-sided, energetic and brazen that
by November 22, only a month after he arrived in Italy, Sforza was
already loudly accusing the Badoglio government of striving to build a
 “royalist-clerical-neo-Fascist movement.” 
 
The “Blue Party” 
While anti-fascists were being clapped into jail, while
all anti-fascist activity was prohibited, the upper class scum
highlighted their activity by attempts to organize again “punitive
expeditions” as during Mussolini’s regime and by a new ambitious
venture to reconstitute themselves as a political force. On November
26, the Associated Press carried the following information:
 “The Monarchist ‘Blue Party’, newest group to enter
Italy’s political arena, opened a high-pressure campaign today to rally
support to the shaky cause of the Royal House of Savoy ... Placards
calling on the people to rally to the monarch ... were posted on
buildings in the city. Pamphlets reminding the people of the services
of the House of Savoy to Italy were disseminated throughout towns and
villages in that part of the country liberated from the Germans ... The
leaders are not prominent Italians, but a number of aristocrats and
highly placed army and navy officers are reported to be members ...” 
The November 26 dispatch to the New York Times
stated that Professor Omadeo, rector of Naples University, related:
 “That much of the poster-erecting is being done by
Carabinieri, sometimes in civilian clothes, at the orders of the
military ... Other reliable quarters have given further evidence of
what used to be called Squadrism—which is now being practiced by
elements that must be considered the equivalent of Fascists—such as
threats to burn houses, or to beat, and in one notable case, to kill
known anti-fascists.” 
The Monarchist “Blue Party” has its genesis in the
Nationalist Party which was organized in Florence in 1910, with a
program in American terms similar to a combination of the programs of
the Navy League, the NAM and the American Legion. By 1921, the
Nationalist Movement was accepted by Mussolini as a “parallel movement” 
in a common struggle. After the march on Rome, the Fascists having
adopted all the tenets of Nationalism, the two parties merged.
Salvemini described the Nationalist Party as monarchist, militarist,
aristocratic, anti-parliamentarian, protectionist, and favoring an
alliance between the church and state:
 “It was the party of toe general staff of the army
and navy and big business ... Now that the Fascist Party has been
discredited by all kinds of disasters, the old Nationalist Party
renamed the Blue Party, has been revived under the wings of the AMG.” 
This all-out campaign of reaction reached a climax when
a unit of Italian soldiers was thrown into an attack on the Nazi lines.
The New York Herald Tribune correspondent described
the action as “little short of suicide ... The first wave of attackers
was virtually destroyed. The second, shoved in frantically from the
reserve suffered grave casualties ... It might as well be admitted that
no one was very much surprised.” 
But the battle had a political, not a military purpose. It was
widely advertised that the Crown Prince had flown over the enemy lines,
 “a trip which takes courage and demonstrates a general desire to
rehabilitate himself in the eyes of the people.” Salvemini correctly
appraised the significance of this military action of December 8:
 “Mussolini attacked France in June 1940 because he
needed a few thousand dead in order to get a seat at the impending
peace conference. In December 1943, Badoglio needed a few hundred
Italian dead to enhance the prestige of the royal house.” 
 
Wooing the Vatican
Parallel with the attempt to recreate the old Monarchist
party, to build up a military force at the disposal of the Big Business
clique around Badoglio and the House of Savoy, and to suppress every
manifestation of democracy, democratic rights and the independent
organization and activity of the masses, went the attempt to build up
the power of the Vatican and to increase its hold over the Italian
people.
Shortly after the conquest of Sicily, General Alexander, the then
military governor of Sicily, held a conference with Cardinal Laritiano,
Archbishop of Palermo, and proposed that the public schools be reopened
and proceed with their educational work “under the direction of the
ecclesiastical authorities.” The reactionary depth of this proposal can
be appreciated when we recall that the Italian public schools, even
during Mussolini’s regime, have never been surrendered to the
supervision of the clergy. The AMG thus tried to put over the program
long cherished and advocated by the Vatican, of destroying the
separation of church and state and putting all education under the
control of the Catholic church—the powerhouse of reaction and
obscurantism.
The New York Herald Tribune carried information on
October 8 from Naples that:
 “All schools remained closed, but the AMG will permit
Catholic schools to reopen soon. The religious schools have received
priority because the AMG feels that Catholic textbooks and teachers are
less imbued with fascist doctrines.” 
What lying scoundrels! Salvemini has demonstrated long ago that
 “books sent to this country for use in Italian-language parochial
schools are stuffed with Fascist propaganda, and the Church has never
objected.” As a matter of fact, why should the Catholic church object?
The Pope considers the ruthless dictatorship of Salazar in Portugal as
the “model Christian state,” the regime of the butcher Franco as
ordained by God. The October 11 New York Times
carried the following information :
 “Mass was celebrated today at the Cathedral of San
Gennaro in the presence of Alessio Cardinal Ascalesi, with Lieut.
General Mark W. Clark and other high American officers in attendance.” 
Salvemini correctly pointed out:
 “... Attending mass officially with one’s retinue to
the presence of a cardinal is not a religious observance. It is a
political act. Cardinal Ascalesi is a man who has been discredited
throughout Italy by his unbridled greed for money and his consistent
servility to Fascism ... To Italians such a gesture could only imply
that General Clark had been instructed to encourage some brand of
clerical Fascism in Italy.” 
The AMG is trying to restore the political power of the Vatican, not
as it existed even under the Mussolini regime, but as it existed a
century ago, before the Italian Risorgimento. United States
imperialism, brash and arrogant, even ventures at times to flaunt its
imperial aims and boast of its imperial power. We must go back to the
writings in Britain of Disraeli’s day to find a suitable counterpart.
Demaree Bess, on numerous occasions a semi-official spokesman of the
State Department, afforded special privileges and confidential data by
the State Department officials in North Africa and elsewhere, wrote an
article printed in the October 30 issue of the Saturday
Evening Post, under the self-confident title: Power
Politics Succeeded in Italy. He discards all pretense, all
diplomatic double talk, he casts aside all the apologetics and alibis
and not only reveals but defends American imperialism and its quest for
power. He writes:
 “Most Americans have an ingrained distrust of power
politics—those maneuvers through which clever statesmen get what they
want from foreign countries by reinforcing their political negotiations
with military pressure. And yet the American people have three times
elected as our President a man who takes the keenest interest in power
politics, and who is one of its most resourceful and successful
practitioners.
 “... The two allied statesmen were indeed negotiating
with conservative Italians who had collaborated with Fascism and with
Germany; they were trying to make ‘another Darlan deal’ in Italy. Where
the critics made themselves appear ludicrous was in asserting that
power politics wouldn’t work ... It is a cold-blood game, having
nothing whatever to do with ideologies or crusades. It is the kind of
game which Hitler and Stalin played when they struck a bargain with
each other in 1939.
 “... The men whom the Allied governments selected to
abolish Fascism in Sicily were not the type to be rash in interpreting
this directive. Most of them are conservative or moderate in their
political views and this is particularly true of the higher ranks. Our
soldiers thus invaded Italian territory with the effective slogan:
‘Abolish Fascism!’ but with such a conservative policy otherwise that
it amounted to the freezing of the status quo in Sicily, once
Mussolini’s personal party machine had been destroyed. The decks were
thus cleared for negotiations with any group inside Italy which could
get rid of Mussolini ... those hostile critics who complained that
Allied statesmen were making another Darlan deal were, therefore, not
unjustified in their contention, because our deal with Marshal Badoglio
was indeed the same kind of deal ... This time, however, allied
statesmen arranged to obtain in advance Marshal Stalin’s approval of
their agreement with Italian military leaders ...” 
With what results have the Anglo-American imperialists
labored in the vineyard? What successes have they achieved in their
program of counter-revolution, political suppression, the recreation of
a military dictatorship and clerical and monarchical restoration? The
results are very tenuous; their hold very uneasy. The waging of war
upon the Italian population has produced a political crisis of the
greatest tension and explosive power. Every political observer,
regardless of his political beliefs, has asserted that once the Allied
military are withdrawn, the Badoglio government will be blown skyhigh.
It does not enjoy the slightest semblance of popular support. It faces
instead the hostility of all classes of Italian society,
except for the thin layer of the very wealthy. This is proved by every
public manifestation, where the masses have had an opportunity to voice
their feelings and demands and by the fact that prior to the Kremlin’s
latest betrayal not one political figure, including a
conservative monarchist like Senator Croce, could be found to associate
himself or join with the Badoglio government and the House of Savoy.
 “To find an exponent of the Royalist viewpoint,” wrote the New
York Times correspondent, “it was necessary to go to the
military ranks, for there is no civilian among the politically active
elements who is not against Victor Emmanuel.” 
(EDITOR’S NOTE: The above analysis of
the counter-revolutionary alignments in Italy comprises the first
section of E.R. Frank’s review of the events in Italy since the
downfall of Mussolini. The struggle of the Italian masses against the
Nazis in the North and the Badoglio regime in the South, together with
other aspects of the Italian political scene, in particular the new
Stalinist policy toward Badoglio and the King will be discussed in a
subsequent article. [1])
 
Note by ETOL
1. This article
seems not to have been published—at least we have so far been unable
to trace it as it does not appear to have been published in Fourth
International.



In opening this discussion on the political resolutions now before the party, the resolution passed by the November 1943 Plenum of the National Committee and the draft resolution of the National Committee to be presented to the coming convention, I am inviting the comrades to study, to consider, to view the question of the European revolution in its entirety, to proceed to a Marxist, and therefore to a many-sided analysis of this crucial problem.
Nothing is so futile in revolutionary politics as to begin a discussion of this character by getting lost on some incidental question, or to attempt to answer or solve this or that immediate problem of the day by divorcing it from your fundamental analysis, from your whole perspective. Before a Marxist can answer an immediate question of the day, he must be clear on his perspective, on his line. And that is precisely what the resolutions attempt to provide. These resolutions are not a new program. As a matter of fact, they are not even a full restatement of our old program. They are simply timely documents; they are documents that, on the basis of our program, analyze more concretely the new events, show the underlying forces at play, delineate the underlying tendencies and more sharply point to the tasks that lie ahead.
To understand the European revolution, its tasks and its perspectives, let us begin by a rough analysis of Europe, its economy and the forces at work on the continent. Capitalism began its absolute decline hi Europe some 30 years ago at the time of the first World War. Capitalism in Europe was no longer expanding, but contracting. In addition to the internal decline, the capitalist states in Europe were further suffocating because of the Balkanization of the continent, because the national boundaries had become fetters on the economy. Each national state was choking to death behind its tariff walls and the Gargantuan militarisms were eating up the substance of Europe’s wealth. The first World War, with its unparalleled destruction smashed Europe’s pre-eminence and further accelerated its decay. Economic hegemony was shifted to American imperialism.
Two revolutionary waves swept over Europe like a terrible paroxysm. One, started by the October revolution, shook Europe to its very foundations and wrenched the territories of the USSR out of the grip of capitalism. The second wave of incipient revolutions during the 30’s in Spain and France was betrayed by the Stalinist and Social-Democratic traitors. With the revolutions aborted and defeated, the path was cleared for the plunging of the European peoples into the second world slaughter.
European capitalism, I said, lost its economic pre-eminence to the United States after the first World War. As a result of the destruction wrought by the second World War, capitalism in Europe is shattered, is finished as a world power. Europe today is ruined and prostrate, and its peoples are starving and dying.
Now as Marxists, we know that the political superstructure is determined in the last analysis by the committee foundation. We are historical materialists; we know that bourgeois democracy is a specific political form, which arose and flowered during the rise and growth of capitalism. Bourgeois democracy was made possible as the form of capitalist rule in the more advanced and wealthy capitalist countries because of the advances of capitalism, because of the increasing wealth of the nation, by the ability of capitalism to buy off, to corrupt the middle classes and the labor aristocracy, and thus to moderate and attenuate the class struggle. Bourgeois democracy has certain definable and easily recognizable features: parliamentarism, more or less free elections, accompanied by the traditional bourgeois rights: freedom of press, speech, assembly, etc.
 
The Fate of Bourgeois Democracy
With the economic decline of Europe after the last war, bourgeois democracy likewise declined. It was virtually wiped out throughout eastern Europe. As for western Europe, the class struggle came to a breaking point in Italy immediately after the war and the question was sharply posed: either fascism or socialism. With the inability of the working class parties to lead the revolutionary struggle forward to the conquest of power, the successive bourgeois-democratic governments quickly gave way to the fascist dictatorship of Mussolini. Bourgeois democracy was ground to dust between the forces of the sharpening class struggle. Ten years later the same process took place in Germany.
And even France, the victor of Versailles, possessor of a great colonial empire, even victorious France reached a blind alley. The class struggle between the two fundamental classes grew so acute that even before the disastrous plunge into the maelstrom of the second World War, bourgeois democracy gave way to one semi-Bonapartist regime after another followed in the end by the imposition of the Bonapartist dictatorship of a Petain propped up by the Nazi bayonets. Bourgeois democracy was not simply destroyed in France by military intervention from without. It was decaying and falling apart because of the unsolvable crisis of French capitalism and the sharpening class struggles from within.
Such was the course of bourgeois democracy, between the two world wars. Today the European masses, who have gone through five years of devastation and slaughter, are in a furiously revolutionary mood. Throughout Europe! The masses are entering the political arena as an independent force. Capitalism in Europe is so shaken, so weak, decrepit and compromised, so bankrupt, that with its own forces it is unable to preserve its rule, to rehabilitate its power. For five years capitalism in Europe has been propped up by the bayonets of Nazi imperialism. Today, if European capitalism is to preserve its rule, it must be propped up by the bayonets of Anglo-American imperialism.
The masses in Italy and now in France, and so it will be throughout Europe, quickly brushed aside the capitalist and liberal parties and gave their support to the traditional parties of the working class. The masses support the Social-Democrats and Stalinists not because the Social-Democrats and Stalinists are betrayers, but because the masses mistakenly believe that these parties will lead them forward in the struggle for socialism, for communism. Just the other day we had a firsthand report from Italy. We were informed that everybody must talk for socialism in Italy today if they wish to get a hearing from the workers. We can put it down as a definite fact: the workers of Europe want a decisive revolutionary change. But the workers are not alone. Fascism, which for a while attracted and hypnotized the middle classes, exposed itself after a brief period as simply the bloody tool of decaying monopoly capitalism. Fascism, the last bulwark of capitalism, has pauperized and disillusioned one section of the population after the other. Today the peasantry and great sections of the urban petty-bourgeoisie follow the lead of the working class in seeking a revolutionary road out of the madhouse of capitalist war, starvation and death.
I have read and heard it bruited about that there is going to be a tremendous revival of democratic illusions among the masses because the younger generation has not gone through the school of parliamentarism, that it must first go through this “body of experience” until it is able to shed democratic illusions. What inability to understand the meaning of events and to sense the mood, the aspirations, the feelings of the masses! The Russian masses, as we all know, had far fewer democratic illusions in 1917 than did the German masses who had a rich parliamentary tradition. Yet the Russian workers didn’t go through any extensive parliamentary school. The political consciousness of the Russian masses was conditioned by their experiences, by the blind alley in which the Russian autocracy thrust the country, by the fact that the bourgeoisie and the landlords had disgraced themselves by their support of the bloody Czarist dictatorship. The Russian masses were forced, because of the intolerable situation, to seek for bold and revolutionary solutions and to support the boldest and most intransigeant, the most extreme of the left-wing parties. A similar process is taking place in Europe today. The capitalists have disgraced themselves by collaborating with Hitler and will today further disgrace themselves by their collaboration with the Anglo-American imperialists. The European masses are finding the situation intolerable. The very conditions of their existence are forcing them to seek for bold revolutionary solutions to extricate them from the death crisis of European capitalism.
It is interesting in this connection to recall the profound analysis of the consciousness of the European masses made by Trotsky in his 1940 Manifesto.
“Today almost nothing remains of the democratic and pacifist illusions. The peoples are suffering the present war without any longer believing in it, without expecting any more from it than new chains. This applies also to the totalitarian states. The older generation of the workers who bore on their backs the burden of the first imperialist war and who have not forgotten its lessons are still far from eliminated from the arena. In the ears of the next to the oldest generation which went to school during wartime the false slogans of patriotism and pacifism are still ringing. The inestimable experience of these strata who are now crushed by the weight of the war machine will reveal itself in full force when the war compels the toiling masses to come out openly against the governments.” 
 
Main Illusions of the Masses
And even more decisive than this analysis, than this prediction, if you will, are the events themselves which are now taking place before our very eyes. Even the least perspicacious of the bourgeois commentators have understood and informed us that the European masses are in a revolutionary mood. The masses have many illusions, to be sure. They do not yet support the parties of the Fourth International. But their illusions, if correctly analyzed, concretized and properly broken down, are found to be not at all those pictured by Morrow. The masses have few illusions about the bourgeoisie. They do not have too many illusions that they can solve their problems within the confines of the capitalist system. Even the illusions concerning the Allies are a more or less transient affair and will quickly give way before the realities of the situation. We saw that in Italy. A year ago the Italian masses of the South undoubtedly greeted the Allies with great enthusiasm and hope. In the course of a few months this enthusiasm was converted to hatred and deadly opposition. So it will be in France on the morrow. So it will be throughout Europe.
The greatest and most dangerous illusions of the masses, if this question is properly analyzed, is found to be their belief, their trust, in the Social-Democratic and Stalinist leaders, especially the latter. They do not yet understand the counterrevolutionary role of these scoundrels. A great dynamic process is taking place in the revolutionary education of the masses, and in this first period it is probably strengthening Stalinist influence. While small sections of the most advanced workers may be recoiling before the treachery of these misleaders, millions of people, first entering the political arena, seeking a way out of the death crisis of capitalism, naturally throw their support behind the parties which in their minds have stood traditionally for socialism, for communism. That is why the struggle to help the masses overcome their illusions is, in one of its most important aspects, the struggle to expose Stalinism and destroy its influence.
There is no question at all that Europe today is a red-hot cauldron of revolution. Everyone admits it. Into this seething cauldron is now entering the new imperialist overlord—American imperialism. This unbridled imperialist power, which aims to make Wall Street the center of world tribute, which seeks to establish its hegemony over all the continents and all the seas, must now strangle the European revolution and prop up decaying capitalism if it is to realize its imperial program. I see in this connection that Morrow objects to our characterizing American imperialism as equally predatory as Nazi imperialism. The objection is not well taken.
German imperialism, which emerged so late on the world scene, which was starved for resources and colonies, attempted to unite all of Europe around highly organized German industry. But the unification of Europe is a task which capitalism is unable to accomplish. Hitler, despite his military might, could only bring havoc to the continent, could only further ruin its economy, enslave its masses and turn the continent into a prison house. American imperialism, which is not a European power, and whose empire lies outside of Europe, aims not to unify the continent, but to dismember it and to keep it dismembered. Wall Street wants not the rebuilding of European economy, but to render impossible its revival as a competitor. Wall Street’s program of dismemberment, despoliation and plunder can only deepen Europe’s ruin. Allied rule over Europe spells thus not the mitigation, but the aggravation of Europe’s catastrophic crisis. The least you can say about American imperialism, whether on a long-term or a short-term basis, is that it is as predatory as Nazi imperialism.
 
Program of American Imperialism
The study of the role, the motive forces, the aims and the program of American imperialism shows you why the political program of Wall Street calls and must call for military occupation, for policing of Europe for ten, twenty, or as the late unlamented Secretary of the Navy Knox proposed, for one hundred years. This study makes clear why American imperialism must seek to refurbish the decrepit monarchies, why they must seek to build up the prestige and power of the Vatican, why they must elevate a lot of royalist and fascist generals to the seats of power, why they must prop up police-military dictatorships. This political program is not something accidental or arbitrary. It is the necessary program for American imperialism, the only program to realize its economic, its imperialist aims; the only method by which they can put over their predatory, their savage program to keep Europe prostrate, helpless and subservient to American imperialism.
On the basis of a rounded analysis, not only of the general historic decline and decay of European capitalism, but of the specific stage in this process of decay, we affirm: bourgeois democracy is outlived in Europe today. Bourgeois democracy is incompatible with the continued existence of capitalism in Europe. If; it was possible for American imperialism to stabilize European capitalism after the last war by loans on the basis of a bourgeois-democratic regime in Germany, then today American imperialism sees as its only program the dismemberment and destruction of Germany as an economic power and the preservation of capitalism with its own bayonets propping up dictatorial regimes.
Naturally we Marxists understand that economics do not automatically determine politics. The bourgeoisie, the Anglo-American imperialists, will practice all kinds of trickery, of deception, to sidetrack the revolutionary anger of the masses, to strangle the revolution, to save their rule. Our resolutions call specific attention to the fact that when the sweep of the revolution threatens their rule, the imperialists and their native accomplices will push forward the Social-Democratic and Stalinist agents and, if necessary, will even set up bourgeois-democratic regimes for the purpose of disarming and strangling the workers’ revolution. But we also point out that these regimes, by their very nature, can only be interim regimes—transition regimes, very unstable, very short-lived. Society cannot exist very long on the basis of a fierce class struggle, of an uncompleted revolution, of a split. A new equilibrium must be established. These interim regimes must either give way to the dictatorship of the proletariat or to the savage military dictatorship of the capitalist counter-revolution. There is no third road.
Now what is Morrow’s objection to this perspective, which is the logical, the necessary link in the perspective on Europe held by our movement from its first days. What is Morrow’s position? The final conclusion you must arrive at is that Morrow anticipates the revival of bourgeois-democracy in Europe for a period of time. Reminding himself that for this extraordinary thesis he must provide proof, he must provide a foundation, Morrow proceeds to give us an appreciation of the difference of program between American and Nazi imperialism, how American imperialism is not as predatory as the German variety.
I am reading this right out of Morrow’s article:
“The short-term perspective is that American imperialism will provide food and economic aid, to Europe and will thus for a time appear before the European masses in a very different guise than German imperialism ... Unlike Nazi occupation American occupation will be followed by an improvement in food supplies and in the economic situation generally.” Morrow, then warming up to his theme, tells us: “Where the Nazis removed factory machinery and transportation equipment, the Americans will bring them in. These economic contrasts, which of course flow entirely from the contrast between the limited resources of German capitalism and the far more ample resources still possessed by American capitalism, cannot fail for a time to have political consequences.” 
 
Morrow’s Theory—and Reality
Thus we have a more or less rounded thesis for the revival, from however short-term a point of view, of European capitalism and for the improvement, however temporary, of the standard of living. If that were true, there would exist, of course, some solid justification for the idea that illusions would revive among the European masses concerning the role of American imperialism and that on some basis, however low, bourgeois-democracy could be revived for a time. But this perspective has nothing in common with cruel reality. It is quite clear that Morrow is himself the victim of illusions about American imperialism, its supposed unlimited powers, its role, its purposes, its program. We called specific attention in our resolution to the statistics of the results of one year of Allied rule in Italy. It is unnecessary to go over all this data again. It adds up to growing starvation, disease, unemployment, a monstrous rising of the death rate, the worsening of the crisis. And Allied treatment of Italy will appear as beneficent compared to their rule of Germany. Yet it is on this flimsy economic foundation, and only on this foundation, that the theory of the revival of bourgeois democracy in devastated and ruined Europe, rests. Without it, it falls to the ground.
Now some comrades have informed us that the proof of Morrow’s theory of bourgeois democracy can be found in the Bonomi and de Gaulle regimes, that we already have bourgeois democracy in Europe today, or reasonable facsimiles thereof.
I described before the historical origins of bourgeois democracy and what a bourgeois-democratic regime is. I told you that a number of its features included free elections, government by elected parliament, various bourgeois-democratic rights, etc., etc. What is the first thing that hits you in the eye when you analyze the Bonomi and de Gaulle regimes? They haven’t the first pre-requisite of a bourgeois-democratic regime or any other kind of independent regime—sovereignty. Power rests in the hands of the foreign conqueror. The very first democratic right is lacking—the right of the Italian and French people to determine their own fate. Secondly, the cabinets are hand-picked. There is no parliament and there are no elections. These governments “rule”  by decree. Is it necessary to argue that governments which “rule” by authority of the military forces of the foreign conqueror, whose troops are stationed in the country; governments which are hand-picked, governments which “rule” by decree, with no parliament and no elections, is it necessary to argue that these are facades of a military dictatorship?
We are told that some democratic rights exist both in France and Italy. To be sure. These rights have been grabbed up by the masses in the course of the struggle, they attest to the rising class struggle in Italy and France but do not prove the democratic character of the Bonomi or de Gaulle regimes. Even under blood-thirsty Czarism, the Bolsheviks were able to publish for a time a legal daily newspaper. There existed, for a time, a consultative parliament with elected deputies. Up until the world war the Bolsheviks, as well as the Mensheviks and Social-Revolutionaries, sent their deputies to this assembly. The argument that de Gaulle’s democracy is revealed by the fact that he rests on the left-wing organizations is equally unimpressive. Every Bonapartist regime attempts to balance itself between the two conflicting forces of society.
Isn’t de Gaulle, however, evolving in the direction of a bourgeois-democratic regime? The whole manner in which this is posed is false. It is not our business to indulge in idle speculation. We know that de Gaulle, that the European capitalists, that the American imperialists, will grudgingly grant this or that democratic right or even, if necessary, set up a full-blown democratic regime if the sweep of the revolution rises to great heights and they fear for their existence. How de Gaulle, or how Bonomi, or how any other regimes will “evolve” depends on the course of the struggle and on nothing else. It is, I repeat, not our business to indulge in idle speculation. It is our business to expose the treacherous maneuvers of de Gaulle. It is our business to teach the masses that every concession de Gaulle or the Allies are forced to grant has the sole purpose of sidetracking the struggle, lulling their revolutionary vigilance in order to gain time to organize the forces of the counterrevolution for a definitive settlement with the working class. It is not our business to lose our sense of proportion and falsely paint up de Gaulle’s regime as democratic because of every episodic concession won as a by-product of the revolutionary struggle, but to utilize all concessions to penetrate more deeply into the worker-mass, to further heighten their class consciousness, to expose the fact that all concessions are transitory, that all promises of improvement are lies, that outside of the destruction of capitalism and the establishment of the Soviet power, there is no salvation for Europe and its peoples.
The perniciousness of this theory of the renascence (with whatever qualifications are attached) of bourgeois democracy is dearly revealed in the two questions I have just discussed.
This theory has so disorientated and confused its proponents that in the first instance they proceeded to paint up American imperialism and even altered the facts to suit the exigencies of their false perspective. In the second instance, they proceeded to paint up the thinly veiled military dictatorships imposed on the people of Italy and France as bourgeois-democratic governments or something very close to it. The imperialists have succeeded beyond their wildest dreams. By covering up their military dictatorship with a little—and very little — democratic veneer, they succeeded in fooling even a few Trotskyists. The job of the Trotskyists is not to accept for good coin the fraudulent democratic facades that cover the military dictatorships. The job of the Trotskyists is to expose this facade and show how behind it stands the military force of the conqueror who denies to the people their right to select governments of their choosing, to show that the shadow regimes are subservient to the conqueror, propped up by Anglo-American imperialism which aims not to liberate but to oppress.
This false perspective of Morrow has a further implication if it is really drawn to its logical end. If American imperialism has such inexhaustible powers, that it can, as he thinks, improve the standard of living in Europe, then of course there exists a certain basis, on however low a foundation, for the establishment of bourgeois-democracy in the immediate period ahead. From that we must assume the softening of class conflicts for a period, that the class struggle will be very largely refracted through the parliamentary struggle, that for a time the parliamentary arena will dominate the stage. If that were true, we would have to revise our conception of American imperialism. And of course the Trotskyist movement would have to attune its work to these new conditions—conditions for a while of slow painful growth, propaganda, election campaigns, etc., etc.
 
The Question of Democratic Demands
Morrow apparently draws back and cannot get himself to enunciate this perspective in clear-cut fashion ... except to give exaggerated emphasis to democratic demands ...
While I am on the subject of democratic demands, let me ask this: Why all this agitation suddenly on democratic demands? Why this insistence upon involving our party in this totally artificial debate? We accused Morrow at the Plenum of wanting a blueprint, of trying to draw up a concrete program of action and set of demands for the European proletariat. Here is Morrow’s answer to our accusation, as given in his speech to the Plenum:
“By a blueprint is meant an unwarranted attempt to anticipate what concrete situations our European comrades will be faced with, which democratic demands our European comrades should raise at various conjunctures and in what sequence they should raise them ... Frank said for the Subcommittee that they don’t want a blueprint. Neither do I. Their objection is not well taken. Frank said, what is true enough, that the sequence and formulation of democratic demands are things which will have to be left to our European comrades to work out in the heat of battle as they sense the mood of the masses. True enough, but irrelevant to my points on democratic demands. For my points do not at all attempt to anticipate which democratic demands and in what sequence they should raise them, but I simply indicate why the METHOD of democratic and transitional demands will have to be employed under the general conditions which are likely to prevail in Europe in the next immediate period.”
If that is what Morrow wanted—an affirmation of the method of fighting for democratic as well as transitional demands, in order to mobilize the masses—he has got it. This is incorporated in the Plenum resolution, and we have included a section on it in the convention resolution. The clamor for and around and about democratic demands, however, has not ceased.
Today Logan comes forward, speaking presumably for the Morrow position, and presents us with a demand not only for the “method” of democratic and transitional demands (a strange “demand” to be put to our party in 1944) but with a full-fledged program of action, a veritable blueprint,—with slogans and all—just how the French, Italian, German and other Trotskyists can win over the masses and make the revolution. Of course, every experienced comrade will simply laugh such blueprints out of court. The attempt is ludicrous. Slogans, especially if we are speaking of democratic, episodic slogans, depend by their nature on the consciousness, the mood of the masses, the flow and tempo of the class struggle, the relationship of forces. That is what determines which slogan is put forward as against another one. That is what determines exactly how the slogan is advanced. Sometimes events alter sharply overnight and the slogan of yesterday must be withdrawn and a new one substituted in its place. What particular slogans to push, to agitate for at a given time, what slogans take precedence—these are all questions which can be determined fully only by the people involved in the struggle who have the necessary information, can gauge the sentiment of the masses and understand the relationship of the forces that obtain. This question of slogans and demands and immediate programs of action cannot be decided by the American party, much less incorporated by us in resolution form, because we do not have adequate information.
Moreover, we are writing a resolution on the European revolution. If we would attempt to sloganeer and write blueprints, we would have to write separate programs of action for a half dozen or a dozen different countries, because we know that revolutionary developments do not proceed uniformly, that the conditions, tempo of development, mood of the masses, vary from country to country ...
 
On the Danger of Ultra-Leftism
The attempt to create a thoroughly artificial and uncalled-for debate over democratic slogans, the attempt in a thoroughly unwarranted manner to magnify their proper importance in our full program and constantly push them to the forefront as a kind of panacea designed to solve every problem and overcome every difficulty, stems from the completely one-sided, tendentious, arbitrary and therefore false theory that ultra-leftism represents the main danger in the Fourth International today. Morrow tells us: “The main danger within the Fourth International appears to me to lie in the direction of ultra-leftism.” And of course, as everyone knows, ultra-leftists are opposed to fighting for democratic demands. That is why “it is necessary,” according to Morrow, “to emphasize and underline the role of democratic demands.” 
What is the proof for this amazing theory that in the period of revolutionary upsurge the main danger is ultra-leftism? It is laughable to even talk about it. Proof number one is historical. According to Morrow, “the rich lessons of the first years after the last war” reveal the fact that “the young parties of the Comintern suffered primarily not from opportunism but from ultra-leftism.” And we are told that “the same phenomenon is far more likely to confront the Fourth International at the end of this war.” 
History does not confirm this theory. As a general proposition it is far more correct to say that in the period of revolutionary rise the main danger comes from the opportunist direction. Consider Lenin’s own party. In 1917, before Lenin’s arrival, virtually the whole Central Committee of the Bolshevik party approved the policy of conciliationism with Menshevism, and only by Lenin’s own timely and energetic intervention was the crisis solved and the helm turned toward a correct revolutionary course. A few months later Trotsky was defeated in the Bolshevik fraction on his and Lenin’s policy of boycotting the Pre-Parliament, which caused another minor crisis in the Bolshevik ranks. And then, on the very eve of the revolution, the Bolshevik party was thrown into a new terrible crisis by the crackup of Zinoviev and Kamenev under the pressure of bourgeois public opinion. The 1919 revolution in Hungary was defeated in part because of Bela Kun’s policy of conciliation with the Social-Democrats. The young Italian party was unprepared for the critical events of 1920 because the Serrati leadership refused to break with and purge the party of its incorrigible opportunist wing. We can, as a matter of fact, sum up the first years of the Comintern by stating that this period was devoted to a fight for the 21 demands, the fight to purge the parties of opportunist elements and destroy the opportunist tendencies. It was only at the Third Congress of the Comintern, after the first wave of the revolutionary tide had already passed, that the struggle was first launched against the ultra-leftist danger.
Proof number two consists of a consideration of the situation inside the Fourth International today. And here again we are treated to a one-sided analysis with the facts arbitrarily selected to fit a preconceived theory. We are informed of “the consistently ultra-leftist course of our official British section and its consequent deterioration.” And from this evidence the sweeping conclusion is drawn: “Thus the present evidence is that within the International the danger of ultra-leftism is far more likely than the danger of opportunism.” How is it, in discussing England, that less than one-half of the situation is described? Why is there no attempt, if England is to be discussed, to discuss the whole English problem as far as the British Trotskyist movement is concerned? As a matter of fact, the more important half of the information has been left out—the fact that the old WIL leadership, for a number of years manifested, in our opinion, traits of national exclusiveness. Today the ultra-leftists represent a truly insignificant tendency inside the fused party. The main problems of the British Trotskyist movement lie in an entirely different direction.
We are further aware that a group of German comrades submitted to the Fourth International and still support the Three Theses (published in the December 1942 FI), a thoroughly opportunist, revisionist as well as liquidationist document. Our Cuban section has just recently been guilty of what is, in our Judgment, an opportunist error when it supported, even though critically, Grau San Martin in the recent presidential elections in that country, etc., etc.
To make any definite judgments today on the varying tendencies within the Fourth International is distinctly premature. And in any case it should never be made in the one-sided manner attempted by Morrow.
We have always been taught that as a general rule the main danger comes from the opportunist direction in the period of revolutionary rise. Trotsky established in his Lessons of October that in every revolutionary crisis, bourgeois public opinion beats down upon the proletarian party and creates a crisis inside the central leadership itself. This, said Trotsky, is an historic law.
The question at hand, however, raised by Morrow, stands on somewhat different ground. When someone proposes that we write a resolution or devote a section of a resolution exorcising a deviationist tendency, then it is not permissible to confine oneself to generalities. One is obliged to tell us where is the danger, what groups or individuals represent it, how have the tendencies manifested themselves. We stand ready at all times to fight real dangers, whether from the left or the right. We will not launch a struggle, however, against dangers that have not yet arisen, but which somebody simply conjures up out of thin air, based on a misreading of the history of the Comintern and a one-sided analysis of the parties of the Fourth International.
 
We Do Not Change Our Course!
Proceeding from our perspective on the death agony of capitalism in Europe, on the predatory counter-revolutionary and tyrannical role of American imperialism, on the clearly revolutionary mood which pervades the masses of Europe and the fact that the European revolution has begun, we are steering the course toward building Trotskyist parties in the very heat of battle. We understand that the class struggle is not about to be softened, nor primarily refracted through parliamentary prisms. We know the very contrary is true. The class struggle is growing more fierce. And in the period of revolutionary rise, basing ourselves on the lessons of the October Revolution, we stress first and foremost to our European co-thinkers the necessity of unfurling our full banner and stepping forth before the masses as the intransigeant fighters for the socialist revolution, for working class internationalism, for the Socialist United States of Europe. We step forth as the most indefatigable builders of the Soviets and the boldest fighters for the soviet power. Our transitional program is not of a propagandistic character now, but is invested with immediate burning importance in Europe today. Many of the slogans will unquestionably become slogans of the day and will be taken up by the masses. And of course, of course, the Trotskyists, who aim to be not only propagandists or agitators, but leaders of mass action, will issue at every turn of the struggle those necessary sharp fighting slogans of an immediate character dictated by the moods of the masses and the needs of the struggle.
For us it is not a question of speculating whether the process will take months or years. That will be decided only in the struggle and by the struggle. We do not view the European revolution as one gigantic apocalyptic event, which with one smashing blow will finish with capitalism. The European revolution will probably be a more or less long drawn-out process with many initial setbacks, retreats, and possibly even defeats.
We know full well the military might of American imperialism and what treachery its Stalinist and Social-Democratic agents are capable of. We know all their counter-revolutionary designs. We know they aim to drown the German revolution in its own blood and that they are already proceeding to draw a cordon sanitaire around the German nation.
But more decisive than their schemes and plots and grandiose plans is the disintegration of capitalism, tie melting away of its reserves. Once the inexhaustible power of the proletariat is unleashed, once the proletariat creates a Bolshevik leadership, it will prove mightier than all the foul conspiracies, than all the military prowess of the imperialists, and it will emerge triumphant in the end.
 



The imperialist war in the Far East has ended amidst the thunderous roar and the blinding glare of atomic bombs, the screams of agonized humanity, the armed occupation of all major cities, and the rising fires of civil war.
Japan lies utterly crushed. She arrived too late on the scene as an imperial power. Her economic base proved far too weak for the grandiose ambitions of her ruling class.
After many years of maneuvering, scheming and marauding, including the snatching and exploitation of new vast territories, backward semi-feudal Japan, beset by inner contradictions and hemmed in by its lack of raw materials and resources, decided to strike out and stake everything on establishing herself as the supreme imperial ruler of the Far East. Seizing the favorable moment when the western powers were locked in combat with Germany, Japan struck out with determination and audacity.
Her initial military successes were enormous. With surprising ease and rapidity she dealt the Allies one catastrophic blow after another until the whole Far East lay at her feet. At Pearl Harbor a major part of the United States Pacific fleet was destroyed, thus breaking at the time, American offensive power in the Pacific. In rapid fire order the Americans were hurled out of the Philippines, the British out of Burma, the French out of Indo-China. Singapore, the Gibraltar of the East, fell like a rotten apple; its millions of dollars of armament investment proved even more useless than France’s Maginot Line in holding back the foe. With the elimination of the Anglo-American Far Eastern military establishment, Japan pushed out the Dutch, seized the fabulously rich South Sea Islands, and was even menacing Australia. In less than six months, Japan had carved out an empire vaster and potentially far wealthier than all of Hitler’s conquests.
Dazzled by these stupendous military achievements the bourgeois penny-a-line scribblers – and in their wake a number of pseudo-Marxists – began beating the drums about Western underestimation of Japan’s strength. The journalists who write for the New International, edited by Max Shachtman, and who mistake impressionism for Marxist sociology, even proposed that we throw overboard our whole previous estimate of Japan, based upon a thorough-going scientific analysis of the fundamental sociological and economic factors involved. [1]
But again Marxian prognosis proved a better and more reliable guide to political action than journalistic impressionism.
In general, of course, it is impossible to predict with certainty the outcome of a military struggle. Too many imponderables exist; there are too many unknown and unknowable factors. Indeed, if the outcome of war could be definitively predicted ahead of time, the loser would never take up arms in the first place, except under very special circumstances. But Marxists base themselves on the fact that modern wars are total wars; the whole strength of the nations, technological, economic and human, is thrown into the balance. Thus war becomes a bloody contest of a more or less drawn-out character affecting the life of every single individual, whose outcome seals the very fate of the nation. Under these conditions, incidental and secondary factors, such as the initial advantage, surprise, the skill of this or that general, etc., tend to play a subordinate role in the inter-imperialist conflict, where the morale of both sides is roughly equivalent. More and more, as the conflict wears on, and all the resources and revenues of the nation are thrown into the fray the country with the strongest economic base emerges triumphant.
 
Japan Was Crushed
And so it was in the war between the United States and Japan. Japan was cruelly and decisively crushed, despite its initial successes, despite its strong geographical advantage, despite the catastrophic blow it dealt the US fleet at Pearl Harbor, despite the fact that the United States with England was concentrating its main strength in Europe. In the end the all-around superiority of the United States in wealth, technique, scientific advancement, productivity of labor, natural resources, and manpower, asserted themselves with pulverizing force. America, after initial defeats, quickly rebuilt its forces, and in one swift blow after another, at Saipan, at Guam, at Midway and finally at Okinawa, wiped out the Japanese navy and air fleet and stood poised for the final invasion of the Japanese mainland. America’s military achievement is all the more sensational as it was carried through in the period when the greater part of the US military establishment was concentrated in Europe. If it can be stated that Germany was crushed by a coalition of powers, first and foremost the USSR, plus the United States and England, then it must be admitted that Japan was overwhelmed single-handedly by the military might of the United States.
The United States emerges out of the second world war as the strongest military power on earth. Its fleet and air force are incomparably superior in quality as well as numbers to that of both Britain and the USSR. Its armaments and wealth are also beyond compare. And to this already terrifying arsenal has now been added the dread atomic bomb. It is not for nothing that the American plutocracy is girding its loins for what it pleases to designate as “The American Century.”
And who are the architects of this projected American Century? Who are the people that possess this fearsome might, who hold this vast array of power in the palm of their hands? And what are their purposes and plans? This incalculable power is in the grip of a small clique of bankers and monopoly industrialists who have amassed and control wealth and productive capacity before which the wealth of all previous ruling classes in history pales into insignificance. These Wall Street masters have been conditioned by their whole past to be a ruthless, pugnacious, arrogant gang of freebooters and pirates. The Bourbon rulers of Europe will appear as yielding and modest people compared with this Wall Street crew. The perfidious and snobbish conquerors who carved out the British Empire will loom as representatives of civilization and culture beside the bloodthirsty ignoramuses, the Pattons and Halseys, which the Wall Street money-changers are letting loose on a tortured world.
This fraternity of robber barons is now completely drunk with power and vision of world empire. It already sees in its mind’s eye argosies plying the seven seas, bringing their tribute to the Wall Street princes. It aims to bend ruined and prostrate Europe to its needs. It aims to convert the vast expanses of Eastern Asia with its teeming millions of humanity into colonial fiefs. It plans to unlock the gates of the British Empire and penetrate into its innermost recesses, not excluding the imperial crown jewel, India. Its engineers are already tapping the undreamt-of oil riches of the Near East and preparing to displace Britain as the master of its affairs. No spot on this globe is escaping its eager and ardent attention. American imperialism is embarking on the biggest architectural job ever undertaken by man – the building of a world empire, an undertaking so gargantuan, so ambitious, so fraught with danger and uncertainty that even the aging, thoroughly cynical British imperialists are staring at Wall Street with disbelief and dismay. Humanity now stands face to face with the unleashed power of American imperialism. We can say that we are now officially in Year I of Pax Americana.
* * *
Crowning Prize of Imperialist Creed
The fabulous riches and cheap labor of the Far East have long made it the crowning prize of imperialist greed. China, with its huge population of over 400 million, its enormous natural resources, and its virtually unlimited supply of cheap labor, has long been the sought-after green pasture of imperial adventurers and speculators. Hegemony over China provides the key to control of the whole Far East and the Pacific. From the early days of the Nineteenth Century, when it was “opened up” by the Western powers, China became the victim of imperialist rapacity, the happy hunting ground for the western plunderers.
All the imperialist powers, England, France, Germany, Japan, Italy, swooped down on backward, feudalistic, helpless China and began voraciously gobbling up everything in sight. In a series of wars launched against the decadent Manchu dynasty, they wrested concession after concession and reduced China to the status of a semi-colonial country. The United States joined this imperialists’ cabal only toward the end of the nineteenth century. It began its struggle for imperial power and pelf under the slogans of fair play: the “Open Door” policy. This meant: “Shove over. Give me some elbow room, too. I want a share of the plunder.”
The United States, as we see, began its imperialist career in China on a very modest basis. It simply wanted a place at the feeding trough, on equal terms with the other pigs. But the latecomer who started his imperialist career with such modesty and reasonableness soon adopted a more menacing and peremptory tone. His ambitions grew; his demands became more stringent, his manner more threatening. Hardly had Uncle Sam emerged from the first world war as the world’s creditor nation than he summoned together all the leading pirates in solemn conclave at Washington, D.C. Now he no longer pleaded. He laid down conditions. Japan was to get out of Shantung and the maritime provinces of Siberia. England was to limit its fleet on a par with the United States; and Japan to three-fifths of that size. Uncle Sam had become the arbiter of the destinies of the Far East.
But today Wall Street is no longer merely the arbiter. Today it enters the Far East as the supreme ruler, the imperialist overlord, the world conqueror. Holland, France and even England crawl back into their old imperial domains by the grace of Wall Street and behind its coattails, or more correctly, its sea and air armadas. Holland and France, imperialist powers though they were and remain, are now reduced to the status of clerks and underlings of the Wall Street bosses. All roads, the ancient world used to say, lead to Rome. All roads now lead to Washington. Nothing decisive can be done until Washington has spoken its word. And even Britain, who so long ruled the seven seas; even Britain, with its $2 billion of investments in China, possessor of Hong Kong and Singapore, with its huge concessions at Shanghai, overlord of India and Burma, Ceylon and Siam, even Britain returns now to the Far East only by the grace and with the assent of Wall Street. From the foremost power in the Far East, it is now reduced to the position of the very junior partner, the beggared partner of the firm of Anglo-American imperialism.
* * *
The Imperialists Ravage China
The western imperialists in the nineteenth century invaded China like an army of locusts and ravaged the land. They exploited, they lorded it over and humiliated the native population. But that is not all they did. They also brought into backward China the methods, the advanced technique of western industry and commerce. They erected modern factories, docks and warehouses. Thus we see superimposed on the backwardness, the ignorance and the squalor of feudal China, factories and business establishments more modern and efficient than could be found even in Paris or London. China provides a classic example of the law of combined development.
The introduction of capitalist relations in China led to the creation of a native Chinese capitalist class. But this belated capitalist class, nurtured and brought forth by foreign imperialism, never attained sufficient strength to stand on its own feet. The first Chinese capitalists were the direct agents of the imperialists and were recruited by the latter from among the landlords and the old Manchu officialdom. It was from the ranks of these imperialist agents that the native capitalist class emerged.
Together with the imperialists they exploited the working class and peasantry. Their interests were closely interlocked with the landlords with whom they were connected by a countrywide banking system. Its weakness, its very origin, its belated appearance and its dependence on western capital linked the Chinese capitalist class by thousands of threads to the imperialists. Another decisive factor made the Chinese capitalists, as a class, the dependable allies of one or another group of imperialists and robbed them of the progressive role played by the European capitalists at the dawn of capitalist development. Capitalism did not arise in China as in Western Europe, but was forcibly introduced from the outside. Concomitantly, with the development of a feeble Chinese capitalist class arose the Chinese working class, employed almost from the first in large scale modern industries.
This proletariat, horribly exploited and oppressed, immediately displayed the most revolutionary tendencies, the greatest will to struggle. Fabianism and gradualism could find no soil to take root in poverty-stricken, semi-colonial China. After the war, inspired by the Russian Revolution of 1917, the Chinese workers in the principal cities quickly turned to communism and began leading vast masses of peasants in their struggles for emancipation. The Chinese proletariat cut through all intermediary paths and strove to emulate the Russian workers and peasants, to take the road of Lenin and Trotsky. It is significant that the Social-Democracy never struck any roots in China.
The stormy growth and revolutionary character of the Chinese working class explains why the Chinese capitalist class turned so savagely reactionary. It could not lead a struggle to drive out all the imperialists and fight for complete national independence, because such a struggle presupposed the unleashing of the mass movement of workers and peasants. And the workers and peasants would not stop half-way. They would combine the fight for national liberation with their struggles for social liberation. While engaged in driving out the foreign imperialist bloodsuckers, they would proceed to crush the native exploiters. They would take over the factories in the cities and seize the land in the villages. That is why the Chinese capitalist class rushed so precipitately into the arms of the imperialists for protection against their own insurgent population. That is why the Chinese capitalists gave up and sold out the struggle for national liberation and became an “anti-national” class. That is why the struggle for genuine, full national freedom can be led only by the working class in alliance with the lower middle class, and the peasantry. That is why the Chinese struggle for national freedom is linked inseparably with the struggle for socialist emancipation.
 
The 1925 Anti-Imperialist Struggle
In 1925 the anti-imperialist mass movement took on stormy proportions. The workers in the principal cities were ready for a seizure of power and the agrarian revolution in the countryside was growing apace. The masses began pouring into the young Communist party, which became the indisputable leader of the mass movement, both in the cities and rural areas. Everything appeared propitious for the success of the Chinese revolution, the destruction of the power of the imperialists and their Chinese allies, and the inauguration of the Chinese Soviet Republic. Why then did this revolution go down in bloody defeat? Because of the criminal policy of Stalin and Bukharin, the two men who led the Comintern in the years 1925-27.
It was in China that Stalin in the name of “the bloc of the four-classes” first practiced on a grand scale the infamous policy of the People’s Front, that is, the subordination of the working masses to the capitalists and their aims. It was Stalin who forced the young, inexperienced Chinese Communist party into a bloc with the Kuomintang, the party of the Chinese capitalists and landlords. It was Stalin who ordered the Communists to stop the seizure of land in order not to antagonize the landlords, and to halt strike activities and the seizure of factories in the cities in order not to frighten the capitalists. Thus did Stalin cement the “unity” between capital and labor by disarming the masses.
At the decisive moment, the Chinese capitalists and landlords, who feared the Chinese masses more than they did the foreign imperialists, turned on their working-class allies and abandoned the struggle for genuine independence. Chiang Kai-Shek, the leader of the Kuomintang military forces, launched the white terror against the masses who had been disarmed both morally and physically by Stalin’s People’s Front treacheries. Forty thousand of the flower of the proletariat were slaughtered in Shanghai alone. The Chinese revolution which started with such tremendous promise, whose red glare, for a brief moment, gave renewed hope and inspiration to the down-trodden masses of the whole colonial world, was snuffed out. Chiang Kai-Shek became the Gallifet or, to cite his modern counterpart, the Franco of the Chinese revolution.
On the ruins of the Chinese revolution arose the counterrevolutionary Kuomintang regime. The workers returned to a slavery intensified by the new military dictatorship of Chiang Kai-Shek. Militarist wars, evidence of the complete disunity of the country, revived on an unprecedented scale as Chiang Kai-Shek sought to extend his sway over all of China. The peasantry scourged by landlordism, usury and military requisitioning, fell into deeper ruin. Imperialism, against which Stalin’s People’s Front bloc had been specifically directed, was able to strengthen all its commanding positions. The road was prepared for the subsequent invasion by Japan. Such were the real fruits of the Stalin-Bukharin policies in China.
But the Kuomintang’s betrayal of the national struggle and the crushing of the insurgent proletarian and peasant movements made the Chinese capitalist and landlord rulers ever more dependent on foreign imperialism, and the continued prey of one imperialist power after another. In 1931, as we know, Japan embarked on an active policy of despoliation in China with its invasion of Manchuria. Chiang Kai-Shek at this time, however, was taken up with his own affairs. He was busy waging a war of extermination against the revolting peasants. The helpless Kuomintang government proclaimed therefore a policy of “non-resistance” to Japanese imperialism. The cowardly Chinese capitalists and landlords were more interested in crushing the peasants and keeping the labor movement prostrate than in fighting the Japanese invader. They preferred exercising their arbitrary rule in at least part of China rather than risking war with Japan.
But Japan continued its encroachments until in 1937 it proceeded to seize North China and launched its attack on the Yangtze Valley. The Chinese capitalist rulers could procrastinate and maneuver no longer. They were face to face with the decision to resist or perish. They decided to strictly limit themselves to a defensive military campaign, a sort of large-scale guerrilla struggle. At the same time they proceeded to embrace Great Britain and the United States from whom they received financial aid. Thus again the Chinese capitalists demonstrated their incapacity of fighting against all imperialism and of truly leading the struggle for national independence.
In 1937-38 Chiang Kai-Shek’s armies were expelled from China’s coastal provinces and driven into the interior by the Japanese invader. The authority of the Kuomintang regime was banished from all the great cities, ports and industrial areas. During the ensuing seven years, Chiang proved totally incapable of driving out the Japanese invaders from any of the occupied territory. Corrupted to the core, fearful of mobilizing the masses for a war to the death against the imperialist violators, the Kuomintang clique watched helplessly while the dismembered country plunged ever deeper into ruin.
All this time, despite the Japanese menace, Chiang continued to employ his forces to suppress the Chinese masses, the genuine opponents of Japanese imperialism. He silenced every voice of criticism and stamped ruthlessly on every opposition movement to his totalitarian regime. The prisons of Kuomintang China are filled to overflowing with genuine fighters against imperialism, with true champions of China’s freedom.
Under the combined blows of the Japanese military and the peasant insurgents, however, Chiang’s regime grew moribund. Devastating economic crisis brought on by the ravages of war loosened the tie-rods of landlord-capitalist rule. In the course of the war years the movement of peasant insurgency finally crystallized into the Yenan Government, a dual government to that of the Kuomintang. Arising originally out of the agrarian revolutionary movement of 1927, peasant revolts continued to sweep the countryside even after the revolution had been annihilated in the cities. The Stalinist leaders, after the workers’ organizations had been extirpated, transferred their activities to the countryside and took the leadership of the peasant movement.
This movement of agrarian reform, misnamed by the Stalinists in the early days as the Chinese Soviets, gained widespread support among the peasantry because it mitigated to some extent landlord parasitism, reduced the burden of taxation, inaugurated farm cooperatives and generally raised the standard of the peasants compared to farm conditions under Kuomintang control. The Stalinist-led peasant movement which fought numerous guerrilla wars against the Kuomintang was forced in 1934 to execute a mass migration into the deep interior of China. The Stalinists consolidated their position in the course of the Sino-Japanese war and today the Yenan regime rules over a vast territory containing a population estimated at 80,000,000 people. It disposes of at least half a million men under arms and in addition controls large guerrilla forces in other parts of the country. This movement in the northwest province of Shensi represented from the first a possible rallying point for the popular revolt against the Kuomintang. That is why ever since the formation of the dual Yenan government, Chiang Kai-Shek has tried to strangle it by military action and blockade. But while he succeeded in keeping it bottled up in the deep interior, he was unable to erase it.
For the whole past year it has been quite clear that the class struggle would violently flare again with the collapse of Japanese imperialism – the major “stabilizing” force in the Far East for the past 8 years. Chiang Kai-Shek was in mortal fear that the great mass movement of 1927 would again revive and sweep his rotted and corrupt regime into the discard. While it is true that Yenan represents only a peasant movement, it nevertheless commands a large army with a heroic tradition. And even more decisive, the mass movement in the cities is likely to pass again under Stalinist leadership in the initial phases. The workers’ organizations in turn will unquestionably seek to establish links with Yenan.
 
Kuomintang Prepares to Settle Accounts
The Kuomintang, constantly haunted by the specter of Communism, was busy preparing day and night in every possible way and with every resource at its command to settle accounts with Yenan once the Japanese menace was removed. The antagonism between Yenan and the Kuomintang is the political reflection of the irreconcilability of the needs and aspirations of the Chinese masses, on the one hand, with the Chiang Kai-Shek regime of capitalist-landlord exploitation on the other.
The Chinese capitalists soon enlisted the support of their Anglo-American patrons in their plans designed to ward off the Red menace. (And with the precipitous decline of British power, they turned more and more to the United States.) They must be bolstered, the Chinese capitalists argued, against the coming danger. They must have plenty of help. American imperialism was more than sympathetic. The preservation of the rotted Kuomintang clique is indispensable for its plans of super-exploitation of China. With the dispatch of Hurley as ambassador to Chungking, all ambiguity was eliminated from United States policy. American imperialism threw its full weight behind Chiang Kai-Shek.
It is clear that both the Kuomintang and American imperialism adjudged the situation correctly. No sooner did Japan collapse than the fires of civil war began to burn once again in agonized China. Reports trickled through of peasant uprisings in the countryside and for the first time since the terrible debacle of 1927, the industrial proletariat was again on the move. A Yenan communique asserted that 50,000 Chinese workers had occupied Japanese-operated factories in Shanghai and had placarded the streets with slogans welcoming the Yenan armies.
Immediately a race began between the armies of Chiang Kai-Shek and those of Yenan to seize the key industrial cities and effect the surrender of the Japanese armies. Both the Kuomintang and Yenan armies are poorly armed. Whoever captured the war booty from the Japanese would thus gain incalculable benefit. But Chiang Kai-Shek had all the advantages in this race and appears to have easily outdistanced his Yenan rivals. First, American imperialism stepped into the breach. It supplied Chiang Kai-Shek with transport planes and other vehicles to rapidly move his troops into the major industrial centers. American troops likewise moved into Shanghai and other centers, prepared to bolster his control. Then, the puppet troops numbering some 800,000, under the command of former Kuomintang generals who had gone over to the Japanese, cooperated with Chiang Kai-Shek in blockading the Yenan troops and preserving “law and order” for the Kuomintang. Furthermore even the Japanese general staff, in its hour of supreme humiliation, never for one moment forgot its class instinct. General Okamura, Japanese commanding officer in China, announced that he would only surrender to Chiang Kai-Shek’s officers.
 
Kuomintang and Yenan
In view of the array of forces on the opposing side, it might appear that the initial setback to Yenan and therefore to the worker-peasant mass movement was inevitable. The Kuomintang had the unstinted aid of American imperialism, the support of the Chinese Quisling armies and even the backing of the defeated Japanese general staff. In contrast Yenan’s “patron,” the Kremlin bureaucracy, left it “holding the bag” at the crucial moment by its pact with Chiang. What could Yenan do? But the revolutionary movement of the masses fighting for their emancipation can never count on rich patrons from outside to help it in its struggles. The rich patrons always have a habit of going over to the side of reaction and counter-revolution. Is the battle therefore hopeless? But we know the masses of Russia in 1917, without any powerful patrons on the outside, conquered power and succeeded in holding the imperialists of the whole world at bay. In general, the strong point of the revolution does not lie in its technical or material superiority over the counterrevolution. On the contrary, such superiority generally lies with the other side. The invincibility of the revolution consists in its ideas, its program, its ability to arouse out of their lethargy the downtrodden millions of humanity and to inspire them with the greatest idea of all, the greatest crusade of history, the overthrow of the slaveholders, the exploiters, the tyrants and the emancipation of mankind. That was the “secret weapon” and the only “secret weapon” of Lenin and Trotsky in 1917. This same weapon can again sweep the slate clean in China today.
Unfortunately, the Yenan armies are not under the leadership of genuine working class militants but Stalinist scoundrels; not mistaken or misled revolutionists, but conscious deceivers. In 1927 the young Chinese Communist leaders were merely duped and misled by Stalin into the blind alley of People’s Frontism. But today the Yenan leaders are battle-scarred veterans of the Stalinist school of betrayal, treachery, sell-outs and crimes. They aim to head the coming mass movement only to behead it. Despite the fact that Chiang Kai-Shek revealed himself in 1927 to be the butcher of the Chinese Revolution, despite the fact that he heads an arch-reactionary, bloodthirsty regime, the Stalinists again proposed to him in 1937 the formation of a governmental bloc in order to fight against Japan. They even went so far as to call off all criticism of his infamous government and gave up their program of mild agrarian reform. But the Kuomintang is so rotted, is so hated by the people, is so dependent on terror to preserve its rule that Chiang Kai-Shek could not preserve an alliance with the Stalinists even on those terms. Civil war broke out again as the war with Japan progressed.
And today, on the eve of new unfolding struggles in the Far East, the Stalinists are attempting to repeat their crimes of 18 years ago; their treachery of Spain in 1936-37. But this time their cynicism exceeds all bounds. They are proposing to fight for bourgeois democracy in China in 1945 arm in arm with the Chinese Franco! The Stalinists, at the present juncture, are continuing to demand a “democratization” of the totalitarian Kuomintang regime through the formation of a coalition government with Chiang Kai-Shek. But this represents the sheerest Utopia, the worst deception. Bourgeois democracy is least of all possible in war-ravaged, poverty-stricken China. The Chinese capitalists and landlords allied with the American imperialists can continue their monstrous enslavement of the masses only by the exercise of the most brutal means, only by the use of terror and violence against the people. Bourgeois democracy represents a chimera, an empty dream for the thrice-exploited colonial world. Only a thoroughgoing radical program similar to Lenin’s program of 1917 can inspire the masses to struggle to the very death and remove the dead hand of reaction which condemns the country to ruin, decay, chaos and famine. Only the program of the Socialist revolution can wipe out the parasitism of the capitalists, landlords and imperialists and provide the necessary economic groundwork for the growth of a genuine democracy.
 
A Transition Stage
Even if Chiang Kai-Shek, because of his present weakness, is compelled to agree to legalize the Communist Party and include a number of Yenan functionaries in the Kuomintang Government it would by no means signalize the dawn of bourgeois democracy in China. Such a coalition would simply represent an interlude, a transition stage which Chiang Kai-Shek would utilize to strengthen the forces of the counter-revolution and at the propitious moment move to effect a new bloody settlement with the rebellious masses.
But probably the Yenan Stalinists are not concerned with democracy at all. Probably they are concerned solely with the legalization of their organizations and the securing of influential posts in a coalition government. If so, they are merely attempting to utilize the resurgent mass movement for bargaining purposes with Chiang Kai-Shek and in order to counter the fast-growing influence of American imperialism. Even on this plane of power politics Stalin is due for cruel disappointment. Even if a coalition People’s Front government is temporarily set up in China, it settles nothing fundamental in the irrepressible conflict between the Chinese workers and peasants on the one hand and the Chinese capitalists and landlords allied with the imperialists, on the other. It merely postpones the decisive conflict while weakening, confusing, disorienting, disarming and lulling the proletariat to sleep. The Stalinists will no more succeed in weaning the Chinese capitalists and landlords away from the influence of the imperialists and pressuring them into adopting a friendly orientation toward the USSR in 1945 than they did in 1927. We said that the resurgent Chinese workers’ movement in the cities will most likely unfold in the initial period under the influence of the Stalinists. The experience of the resurgence of the Social Democracy in Germany after the last world war is now being repeated in the case of the Stalinists on a world scale. The workers are everywhere surging forward. Revolutionary moods are world-wide. And in this first period, the Stalinists, despite all their betrayals, are lifted up on the shoulders of the masses and everywhere stand at the head of millions.
How is this to be explained? Because only a small section of the workers’ vanguard follows political events closely and has fully gauged the treachery of the Stalinists. The masses first entering the political arena follow that movement which in their minds still represents the 1917 Russian Revolution, the struggle for Communism.
Of course it is idle to expect that the Chinese Stalinist leaders will act any differently than the Greek Stalinists, the French Stalinists or any other Stalinists. These utterly corrupt bureaucrats are beyond redemption. They will betray once again as they have betrayed so many times before. The mass movement will never reach its goal until it succeeds in burning out all Stalinist influence from its ranks.
The resurgence of the workers’ movements in the cities holds great promise for the Chinese class struggle. As we explained many times, this is the only class which is capable of providing the necessary leadership to the millions of poverty-stricken peasants, and bringing the struggle against the capitalists and landlords to a decisive conclusion. The workers will unquestionably assume their proper place as leader of all the downtrodden and oppressed. It well may be that the Chinese workers, who have skipped over the stage of Social Democracy, who have displayed such incalculable sacrifice, bravery, self-abnegation and will to struggle, will also be in the van of the movement of the Fourth International, will before others free themselves from the infection of Stalinism and under the banner of Trotsky resume the march again which was halted in so terrible a manner in 1927. The source of the unheard-of super-profits for the imperialists may also become for them the source of new calamities and catastrophes.
* * *
The Trotskyist Position
Despite our fundamental analysis of the “anti-national” character of the colonial bourgeoisie, we Trotskyists, as is known, support every actual struggle of this same bourgeoisie when it is forced into action against the imperialists. We support such struggles despite the bourgeoisie’s half-measures, despite its half-heartedness and treachery, and despite our knowledge that they cannot carry the struggle through to the end. First, because every blow struck by the colonies against imperialism weakens the latter and thus aids the working class in the metropolitan centers in their struggle for socialism, thus improves their chances of success. Secondly, only by supporting such progressive struggles, despite their inadequacy; only by fighting side by side with the masses and sharing common experiences can we, step by step, expose the true character and role of the bourgeois leaders, explain the necessity for a revolutionary program and win the leadership of the mass movement. That is why we supported completely and unconditionally the Chinese war against the Japanese invaders from its very beginning in 1937, even though it was under the leadership of the hangman, Chiang Kai-Shek. Following the same logic, we supported the struggle of the Indian bourgeoisie under the Indian Congress in 1942 against British imperialism despite the cowardly and treacherous policies of Ghandi.
And we insisted on unambiguously demarcating ourselves from all varieties of literary radicalism, some of whom decided to abandon the Leninist policy on colonial struggles, of all times – in the very midst of the Second World War; and of all places – in China and India! Such literary tendencies invariably compensate for their political impotence in life by “super-revolutionary” phrase-mongering on paper, always designed to justify in the end a policy of abstentionism from the struggle.
What did we achieve in practice by following the Leninist colonial policy? How did this policy prove its correctness against the “policies” of defeatist phrase-mongering? Naturally in the period of gigantic working class defeats and unparalleled reaction not even the most flawless policy can produce immediate large scale results. But still we are not without proof. In the very midst of the Second World War, a new section of the Fourth International was created in India. The leadership of this party, it is clear, has fully grasped the fundamentals of our program and has applied them to its country. In the 1942 upheaval it correctly supported the mass struggle which took place under formal Congress leadership, while mercilessly exposing the treacherous policies of this same leadership. Today we learn it is beginning to grow and register gains. And significantly enough its greatest gains come from the forces in the Congress left wing!
In our opinion this example is of enormous symptomatic significance and provides an illustration of the correctness of our policy. We are sure that the Trotskyists of China will have similar experiences to record. Only by not separating ourselves from the masses, only by supporting and joining with them in their struggles, will we earn the opportunity of teaching them the great truths of Marxism. A policy of abstentionism and defeatism will only result in isolation and disintegration of the revolutionary vanguard.
* * *
Today the situation has sharply changed. Japanese imperialism, the marauder of China, now lies prostrate. And the new and far more powerful overlord, US imperialism, has entered and is preparing to subjugate China. And the native bourgeoisie, already trembling before the rebellious masses, has flung itself into the arms of this new imperialist overlord. The main enemy today of the Chinese masses is US imperialism and its Kuomintang ally. That is why in the unfolding class struggle in China we take our stand on the side of the workers and peasants, even though they are now under the false leadership and program of the Stalinists, and against US imperialism and the Kuomintang.
Our whole record – from the very first – on the Chinese question, is clean. Our banner is spotless. Let us hope that in the great class struggles which will rock the Far East on the morrow, Trotskyism will succeed in exposing the perfidy of the Stalinist misleaders and will step forth as the acknowledged leader of masses in action.
 
Footnote
1. The resolution of the 1938 Founding Conference of the Fourth International, The War in the Far East and the Revolutionary Perspectives states:
“Insular Japan, in the era of the twilight of capitalism, proceeding from a weak economic base, is debarred historically from achieving the imperial destiny of which her ruling classes dream ... Weakened by what will turn out to be pyrrhic victories in China, Japanese imperialism will go down to defeat in the coming world war if its career is not brought to a speedier end by the proletarian revolution.”



OPINIONS

A Letter: by Michael Harrington
I WAS very interested in your article [New Thunder out of Communist China, by Bert Cochran] in the April American Socialist, so I thought I would pass on a few comments. I will not take time to puff the good parts – research, calmness, and so forth – but will concentrate upon areas of disagreement.
First of all, I am disturbed by a question of method: the approach of the ‘on-the-one-hand; on-the-other-hand.’ Without being hard and sectarian about it, it seems to me that an essential concept of Marxian analysis is that of the ‘law of motion.’ This idea need not be reified, à la orthodox Trotskyism, into a claim for immediate and total comprehension to the exclusion of all ambiguity and tentativeness. It does, to my mind, require that analysis concentrate upon the direction and tendencies of a social phenomenon, that is, what class is a revolution bringing to power?; what is the mode of resource allocation?; and so on. This element seemed to be lacking in your study. Excellent points were made as to the totalitarianism of the Chinese Communist Party, the danger that China-itis will corrupt the very image of socialism, and so forth. But these were inconclusive notations, and nowhere was there even a hesitant attempt to define the massive movement of the system itself.
Then, there are some specific points.
You write that the big news was ‘that China had veered away from a number of unsatisfactory patterns ... The new pattern produces better results, permits a more harmonious growth of the economy, and offers the possibility of better compensation to the people who are doing the sweating and sacrificing.’ Here, I think you leap from your previous caution to careless assertion. The facts which we can draw upon are of course insufficient for precise analysis. But what of the retreat announced at the Sixth Plenum in December? What of the crisis in transport? What of the belated announcement that all those little furnaces added up to an unsuccessful gimmick? Indeed, I think that one of the main things we have to beware of these days is the gimmicky character of the Chinese Communist Party. And then, I would argue that the commune system, far from being part of a new pattern leading toward ‘better compensation of the people’ is, among other things, an instrument for food rationing and for cutting down the surpluses which the more successful collectives were able to produce.
 
ON the family, I think polemical zeal carried you away. The criticism of the commune and the family was not confined to those who mourned the passing of the old Chinese system. There was genuine, positive socialist disgust with the idea of regulating the sexual activity of husbands and wives, or with compulsory nurseries and boarding schools motivated less ‘by a desire to emancipate woman and more by the aim of getting the woman into the fit alongside the men. For that matter, it was on this score that the opposition of the people had a certain success – the change of line on the family announced at the Sixth Plenum was a gain which can only be understood in terms of the resistance of the masses involved. Similarly, your statement that the various communal services are ‘clearly a marked improvement in the living conditions of the rural people’ requires amendment, if only in terms of the admissions of the CCP itself. After all, Mao & Co. have ready admitted that there was a gigantic mess in precisely those areas, and decrees halting the closing of restaurants and so forth, were published even before the December Plenum.
Then there is Crossman. ‘R.H.S. Crossman believes that the communes sprang from the hard puritan elite peasant Communists who have emerged in tens of thousands from the countryside. He is probably right.’ First all, why is he ‘probably right’? We have no evidence substantiate his claim – and the introduction of army us Into the communes hardly corroborates it. Then, we know the problem of the tourist in the Communist country certainly don’t agree with Richard Walker’s general political line, but his piece in Problems of Communism was a devastating empirical demonstration of how honest and sincere travelers in China had been hoodwinked.
 
FINALLY, let me return to the basic point in terms of your final remarks on democracy. You write that democracy requires a certain material level. Of course! That ABC. But the point is not to under-value the relevance of democracy to socialism – which I feel was the implication of your words – but to re-emphasize it. When, an underdeveloped country attempts a quick industrialization on basis of its own national resources, it will develop a totalitarian apparatus, for that is the only way that the peasant can be forced to give up his surplus or the worker be kept at the grindstone. In the process, the totalitarians will not exist as an abstract and classless force, but enjoy the fruits of their economic, social and political power at once. This grim mechanism of accumulation only be changed if there is massive aid from advanced (socialist, or socialist-tending) countries. It will, I think, become generalized so long as the present international situation continues, and so long as there is no perspective of socialism in an advanced country.
All of this is hardly encouraging, but this is the reality must face. In dealing with China, what realism compels us to recognize is that industrialization is being carried in an anti-socialist way which is bringing a new social class to power. On this point, there is enough evidence. Your major failure, to my mind, was that you did not the problem of the basic direction of the system squarely and that, in your ambiguous remarks about democracy, you gave unwitting aid to those who would corrupt the very image of socialism through their attitude phenomenon like that of Chinese Communism.

Reply by Bert Cochran
Let me take up your main propositions under a few separate headings:
1. What Is Actually Taking Place. You say that Chinese planning has a ‘gimmick’ character and you cast doubt that the rural industry drive amounts to much. We have to beware, it seems to me, of bending the stick so far in direction of suspicion as to deprive ourselves of the possibility of comprehending the actual process under way. It is easy to get into such a mood because the Communists are unscrupulous manipulators of data. But it is the duty of conscientious social observers to strike a reasonable balance on the basis of the best information available. We do not have any reliable statistics as to the value the goods turned out in cottage and rural industry as against urban industry. But even if we had them, they would not tell us too much. Chinese economic development is occurring on several different levels. The commanding fact of rural industry is not its inevitably low productivity, but that it can be gotten under way with a small capitalist investment, with such technical skills as locally available, and that it puts to use resources and or which would otherwise go to waste. It is one aspect the great public works, which in turn makes possible huge agricultural increases, which in turn add to the capital fund for industrialization and general growth. In other words, it is part of a chain reaction; it has what the economists call a multiplier effect.
 
NOW, the proof of the pudding is in the eating. As a result of the public works and local industries program – the two are closely linked – China reported greater agricultural progress than in the previous five years. Food grains shot up to 350–375 million tons, and they are talking in terms of 525 million tons this year. Of course, we can say the figures are all lies, but the Russian experience should caution us, while viewing the statistics critically, against blanket rejection. I am prepared to accept that it is not all beer and skittles: the transportation system is probably badly overstrained, a lot of the rural ventures probably flopped, some costly miscalculations were made, etc., etc. But the economic balance sheet reads very high. The British and Australian journalists on the scene accept the fact of an unprecedented agricultural breakthrough. This is all the more impressive as it is taking place while heavy and general urban industry is being relentlessly pushed ahead. How can monumental achievements of this kind be waved away as ‘gimmicks’? Aren’t we in danger of repeating the experience of some of the professional Russian critics: scoffing and jeering year after year only to wake up one fine day to discover that Russia is the world’s second industrial power?
 
2. The Human Cost. I know the human costs are terribly high, not only in economic deprivation of the living generations, but in regimentation. I indicated that in my article and condemned many aspects of it. But when you go on to talk about Communist regulation of sexual activity of husbands and wives, I must tell you I take this kind of information with a lot of salt. There as an inevitable regulation of sexual as well as other activities because of the grim regimen of hard work, long hours, and primitive living conditions. Even in this country, I can tell you from personal experience that General Motors or Ford regulate their employees’ sexual activity by working them to death on the assembly line. But I have seen no evidence that the Chinese Communists try to directly supervise family affairs of this nature – as does the Catholic Church at times, especially among peasant peoples. You say that the compulsory nurseries and boarding schools are less motivated by a desire to emancipate women than by the aim of getting them into the fields. Why can’t they be motivated by both desires? As a matter of fact, the evidence seems to indicate that they are. I have no intention of defending a commune system which was organized and operates by methods of coercion, but many Western correspondents back up the regime in the claim that the peasant’s economic lot is improving. Why do you want to cast doubt on this without having half-reliable contrary evidence?
 
I AM making these points, as I could several more, because I think the complaints betray an absence of judiciousness. But I don’t believe a question as deep-going as this one can be settled by scoring points. It has to be taken in the large: Regimentation and dictatorship, as far as I can see, are inevitable with a forced industrialization of a backward country. The alternative is not democracy as it is practiced in England or even in the United States, but the regime of Indonesia, or Pakistan, or Iran, or Chiang Kai-shek. I think the Chinese people are far better off with what they have. I don’t think we can look for the pathways of democracy in a poverty-stricken Asia desperately trying to lift itself into the twentieth century. I do believe the Chinese Communists can and should be criticized for forcing the pace too rapidly and inhumanely, for wiping out that measure of political freedom which is possible even in their circumstances, and having recourse to military pressures to solve too many of their internal difficulties.
 
3. The Law Of Motion. This is not the time or place for a restatement of general sociological estimations of the Soviet system, nor need our day-to-day analyses be dependent upon these estimations. The factual appreciations and political attitudes of many British left-laborites coincide roughly with my own although some of them think that China represents a variety of managerial society. I don’t think these transcendental considerations need necessarily determine all political attitudes, although I hold, as you know, that industrialization and modernization will in time bring forth forces working for democratization. The Chinese development – like the Russian – is contradictory and paradoxical, and I fail to see the worth of literary solutions that do violence to this reality. This may lead to a certain amount of ‘on-the-one-hand, on-the-other-hand’ ambiguity. But that is better than unilinear oversimplification. Spare me from both the Anna Louise Strong and Freda Utley schools of history!
Finally, you admit that the under-developed countries will go dictatorial if they seriously try to industrialize by means of their own resources, but this lamentable state of affairs can only be changed if there is massive aid from a Socialist West. Well, what’s the point of pretending; we can’t change it. If Germany or England, or both, had gone socialist in the interval between the two world wars, the history of humanity, including Russia and China, would have been written on different tablets and in a different alphabet. But that’s not what happened. The pattern is now set for the next era, of Russia-China industrializing despite the West and in conflict with the West. The socialists have not taken power and reorganized society in the West, and there is no indication that they will do so in the foreseeable future. That has certain consequences for the Soviet bloc, and willy-nilly, we are forced into far more rudimentary objectives in our own bailiwicks.



Learning from Russian experience and from their own earlier efforts, the Communist regime in China has adopted distinctly new and different ideas of economic planning. The first results are New Thunder Out of Communist China
THE Chinese Communists, like the Biblical apostles, are fond of Prophetic sayings. One of their favorites now is Marx’s remark that there are periods when 20 years are compressed into one day. They are living up to the prophecy. The country is working as if driven by all the furies of hell. The slogan is ‘to catch up with and outstrip Britain in fifteen years.’ At the rate they are going, they won’t need fifteen years – those that don’t break down with nervous exhaustion in the meantime. The Western geopolitical analysts are with good reason worrying about the contours of power in 1980. China is blasting her way out of the sloth of centuries with a demonic speed that is defying all precedents.
Up to 1957, it appeared as if China would follow the path blazed by Stalin in Russia. With the completion of the first (1952-1957) Five Year Plan, the leaders could congratulate themselves on having forced through collectivization without the embittered struggle and disruption of production that attended Stalin’s effort. As the plan had gathered speed, better than 20 percent of the growing national income went into accumulation; gross industrial output considerably better than doubled in five years, rising 19 percent annually; while gross agricultural production brought up the rear, going up a quarter in the five-year span. The original outline of the second (1958–1962) Plan augured a continuation of the same: the sinking of the bulk of the funds into large basic industrial complexes, the neglect of consumer industries, a chronic agricultural lag, and the proliferation of a heavy apparatus to continue forcing the pace by the administrative whip. This was Stalin’s method of industrializing – and it had become frozen into a Communist dogma as the only way the job could be done.
 
BUT the Hungarian and Polish affairs in late 1956 produced a crisis in the highly tensed Chinese society in its Communist leadership as well. The façade of unanimity in the party councils makes it impossible to see the precise lineups, hut the anonymously directed polemics are evidence that a serious debate was afoot on economic policy inside the party paralleling the debate on the outside. Caught off-guard by the boldness of the liberal opposition that responded to Mao’s invitation to ‘let a hundred flowers bloom,’ the Communist heads resolved to extirpate all dissent in a new massive ‘rectification campaign.’ From May to the end of the year, the campaign raged first in the party, then in the government bureaus, then in the ranks of the cities and the countryside. It is a terrifying and somewhat obscene business getting a whole nation ‘rectified,’ going through mass scenes of mummery and confessions under the watchful eye of Big Brother, with the folks finally getting their ideological metabolism properly adjusted through purgations of criticism and self-criticism.
When the rectification was finished, the botanical question which Mao had left in a twilight haze was once and for all cleared up. Reported Liu Shao-chi to the May 1918 Communist Party Congress: ‘The reactionary rightists of the bourgeoisie claimed to be one of the hundred socialist flowers. But that was simply a fraud. They can’t be recognized as such ... Since poisonous weeds exist objectively, if we did not allow them to grow as they are, they would have appeared in disguise, and poisoned the people in secret. We had better tell them openly: ‘Poisonous weeds are illegal, they’ve got to be uprooted when they grow. But we do not stop you from sprouting if you want to. Whoever wants to come out and fight, let them do so!’ Liu assured the Congress that ‘this policy had proved very effective.’ There is no ground to question the assertion.
The ramifications of the rectification campaign can be gathered from General Secretary Teng Hsiao-ping’s September 1957 report to the Central Committee. He explained that since the opening of the free market, the middle peasants in the collectives had been wavering, resisting state purchases, and speculating in grain. To make matters worse, ‘a serious right-deviationist view showed itself in the party’ to the effect that there was no longer any need to stress class divisions in the countryside. We learn further that ‘Capitalist ideology has also gained ground among a few cadres in the rural areas, with the changed economic status of their families.’ The report outlined an intricate set of methods to be employed to carry on the struggle in the countryside. As for the workers, their socialist education had to be polished up so that they would correctly grasp their role as the leaders in the socialist revolution, which role was to consist of developing ‘the excellent tradition of working hard, the noble characteristics of justice and selflessness, produce more, be industrious and economical.’ Among the subjects to be discussed in factories was listed ‘relation between workers and peasants (here the discussion should be centered mainly on why the workers’ living standards should not be much higher than those of the peasants).‘
 
WHILE the political lid was clamped on tight, the regime slowed down the economic pace drastically through most of 1957, cleaned up some of the loose ends and plugged up holes in the imbalanced economy. Free markets had already been set up in the final quarter of 1956 to correct the maladjustment between supply and demand, as shortages had developed in food items and consumer goods, as well as pig iron, steel, timber, and cement. Once the propaganda campaign was pretty well along, the economic campaign was resumed full blast. The big news of the 1958 ‘Big Leap’ was not that after a year of consolidation, the breakneck race for production had been resumed, nor even that prodigal records had been piled up. The big news was that China had veered away from a number of unsatisfactory Stalinist patterns which it slavishly adhered to in the first plan, and had evolved a new integrated concept of growth more suited to her needs and background. The new pattern produces better results, permits a more harmonious growth of the economy, and offers the possibility of better compensation to the people who are doing the sweating and sacrificing.
The change in concept, compared to the first plan, is basic. At the start, Chinese planning was rudimentary. The complete plan figures were not published until mid-1955 when the plan period was half over. A delegation of leading Chinese had gone to Moscow in late 1952 and negotiated for Soviet assistance until mid-1953. It appears that the general scope of the Chinese plan was determined in the course of these discussions. The Soviet Union finally agreed to help build 91 large scale construction projects, which with the 50 previously contracted brought the total to 141. These became the foundation of the five-year plan.
Stalin was an imperialist-minded tyrant and exacted far-reaching concessions in return for the assistance. Had his rule continued, he might have brought relations with the Chinese to the pass to which he brought them with Tito. Fortunately he departed that year. The new Soviet heads displayed better judgement in the matter. In late 1954, when Khrushchev and Bulganin visited Peking, they increased the number of aid projects to 156, announced a new $130 million loan, and agreed to dissolve the joint-stock companies that Stalin had forced on the Chinese. Russian thinking naturally dominated much of the plan organization, as the Chinese lacked experience and had to depend on the experts sent them. The extent of the dependence can be gauged from the statement of China’s top economic planner: ‘On the 156 industrial projects which the Soviet Union is helping us to build, she assists us throughout the whole process from start to finish, from geological surveying, selecting construction sites, collecting basic data for designing, supplying equipment, directing the work of construction, installation, and getting into production, and supplying technical information, right down to directing the manufacture of new products.’ But the Chinese are apt pupils and learned fast.
 
A FEW general considerations of the experience in planning will help clarify what is going on in China today. One of the major criticisms of Russian planning, voiced by Trotsky in the thirties, and taken up by some of the Yugoslav and Polish economists recently, was that it lacked proportion. The disequilibriums between agriculture and industry, between producer-goods industry and consumer-goods industry, between transportation facilities and plant requirements, led to high costs and enormous wastage. The argument went on that the chase after specific high targets and an arbitrary maximization of the accumulation fund did not necessarily lead to maximum rates of actual growth. In the pell-mell race for statistical records, general]y in specific basic industries, costs were disregarded, slipshod work containing big percentages of rejects was pushed through, while necessary interlocking industries were neglected or ignored. Finally, the neglect of consumer goods and lack of attention to producers’ living conditions, lowered productivity. In other words, it was claimed that planning is not a simple matter of the larger the accumulation and capital investment, the faster the rate of growth. A somewhat smaller capital investment, with greater attention paid to the harmonious development of the intermeshing links of agriculture, transportation, heavy and light divisions of industry, and concern for the welfare of the human atoms making up the labor force, might under certain circumstances increase the actual growth rate. The problem was one of delicate balance and coordination rather than a rough-house race regardless of human and monetary costs. This ‘equilibrium’ thesis had a corollary: Russian planning was too centralized and top-heavy. To accurately plan the economy of a huge country, millions of people would have to he drawn into the process, checking, providing grass-roots knowledge, giving down-to-earth reports of what was actually going on in their localities. Costly mistakes and soul-less bureaucratism were inevitable unless the rank and file participated.
 
A DIFFERENT kind of theoretical concept was forged by Professor Ragnar Nurske in his important work, Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries, published in 1953. Economists have analyzed for many years the twin scourges of rural overpopulation and underemployment in backward agricultural societies and how industrialization pointed the only way out of the cul de sac. But how to break out of the vicious circle and start industrializing? Professor Nurske came up with a novel solution (although he mistakenly thought it had no application for a densely populated country like China). You don’t need, he said, a huge capital investment to achieve substantial increases in labor productivity. If you can put the rural folk to work half to two-thirds of whom have nothing to do for over half of the year, their annual production would increase enormously. Since they eat after a fashion while they are doing nothing, it would be sufficient to give them just a little more food while getting them to work. The largest part of their increased production could be treated as a social investment fund. Once this has been set up, you have the basis for large scale industrialization, not by lowering, but by increasing the standard of living. Professor Nurske discussed various possibilities of raising agricultural production by fertilization and irrigation operated with low-cost methods, from shoveling the mud out of river beds for use as fertilizers to the digging of thousands of small canals. As for equipment, he proposed the importation of a large mass of cheap simple tools, and to start the peasantry producing the most necessary primitive tools on their own.
Whether these critical writings actually influenced the Chinese, or whether they came to their conclusions through their own deductions, or both – is not important. The fact is they decided from their experience of the disarray of the economy after the first plan that they needed a change along the lines of the two propositions just discussed. No revised draft of the second plan has been published as yet, and it is probable that no such complete draft is in existence, as conditions are changing so rapidly from year to year. But the new watchword for planning is ‘walking on two legs,’ by which is meant the simultaneous development of industry and agriculture, heavy and light industry. As Po I-po thunders out the new dispensation:
‘The law of planned and proportionate development must be observed in expanding the socialist economy ... There must be all-round arrangements so that every branch can develop proportionately.’
The implementation of this line necessitated the stress on conservation and irrigation projects and the buildup of local industry. This in turn required widespread participation of tens of millions of people, from which derived the so-called ‘mass line’ for planning.
 
HERE is how the new course shaped up in practice. Beginning with the winter of 1957, great armies of rural laborers were mobilized for thousands of local regional irrigation and conservation projects. A number of these were enormous modern engineering ventures organized by the central government and requiring sizable investments of equipment. The bulk were smaller affairs of a labor-intense character involving little investment. work, financed in great part by the food supplied to the laborers, has been estimated to have added an actual third to the total accumulation fund. According to Liu Shao-chi the government invested 1,450 million yuan to harness the Huai river, and completed over 1,600 million cubic meters of masonry and earth work in eight years. But by means of labor, money, and material resources of the peasants themselves, in six months of the winter of 1957 and spring of 1958, more than 12,000 million cubic meters of masonry and earth work were completed in Honan and Anhwei provinces alone.
China’s use of chemical fertilizer is still negligible, and dependent on foreign sources for most of that. The original plan looked forward to the manufacture of three million tons in 1962, which would only provide under 20 pounds per acre as against Japan’s use of 40 times as much per acre. But it is remarkable to note that in this same period, the peasants accumulated 15¼ billion tons of crude and mud fertilizers with which they were able to achieve startling results. The two main efforts, improved irrigation and increased use of fertilizer, coupled with better seed election and control of pests and plant diseases, has been sufficient for spectacular increases in 1958 which revolutionized all perspectives. Where the original figure for grain was 250 million tons, later revised downward to 240 million tons for 1962, production for 1958 is now estimated at 350 to 375 million tons – double last year’s crop. Where the raw cotton target was 2&frac25 million tons, later revised downward to 2&frac16 million tons for 1962, production for 1958 was estimated at 3&frac13 million tons – again, a doubling of production within one year. Output of cured tobacco, sugar cane and sugar beets doubled. Other farm produce increased by 20 to 40 percent. It was assumed by Westerners, as the reports of bumper crops came in, that the sown area had been considerably extended. But Liao Lu-yen, the Minister of Agriculture, explained that the area enlargement was very slight; the increases were due primarily to higher yields unit.
 
WHAT is one to make of these figures? There has never been reported anything like it. The most spectacular example of agricultural advance in a population-congested has been that of Japan. It was able to double agricultural production prior to mechanization from 1885 to 1915, a period of thirty years, by standardization, seed selection, improved irrigation, scientific management, and large uses of commercial fertilizers. In this thirty-year span, output by three-quarters, a rate of increase of 2&frac25 percent per year, with the rural population declining while the national population was rapidly growing. Western experts convinced that this type of advance was excluded for China, as her population density was already extreme and growing at an alarming rate, and her productivity per acre was high, much of her farming being practically of the garden type.
The 1958 achievement has demolished this Western expertise. It has demonstrated that once the social barriers to the scientific application of production techniques and utilization of labor are swept away, even in a country as thickly inhabited as China (where a smaller acreage than of the United States supports a population 3¾ times as large), productivity advances are possible of a magnitude and at a rate that no one had dared suggest before. Even if we downgrade the figures considerably (as Chinese statistics necessarily have a high component of inaccuracy, and the Communists have a tradition of juggling with figures), it is still unimpeachable, as many Western observers have attested, that agricultural production has been revolutionized and the whole economic perspective has altered for the better.
The next stage in the ‘leap forward’ came in the spring of 1958 when small workshops and local industries were set up in thousands of villages. This is the sharpest point of the break with the Stalinist tradition of planning, as the collectivization and conservation campaigns were not so much distinct in conception as in execution and performance. Stalin’s plans provided no bridge from the technology of the eighteenth or seventeenth century to the last word of the twentieth. Unskilled workers but recently recruited from backward villages were put to work on the most complex and intricate engineering structures under the tutelage of experts, a considerable number of whom were hired from abroad in the early years. There was no proportionality between the different parts of the economy. Industry was constantly running short of parts, fuel, raw materials. Deliveries were rarely in accordance with the schedule. There was no realistic provision for the housing, clothing, and feeding of the swiftly growing working class. The party machine had to substitute for the market as the regulatory machine. Naturally, big mistakes were unavoidable, the disequilibrium produced chaotic conditions in many lines, and the over-centralization made for unbearable rigidity and bureaucratism. What Stalin never understood after 25 years, the Chinese learned in four. Already in his February speech, Mao adumbrated the new concept. He said:
‘As China is a great agricultural country, with over 80 percent of its population in the villages, its industry and agriculture must be developed simultaneously. Only then will industry have raw materials and a market, and only thus will it be possible to accumulate fairly large funds for the building up of a powerful heavy industry ... Hence what may seem to be a slower pace of industrialization is actually not so, and indeed the tempo may even be speeded up.’
 
BY the spring of 1958, the new line as laid down by the party was ‘to oppose any tendency to chase only after the latest technical equipment, while failing to make full use of all that is on hand; to oppose any tendency to overemphasize the role of experts to the disparagement of the great role that can be played by the workers and peasants in developing new production techniques.’ The results have probably left Professor Nurske breathless. According to official statistics, more than 15,000 medium and small factories and mines were set up on the county level, and two million workshops, more than 30,000 of which work regularly the year round, were turning out mountains of goods from pig iron and steel (or at least stuff that is called steel), to farm implements, simple machinery, and a variety of consumers’ products. China, it should be remembered, suffered cruelly from rural underemployment. Even in 1955 the national average was computed at somewhere around 125 work-days per year. But in 1958, the villager labored 300 days, with only two days rest a month provided for. Rural underemployment had turned into overemployment.
The big advantage of local and cottage industry is that it permits the immediate output of a considerable amount of simple production based on indigenous techniques calling for very small investment, and making possible an immediate improvement in the mass living standard. Because results are quickly seen, people can be enlisted for continuing efforts to hurtle the next economic challenges. Here in a nutshell lies the possibility of industrializing a backward country without big foreign investments while slowly raising rather than lowering living standards. The January 6, 1959 Peking Review reported that
‘Although more projects were built in the past year than during the entire first Five Year Plan, the total investment was less than half the amount invested in the 1953–1957 period. This was possible because the costs of construction were reduced in many cases by more than one half as indigenous methods were combined with modern methods, materials locally available were used to the full and excessively high standards were lowered.’
This new pattern of work unleashed the initiative of masses of people and the results have been little short of miraculous. The September 1958 China Reconstructs gives the flavor of some of the doings:
In mountainous Yunnan, where over two million new tools have been popularized, the emphasis has been on transport. The watchword became: ‘End carrying on tile back, the shoulders and the head.’ This was spurred by the need to free manpower for other farm tasks. A wheelbarrow can free two people and take five or six times as much per trip as a set of baskets on a pole, while an oxcart releases nine peasants for other jobs. These low-cost wooden vehicles have been made at the co-ops in large numbers. Together with wooden rail systems for short hauls on reservoir projects, they have raised efficiency 15 to 20 times and in some places 40 or 50 times.
Ho Ting, a once poverty-stricken peasant from Honan province who never had a day of schooling in his youth, devised a system of wooden earth-carriers moving on overhead cables with an automatic dump and return mechanism which reduces by eight times the amount of labor needed to build a reservoir ...
Over 3,000 inventions from all parts of the country were brought together for exhibition this spring at the College of Agricultural Mechanization just outside Peking. To it came thousands of farmer delegates to study the devices, sketch them, take home scale models or blueprints, and otherwise consult on farm tool problems. Similar exhibitions have been held in almost every province and region. Copies of 300 of the most widely used farm tools from the Peking exhibition are being sent to every provincial show. By mid-summer more than 30,000 types of tools have been invented or improved and tens of millions were in use.
Business Week (December 13, 1958) can sneer that the peasants are up to fourteenth-century technical standards. To be sure, the techniques are crude. But what counts is that they represent a big rise in Chinese productivity, a utilization of wasted manpower, an addition to the total wealth, and an effective school for industrialization. A serious problem would arise, as in Russia under the NEP, if cottage industry based on crude techniques were to become the substitute for the buildup of modern industry. But China is going ahead with both: Cottage industry is used to fill some of the gaps while great modern industrial enterprises are being erected.
 
THE Communist leaders were bowled over by the results obtained from the two innovations in agricultural development and establishment of local industry. All their targets had been left far behind. They called an extraordinary meeting of the Central Committee, held August 17–30, 1958, which proceeded to raise the sights all along the line, in modern industry as well as agricultural. But the most controversial decision of all was to establish ‘People’s Communes.’ The exact origin of the communes is obscure, but apparently a number of the regional leaders set up on their own during the summer some coordinated systems on county levels as they found the collective inadequate for the organization of vast public works projects, and for the accumulations of raw materials and manpower to feed the local industries. In any case, by the middle of August, the Communist hierarchs, according to the Yugoslavs, after embittered debates in the Political Bureau, took the plunge and issued the directive to reorganize the countryside along communal lines. So effective is the Communist organizational machinery that within two months, 90 percent of the peasant households were swept into the communal maw. By December it was all over: 740,000 collectives had been converted into 26,000 communes consisting of 120 million households. The speed of the operation seems to indicate that many of the pre-conditions for the communes had al ready been established during the public works and local industry drives.
The commune has replaced the township as well as the individual collective and is now the governmental, legal, economic, administrative, and social center. The governing committee runs its own courts, directs the local militia, issues all directives and edicts, and operates the common enterprises, which according to figures at the end of 1958 added up to 1,400,000 public restaurants, 1,200,000 crêches, and a variety of free services like public baths, barbering establishments, tailoring shops, medical clinic commissaries, etc. All the property of the collective far has now become the property of the communes, an even the midget personal holdings have been largely take over. When R.H.S. Crossman, the British journalist, who visited a number of communes last autumn, asked an elderly peasant whether he objected to turning over personal farm and private livestock, he got the reply: ‘We work too hard and too long here to manage a private plot.’ He told Crossman what he had left was his house, garden trees, and fowls. The communes are able to exercise considerable local initiative, but they are rigidly bound as their rights and obligations by the central authority. They are permitted to barter some of their goods with other communes, but they cannot sell in the open market (which has likewise been sharply curtailed in the past months), and prices and selling arrangements are fixed by the government.
 
THE Mao entourage has on more than one occasion exhibited strong gambling traits. Under the mood of success in 1958, many of them thought that they had discovered a short cut to full-blown communism via a virtual militarization of the whole Chinese people. The original resolution promulgating the communes declared:
‘It seems the attainment of communism in China is no longer a remote future event. We should actively use the form of the People’s Communes to explore the practical road of transition to communism.’
An editorial appeared in the theoretical journal, Red Flag, in September, which explained that of the ten measures that Marx and Engels had held necessary in the Communist Manifesto to establish a communist society, eight had already been realized in China, and the remaining two were on the way to being carried out. Next there was talk of abolishing wages. On October 11, the People’s Daily ran an article called Abolish the Ideology of Bourgeois Rights. The authors called for doing away with wages and demanded, ‘Who got wages on the Long March?’ The Hshushui Commune announced that it had already eliminated the wage system.
These ideas of hurtling into the society of the free and equal by way of a Spartan sharing of the scarcity are like echoes of Russia’s ‘War Communism.’ The mood there was similarly heroic and military. Voicing a thought that was common to all the leading Bolsheviks at the time, Trotsky said in 1920:
‘We are now advancing towards a type of labor socially regulated on the basis of an economic plan ... compulsory for every worker. That is the foundation of socialism ... And once we have recognized this, we thereby recognize ... the right of the workers’ state to send each working man and woman to the place where they are needed for the fulfillment of economic tasks ...’
Lenin personally participated in a ‘Communist Saturday’ (unpaid work) to give an example, and the active workers engaged in Trotsky’s emergency campaign for the rehabilitation of the prostrate transportation system were called udarniki, shock troops. Bukharin that year in his Economics of the Transition Period argued that compulsory labor service, which under capitalism meant ‘enslavement,’ was simply ‘the self-organization of the working class’ under the proletarian state. In the Russian case, all these notions of a forced march to communism evaporated when the government had to give way to the peasant with the announcement of the NEP in 1921.
The hubbub in Western Communist circles about the new miraculous Chinese short-cut to communism was abruptly silenced by the frigid reaction of the Russians. Khrushchev told Senator Humphrey that the communal system wouldn’t work. Mikoyan remarked in the course of his American visit that they had tried the same thing in Russia, and had to give it up. The Polish Communist press went to great pains to explain that whatever merits the scheme possessed for China, it had no application at all for Poland. The Yugoslav press emphatically rejected the communes. Nova Makedonija claimed that the year before ‘750,000 members of the security organs’ had been employed to quell armed peasant revolts, and that terror had been widely used to push the peasants into the communes.
 
IN fairness to the Chinese communes, it should be pointed out that the Russian analogy is of limited application. The Russian experiment of payments in kind to workers and barter arrangements between plants and cooperatives took place in the depths of the civil war when industry was progressively breaking down and inflation was destroying the value of the currency. The requisition of the peasant’s grain by armed formations from the cities, the regimentation of labor and the ad hoc quasi-communistic arrangements to feed and clothe the people, were less the result of ideology than the grim necessities forced upon the regime. They were the only way to prosecute the civil war and keep things from going under in the general dislocation and disintegration. Once the imperative of the civil war was removed, the system of compulsion fell apart. But that didn’t end the matter. Ten years later, tinder other circumstances, a semi-militarization of labor was again put into effect under Stalin’s industrialization, and whatever its true worth in most effectively mobilizing labor, and whatever justification it may or may not have from the socialist and humanist point of view, it ‘worked,’ in John Dewey’s sense of the term.
The Chinese communes have been created – were one to use the Russian political calendar – not in 1919, but in 1934. The country is not only making remarkable economic progress but living conditions are slowly improving. Moreover, the communes are not simply a mechanism of compulsion for the forced extraction of the peasant’s produce, or the seizure of his personal holdings, but part of an integrated constructive framework to organize beneficial public works, local industries, and public services. To arrive at any reasonable estimate of the communes and their future, one has to consider their different functions. There has been a good deal of philistinism, not to mention cold-war humbuggery, in the American press criticism. It is unnecessary to spend too much time on a good many of the self-righteous journalistic moralists who have flung up their hands in horror at the horrendous breaking up of ancient Chinese traditions. The destruction of what traditions are they so exercised about? The patriarchal family where women were held in virtual bondage? Where daughters were sold into concubinage and prostitution? Where hunger was the most stable feature of the peasant’s life? Many of the communal services, like public restaurants, free medical centers, children’s nurseries, do not only free labor for work in the fields and public projects, but arc clearly a marked improvement in the living conditions of the rural people, who for centuries have never had enough to eat, who have had to eke out their life necessities under the most primitive and back-breaking conditions. To read some of the heart-rending accounts in our pulp press about the separation of children from parents, and the tragedy of communal feeding, one would imagine that the writers had never heard of plant cafeterias and child nurseries in our own country. This type of criticism is not to be taken seriously.
 
ON the other hand, one must reject all utopian notions about the institution being a bridge to communism. The society of the free and equal, without compulsion or domination – or any society that is a half-way reasonable facsimile thereof – can only come when there is an abundance of material goods, when the most acute adjustments have been righted – and most probably when the acute conflicts between nations have been ameliorated. To imagine that all this can come via rural settlements in China whose per capita output cannot equal England’s or Germany’s for another forty years, is to indulge in the fantasies of Russian nineteenth-century populism. The process of accumulation in China will inevitably breed an income differentiation in the countryside no less than in the cities – just as it has in Russia. Even were it barred from the front entrance by communal fiat, it would re-enter by the rear door Before long, we will be reading about rich communes, poor communes, and rich and poor members within same communes.
As a matter of fact, after a few months of frenzied socialization, the regime was forced to spell out its objectives more in keeping with the facts. The December 10 resolution of the Communist Central Committee first called a halt to any further spread of the communes. They were not to be introduced into the cites for a while until ‘the skeptics and doubters have been convinced.’ Furthermore, the organizers were told to understand ‘socialist ownership by the whole people’ will not realized ‘very soon,’ and they are not to lose sight the fact that the properties and output of the commune are ‘collectively owned by the communes and differ from those of the state-owned enterprises.’ Further, every Marxist must soberly realize that the transition socialism to communism is a fairly long and complicated process of development,’ and therefore the abandonment of wage payments can not be rushed. As a matter of fact ‘the communes must strive gradually to increase the wealth of their members and, for a number of years to come, must increase them at a rate faster than that portion of the income which comes under the heading of free supply’. To set the communist Eldorado further back, the resolution added that wage scales should be divided into to eight grades, ‘and the highest grade may be four more times as much as the lowest grade.’
When divested of high-flown rhetoric and stripped of illusions, the communes can be compared to the ill-fated agro-town scheme projected some years back by Khrushchev. Why was the proposition dropped like a hot potato in Russia, and why has it been pushed through in China? Mao Tse-tung has provided the essential explanation. The people of China are like ‘a sheet of blank paper.’ Nothing is written on a blank sheet, ‘but it lends itself admirably to receive the latest and most beautiful words.’ Others have idealized the same fact by declaring that the Chinese have not been morally and intellectually contaminated by capitalism.
 
WELL, we don’t want to pile too many crimes on the shoulders of capitalism. True, it has bred a highly property-minded class of petty proprietors whose social he horizons are narrow if not non-existent. This has traditionally been considered a debit by socialists. But the highly developed sense of individualism of this class, its stubbornness in arranging its own affairs, its hostility to regimentation by the government, is an expression of the general flowering of the human personality under capitalism. This has been thought hitherto as providing the groundwork for the onward march of humanity. We can probably accept as fact that the Chinese were successfully hustled out of semi-feudal villages into collectives, and now into communes, because they never had a sturdy, independent yeomanry, and that this very backwardness may save them some troubles in industrializing the country. But if we are going to idealize ‘blank sheets of paper,’ then we have to provide in the beneficent society of the future a class of mandarins who will do the beautiful writing, and a class of helots who will docilely do the reading. Under that arrangement, who is to guarantee the continuing wisdom and benevolence of the mandarins? And even if some deity were to underwrite this clause in the contract, wouldn’t life lose its savor if people were regimented and ordered about – for their own good, to be sure – by a Brahmin caste of calligraphers?
This is the biggest objection to the communes – the militarization of the labor and lives of its members. There is no point in anybody trying to talk around this. The Chinese Communists make no bones about it. The December 10 resolution lays down the line: ‘What we describe as getting organized along military lines means getting organized on the pattern of a factory. It means that the organization of labor in the People’s Commune should be as organized and disciplined as in a factory or the army.’ Admittedly, Chinese regimentation is not a simple matter of Simon Legrees forcing people to labor on chain gangs at the point of a gun. There us an amazing élan in the nation. Many are in a frenzy of patriotism. The prospects he country are dazzling. A wide variety of observers has noted how much more indigenous is the local and regional leadership, and how much smaller the role of outside experts, in comparison with Russian enterprises. R.H.S. Crossman believes that the communes sprang from the hard puritan elite of peasant Communists who have emerged in tens of thousands through the countryside. He is probably right. It is nevertheless a disturbing proposition – a fanatical mass movement which flattens out all dissent and pushes millions along as so many cogs of the centrally directed apparatus, which in turn is run on a military basis with directives funneled from the top down. It is a far cry from the first few years of the Russian revolution with the rich diversities of thought and cultural renaissance.
 
THE Chinese revolution is probably the most important social event in post-World War II history. Western socialists have to see the reality of what is going on there without prejudice, and also, without blinders. They would be foolish just to damn this momentous changeover that is transforming China into a modern nation because it employs compulsion and dictatorship. There is merit in the argument that compulsion is necessary to get a backward people to make the sacrifices necessary for a forced industrialization. Moreover, democracy is not a suprahistorical moral ideal which can be fitted into any society, whether it be the Egypt of the Pharaohs, or the Athens of Pericles, or the England of Richard the Lion Hearted. It arose out of certain material and social circumstances in the evolution of middle class commercial states in the West, and it has survived and survives only when a society achieves certain material and cultural advantages and enjoys a mitigation of the social struggles within the nation. In the absence of these sufficient conditions, democracy succumbs. Look at Asia today. From one end to the other, Pakistan, Burma, Indonesia, parliamentary regimes have given way to military dictatorships, with no intervention of Communists. Why? Because there is an insufficient cultural level to maintain parliamentary democracy, and the internal conflicts and pressures are too raw to be adjudicated by European parliamentary processes. Hence, it is unreasonable to ignore the Chinese heritage and background and the difficulties it is up against, and to make demands upon it that no set of leaders, no matter who, is in a position to fulfill. The Chinese are entitled to sympathy from the West in their herculean efforts to lift themselves by their bootstraps; they are entitled to practical aid in their battle for industrialization. They should not be blockaded. They should not be ostracized. They should not be reviled. They should be helped.
At the same time, the Left in the West has to maintain certain standards of what it means by socialism, and what methods are on the approved list to get to the new society. We cannot accept militarization of a people, the hounding of dissenters, the enthronement of a new bureaucratic elite, as the true face of the culture we stand for. We have to take our stand on the ground of a new humanist and democratic society, all the more so as the socialism of Russia, and now of China, have been blended with so many barbarisms of their past cultures, that Eastern socialism is alien and repellent to the labor movements of the West – where socialism was first born. Whatever its rising attractive power in the colonial world, it has up to now undermined rather than facilitated the spread of socialism in the capitalist heartland.
 



The Portland CIO convention brings to a conclusion one stage in the development of America’s industrial union movement and formally inaugurates a new one. The whole 13-year period, in which the CIO leadership was jointly shared by the native American and Stalinist bureaucracies, has now been officially closed. The Murray machine has emerged victorious all up and down the line and as a more or less homogeneous bureaucracy will now singly rule the CIO.
It is true that the Stalinists possess many vestiges of their once formidable strength but the trend against them is so overwhelming that they cannot long hold on to their remaining posts of leadership. The Murray bureaucracy has won the battle. What is involved now is mopping-up operations.
The new stage completes a process which originated in the struggles and developments of the past period, conditioning the trade union movement and the men who now lead it.
The CIO bureaucracy was nurtured in an alliance with a “friendly” administration and became accustomed to operating through the medium of government boards, commissions, NLRB elections, etc. From the first it took on a definite social-democratic coloration in contrast to the older AFL bureaucracy, whose governing creed for decades was pure-and-simple unionism, heavily tinged with syndicalist-like suspicion of the state. The Roosevelt administration, for its part, likewise stood in dire need of the labor movement’s support, first for its NRA program to lift American capitalism out of the morass of the crisis, then for its war preparations, and finally for the prosecution of the war itself.
Thus for the formative 10-year period of the CIO, the bureaucracy was molded by its coalition with the Roosevelt administration. The social trends making for this labor-Roosevelt coalition were irresistible. Even the AFL bureaucrats found themselves caught in the embrace of the capitalist government and entangled in the coalition, where they played their part with some misgivings and slightly less ardor than their CIO brethren.
 
The Period of Cooperation
The appearance of the CIO on the scene happened to coincide with the Stalinist turn on a world scale toward People’s Frontisrn. In its American application, the turn spelled a policy which was all but identical with that of the newly created CIO bureaucracy. This provided the solid ground-work for the cooperation of the two bureaucracies. In the decade of their partnership, the two bureaucracies saw eye-to-eye on all important and even not so important issues. They worked hand-in-glove in tying the CIO ever more securely to the capitalist stale, in stamping out the original militancy of the ranks, in crushing all tendencies to form an independent party of labor, in inoculating the CIO workers with the poison of capitalist “pressure politics” and in foisting their respective bureaucracies upon the unions under their control. This malevolent collaboration continued right through the war, both sides cooperating in outlawing and breaking strikes.
Nevertheless, despite the virtual identity of their policies en a day-to-day basis, the two bureaucracies could never fuse. They were keenly aware that they were in the service if different masters whose aims might at any time diverge. The 10-year marriage was constantly marred by quarrels, bickerings, hostile maneuvers and sometimes even violent clashes. But these conflicts never reached a plane of fundamentally opposed policies. They took the form of clique fights for posts and positions.
However, the very existence of two competitive bureaucracies, even though they were united against the ranks, legitimatized in the CIO a tradition of factionalism, the existence of caucuses, disputation over issues and elections. The clique struggle between the two bureaucracies, while barren and worse than barren in and of itself, helped preserve in distorted form the original democratic impulses which animated the ranks in the stormy days when the CIO was a crusade and not a bureaucratic edifice.
It is instructive in this connection to contrast the internal character of the auto union with the regime in the CIO steel and maritime unions. The existence for 10 years of two powerful factions in the leadership of the auto union – whether in alliance or in opposition – was a big factor in the maintenance of a robust internal democracy. In contrast, the Murray clique, with a monopoly of the steel union leadership, was able to fasten a centralized bureaucratic apparatus upon the steel workers which to this day has prevented the formation of any independent grouping. Similarly, the Stalinist leadership, which until recently enjoyed the same kind of monopoly control in the NMU, ruled over the maritime workers like a tyrannous power, brooking no questioning or dissent.
The evolution of the different CIO unions demonstrates that union democracy is little more than window dressing or academic sham without the right of organized factions to live, to operate, to appeal to the membership, to agitate for their special points of view. It is no accident that in one of the few old-line AFL unions where this right is recognized and practiced, the International Typographical Union, democracy exists. In most of the other AFL unions, even the United Mine Workers with its militant membership and policies, where factions are not tolerated, internal life is empty and democracy is virtually non-existent.
The Portland convention, therefore, in signalizing the entrenchment of the Murray faction and the downfall of its Stalinist rival, marked at the same time a new milestone in the bureaucratization of the CIO. For while the two bureaucracies always labored with might and main to perfect their own machines, always mindful of their special interests and jealous of any and all encroachments on their factional preserves, they interfered with each other’s plans and threw up roadblocks against the monopolization of power in those unions where they both were active and especially in the city central bodies and the national CIO itself. Now with the elimination of the Stalinists from the CIO leadership, the Murray machine has dotted the i’s and crossed the t’s on the bureaucratization of the CIO for which they have been striving over these many years.
The Portland convention arrogated to the parent bureaucracy disciplinary powers in imposing so-called majority decisions on its various chartered affiliates, and centralized authority to reshuffle jurisdictions, withdraw charters, decree affiliations, instruct local central bodies in the positions they may or may not adopt measures without parallel in the history of American unionism. Even the case-hardened bureaucrat, Matthew Woll, while approving the actions of the CIO convention which in his view were taken in a “good cause,” was deeply disquieted by the methods employed in eliminating the Stalinists.
Why was the bureaucracy able to defeat its quondam Stalinist partner so easily and to fasten its heavy-handed grip on the broad membership? To properly answer these complex questions it is necessary to probe more deeply into the changing relationships of the coalition of the labor bureaucracy and the capitalist state, the specific character of the Stalinist movement in the CIO and the role of the trade unions in this period.
 
The Meaning of the Roosevelt Myth
We mentioned previously that as against the old AFL bureaucracy, conditioned in the organization of skilled crafts fighting individual employers and educated in the school of reliance on the economic power of key groups of specialized workers, the new labor bureaucracy from the beginning had entered into an alliance with the capitalist slate and was saturated with the philosophy that it could utilize this state to advance its own aims. This class-collaboration philosophy went deep down into the union ranks. It was the guiding trend of thought not only of the bureaucracy but of practically the whole membership.
Revolutionary socialists and class-conscious workers pointed out the meager character of the Roosevelt reforms and how they scarcely scratched the surface in solving the real problems of capitalist society. But the aspect which the radicals did not stress was precisely the one which impressed the rank-and-file workers most”the favorable political climate which helped them build their unions and the palpable improvements in working conditions, shop relationships and the rise in wages particularly in the better organized industries.
It is true that even these modest reforms were not handed down by Roosevelt but were won in pitched battles and sanguinary struggles. It is further true that Roosevelt could not have moved a step without labor support. But the working people of America, oppressed and downtrodden for generations, knowing the government heretofore only as an omnipotent foe which smashed picket lines, injured strikers and hurled union militants into prison, didn’t appreciate the changed relationship of forces and looked on Roosevelt as the savior of the working man.
In the next decade every attempt of insurgent groups of workers to break out of this political straitjacket was resisted and thwarted by the bureaucracy. Thus the Roosevelt myth grew and grew until it became the unquestioned gospel of the labor movement. The Roosevelt myth was not merely faith in Roosevelt personally as the Great White Father of the laboring people but the conviction that coalition and class-collaboration politics accounted for the benefits secured by labor since 1935 and constituted the only safe and sane course on which the unions could record further advances.
From 1935 to 1941, the main bodies of the CIO were registering constant gains in the form of rising wage schedules, or organization of new groups of unorganized workers and significant improvements in working conditions. Liven in the war years, when inflation and heavy taxes began cutting deeply into the paychecks of the workers, they managed to better their living standards through longer hours of work, premium pay for overtime and increasing the number of wage earners in the individual families.
This general line of development seemed headed for a crack-up after the war when the power-drunk and too sell-confident plutocracy forced the unions to battle for existence again and pushed the Truman administration into sundering the coalition with labor. But the labor bureaucracy clung tenaciously to its class-collaborationist policy and doggedly insisted that capitalism could work out its problems more cheaply and more successfully by reestablishing the coalition. Finally, labor’s massed demonstration at the ballot box in the 1948 elections forced the Bourbon plutocracy back into the alliance it had so brashly broken two years previously.
Despite continuing inflation, high taxes and the anti-labor offensive, the factors of full employment and the economic boom sufficed to prevent any decisive alteration of the mass political consciousness in the two-year Taft-Hartley interval. And now the workers, with a strong sense of accomplishment in the elections, are again willing to give their leaders a chance to produce results through a coalition policy.
We are aware that fierce antagonisms have flared up against sections of the bureaucracy and against individual bureaucrats in union after union; we know that these led in some cases to the ousting of a number of the more obnoxious officials or a shift of power from one section of the leadership to another, but the union ranks never went beyond ousting individuals. They were never able to replace the existing bureaucracy with a new type of leadership because they were still prisoners of the political philosophy and program of the labor bureaucracy.
The material benefits won by the workers, especially in the earlier days of the CIO, sanctified the marriage of the labor officialdom with the capitalist state. But this marriage in turn not only helped the bureaucracy impose its dictatorial rule on the unions but further shaped the bureaucracy, or, more correctly, corrupted it into the slavish and servile servant of the most powerful imperialist state inthe history of mankind. During the war years, the labor bureaucrats worked hand-in-glove with employers, government agents and military officials to weed militant workers out of the plants. After the war, this brazen partnership was systematized into a true relationship of reciprocity. Labor officials journeyed to the furthermost corners of the globe as traveling salesmen of American imperialism while the concentrated influence of the government, the employers, the public press and the church”even in the Taft-Hartley period”was brought to bear to enthrone and consolidate the bureaucracy and to isolate, besmirch, discredit and hound out of the unions all opponents and dissidents.
This coalition stems from stern social necessity and represents the only possible mode of existence for the labor bureaucracy in this period. The plutocracy cannot and will not tolerate now a labor bureaucracy that attempts to practice neutrality toward its state and imperialist enterprises. The bureaucracy, ever adaptable, has swung into line. The Cincinnati AFL convention reflected the fact that even the sons of Gompers had successfully overcome all their earlier inhibitions and hesitations and are now, no less than their CIO counterparts, enthusiastic participants of the labor-government coalition.
The speakers list of the AFL convention bristled with such notables as Hoffman, head of the Marshall Plan; Harriman, Washington’s roving European ambassador; Humphrey, the new head of the Americans for Democratic Action. Over half the proceedings consisted of speeches and reports on AFL activities in promoting the Marshall Plan, providing labor support for the American missions in Greece and Japan, building “free trade unions” in Germany, South America and elsewhere, and of the general yeoman services being performed for the State Department.
We can sum up by recording that in the space of a little more than a -decade there has grown up in America an imposing, consciously social-imperialistic labor bureaucracy disposing of great institutions and treasuries. On the one hand it has forced a recalcitrant plutocracy back into a political coalition, in which the bureaucracy wields more influence than it ever did in Roosevelt’s lifetime. On the other hand, with the aid of this same plutocracy, it has raised itself above the union membership and arrogated to itself vast powers of coercion and repression.
 
Social Imperialism – Unifying Force
We have witnessed the growing together of the labor bureaucracy with the imperialist state which in turn has hammered the labor bureaucracy into a more or less homogeneous social-imperialist force with a common world outlook. It is because of this new feeling of common purpose and ideological kinship that the CIO leaders were willing to relinquish some of the sovereign powers of their own international unions and invest the parent body with immense centralized authority, something the AFL craft czars would not dream of doing so strong are the habits of a lifetime and a tradition.
Of course, there remain considerable gradations in the bureaucracy. The AFL moguls, resting on craft-ridden unions, are less adept at broad social demagogy than their CIO rivals who represent the modern industrial union and bargain across the table with the overlords of industry. Inside the CIO there is also a gradation between the sophisticated, socially alert, social-democratic types like Reuther, Baldanzi, John Green and the older trade unionists of the Murray, Van Bittner, Alan Haywood stamp.
But these gradations between the various sectors of the bureaucracy are not politically fundamental and not half so significant as the growing homogeneity in purpose and methods of all sections of the bureaucracy. Consider these facts: The AFL leaders have joined with the CIO in all-out support for the Marshall Plan. They have dispatched their economist and brain-truster, Boris Shishkin, to Paris to coordinate this work. None other than Jay Lovestone is the generalissimo of their forces in Europe and Irving Brown, former Lovestoneite, their European field agent. Consider that the AFL, whose most ingrained political principle was Gompers’ dictum “support your friends and defeat your enemies,” voted at Cincinnati to set up a political organization based upon precincts and wards similar to the CIO-PAC.
And within the CIO, what is the essential difference between a Murray and a Reuther, politically, programma-tically, on basic trade union policy? None. None of the Differences go beyond such matters as temperament, ambition, agility and questions of tempo. Only uninformed or blind people or the perennial Ypsels of the Shachtmanite Workers Party could classify Reuther as a left-winger in contrast to Murray.
 
Life-Cycle of the Unions
There is another side to the bureaucratization of the CIO that is deserving of attention. It seems that the life-cycle of unions under capitalism comprises first a youthful, formative period of militancy and combativity accompanied by a vibrant internal life. In time, the original insurgency tends to thin out and then to give way to a growing conservatism of the membership and the exuding of a bureaucracy. The radicals, who are welcome and play an important part in the organizing days, are resented and often expelled in the later stages. One does not have to seek far for an explanation of this phenomenon. A union, after all, is organized for limited purposes. No sooner has it established itself in a given jurisdiction and won some concessions, which place it in a position a little above the rest of the working class, than its officials become anxious to consolidate their positions and the membership concerned with securing its advantages. Union after union in this country and abroad has fallen into this life-cycle.
True, the CIO is different in many respects. Unlike the small and isolated unions of the past, it represents the basic elements of the American proletariat. Thus, its leaders bargain for a sizable section of the working class rather than for small groups at the expense of the broad mass. Nevertheless, even here, the conservatizing forces are at work and build up a certain aristocratic layer in the working class which has a stake in the maintenance of the status quo.
An examination of the changing character of the membership of the auto union will prove very revealing. This union is rightly considered the most militant and advanced in the whole labor movement, with a membership noted for its aggressiveness and self-assertiveness. A study completed last April for the UAW by C. Wright Mills of Columbia University, based on a representative sample of Detroit union members, finds that 57% of the men and 35% of the women are over 40 years of age, that the general average is 42 years. Fifteen years ago one could walk through all the big auto plants in Detroit and have difficulty in finding workers over 40 except in the capacity of janitors, stockmen or in the highly skilled departments!
Furthermore, many of the most aggressive and radical workers who manned the picket lines in ’37, provided the leadership in countless strikes, built the new locals, can today be found in the new bureaucracy, or when working in the plants, in the better paying and more desirable jobs. They may not enjoy much prosperity but they have seniority and a measure of security, pitiful though it be, as against the new workers entering the industry.
The old core of CIO militants”that remarkable leadership in the American labor movement which arose from the shops and was enriched by radicals of different tendencies”has either been absorbed into the labor bureaucracy, or smothered in the Stalinist embrace, or dispersed in a dozen different directions. And it took all the galling experiences of the last depression and the repeated sell-outs and defeats of the NRA strikes to create that new leadership!
Take the evolution of the auto union and add to it the steel union, the rubber union and the others, and you have the answer to why the working class today resembles little the class of a decade ago which seized the plants, fought the police and the troops, brought the haughty princes of American industry to their knees and converted a trade union organizing campaign into a social crusade. The leaders of these great class actions have grown ten years older and ten years more conservative, the huge national organizations that were forged out of the battles are under the direction of a puissant bureaucracy. The new young men and women who have entered the industries are still in the position of the led rather than the leaders.
There is an additional temporary but telling factor which further conspires to augment the power of the bureaucracy and to leave, for the time being, decisions in its hands. The unions are now superbly organized as truly mass battalions and bargain with a small number of capitalist trusts closely integrated with the state. Every big strike can at a moment’s notice turn into a national social contest between labor and capital. The workers sense this. They sense that pure-and-simple economic strikes now have very limited efficacy. They are therefore loath to engage in sporadic guerrilla warfare on their own. They tend to leave the major decisions in the hands of their top leaders and prefer peaceful settlements because, after the experiences of 1946, they do not have any faith that under the present leadership the results won by long-drawn-out strikes will be commensurate with the sacrifices required.
 
Stalinism – and Its Frankenstein
Is the monstrous growth and rise to power of the labor bureaucracy with its integration into the governmental machinery sufficient to explain its crushing victory over its erstwhile Stalinist partner? Not entirely. There is still a missing link”the disgraceful and villainous role of the Stalinists themselves and the Frankenstein they created which has now laid them low.
The Stalinists entered the CIO with the best disciplined, the most experienced and largest political cadre in the labor movement. They were able to participate actively and effectively in practically all the original major organizing campaigns and strike struggles. When the immense national union structures were set up, the Stalinists were in possession of an organization machine not too inferior to the Lewis combination. They had the decisive influence over half the auto union, hegemony of the electrical union, the East and West Coast maritime unions, the Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers, the office and government workers, a voice in the rubber and even the steel union. They were in effective control of the most important central bodies including New York, Cleveland, Detroit, Chicago, Los Angeles. They were further favored by an aura of militancy, appearing as the left-wingers, the fighters of the movement. How did they utilize this enormous capital of authority, administrative control and good will?
Let us recall the state of affairs in the 1936 period. The young CIO was imbued with crusading zeal and full of the vision of new great vistas opening up before labor. Those were the days of sit-down strikes. Mayors and legislatures were humbled by the massed might of a working class in action. Even though the pro-Roosevelt and People’s Front current was running high, everywhere the workers were trying to “implement” the policy and “help” their labor “friends” by direct action and by reaching out for more power and more substantial concessions.
Those were the days when John L. Lewis organized Labor’s Non-Partisan League and staged a determined effort to capture the Democratic Party of Pennsylvania and secured the gubernatorial nomination for the mine workers’ secretary-treasurer. Those were the days when the bureaucracy had to set up the American Labor Party in New York as the only means to corral the radical labor vote for Roosevelt. Those were the days when the Detroit CIO ran a full independent labor slate to “seize the reins of government.” The country was ablaze with insurgency.
Viewing the matter in retrospect, it is probably true that the Stalinists, despite their considerable strength, could not have overcome the pro-Roosevelt and People’s Front current. But they could have organized a genuine left wing of huge proportions, a left wing which would have prospered after such experiences as the breaking of the Little Steel strike, the sell-outs of. the Democratic “friends of labor” and the Roosevelt “recession” of 1937. The formation of such a left wing would have turned topsy-turvy all the existing relationships not only inside the CIO but in American politics as well. Today the movement for socialism would be miles ahead.
Instead, in response to the Kremlin line of People’s Front, the Stalinists stood shoulder to shoulder with Lewis and Murray. They became the most ruthless and conscienceless section of the CIO bureaucracy in hurling the most advanced workers back into the Roosevelt fold, in killing the promising labor party potentialities, in inculcating the workers with the vices and prejudices of class-collaboration politics, in isolating and hounding the union dissidents and radicals and in ramming the new bureaucracy down the throats of a turbulent rank and file.
 
Left Wing Devitalized
Lined up with the bureaucracy on all essential questions, but maintaining nevertheless their own independent machinery and bases of support, the Stalinists were able to pervert the strivings of the advanced militants for a class struggle policy into degenerate clique fights for position and power. The faction fight in the CIO”now muffled, now flaring into the open”which dominated the union boards for a decade, never clarified any issues or crystallized political tendencies but only confused everything and demoralized the most sincere elements.
The Stalinists’ ill-deserved reputation as “lefts,” their unscrupulous methods and their demagogy coupled with their organizational might enabled them for a decade to monopolize the “opposition” to the Murray bureaucracy and to nip in the bud any independent progressive manifestations. But they could not, naturally, pursuing this cynical and unscrupulous course, construct a genuine fighting force. As a matter of fact, time and again they demoralized even their own members, disintegrated and debauched the impressive cadre which they possessed after the early strike struggles, destroyed a whole generation of revolutionists and potential revolutionists and became a new school for opportunism and a training ground cf polished highbinders and careerists.
The defection of Curran, Quill and others is not a case of simple renegacy of a number of individuals. It is rather the natural fruit of Stalinist opportunism and treachery. To execute the switch, the Currans and the Quills did not have to after by one iota the essential methods and policies learned in the Stalinist school. Stalinist People’s Frontism only strengthens and consolidates the power of the authentic and consistent People’s Fronters.
To the insufferable burden of their own indefensible 10-year record, the American Stalinist leaders, especially since the war, have had to carry the dead weight of the Kremlin’s crimes and perfidies. For as the American working class grows politically alert, it shrinks from the representatives and defenders of a police state which tolerates no democracy, no free press, no free speech, no free trade unions.
Fifteen years ago in Minneapolis, a group of genuine revolutionary socialists – Trotskyists – built a powerful union structure in the citadel of the open shop and showed in practice how to carve out of the struggle a fighting labor cadre composed of the best and most sacrificing men and women of the union ranks. The threefold combination of the AFL bureaucracy, the employers and the government could only smash this outcropping of radicalism in the union movement on the eve of the war by the deployment of overwhelming forces to beat the union ranks into submission. Even then, the workers remained loyal to the Trotskyist leadership to the end and gave up the struggle only when their leaders advised them that further resistance was futile.
The Minneapolis truck-drivers were certainly not Trotskyists in their political outlook. They were under the sway of the Roosevelt myth even as the rest of the American working people. But they knew the Trotskyists from long experience as men of principle, as the most far-sighted, the most intransigent battlers for the rights of labor. That is why they were willing and anxious to rally in defense of their leadership despite its extreme political complexion.
When the Murray bureaucracy, in response to its master’s voice from the State Department, launched its own “cold war” in the CIO, the Stalinists had the advantage – over the Trotskyists in Minneapolis – of not being isolated in one city but representing a national power. But under what banner could the Stalinists call on the ranks to defend them? What could the Stalinists tell their union memberships? That they were the best People’s Fronters, the best strikebreakers, the best bureaucrats, the best speed-up artists, the best totalitarians? Like drunken profligates, they dissipated their not inconsiderable capital and stand before the ranks today discredited and dishonored, their own cadre dispersed and demoralized. That is why they made such a pitiful showing at the Portland convention. That is why there is no fight, no spirit of confidence in their group. That is why the Murray machine was able to ride roughshod over their remaining forces.
The ignominious defeat of the Stalinists cannot blind us to the fact that it was suffered not at the hands of an insurgent membership but of a red-baiting social-imperialist bureaucracy. Previous defeats of the Stalinists, as in the auto union in 1938 and even the recent upheaval in the maritime union reflected, along with the red-baiting, honest outrage against Stalinist misdeeds and progressive rank-and-file aspirations. The Murray crew, however, carried through its purge exclusively on the plane of the “cold war” between the United States and the Soviet Union. The two planks of its political platform are simply the Marshall Plan and pro-Truman PAC policy.
But the Stalinists are not merely a trade union caucus. They are a national political party with big resources and international connections. Already they are laying their lines for a comeback as a pseudo-progressive opposition. They are banking on the inevitable and irrepressible social contradictions of American capitalism leading to a new crisis and on their ability to place themselves again at the head of rebellious masses of workers.
There is nothing quixotic or fanciful about the Stalinist perspective. American imperialism is heading into mounting difficulties just as surely as night follows day. Not only will the composite masses of the organized industrial unions move into action, but the class itself will be renewed and reinvigorated by the additions of the doubly exploited and oppressed groups of workers hitherto untouched by the organizing drives and mass strikes. The Stalinists in Europe and Asia have demonstrated time and again that despite crimes and betrayals, they are able to recapture leadership by appealing to and rousing new generations of workers when the masses move leftward and in the absence of an alternative radical leadership.
 
Is a Stalinist Comeback Possible?
Can they stage a comeback in the United States as they did in France after the war? Leave aside the fact that the Stalinists are not their own masters and their perspectives and plans are subject to revision overnight when new orders are handed down from the Kremlin. Even their present perspective runs into a buzz-saw of obstacles and complications. First they do not have the kind of cadre they had a generation ago, a cadre hewed out of militant struggles and unemployed demonstrations in their so-called “third period.” A decade of ugly maneuvers and People’s Frontism has corroded their cadre with opportunism and sapped the morale of their ranks. Secondly they are a discredited and despised group. It is common knowledge in the labor movement that their party is a plaything of a foreign bureaucracy. The Stalinists therefore will find it extremely hard, if not impossible, to reestablish broad moral leadership over oppositionist forces.
Finally the Trotskyists, who were preoccupied during the early CIO upheavals with gathering together a political nucleus, have today an impressive cadre of working-class leaders in a number of important industries, far superior in quality to the Stalinists and enjoying an enviable reputation in the ranks as the unwavering champions of militant unionism and class struggle policies.
This changed relationship in the labor movement has already expressed itself in a very significant manner: in the rise of noteworthy progressive groupings in unions like auto and rubber which are not only in opposition to the bureaucracy but are also anti-Stalinist. This represents an absolutely new trend. It foreshadows developments to come. It indicates that the Stalinists will never he able to seize without contest – as they did in 1936 – the leadership of the nascent progressive movement. They will face the determined resistance of a trained, experienced and influential cadre resolved to build an authentic, left wing and not a counterfeit formation which can again disorient, manipulate and sell out the American labor movement as a cat’s-paw in the struggle between the Kremlin and Wall Street.



This article was adapted from the text of a speech delivered in Detroit on May 14, 1955
WHAT is going to happen in the next ten years? What will the world look like in 1965? Before taking the plunge into the unknown, let us review some of the important changes of the recent past. The past is not always a sure indicator of the future, but it provides clues; a conscientious study discloses some of the long-term trends. One can make out the main lines of historical development through the myriad, unceasing movements of peoples, and establish laws governing the sphere of social relations.
I do not need to dwell very long on the miracles of scientific progress and achievement in the past fifty years. These are being trumpeted and heralded unendingly by our public figures and Rotarian after-dinner speakers. They have become part of today’s consciousness, and their importance is fully appreciated by present-day humanity, and if anything, over-appreciated and viewed too one-sidedly and uncritically by most Americans. The genius of man has flowered above all in the sphere of natural and applied science.
Albert Einstein wrote his first paper on relativity at the turn of the century. Forty years later, the power encased in the atom was unlocked on the testing grounds at Alamagordo, New Mexico, and humanity entered the atomic age. The contours of the atomic revolution are still too indistinct to project a firm picture of what is to come. We can only vaguely glean some of the potentialities of this dread secret forced from the hitherto sealed lips of nature. But unless this knowledge shall prove too overwhelming for the mind of man to encompass, so that it unhinges his reason and becomes the tomb of civilization – and I cannot bring myself to believe that – we know enough right now to declare with assurance that the atomic revolution will pale the achievements of the past, and will thrust humanity forward in its material progress with a speed that will beggar comparison with anything that preceded.
 
POETS have written of the existence of a golden age in the dim past. This was just poetic license and an effort to escape from an unsatisfactory present. There never was such an age in antiquity. Man’s ascent from the jungle has been painful and slow, and his history since the dawn of civilization is written in agony, in and in violence. But a golden age has become a possibility. The means are now at hand to abolish poverty and to eliminate want, to escape from drudgery, to alleviate the struggle between man and man for the good of life by providing abundance for all. Will we be able to enter the shining portals by employing the same power of reason and thought that is brought to bear in the laboratory and the research establishment on behalf the social organization of humanity?
Heretofore, the social evolution of man has proceeded just as blindly as the natural evolution of species. The law of one was natural selection. The law of the other was class struggle. The element of conscious organization and planning was not much greater in the social sphere than in the natural. Capitalism, the system under which living in this country, and which still dominates the greater portion of the globe, came into the world as an emancipatory, revolutionary system, breaking down old hampering restrictions and sweeping clean the Augean stables of feudal particularism and pollution. Its flaming banners proclaimed a new liberty, equality and fraternity.
In a number of passages in the Communist Manifesto, Marx and Engels go into a veritable paean of praise for the historic accomplishments of capitalism in its progressive heyday. ‘The bourgeoisie,’ states the Manifesto ‘during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has more massive and more colossal productive forces than have all the preceding generations together.’ But the system exhausted its progressive mission and went into historic decline when the major imperialist powers opened up the epoch of world wars of mutual annihilation. The glories of scientific achievement, the magnificent new tools and machines, the conquest of hitherto mysterious natural all turned into a Frankenstein monster, which proceeded more efficiently and mercilessly than any ancient barbarian horde to put millions to the sword, and monuments of centuries of civilization and enterprise to the flame.
 
DESPITE the tons of editorials and the mountains of learned essays and books tearing to shreds the views of Karl Marx, the capitalist system cracked up in Russia in 1917, in Yugoslavia in the course of the Second World War and in China in 1950. All these countries proceeded to abolish capitalism and start new planned economies in accordance with Marx’s forecasts. Marx’s uncanny projection of the next stages of social development has been demonstrated as a work of genius, of a magnitude equaled in man’s history.
But, alas, historical developments did not follow Marx’s theory precisely. Life proved more complex, more multi-colored than the book. Marx thought the workers would take over in the most advanced countries of Europe and build on the considerable cultural heritage of capitalism. That is the way the latter system came into being. The capitalist revolutions of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries occurred in England and France, which at the time were the most advanced countries in the world. The capitalist system was thereby enabled to display its superiority over feudalism almost at once – in military prowess against its enemies, and in capturing the imagination and loyalty of the peoples because of its economic and cultural pre-eminence. By contrast, the modern revolution introduced socialism as a practical alternative to capitalism under a grievous handicap. The overturn took place in the most primitive country of Europe. Russia had to start building socialism on Asian backwardness. And today China has to build on an even more barren foundation.
Socialism has unfortunately been presented, at least in its first manifestations, as a system not of abundance but of scarcity, as a system not of increased leisure and comfort, but of unusual sacrifice and back-breaking toil. Moreover, encircled by hostile capitalist powers dedicated destruction, boycotted, blockaded and reviled, Russia had to start industrializing by a forced march at the expense of the peoples’ living standards, and by using force and dictatorial pressures on often apathetic and sullen masses. For over three decades Russian socialism has therefore appeared as a system which offered not political democracy and a wider freedom, but conspicuously less freedom than exists in the most advanced capitalist countries. The socialist experiment could not have started under less auspicious circumstances or taken root in less promising soil.
 
THE first crude automobile was probably slower and efficient than the horse-drawn carriage. But its potential was vastly superior. Similarly, Russian socialism building on the heritage of Asian backwardness, and forced to repair the devastation of two world wars, has in a quarter of a century by means of its superior social engine hoisted itself from the depths to emerge as the second industrial power in the world. History draws no comparable achievement! Its economy is still considerably behind the United States. But its planned system has already revealed its superior potential. Can you imagine the magnetic pull on the world’s peoples when socialism wins out in one of the Western countries and can demonstrate its economic and political superiority in absolute terms?
History accepted Marx’s basic prescription, so to speak. But it played a nasty trick on him and the rest of us. Instead of starting the new system, as the doctor had indicated, in France and Germany, then spreading it in rapid order to the other advanced European countries, and then pulling the backward and colonial nations into its orbit, it went to work from the wrong end. The capitalist chain first broke in its weakest links, and these proved to be the backward, not the most advanced countries.
In Western Europe the workers are organized today into powerful parties of their own, socialist or communist, or both. But they are held back from taking over by narrow-minded opportunist thinking and leadership, or disillusionment bred from past defeats, or lack of independence from Russian diplomacy, or fear of upsetting the applecart and precipitating a new war, or a combination of all these reasons. In the United States, labor is truly a sleeping giant. The workers still listen to the propaganda of the Chambers of Commerce. They know they eat and live better than the Russians, or anybody else, for that matter, and that’s been good enough up to the present to hold them as camp followers of the capitalists.
But the American plutocrats are wiser than the workers. At least, they have a far better-developed class sense. They have a foreboding that the existing state of affairs and relationships is transient. They see the threat to their way of life in the new system that is building up in the Soviet bloc. They can mouth for public consumption a lot of blather about the glories of ‘free enterprise.’ But they don’t seem to have too much confidence that they can win out in peaceful competition as a long-term proposition. That is why Mr. Moneybags in America is in a state of high fever and demanding in stentorian tones that ‘something must be done.’
This crowd of panicky businessmen has turned the world into two armed camps and is bracing itself for a fight to destroy the new system which it fears. The second half of the twentieth century has thus opened with two immense phalanxes facing each other panoplied in full battle array. This is a lineup for Armaggedon that neither Marx nor anyone else foresaw. How will the world extricate itself from this impasse?
 
THE first question that calls for an answer is: Will there be a third world war? If the answer is yes, we can stop right here, as this obviates any necessity for weighty analyses of further matters. Let us begin our inquiry by asking: Who is threatening a new war? Both sides point the accusing finger at each other as being the aggressor. Which side is lying? Or are both lying? Or are both telling the truth – about each other? The facts absolve the Kremlin people of responsibility for planning or threatening war. The blame has to be placed on the shoulders of imperialism, led in the main by the Washington-Wall Street axis. Don’t let us forget that there was a world war in 1914 before anyone ever heard of the Soviet hobgoblins. Don’t let us forget that the second World War erupted without any provocation on the Soviet side, and without its initial participation. We have had in other words two shattering world wars brought on by the rivalries and conflicting ambitions of the leading imperialist powers. Now Washington is trying to construct a united imperialist front to wipe out an anti-capitalist bloc of states. That seems to me to be the root cause of the present war tension.
We are told that Russia is imperialist too, that it expanded into Eastern Europe and the Far East. Its expansion at the end of this last war is an indubitable fact. But if we don’t permit ourselves to get mesmerized by the cold-war propaganda, we can discern that Russia simply took advantage of the exceptional set of circumstances that obtained at the end of the war to build up spheres of influence both in Eastern Europe and the Far East. The almost four decades of Soviet history both before and after the second World War demonstrate that the basic impulse and dynamic of the Russian system is for internal development, not toward expansion, and certainly not in hunting for military adventures abroad. We may certainly take issue with some of the policies and acts of the Russian heads on the eve of the second World War, but the evidence is conclusive that their motivation was to try to stay out of the bloody mess. We see the same impulse at work today in the Soviet maneuvers to neutralize Germany and create a vast zone between itself and the NATO capitalist bloc. Now, this would certainly be a foolish and self-defeating course if the Soviets were planning to send their armies marching across the continent to the Channel. Whatever the Soviet leaders may be guilty of, war aggression is not one of their crimes. The drive for war comes from the other side.
 
NEXT, let us look into this matter whether nuclear warfare is as destructive as some have represented it. Are hydrogen bombs, as Krishna Menon of India stated, ‘suicide for the nations who used them, genocide for those against whom they were used, and infanticide for posterity’?
I will begin by quoting a man who on this subject knows whereof he speaks, General MacArthur, one of America’s foremost militarists, a man who has never been accused of either pacifism or secret pro-Soviet proclivities. I believe that even Attorney General Brownell would unqualifiedly agree that MacArthur is definitely no security risk. In a speech delivered in Los Angeles on January 26th under the sponsorship of the American Legion, MacArthur said:
‘War has become a Frankenstein to destroy both sides. No longer is it the weapon of adventure whereby a short cut to international power and wealth – a place in the sun – can be gained. If you lose, you are annihilated. If you win, you stand only to lose. No longer does it possess the chance of the winner of a duel – rather the germs of double suicide. Science outmoded it as a feasible arbiter.’
On March 21st, General Gruenther, who Eisenhower replaced as Supreme Allied Commander in Europe, let us in on this additional bit of cheery news delivered before the Advertising Council:
‘We have an overwhelming air retaliatority capacity in the event that war should break out today. Thus, to make the most pessimistic assumption, namely that the Soviets might be successful in over-running a part or all of Europe now, the Soviets would still be defeated because of our great air capability. Please note that I do not say that we would "win." I recognize all too well that if a world war should break out now, there would be no such thing as a "winner." But definitely the Soviets would be defeated.’
That’s certainly consoling! We’re going to be blasted to Kingdom Come, but we’ll drag the Russians in with us. How nonsensical can you get? This is the stuff of the raving of madmen, of the gibbering of fools. The next lurid account was printed in the NY Times of March 25th based on a UP dispatch from Washington: ‘The government withheld a report on the deadly results of hydrogen bomb radiation for nearly three months for fear it would ‘adversely affect certain international situations.’ So testified Chairman Strauss of the Atomic Energy Commission before a Congressional subcommittee. After months of alarums and warnings by scientists over the world, the AEC report was finally made public on February 15th, which confirmed how one H-Bomb exploded in the Far East spewed deadly radioactive fallout over a 7,000-square-mile area.
On March 16th, Professor Linus Pauling, Nobel Prize chemist of the California Institute of Technology, warned that radiation from the atomic tests was polluting the earth’s atmosphere so that it could endanger life and lead to an increase in the birth of abnormal babies. A few days later, on March 21st, Professor Frederick Soddy, Nobel Laureate physicist, stated in an interview that the hydrogen bomb explosions ‘are fouling the air with radioactivity ... It is nonsense to say it is harmless.’ He declared that these radioactive gases might devastate the natural resources of the countryside and bring economic chaos and ruin. ‘Politicians and technicians rushing into experiments without the faintest idea of what the results might be.’
 
FIVE damage Suits have been filed against government by sheepmen of Cedar City, charging that their animals sickened and died as a of the fallout from the 1953 tests. The Atomic Commission disclosed that it had received 57 medical and hospital expenses resulting from injuries caused by radioactive fallout from atomic tests in Nevada since the beginning of the tests in 1951, and has paid almost 400 of these claims.
But these warnings of the scientists and t suits are about the bomb tests. What happens when the real shooting starts? An ordinary-sized H-Bomb would blow a hole 200 feet deep and a mile across. Complete obliteration for four miles, severe damage for sixteen miles, fallout for 7,000 to 10,000 square miles. Have the Russians the military capability of giving us a dose of this warfare? Oh yes! It seems the Russians probably detonated an H-bomb six months before the United States did. Brigadier General Thomas A. Phillips, military analyst of the St. Louis Post Dispatch, thinks the Russians may have 1,000 H-bombs by now, and have the long-range carrier to deliver them. Both sides are now working on inter-continental guided missiles which can carry atomic warheads and travel faster than sound. No wonder Dr. Norris Bradbury, director of the laboratory in an interview reported in the Los Angeles Times on March 13th summed up his feeling that we had reached a dead end. He said: ‘He [the enemy] may die faster sooner, and I may die slower later.’ It is conceivable, although not sure, that life would be left on this planet after such a holocaust, but civilization will have been wiped out and the long painful climb from the jungles and swamps will have to start all over again.
Bertrand Russell isn’t even this optimistic. He stated:
‘Authorities are unanimous in saying a war with hydrogen bombs is quite likely to put an end to the human race. There will be universal death – suddenly only for a fortunate minority, but for the majority a slow torture of disintegration.’
Can we avoid this war of mutual annihilation? I don’t know for sure, because time and again we seem to approach the rim of the abyss, but I think we can. For the time being, the common ownership of this dread weapon acts as a deterrent. Fear of nuclear retaliation is holding back the rulers, and has produced a deadlock in the international struggle. Out of this stalemate arises the possibility of the two blocs coming to a new practical agreement, a modus vivendi, co-existence. We have had a number of little wars since 1945, and the war of nerves goes on without respite. I am afraid that this generation will see more of these little sectional wars, and that the diplomacy of blackmail and threat will continue for the decade ahead. I am also aware that fear of retaliation is not an absolute deterrent. Decaying social classes sometimes get irrational. But the organized anti-war movement is growing abroad, and if we reinforce it from here, and make it harder for public figures to rattle the atom bomb, it can well be that this present unique, unprecedented combination of circumstances will save humanity the harrowing ordeal of a nuclear world war. I am trying to make a sober estimation of the situation. I hope I am making no mistake.
 
WILL this stalemate between the two power blocs freeze the status quo everywhere – in other words, will the present line-ups endure intact? And a corollary proposition, will the masses in Western Europe and the United States continue to see socialism exclusively in the grim and dictatorial visage of the present Russian and allied states?
Experience since the end of World War II has answered the first part of the question. The overhanging war clouds may have affected up to a point the workers in Western Europe, but the struggle against ancient wrongs continues to blaze brightly in the colonial world. Chinese Communism swept that country clean. The Indochinese cleared the French out of half their country. Civil war continues in Malaya. And even Africa is stirring from its century of enslavement and degradation. Imperialism is wounded from the blows dealt it by the colonial freedom movement in Asia. But that continent, trying to lift itself by the bootstraps from centuries of backwardness and decay, cannot give socialism its more advanced imprint along the lines originally conceived by its founders. Neither Chinese Communism, nor Russian, can be the trail blazer of democracy and abundance of the present-day revolution. That will have to come from the West, with its advanced economies, its trained labor movements, its democratic background. Have we reason to expect the socialist struggle to revive in Western Europe in the next period?
G.D.H. Cole, the old British socialist historian, has written recently a provocative article appearing in the Nation, where he complains that the old internationalist spirit that animated the socialist movement when he joined it as a young man seems to have got lost. Socialism, he says, ‘has renounced its old ambition of world revolution and has shrunk into a number of separate national movements’ for the furtherance of minor welfare reforms within capitalism; while communism has turned into a totalitarian tyranny in the states that it dominates. Cole tries to find a solution for this very real dilemma by proposing the organization of a small intellectual elite international society which could hold itself aloof from the mass parties and do their thinking for them, because he, for one, doesn’t think the masses can think, anyway. I doubt that Cole’s idea is a very happy one. In certain periods and under certain conditions, socialist educators can profoundly influence the thinking and direction of a movement, but never by standing aloof from the existing organizations in a posture of snobbery or superiority; only connected with them, and basing their thinking, in every case, upon the actual dynamics of the workers’ movement.
 
THERE actually has been a remarkable revival of the workers’ movement this past year in England and Germany. Both these movements are controlled by right-wing socialists who want to convert them into pressure groups operating within capitalism, but left wings have sprung up in both parties and are contesting with the old-line leaders. On the other hand, the strong communist movements in Italy and France lack independence from Russian tutelage, and they’re very short on internal democracy. But the Italian CP has also felt the tremors of rank-and-file opposition. If the next decade witnesses massive upheavals in these four countries, there is bound to come a political regroupment signifying the rise of a revived militant socialism prepared to tackle the tasks of this second half of the twentieth century. Bevanism is a small forecast of the new socialism that will reappear and renew the battle with the old, still-unvanquished institutions and antagonists challenged by Marx a century ago. Who can doubt that Western Europe will pass through these struggles? The huge armaments programs do not ensure elimination of the boom-and-bust cycles, but transpose them into a lowering of living standards and the frittering away of the substance of the nation’s wealth. The imperialists’ attempt to hang on to their empires will become a drain on the workers’ living standards instead of a source of higher wages. At a certain point, the economic crisis will inevitably merge with a political crisis.
How about the USA? Are we foredoomed to be represented forever by Republicans and Democrats? Is our current golf-playing Harding to be succeeded by a McCarthyized Coolidge to be followed by a Brownell-model Hoover? It was the unprecedented 10-year economic boom that accounted for the sweep of conservatism and Babbitry, and generated complacency in the face of McCarthyism. It will be, first of all, the whip of economic insecurity that will reverse the process. And economic troubles are now building up.
The similarity in the present trends to those of the 1920’s is being more widely recognized every day. With a sizable and growing unused industrial capacity typified by the automobile industry’s ability to manufacture 9 million cars annually as against its best recent output of about 6½ million, retail prices continue to stay high due to monopolistic control; corporation profits remain abnormally high for the same reason, and personal consumption has continued to rise, propped up by installment buying and mounting accumulation of consumer debt and mortgages. The parallel with 1929 is absolutely deadly. But there is one big difference: government spending, which in 1953 was 46 times greater in dollars than in 1929, accounting in that year for a sixth of the gross national product. The federal government spent $1.3 billion in 1929 and $60 billion in 1953, and of this $52 billion went under the heading of ‘national security.’
You don’t have to be a financial wizard to figure out that without this big chunk of government spending, we would be heading for depression right now. But this type of ‘built-in stabilizer’ is not something new. Schacht, Adolf Hitler’s banker, knew all about it, and administered this same kind of medicine to a sick German capitalism back in the thirties. They even had a big road-building program, too. But you’re in bad shape when you have to depend on ‘shots’ of dope all the time, and increasing doses of those. Even at the height of government spending, sizable unemployment reappeared in 1953 and has persisted since then, enormous dislocations showed up in certain industries, and falling prices and mounting surpluses became the rule in agriculture, the main non-monopoly branch of the economy. In other words, dry rot is eating away at the foundations. The danger ahead is not ‘creeping socialism,’ but ‘creeping depression.’
I am not going to speculate on whether the capitalists have grown smarter in the last quarter century, and whether they will throw out some concessions when up against trouble. I am sure they will. Even crusty old Henry Ford had enough flexibility to sign a with the union when he found he couldn’t open his plant at River Rouge without doing so. I am going to concern myself with how labor will react to the economic difficulties. I believe that we will see for a while greater strike movements in an attempt by workers to reverse the trend and safeguard their economic status. This will bring heightened social awareness and alertness, and sharper clashes and mounting resentment against the forces which pretend to represent the people, in reality the watchdogs of the special interests. Before many more national elections pass, I think we will see a split from top to bottom in this unnatural monstrosity which calls itself the Democratic Party, and the political re-alignment will produce the long overdue labor party, roughly similar to what they have in Britain.
The Democratic Party is based on an unnatural alliance and an archaic system of control. Here is a party whose most powerful contingent is organized labor. With the ADA liberals and professional elements, this accounts for probably over 85 percent of the party in the North, which in 1948 elected Truman even after the Dixiecrat secession. Yet the Southern Bourbons run the congressional machinery of this party to suit themselves, and on the most important matters, either dictate the Democratic policies, or team up with the Republicans to defeat the Northern Democrats.
The Southern Bourbons are not only arch-reactionaries and racists, but organizationally disloyal to the party and contemptuous of its majority decisions. They only maintain the right to dictate to the party. The truth is they don’t want a Democratic presidential victory, as the situation gives them greater power both in the and in the Congress. There was a kind of two-party system in this country in the heyday of the New Deal, but the two-party system is a hoax today. The Southern oligarchy is in the saddle and has blocked the operation of even the mildest milk-and-water ADA variety of opposition to Eisenhower. The Democrats don’t deserve to elect a dogcatcher on the basis of the opposition they furnished to the Republican administration. This conspiracy is so blatant that even a Truman, as an old-time Pendergast-trained politician, likes to see his candidates get into office, felt impelled to lash against the oligarchy. ‘I have got tired a long time some mealy-mouthed Senators who kiss Ike on cheeks.’ William White, the NY Times correspondent added:
‘Mr. Truman did not name these Senators. The implication seemed inescapable, however, that he was far from satisfied with the restrained partisan activity of the present Democratic leadership of the Senate headed by Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas.’
And yet this scandalous situation continues, and the Southern oligarchy remains in the drivers’ seat, because weak-kneed Northern liberals continue kowtowing and capitulating to the stiff-necked Walter Georges and Lyndon Johnsons, and the labor leaders continue chasing the liberals.
Of course, I read recently the report of a speech made by the president of the CIO that a labor party is all right for Europe, but has no place in this country, because we have no rigid class lines here. Whom has Reuther been talking with recently? Hasn’t he read, or told, about the writings of Robert Lynd, or the studies of C. Wright Mills on the middle class? Why, even conservative sociologists and investigators have become so impressed with the stratification of this society that they have stopped talking about opportunity and are concentrating on trying to reconcile the ‘lower classes’ to their lot, lest people strive for the impossible.
I direct Reuther’s attention to the recent testimony of Theodore K. Quinn, former Vice-President of the General Electric Corporation, who testified before a congressional committee that the small independent business man was ‘going the way of the American Indian.’ Quinn stated: ‘As few as 200 industrial giants own outright the most important half of all American industry and are transforming the organization of our society into a kind of American feudalism.’ Reuther’s blooper may rank in the days to come alongside of Hoover’s famous aphorism that ‘prosperity is just around the corner.’ The misalliance labelled the Democratic Party is not called forth by special social needs of the country. It is strictly a product of ‘cultural lag.’ What is holding the party together and binding labor to its coat-tails is not absence of rigid class lines, or renewed opportunity to rise into the middle classes, but the inertia of a working class, born of the complacency that enjoyment of the highest standard of living in the world produced. Begin threatening that – and this whole edifice will start to totter. Subject this party to social tensions, and it will split apart at the seams.
 
IN Britain, the Labor Party was formed at the turn of the century, and another four decades elapsed before a Bevanite left-wing movement arose within it. Is it therefore implied that a labor party will appear in the United States somewhere along 1965, and that a left wing will come up around the year 2000? Such a timetable would ignore the differences in the two periods of world history: The British party organized at a time when the poet Browning wrote that ‘God’s in his heaven, and all’s right with the world.’ We are living in an age of the destruction of the colonial system and the rise of anti-capitalist states. The fat cats of the American plutocracy who preside over an enclave of comparative stability and plenty in an ocean of turbulence and poverty are nevertheless rocked daily by the eruptions abroad, and have thrown up a garrison state to ward off the dangers crowding in on them. For good or for evil, events are enormously speeded up nowadays, and important changes loom ahead in our lifetime.
At the 1935 AFL convention in Atlantic City, John L. Lewis and his associates told the assembled hierarchs that if they, the conservative, safe-and-sound labor leaders, did not organize the workers of the mass-production industries, the radicals would. A similar threat will bring a labor party into being. And because that is the only way a labor party will be born, it will necessarily be accompanied with the mushrooming of radical left-wing formations both inside and outside the labor party itself. It is in this context that I view a labor party organization as the prelude for a rebirth of a mass socialist movement. That is the perspective ahead of us, as I see it. In the meantime, as we pass through the valley of the shadow of death, what is necessary is to keep our vision undimmed, our courage high, and our resolve unbending.



Does socialism necessarily mean a one-party dictatorship? Or can fuller democracy and popular control than ever seen under the capitalist system be achieved? An essay on one of the most debated issues of the modern age.
ONE of the most potent pitches that world reaction employs against the Soviet Union – is that the people have no democratic rights, that the governments are police dictatorships; and from this jump to the conclusion that socialism is synonymous with dictatorship. The guess can be hazarded that at least in Western Europe, the United States and Canada, this accusation has hurt the Soviet cause more than any other, and has struck deep chords of suspicion and doubt in the minds of many liberals and workers who otherwise might conceivably be friendly to the socialist states.
Fanatical supporters of all things Russian have taken the line of a blanket denial of the accusation – and retort with an expose of the spurious character of much of Western democracy. They insist that a system of government which is based on a one-party monopoly, where elections consist of one-slate plebiscites, where civil liberties are non-existent – that this kind of rule is the very embodiment of socialist democracy. This position is neither helpful to the popularization of socialism in general, nor to working up of support for the Soviet states in particular. But regardless of its immediate propaganda effects, is it true that socialism stands for the one-party system, and is that what Marx had in mind when he spoke of the dictatorship of the proletariat?
One of the most authoritative statements of the original Marxist position on this question is contained in Frederick Engels’ 1895 introduction to Karl Marx’s pamphlet, The Class Struggles in France. Engels explains that at first both he and Marx were still under the spell of the Great French Revolution and that their ideas of the path that the socialist revolution would follow were colored by this earlier model. But, he says, history showed that both he and Marx were wrong in some of their original assumptions. Where all previous social revolutions in history resulted in the displacement of one minority in favor of another minority, the socialist revolution involves for the first time the displacement of a minority in favor of another minority, the socialist revolution involves for the first time the displacement of a minority in favor of the big majority:
“The epoch ... of revolutions carried through by small conscious minorities at the head of unconscious masses is past. Where it is a question of a complete transformation of the social organization, the masses themselves must participate, must grasp what is at stake, and why they are involved. That is what the history of the past fifty years has taught us.”
 
THE term “dictatorship of the proletariat” was first employed by Marx in 1875 in a private document, and then popularized in the 1917 Russian Revolution. Eugene Debs rightly thought it a very unfortunate phrase, because no matter how many lengthy explanations are given concerning its true meaning, it lends itself to the interpretation that socialists stand for dictatorship. But that is not what Marx had in mind at all. He was talking of the necessity for a victorious labor government during the transition period to resolutely destroy the old privileged positions and suppress all activities aimed at restoring the old order. In this sociological sense, he labelled the regime a “dictatorship”; not to signify minority rule in the manner of Robespierre’s Jacobin dictatorship in the eighteenth century French revolution, or Cromwell’s dictatorship in the seventeenth century English revolution, but only in the sense that it was still class rule, just as under the present system the capitalists wield a class dictatorship regardless whether it is exercised through democratic or autocratic political forms.
Here is the way Rosa Luxemburg, the leading revolutionary Marxist of the pre-war German socialist movement, defined the proletarian dictatorship in her essays on the Russian Revolution:
Socialist democracy is not something which begins only in the promised land after the foundations of socialist economy are created; it does not come as some sort of Christmas present for the worthy people who, in the interim, have loyally supported a handful of socialist dictators. Socialist democracy begins simultaneously with the beginnings of the destruction of class rule and of the construction of socialism. It begins at the very moment of the seizure of power by the socialist party. It is the same thing as the dictatorship of the proletariat ... This dictatorship consists in the manner of applying democracy, not in its elimination; in energetic, resolute attacks upon the well-entrenched rights and economic relationships of capitalist society, without which a socialist transformation cannot be accomplished. But this dictatorship must be the work of the class and not of a little leading minority in the name of the class – that is, it must proceed step by step out of the active participation of the masses; it must be under their direct influence, subjected to the control of complete public activity; it must arise out of the growing political training of the mass of the people.
This was no peculiar interpretation of Luxemburg’s. Before the revolution, Lenin and the Russian Bolsheviks held a generally analogous position. In State and Revolution published in 1917, Lenin wrote:
Together with an immense expansion of democracy which for the first time becomes democracy for the poor, democracy for the people, and not democracy for the rich folk, the dictatorship of the proletariat produces a series of restrictions of liberty in the case of the oppressors, the exploiters, the capitalists.
Lenin assumed power in 1917 with no preconceived notion of setting up a one-party government. On the contrary, the Soviets were freely elected in the first years, and the original government consisted of a bloc of the Bolsheviks and the Left Social Revolutionary Party. The Mensheviks (similar to Western reformist socialists) and the Right Social Revolutionists (a populist party with its chief strength in the peasantry) continued to operate legally. In his dispute with Trotsky in 1920, Lenin insisted that the trade unions must be permitted to function independently of the government apparatus and to protect the workers from its bureaucratic encroachments. In other words, the original concept on which the Russian government was founded was entirely different from that embodied in the constitutions that governed the creation of the “Peoples Democracies” and the Mao government in the present postwar epoch.
 
NEVERTHELESS, history has recorded that within a few years the original libertarian ideas were discarded in Russia and the dictatorship became one not of a class but of a small group, with the Communist Party remaining the only one on the scene and all other parties suppressed and destroyed, and democracy eliminated from the inner councils of this one existing party as well. The Russian communists in other words wound up not with the democratic governmental structure that they had set out to build, but one of an almost diametrically opposite variety.
In the welter of theories that have flooded the market in recent years to explain Soviet developments, the more serious-minded of the middle-class analysts have tried to account for this startling discrepancy between theory and practice on two broad grounds. One school has rested its case on Lord Acton’s aphorism that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely. In other words, the Russian communist leaders, whatever their previous intentions, could not resist the temptation of becoming absolute dictators once the opportunity presented itself. The other school explains the transformation on the ground that the original Marxist theory was worthless, that consequently as soon as these men were confronted with the practical problems of statecraft, they had no alternative but to discard their former utopian conceptions.
Lord Acton’s bon mot assuredly expressed a psychological truth, but it explains nothing as to why dictatorships rise and prosper in certain periods and under certain historical conditions, and why such forms of rule become impossible in other periods. To ascertain that, one must analyze the economic and social conditions of a given period rather than explore the atavistic impulses that still find refuge in the human psyche.
The first attempts to run the Russian government as a coalition of two parties and to grant a large measure of democracy broke down under the weight of the superhuman difficulties in trying to bring order out of the chaos inherited from Czarism and the destruction of the war. Concretely, the coalition blew up in 1918 when the Social Revolutionists refused to go along on signing the Brest-Litovsk treaty with Germany and walked out of the government. A few months later their party was outlawed when it embarked on a program of insurrection against the government, assassinated the German ambassador, wounded two Soviet leaders, Lenin and Uritsky, and tried to organize anti-government uprisings in a number of cities. The same year the Mensheviks and Right Social Revolutionists had to be outlawed when they set up connections with the White Guards and interventionist armies of imperialism in the midst of the civil war. This process was finally capped in 1921 when the Communist Party outlawed the organization of any opposition groups or factions even within its own party. This extraordinary measure, which Lenin and his friends conceived to be a temporary expedient, taken at the time of the Kronstadt rebellion when the communist regime feared for its survival, proved instead to be a milestone on the road of dictatorial rule.
Luxemburg with great perspicacity wrote in 1918 in the aforementioned brochure:
Dealing as we are with the first experiment in proletarian dictatorship in world history (and one taking place at that under the hardest conceivable conditions, in the midst of the world-wide conflagration and chaos of the imperialist mass slaughter, caught in the coils of the most reactionary military power in Europe, and accompanied by the completest failure on the part of the international working class), it would be a crazy idea to think that every last thing done or left undone in an experiment with the proletarian dictatorship under such abnormal conditions represented the very pinnacle of perfection. On the contrary, elementary conceptions of socialist politics and an insight into their historically necessary prerequisites force us to understand that under such fatal conditions even the most gigantic idealism and the most storm-tested revolutionary energy are incapable of realizing democracy and socialism but only distorted attempts at either.
 
SOME, of course, have decided to make a virtue out of the grim necessity and to denominate the benevolent despotism as the unparalleled flowering of democracy, and have unabashedly propounded the theory that whereas the Communist parties represent the true interests of the working masses, they are necessarily the only representatives of the majority of the people. There is consequently neither the desire nor the need to set up any rival parties; the only people who are interested in new parties are the capitalists, the counter-revolutionists, the spokesmen for the old regime. Ergo, the one-party system is a true democratic expression the laboring mass will.
No one but uncritical Soviet enthusiasts will accept this rather too-thin rationalization at face value. For it corresponds neither to present experience nor to the past history of classes and parties. In actual life, things are not that simple, individuals are not that uniform, and classes are not that homogeneous. Everyone knows that throughout its history the capitalist class has been represented in most countries by two or more political organizations except in periods of dictatorial suppression. This is explained by the fact that the various subdivisions of the class have different and sometimes even conflicting interests that demand special political consideration and expression. In the United States, for example, some capitalist groups, in highly advanced or favored industries, are free traders. Others who fear foreign competition insist on high protective tariffs. As another example, in Roosevelt’s first terms, the big department store owners and other “consumer” capitalists backed the administration, while the “heavy” industrialists were its obdurate opponents. In France, Italy and Germany, the capitalists to this very day continue to be represented by anywhere from four to six different political parties, which voice either special group or sectional interests, or different programmatic solutions to meet the needs of the class.
The working class is no less heterogeneous in its makeup. Its topmost skilled aristocratic division at times almost merges with the lower middle class. Its bottom section fringes off into a slum proletariat. In between there are innumerable gradations based upon differences in income, nationality, education and religion. In Marx’s time the working class movement was represented by Marxists, Proudhonists, Bakuninists, Mazzinists, conservative laborites. Even in those countries where Marxism later became the accepted program of the working class, there was no agreement as to interpretation of its practical meaning, and, as we know, the working class continues to this day in the West to be represented by Communists and Socialists, and at times, additional numbers of radical parties. The factors which make for this political pluralism continue after a socialist, government takes power, because the gradations and divisions within the class are not and cannot be eliminated for many years to come; in the first years of transition they may even be accentuated. And in any case there are always varying answers and conflicting solutions for the problems at hand. That is why under conditions of democratic fee play, the working masses will inevitably create two or more parties to voice either distinct group interests, or their special programmatic positions for the advancement of the new socialist state.
 
THE experience of the last three decades has been conclusive in demonstrating that all the mechanical and constitutional devices of democracy, including socialist democracy, are easily robbed of essential meaning when one party has the monopoly of political rights, keeps the rest of the population in a state of amorphousness and atomization, and uses its power to discourage and suppress any and all political opposition or competition. Democracy must mean a free press, free assembly, a legal code that guarantees inalienable rights to the individual, and sharply demarcates and limits the police powers of the state, as well as ability on the part of the majority of the people to periodically pass judgment on the performance of its government, and to turn it out of office in favor of another, if it so desires and decides.
In the last analysis, rights such as these can be guaranteed and maintained not primarily by being written down on pieces of parchment, but by the existence of competing political organizations, which are able by their presence and activity to prevent political power from being monopolized by one minority group and thus centralized in an omnipotent state. No one of course can insist that the peoples of any country must form a multiplicity of competing political organizations, whether they want to or not. What is decisive is that they have the right to form such organizations if they want to. The draconian legal codes and ruthless suppressions make it obvious that Soviet political uniformity is maintained not by electioneering but by force.
 
SOCIALISTS have to insist on democracy not merely as a matter of justice and the good life, although these are by no means inconsequential considerations; because socialism after all is not a private axe that some of us have to grind, but represents the struggle for a superior social order which will provide greater well-being and happiness for the human race-and it is impossible to conceive of that without an increasing popular participation in and control over all phases of public life. But democracy also has a utilitarian aspect: people work better, are more interested in the success of a venture, and have greater kinship with it, if they feel they are actually part of it, and profit from it. Democracy is not only a more just way of running society; it is more productive in the long run. It is the only way to fully unleash the creative powers lodged in the people.
Luxemburg had a prophetic anticipation of many of the difficulties to come in later years when she wrote:
In place of the representative bodies created by general, popular elections, Lenin and Trotsky have laid down the soviets as the only true representation of the laboring masses. But with the repression of political life in the land as a whole, life in the soviets must also become more and more crippled. Without general elections, without unrestricted freedom of press, and assembly, without a free struggle of opinion, life dies out in every public institution, becomes a mere semblance of life, in which only the bureaucracy remains as the active element. Public life gradually falls asleep, a few dozen party leaders of inexhaustible energy and boundless experience direct and rule. Among them, in reality only a dozen outstanding heads do the leading and an elite of the working class is invited from time to time to meetings where they are to applaud the speeches of the leaders, and to approve proposed resolutions unanimously ... Such conditions must inevitably cause a brutalization of public life.
It is irrelevant in this connection to point out, as some do, that the formal democracy under capitalism has very restricted meaning and is robbed of its essence by the concentration of power and wealth in the hands of a privileged few who are able to manipulate the political mechanism in their own interests and corrupt the legislators to do their bidding. This is all very interesting and true. But socialists have traditionally insisted that the answer to the corruption and bowdlerization of democracy under capitalism is not to throw out democracy altogether and place their fate in the hands of a few saviors, but to eliminate the social parasitism of capitalism so as to be able to extend, to broaden, to ensure a genuine popular democracy, first for the working people, and eventually for all mankind.
 
A YEAR and a half ago, and again this last January, the question of socialist democracy received international attention when Milovan Djilas, former vice president of Yugoslavia, complained that bureaucratic forces had taken over in his country, and in his latter declaration called for the formation of a new democratic socialist party and the creation of a two-party system. Since the break with Russia in 1948, the Titoists have introduced a number of important reforms toward loosening up the top-heavy structure by decentralizing the administration of economic planning and government operation, a new election law which permitted plural candidacies, liberalization of the legal code, and institution of “workers management” committees in industry. As a result of these reforms, the Yugoslav peoples enjoy a more liberalized rule that do the Russians or the populations of the “Peoples Democracies.” But while the political despotism is more benevolent, it remains a despotism nevertheless, with sole political power concentrated inside the Communist party, and that party, in turn, run by a small coterie of leaders, who brook no opposition, as the Djilas episode graphically illustrated.
The Titoists used to repeat the argument that in their country there was no need for more than one party (except on the part of the counter-revolution) as there was only one program: socialism. The Djilas controversy quickly disposed of this synthetic thesis. In the course of the debates in the Yugoslav central committee a year and a half ago, Tito put his cards on the table:
“I prefer,” he flung out at his adversary, “being guided by gendarmes and that I should be a priest of socialism, that is, I should be an agitator of socialist ideas – I prefer this to pondering again in some capitalist jail on how to fight against the restored bourgeois dictatorship which probably would win if we were to accept the views of Comrade Djilas.”
This straight-from-the-shoulder avowal brings us squarely up against the question whether the old Marxian concept is actually workable? It certainly does no good to rest our case on quotations from Engels, Lenin, Luxemburg, beautiful though they may appear in print, and ignore the practice of the Russians, and now of the East Europeans and Chinese. The experience of Lenin and his friends is even more telling, as they clearly started out with libertarian ideas on this score, and quickly abandoned them as impossible to execute in the given conditions of the time. Obviously, no revolutionary government will permit political liberalization to develop when it is convinced that it will thereby open the door for the socialists to be driven from power and for the capitalist regime to be restored. No revolutionary party will consciously dig its own grave. Has life then pronounced this part of the Marxian conception as utopian?
 
SUCH a sweeping conclusion would ignore the fact that contrary to Marx’s expectations, capitalism was first destroyed and the construction of socialism started not in the most advanced but in the most backward countries of the world. Revolutionary governments throughout history have been unstable governments. But this general instability was in these cases immeasurably aggravated because the majority of the populations consisted of backward peasant masses, because of the primitive economic heritage, by the lack of capital resources for industrialization, by the need to make good the ravages of destructive invasions and civil wars. Socialist development thus necessarily took on lopsided forms, and the industrialization programs, which had to be financed out of the living standards of the living generations, led to the imposition of despotic forms of rule, and warped out of recognizable shape Marx’s old concept of the proletarian dictatorships.
The well-known writer on Russian affairs, Isaac Deutscher, has offered the theory that Stalin’s regime of tyranny and “primitive magic,” as he calls it, derived from the isolation, ruin and backwardness of the Russia of the twenties, typified by the muzhik tilling the soil with his wooden plow; and that with the country’s emergence as a great industrial power, these methods are outlived and cannot long endure. This theory is undoubtedly correct as far as it goes. Unfortunately, sociological developments have a habit of becoming devilishly complicated, and social institutions and groups do not conveniently abdicate and remove themselves from the scene when their presence no longer corresponds to objective needs.
In the course of its grim struggle to industrialize and to construct a powerful military machine, Russian society got stratified and an aristocratic caste enjoying greater privileges and higher incomes hardened on top. The harsh legal code, the absence of elementary civil liberties, originally devised to destroy counter-revolutionary foes, in time merged with the needs of the bureaucratic caste to preserve its own favored status. In the meantime, the successive five-year plans have created a new Russia with a vast urban population, a strong working class, a new intelligentsia and an educated class of collective farmers.
This new Russia cries aloud for a breaking down of the old prison walls; the old despotism has become an anachronism. But no privilged group gives up its favored position unless it is forced to do so, and the elaborate hierarchical structure of despotism that has been built up over the years will crumble only as the masses regain their initiative, secure their rights to form independent organizations once again, and impose a more democratic setup in all spheres of life. That as a matter of fact appears to be the long-term trend implicit in present Russian affairs.
 
WHEN socialists take over in the advanced Western countries, they will be able to rest on the more consistent support of the big majority, and from the first will be able to offer notable advances over the best of capitalism. Hence, political rule will be far closer to the theoretical model: Socialism will be able to give full rein to democracy for the mass of the people, which under capitalism could never attain more than rudimentary and stunted forms.
The vicissitudes of the struggle, the practical difficulties, and unforeseen peculiarity of socialism having begun its work on the most unfavorable foundations have wrought damage to the democratic conceptions that animated socialism’s founders. With the end of the Soviet Union’s isolation and the build-up of its economy, however, the tendency even here will be increasingly for a return to libertarian ideas and methods; in other words, toward a more faithful realization of these original socialist principles.
That is the programmatic model that socialists must continue to cherish.



Class, Status And Power, A Reader In Social Stratification
edited by Reinhard Bendix and Seymour Martin Lipset
The Free Press, Glencoe, Illinois, 1954, $7.50.
THE concepts of a class division of society and a struggle between the classes as a motive force of history are considered as specifically Marxian by capitalist social scientists today, and as such naturally damned and rejected out of hand as a self-evidently outlived 19th Century dogma. As Joseph Schumpeter states in his chapter on The Problem of Classes, ‘The very term class struggle, let alone the idea behind it, has fallen into discredit among the best minds in science and politics alike.’ Actually Marx pointed out on many occasions that neither he nor Engels were the discoverers of either the existence of classes in society, or of the struggle between them furnishing the fuel for the fires of history. The great thinkers of bourgeois enlightenment, writing when capitalism was a great emancipating system and not a scourge threatening the very existence of humanity, have the credit for that. Before Marx, they had perceived these relationships at the foundation of society, and with this theory, had opened a window on the past history of peoples. What had been an unintelligible jumble of chronicles, myths, and romances was for the first time transformed into a coherent, systematic and rational explanation of man’s past.
Marx and Engels never systematically set down their theory of social classes. Their ideas can be found scattered through various of their writings dealing with other matters. The editors of this volume attempt to remedy this lack by gathering together in one short essay a number of the pertinent quotations. Their effort is commendable. Unfortunately, they are incapable of understanding what Marx is talking about. College sociology has become so stultified and formalistic that it is simply beyond our two professional sociologists to follow a dynamic mode of thought.
 
FOR Marx, a class is formed and derives its social position from its role in the social organization of production. Every individual belongs to this or that class by virtue of his place in the productive and social process, irrespective of his own opinions on the subject. But, as with all his concepts, Marx viewed classes, including the modern working class, an motion: He was interested in its origins, its development, and its future. In Poverty of Philosophy, Marx states:
‘The first attempts of the workers to associate among themselves always take place in the form of unions.
‘Large-scale industry concentrates in one place a crowd of people unknown to one another. Competition divides their interests. But the maintenance of wages, this common interest which they have against the boss, unites them on a common thought of resistance – unionization. Thus unionism always has a double aim, that of stopping the competition among themselves, in order to bring about a general competition with the capitalists. If the first aim of the general resistance was merely the maintenance of wages, unions, at first isolated, constitute themselves into groups as the capitalists class in their turn unite with the idea of repression, and in face of always-united capital, the maintenance the union becomes more necessary to them than that of wages. This is so true that the English economists are amazed to see the workers sacrifice a good part of their wages in favor of Unions, which in the eyes of the economist are established solely in favor of wages. In this struggle – a veritable civil war – are united and developed all the elements necessary for the coming battle. Once it has reached this point, unionism takes on a political character.
‘Economic conditions had first transformed the mass of the people of the country into workers. The domination of capital has created for this mass a common situation, common interests. This mass is thus already a class as against capital but not yet for itself. In this struggle of which we have noted only a few phases, this mass becomes united and constitutes itself as a class for itself. The interests it defends become class interests.’
Whether one agrees or not, Marx’s thought seems perfectly clear. The working class is formed and exists through the organization of the social process. It is an objective fact regardless of anyone’s understanding, or how various individuals picture to themselves their class position. But for a class to understand its own interests and engage in political battles in its own interests, it needs class consciousness. This consciousness is attained however in the course of its inevitable experiences and conflicts with the employing class.
But our authors simply cannot Marx’s distinction between objective class position and class consciousness, or follow his mode of thinking. They juggle a few more quotations to arrive at the incomprehensible conclusion that
‘It will be apparent from the preceding discussion that Marx did not simply identify a social class with the fact that a large group of people occupied the same objective position in the economic structure of a society ... Subjective awareness of class interests was in his view an indispensable element in the development of a social class.’
That this obfuscation derives not from personal obtuseness but from the social function of college sociology is driven home to the reader as he buckles on his armor and proceeds to fight his way through the sixty-odd essays of different authors that comprise this textbook, running all the way from theories of class structure to studies of social mobility among college graduates, to comparative social structures abroad.
 
THE fathers of American college sociology, writing in the pre-World I days, were still bound by the established concepts of class, were scientists in their field, at least in intention, if not in performance. Their works consisted of attempts at broad systematization and delineation of the role of class forces in American life. Responding to the mode of thought of American society, however, they increasingly stressed the unique ‘classlessness’ of American society, the allegedly harmonious cooperation between the different strata, and the embodiment of American virtue in the great middle class. Ward called for the creation of a ‘sociocracy,’ Sumner coined the phrase ‘the forgotten man,’ and Cooley predicted the growth of a greater ‘open democracy.
These soap bubbles were exploded the first World War, and the college sociologists, as so many others, fell victim to the mania for specialization. The speculations of the founders had been pretty vapid. But all broad theorizing, and all integrated viewpoints, became suspect now. Sociology was chopped up into little compartments: the family, population growth, juvenile delinquency, etc., and the colleges began turning out like sausages monographs on a thousand-and-one unrelated subjects. ‘In this more ‘exact’ and ‘scientific’ treatment of social phenomena, the problems of class were largely neglected,’ writes Charles H. Page in his study on American sociology. The researchers operated on the basis of an eclectic jumble of half-baked ‘multiple-factors’ explanations for all phenomena, or simply limited themselves to an empirical gathering together of statistical data. They no longer aspired to be soaring eagles, but contented themselves with being burrowing moles and hired specialists.
With the social convulsions of the New Deal and the rise of the CIO, our sociologists felt constrained to rediscover the existence of classes in our society. Using the sampling-poll techniques and other new devices that have become popular in the past years, they set out with their sets of questionnaires and IBM machines to chart the social stratification which they could no longer ignore. Several highly valuable studies were written, notably the Lynds’ survey of ‘Middletown,’ and a little later, those of C. Wright Mills on the middle class and the white collar workers. It is not accidental that both these scholars were considerably influenced by Marxist thought. But the main trend is not with them, but with the so-called Warner approach.
 
W. LLOYD WARNER and a number of associates made elaborate studies of the class structure of three communities, a New England town of 17,000 (Yankee City), a Southern city of 10,000 (Old City), and a mid-Western city of 6,000 (Prairie City), in order to establish the social organization of the typical American community. While it was undoubtedly simpler for the researchers to gather data in small towns, these can hardly serve as examples of the typical American community of present days. Then Warner employed a purely subjective concept of class – determined by what class a person thinks he’s in and what others in town think about it in terms of prestige status (a favorite hobby horse of our college sociologists). After a lot of complicated weighing of indices and sub-indices, and totalling of the weighted ratings, Warner comes up with the earth-shaking division of the community into the following classes: upper-upper, lower-upper, upper-middle, lower-middle, upper-lower, and lower-lower. (Others have discovered 9, 11 and 16 ‘status-classes.’) Warner insists: ‘The social levels are not categories invented by social scientists to help explain what they have to say; they are groups recognized by the people of the community ...’ and that this same pattern of organization exists throughout the country.
Warner’s studies have become the basis for a host of derivative works. For example, Alison Davis and his collaborators have focused on child-rearing practices of middle and lower-class parents. The tenor of the studies and conclusions can be gauged by the following quotations from Davis:
‘Almost all the good things in American life ... are the achievements of middle-status persons: care of and pride in property, careful child-training with emphasis upon renunciation and sacrifice for future gains, long and arduous education, development of complex and demanding skills, working and learning one’s way up in the complex processes of business, industry, government, church, and education – all of them administered ... by the upper-middle class in the American status system ... In order to make low-status children anxious to work hard, study hard, save their money and accept stricter sex mores, our society must convince them of the reality of the rewards at the end of the anxiety-laden climb.’
Warner’s theories have been shot full of holes by a number of critics. C. Wright Mills and others demonstrated that his definition of class is a hopeless muddle, that the analyses of relations in a small town do not furnish a sufficient field for generalization, that even here the class structure is described through the eyes of upper-class residents, that his study is trendless, and an elaborate rationalization for the status-quo. (In Social Class in America, Warner writes: ‘It is the hope of the author that this book will provide a corrective instrument which will permit men and women better to evaluate their social situations and thereby better adapt themselves to social reality and fit their dreams and aspirations to what is possible.’)
 
NEVERTHELESS, we learn that ‘Warner’s studies have been accorded widespread acclaim and his concepts and methods have been adopted by a large number of investigators.’ And in the wake of Warner and the researchers come the slick salesmen of the status-quo like David Riesman. He asks the question, ‘Who Has the Power?’ in the United States, and answers: No one has the power, or if you prefer, everyone has the power.
‘In the amorphous power structure created by veto groups it is hard to distinguish rulers from the ruled, those to be aided from those to be opposed, those on your side from those on the other side.’
Such is the new wisdom coming out of the colleges, the research teams, the educational foundations. It is pathetically evident that their supercilious scorn for Marxism derives not from superior knowledge or methods that they have discovered, but from their clinging to the established capitalist society, where the center of power is only too clearly evident, and where its retribution is swift and certain upon all transgressors against its vested interests. This is not to say that the world has stood still since Marx’s time, that American society can be understood in all its complexities and tendencies by simply referring to classical works. Marx did not about many recent manifestations of capitalism, and it is possible to analyze more precisely, or more correctly, all sorts of things on the basis of knowledge and experience that we possess today. But all writing in sociology and related fields, if it is to be scientific, has to rest on the methods and contributions of Marx, just as all progress in biology perforce rests on Darwin and his epochal theory of evolution.



The three month long fight in coal has centered national attention on the miners union; has evoked a new burst of strikes in the war-converted automobile and rubber industries; has thrust the Roosevelt war government into its first serious labor crisis and disgraced its two main agencies on the domestic front, the War Labor Board and the OPA; has broken up the existing disposition of forces inside the labor movement and has again catapulted the figure of John L. Lewis into a position of high eminence.
The fight which Lewis is now conducting is on behalf of the coal miners and their economic demands. But the grievances of the coal miners are basically the grievances of the whole working class. The dissatisfaction of the miners and their will to fight is by no means peculiar to them alone. It mirrors with complete faithfulness the existing mood of the men working in the giant factories and plants of America’s war-converted industrial machine.
The flurry of strikes that has swept through the Michigan war plants and in the nation-wide aircraft industry since the beginning of the year gave clear warning that the patience of the workers was wearing thin, that the tide of resentment was rapidly rising and that a preliminary showdown was in the offing. What the fight of the miners accomplished was to crystalize this sentiment and provide leadership for it. When Lewis spoke out against war inflation, when he attacked the “Little Steel formula,” when he defied the WLB, his words thundered with power across the whole country. Not only because Lewis spoke out against war inflation, when he attacked the “Little [...] [1*] feelings of millions of American workers and because behind him stood over half a million miners, who, in turn, enjoyed the sympathy and encouragement of millions of other workers. His very first blast at the WLB and its “Little Steel formula,” in the preliminary meeting with the coal operators, shattered the “hypnosis” of labor – the “hypnosis” that there was no way out of the blind alley that the labor movement was in, that nothing could be accomplished while the war was in progress, that there was no way of disengaging the labor movement from the chains of die “no-strike” pledge, that there was no alternative to the policy of subverting the labor movement into a miserable appendage of the war machine. The obvious sympathy and support with which the rank and file greeted the Lewis defiance was clear proof that the labor movement was thirsting for a clear word and a bold challenge. The Lewis blast quickly pushed the AFL and CIO representatives on the WLB into a noisy campaign of garrulous complaining and whining, which thrust the board into a crisis from which it has not emerged to the present day. This conduct of the AFL and CIO representatives, while scarcely courageous, nevertheless served to increase the general confusion and uncertainty and to further weaken the existing labor relations apparatus of the Roosevelt war government.
The program of freezing wages under conditions of war inflation, the program of chaining labor to the machines in a new form of industrial feudalism under conditions where the giant corporations are paid huge subsidies out of the public treasury to continue manufacturing articles of war, the program of starving labor under conditions of unbridled war profiteering – in a word, the Roosevelt war program, is under normal circumstances not attractive to labor nor conducive toward winning its support. Such a program fares best with a labor movement that is humble, whipped and imbued with chauvinism. But the American labor movement is neither humble nor whipped nor, despite its support of the war, has it succumbed to chauvinism.
The repressive machinery of the Roosevelt war government appeared imposing and authoritative in 1942 because it was supported by the labor movement through the agency of its top officialdom. It appeared doubly impressive and authoritative when the Murrays and Greens would whine and bleat in protest over some order or decree, while continuing to support and buttress by the strength of their millions of members the whole repressive machinery by which labor is hog-tied and rendered ineffectual.
But from the very first day of the current coal negotiations, Lewis challenged this repressive machinery, studiously ignored the WLB, unlike every other trade union leader, conducted himself as the spokesman of a sovereign power, as if his headquarters suite in New York were fully on a par with the White House. This one act of courage of one union leader threatened to topple the whole intricate labor relations edifice and upset Roosevelt’s coalition with the labor movement.
 
The Plan of the Kitchen Cabinet
As they watched Lewis breathing thunder and defiance, Roosevelt’s kitchen cabinet must have experienced the feeling of the proprietor of a china shop when a wild bull comes charging into his well ordered establishment. Lewis must be stopped at once, they cried, before he wrecks the whole delicate relationship of the coalition structure – the coalition upon which depends the stability of the administration.
Roosevelt had no qualms in March and April 1943 about the rest of the labor movement. Was he not himself the first leader of American labor? In any case, Murray and Green had assured him that they would soft-pedal their opposition to the “Little Steel formula” in return for the promise that prices would be “rolled back.” Besides, there was no danger from this quarter. Roosevelt knew the Murrays and Greens and how one decisive word from him was sufficient to keep this chicken-hearted crew in line. And after all, they represented the massed millions of the AFL and CIO. Their announcement that they would abide by the decision of the WLB majority, when the latter rejected their proposals to revise the “Little Steel formula” was an open demonstration of Lewis’ isolation. Lewis alone was the danger. The Murrays and Greens, its was obvious, having made their face saving protests, were ready to abandon the miners to the tender mercies of the WLB and to abandon Lewis, they hoped, to his fate.
The White House coterie acted as if this might be the God-given opportunity to settle old scores with Lewis and to eliminate him once and for all as a contender for leadership of the American labor movement. Who knows? Maybe if all went well, he might even be squeezed out of his position in the miners union. It had been accomplished once before in the case of the CIO. But what is basic was their deadly fear that a concession to the miners would break the dams: the workers all over the country would defy the government and strike to secure favorable action on their wage demands; the policy followed by Lewis would become a pattern for other union leaderships and it would become impossible for the Murrays and Greens to continue their kow-towing to Roosevelt. The kitchen cabinet thus had its strategy all cut out: isolate Lewis, disgrace him as a leader before the working class, grant no concessions to the miners, keep the wage and job freezing program intact, teach labor a stiff lesson that opposition does not pay and thereby insure the continued support of the Murrays and Greens and make them, as a matter of fact, even more dependent upon the bounty and the favors of the White House.
So, egged on by his advisers and with the admonitions of the tory press about a “firm” policy ringing in his ears, Roosevelt on April 8th announced his new “hold-the-line” order. Wages were to be absolutely frozen without any ifs, ands or buts. The question of wages was closed for the duration! The following week, McNutt, the Manpower Commissioner, issued his ruling that 27 million workers were frozen to their present jobs. Two brilliant strokes all in one week! With one decree and one departmental ruling Roosevelt had solved all his labor troubles for the duration of the war. Why had he not thought of this simple solution before? By legal fiat, it was now ensured that Lewis and the miners could not secure any of their wage demands. This would also constitute a never-to-be-forgotten lesson of the dire consequences that befall labor or any of its leaders when they challenge the authority of the government.
But events demonstrated that Roosevelt had reckoned without his host. For once, he had badly miscalculated the forces of the labor movement. For once, he had seriously overestimated his hold upon the American worker and mistaken his temper. The mine union leadership was not overawed by the “hold-the-line” decree! Lewis calmly challenged it as he had previously challenged the “Little Steel” ruling of the WLB. On April 10 he announced:
“It is beside the point that other labor organizations such as the AFL and CIO, through their leaders, have adopted a policy of cringing toadyism to the administration ... The United Mine Workers and its membership will continue to make this fight ...”
 
Where Roosevelt Miscalculated
Accompanying the defiance of the miners, groups of workers struck in many cities. The unrest in labor ranks grew so acute that many leaders of the most important International unions, feeling the hot anger of their own membership, began to make threatening gestures. Before many days had elapsed even the august statesmen of labor themselves, Murray and Green, crawfished on their assurances to the White House and issued protests against the new decree. Even such a case-hardened bureaucrat as Matthew Woll began popping off: “The War Labor Board has become a policeman’s club,” he declared. “The time has come for labor to declare its independence of unconstitutional government dictation ...” With the labor movement in a furor, the AFL and CIO representatives of the WLB threatened to resign. Its prestige already badly punctured, the board now faced imminent death. The “hold-the-line” order thus failed to achieve any of its objectives. It did not dampen the unrest of the labor movement. It further aroused it. It did not isolate Lewis, as a preliminary to his eclipse and downfall. It threatened to push the labor movement into his arms. It did not settle the coal crisis. It aggravated it. It did not reestablish the authority of the WLB. It almost wrecked it.
The whole capitalist class, moreover, in the wake of the coal operators was pressing down on Roosevelt for a “strong” policy. “Hold the line,” they demanded. “No more concessions to labor.” Roosevelt is first and foremost the war spokesman of the American capitalist class and he must heed his master’s voice, in spite of the fact that the stability of his own administration, not to mention Roosevelt’s own career as a public figure, rests upon an understanding and alliance with labor.
As the walkouts in the mines began spreading with the approach of the May 1 deadline, Roosevelt threw caution to the winds and embarked on the ambitious venture of separating the coal miners from their union organization and leadership. He went on the air May 1 and in his own name he called upon the half million coal miners to repudiate the union strike call and to continue at work. It is true that, unlike Lewis in 1940, he did not promise to resign his position if the miners ignored his demand. Nevertheless, he threw his own labor prestige pretty heavily into the balance. The miners did not keep him waiting long for an answer. They calmly disregarded the Rooseveltian exhortation to scab and in their overwhelming majority obeyed and followed the instructions of their union.
It is not, of course, an impossibility to separate a union membership from its leadership. Lewis in the past has been very unpopular in the coal fields. Anti-Lewis feeling and opposition to his administration is by no means all dissipated even today. For years, Lewis has ruled the union by bureaucratic suppression of all opponents and critics, by the destruction of the democratic rights of the membership, by strong-arm squads, by expulsion out of the union and industry of the foremost militants among the coal miners. Democracy is still something to be achieved, even today, in the miners’ union.
But in the current controversy Lewis and his lieutenants are waging a militant fight for the demands of the miners. In this fight, the men in the coal fields were back of Lewis 100 per cent. For Roosevelt to imagine that in this situation he could play on the traditional anti-Lewis feeling of large sections of the coal miners, or bank on his own labor prestige, at a time when he was advocating a straight union-busting program and counseling the miners to scab against their union in order to ensure his wage-freezing, job-freezing orders, did not reveal a very high order of thinking. It demonstrated that with all his abilities, talents and great wealth of experience, Roosevelt has all the limitations of the educated bourgeois snob and that his understanding of the working man and the labor movement is indeed a very one-sided one. At any rate, Roosevelt and his advisers lost their illusions how the miners would respond, as the second strike deadline approached on the eve of May 15. No newspaper reporters were rushed out to the coal fields this time to dig up miners who proclaimed their intentions to scab. May 1 demonstrated even to the blind that the miners were ready to fight. As a corollary, the kitchen cabinet was taught that an important labor leader like Lewis in the midst of leading a militant labor fight cannot be read out of the labor movement by a Harry Hopkins or a Ma Perkins or even by Roosevelt himself.
Instead of a group of cowed miners, isolated and spurned by the rest of the labor movement and docilely trudging back to the coal pits, after the government took possession of the mine properties, the miners returned to work as they had come out – united, confident and determined to continue the fight. They returned only when their union announced a strike truce. Their fight had won them the admiration and the active sympathy of the ranks of all American labor. The miners had definitely won the first round.
Things were not faring half so well in the camp of the Roosevelt government. The WLB and the OPA were a shambles. Then, before the second strike truce expired and before the government could recover its poise, two great roars of thunder came crashing out of Detroit and Akron – the four-day strike of 29,000 Chrysler workers and the six-day strike of 50,000 rubber workers. Samuel Colton, executive secretary of the American Labor League, representing over 300,000 AFL and CIO members of New Jersey has properly described them as “anti-administration strikes.” In less than a month Roosevelt had been dealt two serious rebuffs. His government was in the throes of a full-blown labor crisis.
 
The Labor Crisis Was Inevitable
How did this experienced, talented capitalist politician, who for over ten years has proven himself a master in leading the labor movement and in manipulating its leadership, allow himself to be maneuvered into such a difficult position?
Because the economic consequences of the war have a logic far more eloquent than Roosevelt’s radio speeches. There is a limit to trickery, deception and demagogy. It was only a question of time until the workers would begin to catch up with him. The war and the resultant government policies have enormously speeded up the political education of the workers.
More concretely, the existence of the powerful miners union, remaining independent and aloof from the administration, under a leadership hostile to Roosevelt, has constituted for a long time a potential danger to the coalition and its stability. It is not so easy to ignore a strong industrial union of 600,000 men headed by an able, experienced and bold leader. The Roosevelt policy of keeping Lewis isolated and granting him no recognition was effective only so long as the miners union was quiescent, while its leadership remained isolated from the rest of the labor movement, and Green and Murray could continue to speak unchallenged for the millions of workers of the AFL and CIO. But as soon as the miners launched their fight and their challenge of the government was eagerly seconded by the auto and rubber workers, it was a foregone matter that the Roosevelt coalition could no longer continue without some drastic readjustments and a new reshuffle of the labor machinery.
In the final settlement of the coal controversy, the operators will unquestionably sign a contract granting the miners union the minimum which the union was prepared to accept as a settlement from the first – a six-day week and a fair portal-to-portal pay allowance. But the government will carry the onus of having permitted concessions only under compulsion – it was first necessary for the miners to strike. Formally channeling the case via the WLB has not upheld the tottering authority of the already-moribund WLB. The Detroit and Akron strikes gave warning that the government’s troubles, far from ending, are just about to begin. [1]
It is probably not surprising, viewing the coal crisis in retrospect, that the popularity and authority of Roosevelt suffered a setback in the eleventh year of his rule. The forces of American labor are too strong, too militant, too well organized, too fresh and undefeated to be cheated and tricked indefinitely. What was surprising was the bull-headed manner in which Roosevelt attempted to halt the march of American labor, his miscalculation of its temper and strength and the subjectivity and obvious malice with which he tried to wreck a leadership that opposed him.
The Roosevelt strategy of April 8 has not come out of the battle unscathed. Roosevelt tried to isolate Lewis. Lewis has emerged again as a labor figure of great importance. Roosevelt tried to prevent the granting of concessions to the miners. He will be forced in the end to grant concessions. He tried to teach labor a lesson that opposition to Roosevelt does not pay. The opposite has been established. He tried to end the debate on his wage and job freezing program. The program is under heavier attack from the labor movement.
Why did it fall to the United Mine Workers to strike the first blow in labor’s challenge to the government, rather than to the more aggressive and dynamic industrial unions in auto or rubber? Because the miners union, through Lewis, is independent of the Roosevelt administration and hostile to it, while the national leaderships of both the auto and rubber unions are tied in the straitjacket of the Roosevelt war government. The present fight of the miners was conducted in every respect under the direction and control of the Lewis leadership. The automobile and rubber workers in their battles were forced to call “outlaw” strikes against the wishes and in defiance of the authority of their international union leaderships.
In certain respects, Lewis heads a union that is ideally suited to challenge the government. The membership of the miners unions is distinctive. The miners are by no means more politically advanced or more militant than the members of the auto, rubber or steel unions. Quite the contrary. But the miner does have a somewhat different attitude toward his union than the worker in mass production industry. The miner as a rule lives in a small community where life does not offer the numerous activities of the metropolitan city. The union is a far more dominant feature of life and vehicle of public opinion in the small mining communities than it is in the large industrial cities. Union organizers often relate with what pride the miners in the small hamlets of West Virginia, Kentucky or Tennessee will exhibit their union membership cards and how painstakingly they will make clear that all their dues stamps and assessments are paid up to date. How often have we heard the expression: “Unionism is the miners’ religion.”
The average mining town does not have the complex and intricate gradation of classes of the big cities. What is there outside of the miners and their families? A handful of storekeepers, a schoolteacher, a preacher and the direct agents of the mine owners. A scab in the coal strike must not only buck the pickets; he has to brave the social ostracism of the community. Even today, with the outside world having been brought far closer by means of the radio and the automobile, it is far more difficult to bring the full pressure of capitalist public opinion down on the heads of the coal miners than on a group of city workers.
For these reasons, it is traditionally a difficult task to break a coal strike. Even under martial law with the presence of troops, the miners simply stay away from the pits. The common method of breaking a coal strike, as a matter of fact, is for the owner to shut down the mine and starve the men out. Sooner or later the ranks break under the pressure of hunger and before long, a sullen group of coal diggers marches back dejectedly to the pits.
Such a tactic was manifestly out of the question in the present controversy. Before the coal miners could have been starved out, the steel industry would have shut down and the whole war effort would have come to a grinding stop. That is why, from a purely trade union point of view, the miners were in an exceptionally strong position to defy the government and to strike for their demands.
The power of the capitalist class in this country is immense and it would be a rash statement to say that Roosevelt could not smash a coal strike. But obviously he was loathe to break the strike in cold blood. Because, even if successful, he would at the same time have obliterated his coalition with labor and written his own death decree as a public figure.
 
The Lewis Machine
The leadership of the union is very simply described: John L. Lewis rules as the undisputed head. Lewis achieved this preeminent position by building a machine that ruthlessly crushed all opposition and destroyed the democracy, the free discussion and debate that had been characteristic of the mine union in the previous decades. Even when the UMW flowered again in the NRA days and hundreds of thousands of miners were brought back into its fold, the union never regained its old spirit of free discussion, its rich internal life. No important new leaders have emerged in the miners union in the recent period, although half a million new members have been enrolled into the union since the NRA days. The leadership remains roughly the same as in the period when the union had a membership of 100,000 in 1930.
John L. Lewis does the thinking in the UMW for the machine. Insofar as he has a philosophy, Lewis is of course thoroughly capitalist in his thinking. Personally, however, he is built on a different scale than the grey nonentities and mediocrities that make up the national officialdom of the AFL and CIO. He is imperious, egotistic, proud, ambitious and far bolder, far more able, far more colorful and far more imaginative than any one or dozen other top labor officials. To this must be added that Lewis is an adventurer, par excellence. His gesture of placing the CIO presidency on the gambling table in the 1940 elections was far more suited to a poker player than a responsible leader of labor. His adventurism and unbridled opportunism give him a certain dexterity and nimbleness of movement. He has none of the inhibitions of the Murrays and Greens. But these characteristics also set off his woeful limitations. His machine is a personal one. It has no basic program or aims except those of power. The program and auspices under which that power will be exercised is decided for the Lewis machine not by great labor principles or aims but by expediency.
But in Lewis’ own recent experience, the power of political events more than once has thrust aside his machinations and demonstrated that political program is in the long run and on big questions more binding and decisive than personal allegiances and clique formations.
His adventurism and lightning changes of front cost him the CIO presidency in 1940. Lewis thought he could spend seven years in building up Roosevelt as Savior No.1 of American labor and then overnight snap his fingers, and with no explanations or preliminary discussion, instruct millions of workers that now the signals were changed, now we are going back to the Republican Party and Willkie is the man of the hour. But the American workers are not members of the Lewis machine nor are they adventurers.
The following year, the CIO convention at Detroit, on the eve of Pearl Harbor, isolated Lewis completely, and lost him even his closest co-workers and friends: Murray, Allan Hay-wood, Van Bittner, Fagan. Why? Some people explained that Hillman had outmaneuvered Lewis at some super-clever chess game. But that is nonsense. The lightning struck Lewis for a different reason. Lewis thought he could play with the question of program – in this case, Roosevelt and the war. He thought he could cross and recross class lines with impunity. He thought he could continue to be a 100 per cent patriot, pursue a time-honored policy of class collaboration, give backhanded support to the America Firsters, and at the same time run a private feud with the President of the United States, who is not a private individual, but the chief executive of the American capitalist class.
A basic fight against Roosevelt is a fight for labor independence and political power. You cannot do that in company with America First and the Republican Party. Lewis’ pre-war policy could be pursued by an individual pacifist who registers his protest and then retires from the scene. Possibly a newspaper columnist, who has no responsibility to a movement, might with impunity play such blind man’s buff. But the labor movement confronts the war machine every day of the week and at every turn of the road. Whatever policy its leaders adopt, they are forced by their very position to accept the full consequences of that policy. A labor union like the CIO, which is entrenched in the industries that form the backbone of America’s economy, cannot play at opposition. The top leaders of the CIO knew enough to understand this. And, of course, the thought of opposing Roosevelt and his war program never having entered their heads, they had no choice but to dump their ex-chief.
Lewis’ opportunism and lack of a thought-out program played him false again in his relations with the Stalinists. He helped build them up as a power inside the CIO. Apparently he imagined that he could get rid of them whenever they became troublesome to him, just as he had, in a previous period and under totally different conditions, rid himself of the opposition inside the miners union. The same Detroit convention saw the Stalinists very much in the CIO while the Lewis forces were virtually on the outside looking in.
This lack of a thought-out program, this combination of unbridled opportunism, adventurism and lightning-like changes and shifts of front, prevent Lewis from building anything but a personal machine. No one knows what the miners union will do or what policy it will pursue until Lewis has spoken the word. One miner expressed this idea when he said: “Lewis is always taking us into or out of something.”
The limitations of the Lewis machine are discernible even from a more limited organizational point of view. For one, the machine lacks the talent of its leader. Its origins and lack of program are all too clearly stamped on its visage. It resembles very closely the machine of a Tobin in the teamsters union. Take John L. Lewis away and the UMW leadership would resemble in almost every way the leadership of the teamsters union. That is always the drawback of a personal machine. A program can be transmitted to other people. It is not so easy to transmit to others personal talents and attainments.
The Lewis machine invariably gives a bad account of itself when called upon to perform on its own. The most recent example is the organization drive of District 50. After two years of effort, in spite of ample finances, an apparatus, organizers at the union’s disposal, with virtually no competition in the field for which theoretically it was set up – the chemical and by-products industry – District 50 has very little organization to show for the great outlay of energy and finances either in the chemical or any other field. The history of District 50 for the past two years is replete, however, with all sorts of wild adventures, screwball schemes and organization of senseless and meaningless jurisdiction battles with the CIO and AFL.
 
Lewis’ Return to the AFL
During the first days of the coal crisis, the miners union was organizationally isolated from the rest of American labor. It was the intention of the Murrays and Greens to keep the miners isolated, not only organizationally, but morally as well. They placed their petty personal ambitions and fears of competition from Lewis above the interests of the miners and the whole labor movement. The AFL and CIO Executive boards, meeting in the midst of the coal crisis, repudiated the mine strike and took that occasion to reiterate their no-strike pledge.
The miners, however, were saved from the evil consequences of this treachery by the active sympathy and support they received from the ranks of the more militant unions. In two important regional conferences of the Michigan and eastern districts of the UAW, representing over half a million members, the auto workers came forward against their own International officers to back the militant fight of the miners. Finally, the strikes of Detroit and Akron made amply clear that the miners were not without friends in the labor movement.
With the re-emergence of the miners union as an active force in the American trade union movement and of Lewis as its most important single figure, it was obvious that the miners union could not remain organizationally alone any longer. The coal crisis had proven that the industrial workers inside the CIO, the auto, rubber, steel workers, were the most reliable allies of the coal miners. This group of workers constitute the most dynamic and progressive section of American labor. The miners belong with them.
It was correct and necessary for Lewis to break the isolation of the miners union. This could have been accomplished in a truly progressive way had the mine leadership launched a campaign to establish a fighting alliance with the auto, rubber, steel unions, etc., as a step toward full labor unity. A campaign based upon the calling of a conference of all International unions for the purpose of launching a united fight against the wage and job freezing program of the government, if pushed with the same vigor and aggressiveness displayed in the coal fight, would have achieved such a fighting alliance. Lewis has instead taken a different course. He has come to a personal agreement with Hutcheson, Woll and several other of the most case-hardened bureaucrats of the AFL and through Hutcheson has reapplied for membership in the AFL. The miners will thus find themselves part of the more conservative, less dynamic section of the American labor movement. Here again the Lewis machine demonstrates its woeful limitations. Instead of its policies being determined by a clear goal and aim, and pressing toward such a goal at every available opportunity, we find that again purely gratuitous circumstances have dictated to Lewis his course.
 
What Next?
Reviewing the experiences of the miners’ fight and its aftermath, it becomes obvious that in the 18-month period since Pearl Harbor profound changes have been wrought in the political thinking of the American workers.
The confusion and apathy that seized the men in the shops after Pearl Harbor has worn off. Roosevelt no longer commands the uncritical loyalty that he enjoyed since NRA days. That is not to say that the working class is already anti-Roosevelt. But the Akron and Detroit strikes proved that the miners’ fight against the administration was no isolated event. The miners were only blazing the trail that the rest of American labor will now follow. For the first time in 10 years, it is possible to criticize Roosevelt personally at union meetings without inviting violent opposition from the majority of those present. Roosevelt can no longer hide behind the skirts of some underling or clerk. The recent strikes demonstrated that he must come out today and take personal responsibility for the acts of his administration and for his program of hunger and repression. The day is therefore past when labor’s anger vents itself upon Roosevelt’s hirelings and by-passes the chief culprit himself. May 1 definitely broke the Roosevelt “spell” over labor.
With the declaration of war, labor found that it was no longer negotiating with private companies, but with the government. Every contract, every wage agreement had to be approved by the WLB. The negotiations with private management became a mere formality, the negotiations with the government the reality. In the coal controversy, the operators played the role of minor characters. They uttered their few lines and then turned the whole matter over to the government. The two main parts in the unfolding drama were played by labor and by the government in its role of general executive board of big capital. For 18 months, this shift of scenery had the labor movement buffaloed. The workers had learned and understood how to fight the private corporations. They had lost all feeling of timidity for the Fords, the Girdlers, the Chryslers, the Knudsens. They had learned how to organize great strikes and see them through to victory. But how can one fight the government? That represents, they thought, all the people.
The historic significance of the coal strike is that it dramatized the hypocrisy of the government’s “equality of sacrifice” program and tore away its pretense of impartiality. The coal strike wrenched one contingent of labor free of subservience to the war machine. The fight demonstrated in practice that labor was strong, possessed great resources and could successfully resist the autocratic encroachments of the government.
We can see that the 18 months in which the labor movement was in retreat before the offensive of big capital and the government have not passed in vain. The experiences gained have produced a giant leap in the political thinking of American labor. Politics has been taken out of the realm of Fourth of July speeches and has been brought into every home every day of the week. Politics has become serious, austere, the bread and butter problem of the American worker. The declaration of independence from the Roosevelt war government is already finding organizational expression in New Jersey and elsewhere in the movement for independent political action of labor.
The miners’ fight has lessened the authority of the international officialdom, the Murrays and Greens. It will be more difficult for them to keep labor in the chains of their “no-strike pledge.” A new leadership is arising from among those officers and committeemen of the local unions who are espousing a program of the independence of labor and a fighting policy to protect labor’s rights and advance its interests. The violent struggle which the Chrysler strike precipitated in the UAW, and the sharp cleavage created between the local officers and the International bureaucracy, is a harbinger of what is in store for the top officialdom of many other International unions.
The miner’s fight has upset the relationship set up at Pearl Harbor between the labor movement and the Roosevelt administration. The old relationship no longer corresponds to the new disposition of forces. Both the AFL and CIO leaderships are going through violent convulsions in their attempt to achieve a new equilibrium. The Roosevelt government has already announced the setting up of a new super-board on the domestic front, the Office of War Mobilization, in one effort to bridge the gap. Many shifts, readjustments, struggles and convulsions are in the offing in an attempt to achieve a new equilibrium. If the Roosevelt government conducts itself with the same vengeful bull-headedness it exhibited in the coal crisis, the class struggle in America will be volcanic indeed in the days ahead.
Labor, represented by its vanguard in coal, auto and rubber, crossed swords with Roosevelt, the spokesman of American capital, in May 1943. But both sides, after taking the measure of each others’ strength, withdrew. Roosevelt was not ready to discard his pretentious disguise as “friend of labor” and openly assume the mantle of the union-busting, strike-breaking head of US imperialism in war. Labor was also not prepared to dispute the authority and the might of the war government. In this sense the fight from a national point of view has ended inconclusively. The miners will unquestionably win significant concessions. But as far as the labor movement as a whole is concerned, the wage and job freeze program remains. Labor’s fight for its right to live, ushered in by the miners and ably supported by the auto and rubber workers, will continue. The next showdown will not be long in coming.
 
Footnote
1. This article was written before the second miners’ strike began. – Ed.
 
Note by ETOL
1*. There appears to be a short passage missing here in the published text.



The current negotiations between the United Mine Workers and the coal operators have served to lay bare the mechanics as well as the purpose of the Roosevelt labor policy. The events have demonstrated again the impossibility of the Roosevelt war government conducting its affairs without the unqualified support of the official leadership of the trade union movement.
Analyze the facts: John L. Lewis, ONE leader of ONE independent union, albeit a large and important one, denounces the government’s labor policy and threatens that the coal miners will strike unless they receive wage increases of $2 a day. And what happens? The whole seemingly imposing edifice of the Rooseveltian labor structure begins to tremble and totter and large cracks appear all over its surface.
The leadership of the AFL and CIO, so uncritically committed to support of Roosevelt the day before, suddenly begin to complain and balk and by their actions threaten to blow up the War Labor Board, the main labor agency of the Roosevelt administration. Even the all-out offensive against the labor movement is halted for one brief moment, while the Congressional jackals and time-servers of the million-dollar corporations apprehensively scan the fast darkening horizon. And this full blown crisis is precipitated without the firing of a shot. One important union leader has simply issued a denunciation and a warning. No more. It would seem that super-wealthy American capitalism is not as all-powerful in its internal structure as some of its idolaters imagine.
The coal controversy is the most significant single event that has taken place in the American labor movement since Pearl Harbor, because, in truly merciless style, it has ripped the veil of hypocrisy off the Rooseveltian labor policy and exposed to the pitiless glare of working class public opinion the sham and fraud of its “Equality of Sacrifice.” The “Steel formula” has been dragged out of the province of statisticians’ charts and graphs and exposed as nothing but the freezing of wages under conditions of soaring war inflation. The War Labor Board has been revealed as an agency designed to throttle the labor movement and keep it subservient to the war machine. “A court packed against labor.” Its chairman will be known henceforth as a “rapacious, predatory Park Avenue lawyer on the loose in Washington against the American worker.” For the first time the labor members of the War Labor Board, the “labor zombies,” are understood to be simply hostages of that corporation-dominated body. “Price control” is being recognized as a fraud to dupe the people with the idea that everything possible is being done to keep down the cost of living, while in reality prices are skyrocketing and the black market is beginning to flourish.
Of course, these conclusions have been stated and restated many times on the pages of the Fourth International. But that is the difference between propaganda and the experience of life. Propaganda instructs dozens and hundreds of individuals. The experience of life teaches thousands and hundreds of thousands and later will teach millions. When theory unites with the mass, it becomes a power, said Karl Marx.
Capitalism today can conduct its war in no other manner but by turning over the public treasury to a small and increasingly smaller clique of millionaire bankers and industrialists – the true owners, the true rulers of modern society; by ruining the lower middle classes and by imposing the major burden of the war on the working class.
The conduct of the Second World War on the part of the Roosevelt government is no exception to this rule.
When the workers, like beasts of burden, docilely accept the “sacrifices” of war and sweat and bleed for the greater glory of their capitalist “masters,” we have what is called “national unity” and the capitalist system is able to maintain some semblance of stability. When the working class balks and tries to rid itself of the slave burden, we have “disunity” as the columnists call it, or the “class struggle” as Marxists define it. When the fires of this class struggle begin to rage, especially in the midst of modern war, no government can escape a full blown crisis of the system itself.
As the Second World War continues, with no end in sight, and devours more and more every day, constantly greater demands are made on the economy of the country and upon its human material. The structure of American economy is basically the same as that of Nazi Germany. That is why Roosevelt can discover no new schemes, can contrive no new devices in the running of the Second World War other than the schemes and devices employed by Hitler and his Nazi regime. A study of the German measures for financing the war, the doling out of war contracts, the organization of war production, would astonish many by their striking similarity to Roosevelt’s methods and decrees in the organization of America’s participation in the war.
But in spite of these considerable similarities, there is one profound difference. Hitler and the German imperialists embarked upon their adventure to dominate the world only after they had successfully concluded a preventive civil war, only after the Nazi praetorian guard had crushed the labor movement with fire and sword and extirpated all of its organizations. Hitler has not, of course, and could not eliminate the class struggle from Germany, but he did succeed, for a decade at least, in reducing the German labor movement to impotency.
Roosevelt, on the contrary has had to thrust the United States into the Second World War in the face of a strong, well organized, superbly self-confident and militant labor movement. This labor movement had suffered no serious defeats. It had gone through eight years of unprecedented growth, achieved in militant class struggle. It is right now, in the midst of war, reaching out for a greater place in American public life.
 
Roosevelt’s Coalition Government
Hence for Roosevelt, as for Churchill in England, there was no other way of achieving the necessary “national unity” in the conduct of the war and maintaining a political equilibrium except by the establishment of a coalition government. And that is exactly what we have in the United States today. Of course, it is a strange kind of coalition. It is not formally legalized or recognized. It has none of the formal features of the prewar European coalition governments or the present one in Britain. We do not have a de jure coalition. But we do have, nevertheless, all the essentials of a de facto coalition government.
In England, the political relationship is relatively simple and clear. Everyone understands and admits that Churchill and the Tories rule by virtue of a coalition with the English labor movement and, were the British Labor Party tomorrow to withdraw from the government, a great crisis would be immediately precipitated and the Churchill government would unquestionably fall. In the United States the relationship is more obscure, less formally established, less well understood even by many of its direct participants.
For one thing, the American labor bureaucracy is not recognized by the capitalist masters as an equal in matters of government. The American labor bureaucracy has no cabinet posts and no important governmental jobs. The American labor bureaucracy has still not learned to enter the White House except, by way of the kitchen entrance. This giant of a labor movement, thirteen million strong, as a matter of fact, does not even possess its own political party, but remains an appendage of Roosevelt’s Democratic Party.
All this attests, of course, to the backwardness of the American labor movement and, from another vantage point, demonstrates the stiff-necked, outright tory character of the American ruling class. But despite all the backwardness, bewilderment and timidity on the one side and all the tory arrogance on the other, the fact remains that this mighty giant lives, breathes and cannot be conjured away. He remains a dominant factor in the whole sphere of internal politics, if for no other reason, by the sheer weight of mass alone. And while the labor movement remains on the scene, retaining its present stature, it is impossible for any government to rule except by agreement with its official leadership. Only on the theory of a de facto coalition is it possible to understand the internal policy of the Roosevelt war government and to analyze the role, function, purpose and place of the myriad governmental bureaus, agencies, rulings and decrees.
Examined in this light, the Rooseveltian labor policy takes on new meaning. The War Labor Board, the main administrative agency of labor policy, has the function, as we all know, of housebreaking the labor movement and destroying its wage standards; for capitalism today will and can conduct its affairs on no other terms. As the class struggle enters a new phase, the more outspoken reactionaries have ceased pretending otherwise. Senator George frankly declared to the US Senate, in denouncing the $25,000 salary limitation, that when a government ceases to protect the rights of the privileged oligarchy, “it degenerates into a mob.”
Hence the introduction of the “Little Steel” formula, that clever little devise that was to keep wages frozen under conditions of war inflation. Such a policy, however, designed to “fatten industry and starve labor” can be engineered in the United States today only with the consent and support of the trade union officialdom. That is the function of the four places on the War Labor Board allocated to the representatives of labor.
But a labor leadership is a leadership only by virtue of the existence of a strong labor movement. It can betray and sell out its membership only if it is “not dependent on them, only if it is sure of its privileges and position. The Roosevelt war government needs a labor bureaucracy that stands above its membership and is disdainful of its interests. It is therefore obligatory for Roosevelt to create such a hardened caste, a bureaucracy that can hold the ranks in check and keep them safely tied in the strait-jacket of the war machine. Roosevelt could do so only by assuring the union leaders that there will be no attempts to destroy their unions; that, in return for their cooperation, the war government would guarantee them continued recognition as the national labor leadership. Out of this need of Roosevelt developed the WLB policy of granting “maintenance of membership” to unions, a bastard form of the closed shop. This guarantee to the labor officialdom of its careers, its privileges, its prestige, represents not so much a concession to labor as a necessary, nay indispensable, feature of the Rooseveltian labor policy.
Even during Roosevelt’s second term, however, it took plenty of maneuvers, compromises, small concessions, etc., to preserve the coalition government. But throughout that whole period, labor was registering impressive gains. The coalition with Roosevelt took credit for the beneficial social legislation, modest in character though it was. And through gigantic strike victories, the unions raised wages in all the important industries. This twofold achievement provided a certain realistic basis for the stabilization of the coalition. The success of the coalition during that period, however, was not crowned with the formation of a stable bureaucracy with assured domination of the trade unions – one of Roosevelt’s main aims. His peacetime reign as president was too short a period in which to foist such a hardened caste on the great unions in the mass-production industries. And even those eight honeymoon years were characterized by mass unemployment and the threat of insecurity – conditions unfavorable for the creation of a stable bureaucracy. But this becomes a far more difficult task in the period when furious assaults are in progress against all wage standards and even against the pitiful social legislation that was secured in the previous period.
And now Roosevelt’s difficulty is beginning to assume the proportions of an impasse when we consider that a large and possibly major section of the American capitalist class has committed itself to all-out headlong opposition to the policy of coalition and is daily seeking to upset it.
The American capitalist class is unregenerate. In savagery and arrogance, it is, the world over, second to none. From the days of the American “Liberty League” and the “Grass Roots” conventions of the Middle West to the present alliance of poll-tax congressmen, the “Farm Bloc” and the Republican Party, it simply refuses to reconcile itself to the existence of a powerful labor movement. This opposition is intent upon crucifying Roosevelt, the one man in American public life who has become an expert in how to maneuver with the labor movement, how to cheat it, deceive it and throttle it under pretense of friendship. The American capitalists do not want to maneuver with a strong labor movement. They want to crush it and reestablish the old relationship of masters and slaves.
Now grown fat again on “cost-plus” war contracts, the American capitalists are power drunk. Insulated by their ignorance and self confident again to the point of rashness, they are currently engaged in a virulent anti-labor campaign in Congress and a shrieking rampage in all the legislatures of the states.
But it is a far cry from desires to accomplishment. For the time being, the industrialists and their Congressional lackeys must content themselves with their field day of unrestrained labor baiting in the halls of Congress and with organizing national tours for the Rickenbackers. For the time being, they have no alternative program of action to the Rooseveltian coalition policy. This labor movement, this 13 million-man giant may be without adequate program and leadership, he may be in retreat, but nevertheless he is still a giant. And it will take more than the screaming and the diatribes of vicious Congressmen or Rickenbacker tours to lay him low.
The campaign of the anti-Roosevelt opposition has one positive accomplishment to its credit. It rendered impossible any stabilization of the already highly unstable Roosevelt coalition government. The administration now can only live by moving from crisis to crisis. By their imprecations, by their brutality, the opposition has scared the whole labor officialdom out of its wits and aroused its fears for its very life. How can the labor officials disdain their own members, when they are in a constant terror that their unions may be wiped out and with it their official careers? The labor officialdom in the United States is not allowed to enjoy any feeling of stability and security in its situation. Thus the anti-Rooseveltians have hurled the labor officials back into communion with their own rank and file membership and thus the Roosevelt policy of building up a hardened bureaucracy on the British model has been thoroughly and effectively torpedoed out of existence.
Summing up, we have analyzed the Roosevelt war government as a coalition government, but a coalition government of a doubly peculiar character. The government rests on a labor movement so backward in character that it does not possess its own political party. The government does not acknowledge that it is a coalition government and refuses to grant the labor leadership legal recognition in the form of cabinet posts and important governmental positions. And finally, a great section of the capitalist class is opposed to the coalition and is daily attempting to destroy it. Is it any wonder, then, that the Roosevelt war government is characterized by the greatest instability in its internal structure and affairs? The government obviously represents no more than a transition phase of American politics. Roosevelt’s inability to establish a stable coalition is further illumined by a comparison of his administration with the Churchill cabinet. The Churchill coalition enjoys full support of the British capitalist class. Roosevelt, even in his halcyon days, was forced to impose his program on a skeptical and sullen capitalist class. Today that class has vengefully turned on him and his entire domestic program.
Secondly, Churchill is able to lean on a case-hardened labor bureaucracy built over a long period of time, when super-wealthy British imperialism was still able to grant concessions and material privileges to a select labor aristocracy. Roosevelt, on the contrary, must lean on a labor bureaucracy whose decisive section comes from new mass production unions and who remain far more dependent upon their membership and more sensitive to its pressure.
 
The Case of John L. Lewis
The Administration’s inability to establish a stable coalition government is highlighted most graphically by the defection of John L. Lewis and the United Mine Workers. Why was Roosevelt unable to hold the loyalty of Lewis? For the same general reasons which made it impossible for him to create a hardened labor bureaucracy.
Who is Lewis and what does he want? He is not a principled or consistent opponent of the government. Lewis is no socialist or near socialist. He is no opponent of the capitalist system. Even in his famous 1937 Labor Day speech, where for the first time he lashed out at Roosevelt, he made it clear that he based himself on the capitalist system. “Unionization, opposed to communism,” he said, “presupposes the relation of employment; it is based upon the wage system and it recognizes fully and unreservedly the institution of private property and the right to investment profit.”
Even in his sarcastic and bitter address to the Joint Conference in New York at the current coal negotiations, he was at pains to emphasize, while describing the exorbitant profits of the railroads and other industries: “We don’t envy them their prosperity. We think the investors in that road are entitled to a return.” And again: “It is good for the stockholders of the Southern Railroad. We think it is good for the country ...”
Neither is Lewis some enthusiastic rank and filer, just emerged from the shops, eager to tilt his lance with the powers that be. On the contrary, for years Lewis was a wheel-horse of Gompers’ AFL machine of pure-and-simple unionism. After the death of John Mitchell, he emerged as the czar of the miners union and for a decade ruled it in the complete spirit of the old-line AFL unionism. Even today the miners union does not possess the democracy that is enjoyed in such a union as the United Automobile Workers.
The philosophy of Lewis, therefore, insofar as he has one, is thoroughly capitalist. That is why he is no opponent of the basic idea of a coalition government – the subservience of the labor movement to the capitalist class and its aims. As a matter of fact, Lewis was not even opposed to labor representatives accepting posts on the various war boards and agencies. Thomas Kennedy, secretary-treasurer of the miners, joined the War Labor Board at the time of its formation and remains a member of that body. Lewis himself was a member of the conference of labor leaders that unanimously voted to give up the right to strike. As far as basic philosophy of government goes, it is quite clear that Lewis has, no fundamental quarrels with Murray, Thomas, Reuther, or for that matter, even Hillman and Dubinsky. He does differ very sharply, however with the whole CIO and AFL officialdom on the tactical orientation of the labor movement today.
Personally, Lewis, is built on a different scale than the grey nonentities and mediocrities that go to make up the national officialdom of the AFL and CIO. He is imperious, egotistic, proud, ambitious on a bigger scale and far bolder, far more able, far more colorful, and far more imaginative than any one or dozen top labor officials. In 1935, it was he above all other established union officials who had the vision and qualifications to become the leader of the industrial union movement. After the CIO had established itself in the key industries and had, in savage battles, brought the leading financial and industrial giants to their knees, Lewis became keenly aware of the inexhaustible power that reposed in this movement. In the 1936 elections he saw how completely the mighty Roosevelt was dependent on labor’s support. It then became clear to him that Roosevelt could not maintain political stability without the support of the labor movement and that the government rested on a de facto coalition. He was quite prepared to help maintain the political stability of capitalist America and to enter its coalition government. But if it was worth doing, it was worth doing on an ample scale.
Apparently Lewis thought that the whole problem was little more complicated than the purchasing of a voting bloc in a corporation. Lewis was certainly eager to become a stockholder. After pouring one-quarter million dollars out of the miners’ treasury into the Democratic Party campaign trough, Lewis expected results. He appears to have believed that he and the miners were now full-fledged stockholders in the concern.
Lewis thereupon demanded a price for labor’s support which he considered commensurate with the importance of the services rendered. If there is a coalition, why an unofficial backdoor coalition? Lewis wanted the relationship made formal and official. And an official coalition presupposes the entrance of labor representatives into the cabinet and representation in other government posts. Why not? Was the price too high? In a word, he demanded for the American labor bureaucracy the same honors and position enjoyed by the British trade union and labor party bureaucracy.
But as everyone knows, the British trade union movement possesses a large political party which at different times has commanded the largest bloc of seats in Parliament. Hence the British capitalists cannot rule in Parliamentary fashion especially in time of war except through the agency of a full-dress coalition. The American capitalists did not believe they were under any such necessity. The American capitalists were by no means reconciled even to Roosevelt’s backdoor coalition. So Roosevelt had no alternative but to reject Lewis’ grandiose demands. Probably Roosevelt was anxious to rid himself of this too importunate and too ambitious ally. In any case, the American capitalist class, being what it is and American political relations being what they are, Roosevelt was in no position to accede to the Lewis demands. In the words of an old popular song, he “couldn’t if he would.”
The first important payment Lewis received on his quarter million dollar investment was the smashing of the steel strike during the summer of 1937 – a body blow to the CIO. Every governor that sent out the National Guard on strike-breaking duty was a pro-Roosevelt Democrat, and in all cases had been elected to office with the active support of Labor’s Non-Partisan League and the CIO. The Memorial Day massacre in Chicago was under the direction of Roosevelt’s mid-western lieutenant, Democratic Mayor Kelly, also elected to office with full labor support. When the CIO officialdom, bewildered and stunned, called upon their “election partner,” President Roosevelt, to halt the employers’ lawlessness and violence and the strikebreaking activities of his fellow governors, the Great White Father proceeded to rub salt into the CIO wounds, declaring: “A plague on both your houses.”
Lewis, believing himself betrayed by his business partner, went on the air on Labor Day 1937 to deliver his first public challenge to Roosevelt. Labor would not continue to support Roosevelt unless he sharply changed his course and lived up to his campaign pledges. “It ill behooves one,” he said, “who has supped at labor’s table and who has been sheltered in labor’s house to curse with equal fervor and fine impartiality both labor and its adversaries when they become locked in deadly embrace.”
But Roosevelt was about to embark on the policy of “quarantining the aggressors” and his gaze was turned more and more on Europe and the coming struggle for world hegemony. As the second term of Roosevelt drew to a close, Lewis drank the cup of humiliation to its very dregs. He felt himself completely cheated and tricked. He was convinced that under the existing line-up and relationships, labor could expect no further concessions from Roosevelt and the Democratic Party.
 
The Defeat of Lewis
In January 1940, he mounted the rostrum of the “Cross Roads of Destiny” Golden Jubilee convention of the United Mine Workers, thundered his denunciation of Roosevelt and all his works and openly announced his public break with the Administration. Reviewing the history of the previous four years, Lewis stated:
“In 1936, a coalition was effected between the Democratic Party and organized labor. The resources of both interests were pooled, the objective being the return of the party to power in the election of the same year. Organized labor furnished money, speakers, party workers in. every political subdivision, and many millions of votes.
“Psychologically and politically, organized labor created the atmosphere of success that returned the Democratic Party to power with an ample margin of safety ...
“A political coalition, at least, presupposes a post election good faith between the coalescent interests. The Democratic Party and its leadership have not preserved this faith. In the last three years, labor has not been given representation in the Cabinet, nor in the administration or policy-making agencies of government ...
“The current Administration has not sought nor seriously entertained the advice or views of labor upon the question of national unemployment or lesser questions affecting domestic economy, internal taxation, foreign trade, military and naval expansion, relations with foreign nations or the issues of war or peace ...
“Labor today has no point of contact with the Democratic Administration in power, except for casual and occasional interviews which are granted its individual leaders. In the Congress, the unrestrained baiting and defaming of labor by the Democratic majority has become a pastime, never subject to rebuke by the titular or actual leaders of the Party ...
“It is true that at the present time the states of Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and New York are trending toward the Republican column in the campaign year of 1940. This trend can be corrected, and the Republican Party prevented from winning, only by an accord between the Democratic Party and organized labor, and the adoption of an intelligent and rational program to be written into the platform of the Democratic Party and placed before the American people as the issues of the election. Even then, guarantees of good faith and fulfillment of party promises would have to be made to labor and the people by responsible Democratic leaders ...”
It is history that neither Roosevelt nor the Democratic Party offered such an accord to Lewis.
In truth, it was not Lewis but Roosevelt who was the first leader of the American trade union movement and it was Lewis and his associates who had made him so.
It was Lewis who issued the declaration of war but in the battle that ensued it was Roosevelt who emerged victorious. The day after Lewis issued his ultimatum, Hillman, Rieve and other CIO leaders rushed forward declaring for the third term without any conditions, or demands. The rubber convention came out for the third term. His own miners’ machine split in half on the issue. And William Green, heading a delegation of confectionery workers, rushed to the White House to present Roosevelt with a birthday cake. Thus Lewis, to his chagrin was taught that bluff, bluster and even arrogance are no substitute for an independent working class policy and for an independent party of labor. Even so, not until Roosevelt forced Lewis out of the CIO leadership, isolated the miners from the rest of the labor movement and threatened to wreck his labor career, did Lewis acknowledge, as it were, his mistaken policy. With the outbreak of the war Lewis played his cards far more skilfully.
 
Lewis Since Pearl Harbor
To the average trade unionist, Lewis has conveyed the impression that he remains aloof and in opposition to the various agencies and boards of the war government. And today, as the AFL and CIO officialdom is becoming compromised and smeared with its support of these agencies, they are losing moral leadership to Lewis. His progressive, militant stand in the current coal negotiations, his resourcefulness and talent in manipulating the coal operators and the government labor officials, is contrasted by all workers to the pitiful exhibition of treachery and ineptitude of the AFL and CIO representatives on the War Labor Board. Today Lewis commands the national spotlight once again and workers from coast to coast are eagerly watching the developments in the coal negotiations, and looking to him for leadership.
Every day that this mad war continues, it reveals ever more glaringly the chasm between the masters of society and its industrial slaves. Every new crisis, and there will be many of them, remorselessly tears away the government’s pretense to impartiality. Widespread sympathy greeted Lewis’ ferocious attack on the War Labor Board; the AFL and CIO officials had to rush to associate themselves with opposition to the WLB’s “Steel Formula.” These are lightning flashes that give grim warning that, regardless of all preconceived notions or ingrained prejudices of the labor officialdom, this American working class will never content itself with the role of handmaiden to the industrialists and bankers. The drunken anti-labor orgy of Congress and its threat to choke the labor movement by repressive legislation, far from frightening the American workers, is providing the necessary irritant to rouse the ranks of labor and is forcing its leadership, under penalty of destruction, toward the road of independent political action.



The Struggle for a Proletarian Party
by James P. Cannon
Pioneer Publishers, 116 University Place, New York. xiii plus 302 pages, including Index.
Paper covers $1.50. Cloth bound $2.
Lenin is considered by all Marxists as the great master of the organization of the revolutionary party. For Lenin, the organization question embraced all the problems involved in the building of the revolutionary workers’ party. What was the secret of Lenin’s success? What formulas did he employ to build the Russian Bolshevik party, a party that proved capable at the decisive moment of rallying the masses of the people behind its leadership and seizing power?
The formula which is most often used to express the most complete synthesis of Lenin’s organizational conception is Democratic Centralism. And yet in one form or another, references to the idea of Democratic Centralism can be found in the writings of Marx, Engels as indeed in the writings of all the leading Marxist publicists. Lenin’s genius, therefore, is not to be found in the invention of any single organizational formula. Lenin is the foremost revolutionary architect because he pioneered the creation of a new type of revolutionary Marxist party, never before seen in history. Lenin’s party was completely unlike the loose, sprawling, easy-going parties of the pre-war Social-Democracy, with their accommodating attitude toward every perversion of the Marxist program; parties that were built primarily for the winning of electoral successes and conducting of loyal oppositions in the various parliaments and legislative assemblies.
Lenin’s party was built along different lines. It was tight-knit, compact, bound by an iron discipline, based upon unyielding adherence to the program of Marxism – the science of the proletarian revolution. Lenin’s party was a combat organization
poised for action, a party whose purpose was to win power and clear the road for the socialist society.
“Bolshevism, as a trend of political thought,” wrote Lenin in 1920, “and as a political party, has existed since 1903. Only the history of Bolshevism during the whole period of its existence can satisfactorily explain why it was able to build up and maintain, under most difficult conditions, the iron discipline necessary for the victory of the proletariat.
“On the one hand, Bolshevism arose in 1903 on the very firm foundation of Marxian theory. On the other hand, having arisen on this granite theoretical foundation, Bolshevism passed through fifteen years of practical history which, in wealth of experience, has had no equal anywhere else in the world. For no other country during these fifteen years had anything even approximating this revolutionary experience, this rapid and varied succession of different forms of the movement – legal and illegal, peaceful and stormy, open and underground, small circles and mass movements, parliamentary and terrorist.”
Lenin demonstrated the correctness of his ideas by the most effective and eloquent argument of all. He built a party in life that took power and established the workers’ state. He established for all time that the Marxist idea of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat was no Utopia but the next necessary step in the present evolution of society. Lenin’s party stood the test of experience. (A discussion of the Stalinist degeneration of the workers’ state and the present corrupted and reactionary Stalinist parties throughout the world would take us too far afield.)
The true stature of Lenin and his work can be more fully appreciated, the tremendous difficulties involved in the building of a revolutionary party can be more thoroughly grasped, when we review the failure of all other Marxist groups in Europe to build a party comparable to the Russian Bolshevik organization, despite the favorable objective conditions that prevailed in Germany and numerous other countries in the years after the first world war and despite the fact that all these parties had the advantage of Lenin’s example and could draw upon the experiences of the great Russian revolution.
What was lacking? The cadres were insufficiently experienced, insufficiently firm. The leadership had not yet mastered the science and the art of revolutionary politics. They were not able to take the general formulas of Marxism, the organizational ideas of Leninism and apply them correctly to the concrete situation.
Obviously it is no easy task to build a Bolshevik party. As a matter of fact, the experience of the twenty years that have elapsed since Lenin’s death proves that it is one of the most difficult of all tasks.
 
A Record of Struggle
James P. Cannon writes in his book, The Struggle for a Proletarian Party, that you can’t learn how to lead the revolutionary party or a workers’ organization by reading a book. Of course, that is true. But from a good book it is possible to learn much, to absorb many of the experiences of other revolutionary fighters and thus by analysis and study to deepen one’s own experience and knowledge. Besides, The Struggle for a Proletarian Party is more than just a good book on the organization question. It is the record of a historic fight. And it is more than that. It is a summation of over twenty years’ effort and experience in building the Marxist revolutionary party in the United States. The fight that it deals with – between the Marxist wing of the Socialist Workers Party and the petty-bourgeois opposition – will undoubtedly be recorded as one of the classic struggles in the annals of Marxist faction fights.
The American Trotskyist movement had gone through 11½ years of struggle at the time that this faction fight took place. Cannon had the additional experience of participating in the founding and building of the Communist Party in this country as well as the struggles of the pre-war socialist and IWW movements. Leon Trotsky, who personally participated in this faction battle in the closest possible fashion and was the author of most of the major political documents, contributed to the fight his great political wisdom, his well-nigh inexhaustible knowledge, his unequalled revolutionary experience.
The struggle was classical, therefore, not only because it involved a fight over all the basic tenets of Marxism, its doctrine, its philosophy, its tradition, its methods, but also because it was conducted in so educational a fashion. The lessons of the fight were clearly brought out, the methods of Marxism fully explained, the ideas of Marxism concretely illumined as they relate to the current problems and tasks that face the revolutionary Marxist party and the working class. For a long time to come, all who aspire to become revolutionary Marxist fighters will return to a study of this struggle and the way in, which it was conducted.
 
The Building of Our Party
The American Trotskyist movement was founded in 1928 when Cannon and a small group of adherents were expelled from the Communist Party for their support of Trotsky’s program. For a number of years the Trotskyist movement in America developed in a restricted circle. Cannon describes these early days in his pamphlet, The Struggle for a Proletarian Party, which makes up the first section of the book:
“In the first period of the Trotskyist movement of America, when we were an isolated handful against the world, we deliberately restricted ourselves to propaganda work and avoided any kind of pretentious maneuvers or activities beyond our capacity.
“Our first task, as we saw It, and correctly, was to build a cadre; only then could we go to the masses. The old-timers can well recall how we were pestered in those early days by the bustling windbags of the Weisbord type, who promised us a short cut to the mass movement if we would only abandon our ‘conservative’ propagandistic routine ... By sticking to our modest propagandistic tasks we recruited a cadre on the basis of fundamental principles. In the next period, when new opportunities opened up, we were prepared for a decisive turn toward more expansive activity In the mass movement. As for Weisbord, who had worn himself out with his own agitation in the meantime, he fell by the wayside ... The moment the Muste movement began to take shape as a political organization, we approached it for fusion and successfully carried it out. In one operation we cleared a centrist obstacle from the path and enlarged our own forces. When the ferment in the Socialist Party offered favorable opportunities for our intervention, we steered a course directly toward it, smashed the resistance of the sectarians in our own ranks, entered the Socialist Party and effected a fusion with the left wing.”
With the signing of the Stalin-Hitler Pact and the outbreak of the Second World War, a petty-bourgeois faction was organized in the Socialist Workers’ Party under the leadership of Burnham and Shachtman. Obviously unnerved by the capitalist campaign against the Soviet Union, this faction began demanding a revision of the party program on the Russian question, especially in relation to the traditional Trotskyist position of “unconditional defense of the Soviet Union against imperialist attack.” Before many weeks had elapsed, however, this faction developed an assault against Marxism all along the line.
The principal debates on the programmatic points at issue are discussed at length in Leon Trotsky’s In Defense of Marxism. James P. Cannon’s The Struggle For A Proletarian Party is a companion volume to Trotsky’s book.
The Cannon book rounds out the picture of the whole struggle. It makes it more concrete. It fills in and develops more fully the important organizational features of this classic fight.
The book provides a brilliant sketch of the history of the American Trotskyist movement, how the party overcame the many obstacles with which it was confronted, how the party broke out of its initial isolation, how the sectarians were defeated, how new strata of workers were won to the party, how a cadre was built which is hard, experienced, united, disciplined and thoroughly imbued with the program, the methods and the tradition of Bolshevism.
 
The Petty-Bourgeois Opposition
The substance of the book relates, of course, to the fight with the petty-bourgeois opposition. This faction really consisted of an unprincipled bloc of three component groups. Burn-ham, leader of one group, was breaking with Marxism all along the line and was advocating a substitute petty-bourgeois program. Abern and his group had no program, but were interested in achieving organizational victory. Shachtman, confused, bewildered and disoriented by the shock of the Second World War and the pressure of bourgeois public opinion, took it upon himself to become the defense attorney for Burnham and his anti-Marxian program for lack of any views of his own to defend.
How this anti-Marxian combination was fought and crushed, the meaning of principled politics, the idea of Bolshevik discipline and organization, the Bolshevik method of fighting unprincipled political blocs are described concisely and authoritatively in the pages of Cannon’s book.
“Organization questions and organizational methods,” Cannon writes, “are not independent of political lines, but subordinate to them. As a rule, the organizational methods flow from the political line. Indeed the whole significance of organization is to realize a political program. In the final analysis there are no exceptions to this rule.”
Cannon took up the discussion of the organization question only at the latter part of the faction fight.
“Now that the fundamental political issues are fully clarified, now that the two camps have taken their position along fundamental lines, it is possible and perhaps feasible to take up the organization question for discussion in its proper setting and in its proper place – as an important but subordinate issue; as an expression in organizational terms of the political differences, but not as a substitute for them.”
Cannon defends the Leninist conception of the party:
“For us the party must be a combat organization which leads a determined struggle for power. The Bolshevik party which leads the struggle for power needs not only internal democracy. It also requires an imperious centralism and an iron discipline in action. It requires a proletarian composition conforming to its proletarian program. The Bolshevik party cannot he led by dilettantes whose real interests and real lives are in another and alien world. It requires an active professional leadership, composed of individuals democratically selected and democratically controlled, who devote their entire lives to the party ...”
This is Cannon’s credo of a proletarian revolutionist:
“For a proletarian revolutionist the party is the concentrated expression of his life purpose, and he is bound to it for life and death. He preaches and practices party patriotism, because he knows that his socialist ideal cannot be realized without the .party. In his eyes, the crime of crimes is disloyalty or irresponsibility toward the party. The proletarian revolutionist is proud of his party. He defends it before the world on all occasions. The proletarian revolutionist is a disciplined man, since the party cannot exist as a combat organisation without discipline. When he finds himself in a minority, he loyally submits to the decision of the party and carries out its decisions, while he awaits new events to verify the disputes or new opportunities to discuss them again.”
Returning to this same theme, at the latter part of the faction fight, when the petty-bourgeois opposition, reduced to a minority and facing obvious defeat in the coming party convention, was threatening to split from the party, Cannon wrote to Trotsky in a long letter on February 20, 1940:
“It is impossible to build a combat party with a tolerant attitude toward splits. In the discussion every democratic right must be assured and has been assured. Every reasonable organization concession must be made in the interests of preserving unity and educating the party in a normal atmosphere. But we must not sanctify permanent demoralization. We must not permit anybody to make an endless discussion club out of the party. Those who go beyond these bounds and take the road of split are no longer to be considered as comrades discussing a difference of opinion, but as enemies and traitors. They must be fought without mercy and without compromise on every front. We will never instill a real party patriotism into the ranks unless we establish the conception that violation of the party unity is not only a crime but a crime which brings the most ruthless punishment in the form of a war of political extermination against those who commit it.”
Cannon and the American Trotskyists drew the following conclusions from this fight:
“1) It is not sufficient for the party to have a proletarian program; it also requires a proletarian composition. Otherwise the program can be turned into a scrap of paper overnight.
2) This crisis cannot be resolved simply by taking a vote at the convention and reaffirming the program by majority vote. The party must proceed from there to a real proletarianization of its ranks.
“We stand at a decisive stage in the evolution of American Trotskyism from a loosely organized propaganda circle and discussion club to a centralized and disciplined proletarian party rooted in the workers’ mass movement. This transformation is being forced rapidly under pressure of the approaching war. This is the real meaning of the present party struggle.”
These tasks have since been carried out – at any rate, in part. In this sense, the fight against the petty-bourgeois opposition has been won, not only negatively, by repulsing their pretensions and defeating their proposals, but also positively. The fight clarified the organization in its purposes and tasks and succeeded in making the party proletarian in composition as well as outlook.
Johnson, one of the leaders of the petty-bourgeois opposition wrote that the movement of American Trotskyism, the Socialist Workers Party, “is the second party in history which has been built on Bolshevik lines.”
Cannon’s answer to Johnson’s statement is that “Our party has not been a homogeneous Bolshevik party, as the superficial Johnson implies, but an organization struggling to attain to the standard of Bolshevism, and beset all the time by internal con-traditions. The present internal crisis is simply the climactic paroxysm of this long internal struggle of antipathetic tendencies.”
“I believe,” nevertheless writes Cannon, “that our party, modeled on the Russian Bolshevik party, has been built more firmly and stands nearer than any other to the pattern of its great prototype ...”
Comrade Trotsky wrote on April 16, 1940 in a letter to Dobbs, after reading the pamphlet The Struggle for a Proletarian Party, which forms the first section of the present book:
“Jim’s pamphlet is excellent. It is the writing of a genuine workers’ leader. If the discussion had not produced more than this document, it would be justified.”
There is no simple formula on how to build a revolutionary party. At one point in the book Cannon states that the “essence of politics” is to “know what to do next – and to do it.” This art and science of revolutionary politics cannot, of course, be learned from books alone. Experience is necessary. Knowledge is necessary. Talent is necessary. Every proletarian revolutionist, every Marxist student will learn a great deal, however, on this subject from a study of this book. Reading this book will not be anoverly difficult or a wearisome task. It will be one of pleasure. The book is written in a clear and lucid style.
The book is well edited. It is so put together that the full course of the struggle can be easily followed, understood and relived. The book is divided into several sections. First comes Cannon’s pamphlet The Struggle For a Proletarian Party. The second consists of various letters, which provide a day by day, week by week chronology of the struggle. The third section consists of Documents of the Struggle. The book has an Appendix which contains the principal organizational document of the opposition. It is also provided with an excellent index and an introduction by the editor, John G. Wright.



The Second World War has unquestionably gone far beyond
its predecessor of twenty-five years ago in its ferocity, its
destructiveness and its all-inclusiveness. The war has swept into its
whirlpool the peoples of virtually the whole globe, the colonies as
well as the metropolitan centers. Even the neutral countries have not
escaped its all-embracing effects. In this war the dividing line is
beginning to disappear between civilians and soldiers.
The war poses all the questions of the class struggle point blank.
It subjects all peoples, ideas, organizations, institutions and systems
to an inexorable test. It abhors all ambiguity. The war rejects all
half measures. It exposes all that is rotten and decaying.
This war is bringing to a close that historic period of capitalism
where politics was characterized by unlimited compromises, by
huckstering between the different political factions and cliques, by
political stockjobbery of all kinds. The politics of pre-war Europe is
vanishing before our very eyes.
The day is past when the politics of reformism—the elaboration of
empty, high-sounding “compromise” schemes which threw a sop to the
masses, while leaving the domination of the monopolies and banks
untouched, and all the essential problems of the masses unsolved—were
adjudged as the highest political wisdom. The foundation has been
withdrawn from this kind of politics. Capitalism in its death agony
cannot offer the people even the smallest reforms, even the most
insignificant improvements. It cannot even offer them the miserable
standard of living of pre-war Europe. Capitalism in the period of its
terrible decay and decline, can offer the masses of Europe only a new
serfdom, political reaction, starvation, disease and self-destructive
wars.
The contradictions of this epoch are too profoundly acute, the
catastrophic downward plunge of capitalism is too headlong, the needs
of humanity too unpostponable, to provide much leeway for the
middle-of-the-road politicians whose stock in trade consists of
parliamentary trickery and jugglery.
New “democratic” capitalist governments, on the model of the Weimar
Republic of 1918 or the British Labor government of Ramsay McDonald,
may still be formed. The emergence of such governments remains a
distinct possibility, however, only because the European working class
is badly disorganized. The organization of such “democratic” capitalist
governments will not signify that Europe is about to repeat the
experience of the last war and go through a prolonged period of
 “democratic” capitalism. It only means that the capitalist rulers will
be forced to push forward “democratic” capitalist governments in a
desperate attempt to halt the radicalization of the masses and their
struggle for a new socialist society. Such governments will be of an
extremely unstable nature and of very short duration. They will
represent not a new equilibrium, but merely a short-lived stage ending
either in the victory of the workers’ revolution which will establish a
socialist republic or the definitive victory of the counter-revolution,
which will establish a stark-reactionary military dictatorship.
The only revolutionary forces in Europe today are the working class
in alliance with the city and country poor. The only revolution which
the working class can and will lead is the socialist revolution. The
only alternative to the present rule of the industrialists and the
banks is the rule of the workers’, soldiers’ and peasants’ Soviets.
 
Two World Programs
Roosevelt and Churchill both represent “democratic “
capitalist governments. But the trend even in the United States and
Great Britain is toward totalitarianism, toward dictatorship. Strikes
are outlawed in the both countries. The democratic rights of the people
are systematically being trampled upon and destroyed. Both the US and
Britain possess numerically powerful labor movements; the
Anglo-American capitalists are thus forced to proceed with a certain
caution in their home countries. In Europe, however, they feel no such
restraint, in the pursuit of their openly counter-revolutionary aims.
Roosevelt and Churchill understand that it is not in the cards to
establish stable “democratic” capitalist governments in Europe today.
Given free scope, given their democratic rights, the European working
class will not require overly much time to organize its revolutionary
party, and to overthrow all of its capitalist oppressors. The choice,
from the Roosevelt-Churchill point of view, is a Franco-type government
or the spectre of the socialist revolution. (Roosevelt and Churchill
prefer to call it “anarchy. “)
The war is bringing the fact home that there exist only two
fundamental world programs today—the stark-reactionary, imperialist
program of the ruling classes, representing the monopolists, the cartel
owners, the banks, and the world program of the socialist revolution,
that is, the program of the Fourth International. All the programs, or
lack of programs, of all the intermediate groups, the Stalinists, the
laborites, the social-democrats, the liberals, the centrists, the
pacifists, etc., etc., all reduce themselves in the last analysis to
eclectic hodge-podge concoctions in the service of big Capital. They
represent the pathetic waverings of the middle class between the big
capitalists and the working class. The petty bourgeois groupings,
tossed about like a feather in a gale storm, capitulating to the
imperialists at every critical juncture, demonstrate again the profound
Marxist truth that the middle class can have no basic program of its
own today but must espouse the program of one or the other of the two
fundamental classes of present-day society.
The example of Stafford Cripps is highly instructive in this regard.
In pre-war Europe, Sir Stafford might have spoken his empty banalities
for many years and have established a reputation for being a great
social thinker, a great “left-winger “, a do-gooder, a friend of the
common man and of suffering humanity. Today major political questions
cannot be so easily evaded. Almost overnight, history, in the guise of
Winston Churchill, grabbed up by the collar this estimable,
middle-class muddlehead and converted him into an open agent of British
imperialism which at that very moment was engaged in the attempt to
strangle the Indian revolution. The historic period when the heroes of
the golden mean can bask in the sunshine of middle-class public opinion
is rapidly drawing to a close.
Both the programs of Marxism and of world capitalism base themselves
upon the reality of the present-day world. They have this much in
common:—they both seek to analyze and evaluate the actual facts of
the class struggle. That being the case, it is important to establish
exactly what is the perspective of the big bourgeoisie? How do they
evaluate the present situation in Europe, the outcome of the war?
Of course, it is not so simple a matter to discover these facts, as
one might imagine. In spite of the thousands of books published each
year, in spite of the hundreds of speeches delivered over the air
waves, it takes considerable effort to ascertain the true opinions and
plans of the leaders and spokesmen of Big Business. The capitalist
statesmen of England and the U.S., no less than those of the fascist
countries, rule to a great extent by deceit. Hypocrisy, lying, trickery
and double talk have been developed by these capitalist statesmen into
a veritable art. Mastery of this art is an indispensable prerequisite
for any individual who aspires to become a bourgeois statesman.
Capitalist writing and oratory require the ability to weave high
sounding, sonorous phrases that mean nothing and commit one to nothing,
but are intended to lull and soothe the people, to quiet their fears,
arouse their hopes and retain their confidence.
When you are trying to glean the policy of a Roosevelt or a
Churchill from one of their speeches, you have to go about studying the
material at hand in the manner of a detective studying clues in a crime
case. You have to read the speech “between the lines.” A recent article
entitled British Policy—A Conservative Forecast by Quintin
Hogg in the October issue of Foreign Affairs, is very
illuminating for an understanding of Churchill’s declarations and
provides a key for a more profound understanding of the policies and
aims of Anglo-American capitalism. Quintin Hogg is an important member
of the influential group of young Disraelian Tories, and is a member of
the British House of Commons from Oxford.
The British Tribune, organ of Stafford
Cripps-Aneurin Bevan, characterizes this group in the following manner:
 “The British traditionalists are still desperately in
need of the active support of the organized Socialist movement of Great
Britain, for the task which they now have to achieve is infinitely more
delicate than the one which faced them when Germany was loaded with
military menace. What they now need is the cooperation of British
labor in the murder of the infant European revolution. That is why
reaction in Britain must still wear the mask of progressivism without
at any moment yielding a single bulwark of privilege. That is why the
young Disraelian Tories, like Lord Hutchingbroke, Quintin Hogg and Hugh
Molson, continue to mouth the phrases of reformism anent the social
services of Britain while, at the same time, they become almost
incoherent with rage if our policy toward Europe is questioned. “
 
Candid Avowals
Quintin Hogg, as we see, is an authoritative spokesman
and member of the British ruling class. His article, printed in a
magazine read by government officials, diplomats, professors etc., but
not widely read by the general public, gives a less guarded and far
more complete picture of where the imperialists are heading than the
speeches of Churchill or Roosevelt. As a matter of fact, the discerning
reader quickly grasps the fact that the policy outlined in this article
dove-tails with the policy enunciated by Roosevelt, Churchill, Eden and
Hull. As a rule their policy has to be reconstructed from hints and
phrases, it has to be read between the lines in the declarations of
these capitalist statesmen. The same policy is stated more thoroughly,
completely and frankly in this article.
 “The first principle of the conservative statesman,” writes Hogg,
 “is to try and think himself ahead into the concrete situation with
which he is likely to be faced ... But what is the situation likely to
be?” Hogg gives the picture as the British Tories see it:
 “This war is not going to end like the last. To
appropriate a line from T.S. Eliot, it will end ‘not with a bang but a
whimper.’ There will not be an Armistice. There will be no last shots
fired at 11:05 a.m. There will not be a certain moment at which we are
at war and a subsequent moment at which we are at peace and free to
reconstruct the world. There will be a confused period in which the
problems of peace and the problems of war are inextricably intertwined
— the only peace of reconstruction we are likely to get.
After that it will be too late to reconstruct. “
He continues,
 “The two immediate factors of the situation in Europe
after the defeat of Hitler will be the necessity of military occupation
and European relief. We—and I mean the United States, the USSR and
the British Commonwealth—will not be driven to these acts by
vindictiveness or sentimentality but by the sheer logic of events. Some
will not like the policy they entail. All will have to accept it.
 “I think that this was what Mr. Churchill had in mind
in his somewhat guarded reference ...
 “The first purpose will involve the maintenance of a
large military force in Germany. The Nazi regime has destroyed every
organization that might conceivably have formed the basis for an
opposition ... When the Nazis fall there will be a void. Pockets of
isolated Nazi fanatics will hold out, will be suppressed and from time
to time will break out again in fits of hysterical resistance. Droves
of expropriated workers will roam far and wide without the means of
livelihood. Towns will have been battered. Food supplies will have been
disorganized. Epidemic disease will probably appear on an enormous
scale.
 “All Europe, as well as Germany, will be in confusion.
Peoples will rise against the remnants of the Nazi occupying power but
will not thereby achieve unity. The Giraud-de Gaulle controversy is
only a foretaste of factional disputes to come. Some of the Quislings
will rat. Others will continue their treachery in varying degrees.
Always there will be an insistent cry for food. Homeless people will
demand houses. War prisoners and foreign workers from German factories
will ask care and lodging on their way borne in places which cannot
accommodate them. Factories will be closed. Chaos will reign
everywhere. The one unifying force will be the armies of the United
Nations. The one sure source of food will be the United Nations Relief
Organization. The one instrument of political security will be the
authority of the victorious Powers.
 “It is idle to pretend that this period of chaos will
prove short. Houses are not built in a day. It will take time to
repatriate Hitler’s slave labor and years to reorganise industrial
production. The agriculture of Europe is not going to recover for
fifteen years or more. The cattle have been slaughtered. The fields are
partly unfertilized. The farmers and their laborers have been
scattered. And in Germany itself the disease of Nazism will take at
least a generation to eradicate.
 “Europe as we knew it has disappeared. Possibly it has
ceased forever to be the economic or political center of the world ... “
In the light of this harsh and cruel picture of post-war
Europe, how hollow, how empty, how pathetic is the chatter of the
liberals and laborites about post-war reconstruction, about the century
of the common man, about the brave new world “we all seek to build. “
Like religion, these slogans are intended as opium for the people.
The British ruling class knows the real facts and their only program
is, in partnership with the United States, to preserve and ensure their
power and privileges by converting the peoples of Europe into serfs,
under the rule of Anglo-American bayonets and threats of starvation.
That is the cold-blooded, barbaric program which the Anglo-American
capitalists offer as their “solution” to the European problem. As Hogg
puts it: “Some will not like the policy ... All will have to accept it. “

 
The Reed Plans
From all sides comes confirmation that Hogg’s is no
individual opinion. On the contrary, this represents the deliberate,
calculated, predetermined and authoritative policy of Wall and Lombard
Streets. Two important pronouncements verify this fact. The September
24 NY Times reports that US Secretary of State
Cordell Hull declared to newspaper reporters that “food and order” will
be the two-fold key for Wall Street’s plans to subjugate Europe. The Times
states:
 “In emphasizing the importance of the project (United
Nations Relief), the Secretary of State recalled how four nations
slipped into anarchy after the last war and warned that as many as
fourteen nations would follow that course after the present war, unless
someone fed them. “
This statement should be studied in connection with the
speech delivered in England the same week by Sir Samuel Hoare, British
Ambassador to Spain. Sir Samuel Hoare declared that Britain has become
the “leading military power in Europe.” “Having achieved this power, “
he asserted, “Britain does not intend to abandon it and ‘tomorrow it
may be the safeguard of European stability’ ... “
 “Sir Samuel placed ‘food and order’ as the first needs of Europe, “
the New York Times correspondent reports. “We are
prepared in full cooperation with our great Allies to prevent famine by
insuring the effective distribution of food supplies and to forestall
anarchy by Allied garrisons at key points on the continent. “
These are the plans, these are the intentions of British
imperialism. But there is a great gap between desire and
accomplishment. Hogg of course recognizes that Britain has lost her
world preeminence. “... Our industrial ascendancy has disappeared.
Financially and economically the US is incomparably the greatest Power in the
world.” He hopes, however, and this is the hope of the British Tories,
that Britain will be indispensable, even though in a junior capacity,
in Wall Street’s drive for world hegemony. “Can American trade function
in Africa and Asia without British political assistance?” he demands.
Hogg thinks it cannot.
 
The War With Japan
But even if Britain is able to establish itself as the
junior partner of the firm of Anglo-American capitalism and even if the
war with Hitler is successfully concluded, there still remain the war
with Japan and the necessity of reestablishing Anglo-American hegemony
in the Far East.
 “The result,” writes Hogg, “will be a period of peace and war. Part
of our industry will be switching to the reconstruction of Europe and
Great Britain. Part will still be supplying the armed forces. Part of
the armed forces will be transferred to the Far East; part to the
European Army of Occupation. But some will return to industry ...” He
forecasts that:
 “This will raise intricate problems within the armed
forces. Who is going back first to get civilian jobs? Veterans of Tunis
and Burma will strain to come back to England, only to be told that
they are wanted in the European Army of Occupation, or to fight the
Japanese. Boys will be sent out from this country to take the places of
demobilized men just as they come to think the war is over.
Demobilization will become a thorny political problem.
 “The end of the war with Germany will set up a new
series of shortages. It is estimated that bombing, lack of repairs and
shifts in population, added to existing slums and overcrowding, will
give Britain a shortage of 4,000,000 dwelling houses in 1944—more
than ten years’ output at maximum prewar rates. Our clothes are wearing
out. Everything is getting shabby and out of repair. We shall be short
of timber, short of ships, short of food, short of oil and, above all,
short of men.
 “Certain political conclusions follow from this. Mr.
Churchill is one of the few men who have had the courage to draw them.
If government is not to break down it will have to he strong
government. The mere demand for demobilization from within the services
will ensure the continuance of conscription to replace those who are
demobilized. There will still be rationing, because there will still be
shortages; a system of priorities will still govern new production.
Some requisitioning of housing accommodation is probable. Rent
restriction is certain to continue so long as there is a shortage of
houses; and there may be a continuation of billeting and of compulsory
labor service ... “
Such is the future that the British ruling class holds
out for the British people. Regardless of military victory, nay, on the
assumption of military victory, the war economy plus the organization
and maintenance of huge armies and military establishments will
continue for a very long time to come. How long? The only authorative
statement given out on this score thus far has come from Knox, US
Secretary of the Navy. He blurted out in an unguarded moment that the
US and Britain will have to police the world for the next hundred
years. By then Knox and his friends feel that it will be safe. Or maybe
they will demand an additional extension.
Hogg undestands too well that such a program cannot survive even the
ordinary rigors of British parliamentary contest. “Will these become
party issues?” he apprehensively inquires. “No government,” Hogg is
convinced, “can withstand grievances on the scale which will exist, if
they are given organized expression by a powerful Parliamentary
opposition.” He then quotes Churchill’s plea for a continuation of the
present coalition after the war. “Anybody who opposes Mr. Churchill’s
plea for national unity after victory, will, I believe, be simply swept
off the map,” he melodramatically warns the weak-kneed Labor Party
leadership.
This perspicacious, class-conscious Tory unwittingly gives testimony
on behalf of our contention that the treacherous labor bureaucracy of
the Bevin-Morrison type, as of the Murray-Green variety, constitutes
today an indispensable cog in the maintenance of the stability of the
capitalist regimes both in Britain and the United States. Apparently
the stability of the mightiest capitalisms rests on none too firm a
foundation.
 
The Lies of the Past
In the temporary stabilization that capitalism achieved
in Europe after 1923, the middle-of-the-road politicians of the yellow
Second International told the workers that their methods of peaceful
and gradual evolution were safer, demanded less sacrifice and bloodshed
than the aggressive, sanguinary methods of the Russian Revolution. They
assured the working class that the reformist policies of the British
Labor Party or the German Social-Democratic Party, the methods of
peaceful election contests, the routine organization of trade unions,
and the winning of modest reforms etc., guaranteed the gradual,
peaceful and painless transition to the new socialist society. This
argument had a certain appeal and exercised considerable influence on
sections of the working class of Europe. Of course, the yellow
 “socialists” did not bring socialism to the European workers. Neither
were the workers in Italy, Germany and Spain spared the rigors and
violence of civil war. Nor were the European workers spared the horrors
of the Second World War.
 
Europe Today
Under Czarism, with its tyrannical, barbaric and
murderous rule, the Russian working class quickly shed its reformist
illusions and learned the lesson of revolutionary Internationalism. The
Russian working class was the first to build a powerful Bolshevik party
and the, first to make a successful socialist revolution.
In similar fashion, the Europe of today provides little soil for
reformism to take root and flourish. The Europe of today leaves little
room for philistine illusions. Gradualism will be thought of in the
next period as a bizarre, totally unrealistic philosophy. The war is
pounding home the grim lesson that the workers’ revolution is the only
way to end the imperialist slaughter, that the Socialist United States
of Europe is the only alternative to the present madhouse of capitalist
Europe.
The European workers can be depended on to rebuild their
revolutionary socialist International, the Fourth International, on
lines that correspond to the requirements and needs of the present
epoch. The present epoch will be recorded as one not only of
imperialist wars but also of liberating revolutions.



The Seventh Convention of the United Automobile, Aircraft and Agricultural Implement Workers, just concluded in Chicago, was the most significant since the historic Milwaukee convention of 1937, when the tempestuous union of the auto workers elbowed its way forward and gave notice that it had taken up its position in the front ranks of American labor.
The auto workers gathered in Chicago demonstrated that, although only eight months have elapsed since the United States entered the “shooting war,” they have already overcome to a considerable extent the apathy and confusion that seized the men in the shops in the months immediately following “Pearl Harbor.”
The magnificent revolt during the debate on overtime pay was nothing less than the lightning flash of the mood of exasperation with the auto barons and their dollar-a-year War Production Board. In the language of the English Parliament, it was a vote of “no confidence.” It established conclusively that the war has not cowed the ranks of the auto union, and that the auto workers retain their exemplary militancy, their courage, their fighting qualities and their sound class instinct.
For four solid days the delegates roared their disapproval, they howled down their elected leaders, they hurled contemptuous taunts at their officials, they refused to let an Executive Board member speak. At one point they demanded the removal of all organizers from the convention floor. They voted down almost every important recommendation of the main convention committees.
Yet they concluded the convention sessions by reelecting to office, with a few insignificant changes, the whole top leadership of the union.
How explain this extraordinary behavior?
There is no question but that the leadership was the democratic choice of the delegates, for the convention successfully preserved its high authority and democracy continues to reign in the auto union as in no other international union.
Several of the bourgeois reporters, in attempting to explain the contradiction, made the cynical suggestion that this opposition really amounted to very little, that the delegates were merely interested in letting off steam before reelecting their officers. But this puerile and superficial estimate is rejected even by the responsible bourgeois editors. No! The great roar of protest that rose from the ballroom of the Sherman Hotel carried all the way to Capitol Hill and the White House, and its meaning was too clear to be misunderstood.
The contradiction between the conduct of the convention and the reelection of the old leadership, when analyzed, provides the key to understanding the development and the dynamics of the auto union, and the future course of the whole of American labor.
The American workers have now gone through nine months of “shooting war” and, previous to that, two years of “national defense.” They accepted the war as previously they had accepted “national defense.” But their acceptance was purely formal; based not on a thorough understanding of what modern capitalist war means, but simply on naivete and political inexperience. Catering two years ago to this prevailing mood, Roosevelt proclaimed a program of providing the American people with the guns and the butter too. But modern total war, under conditions of moribund capitalism, cannot be conducted without reducing the mass of the people and above all the workers to a regime of overwork, poverty, hunger and disease. Thus the auto workers accepted the war on the false premise that they would not have to accept any of its consequences.
Now that the reel is beginning to unfold before their own eyes, the auto workers are balking. The convention thus presents the bizarre picture of a majority of its delegates bitter against Henderson and the OPA, bitter against Nelson and the WPB, scornful of the “15 per cent formula” of the War Labor Board, dead set against any proposal to freeze wages, mocking at the 44-cent increase received by the steel union, and yet continuing solemnly to declare that they stand foursquare behind President Roosevelt and his war program. How can you be for and against the same thing at the same time? It is this contradictory thinking that explains the contradictory actions of the convention.
The Chicago delegates had come to the convention fresh from the shops. They were frightened that the “sacrifice program” was leading to the destruction of their union. They complained bitterly of mountains of unsettled grievances, of the nervousness and the dissatisfaction in the rank and file, the growing arrogance of the corporation managements, the firing of increasing numbers of union militants, the red tape and hopeless delays involved in negotiating their demands through the War Labor Board, the helplessness of the union now that it had given up its right to strike. Therefore, they hurled their bitterness and their exasperation at the heads of their leadership and demanded “action.” What kind of action did they want? What alternatives did the opposition present to the convention? In truth, none. They had not yet thought their opposition through to the end. They did not possess a clear-cut alternative program. The opposition was still seeking some middle of the road course, some half-way house. But there is no half-way house; consequently the delegates could not find it.
 
The Only Alternative: Our Program
Any genuine alternative program could have been patterned only after the one presented by The Militant, which had been widely distributed among the delegates. On Wednesday, at the height of the controversy over the union’s war policy, the opposition was challenged on this very point by the ex-Stalinist, pro-administration chairman of the Constitution Committee, Lindahl.
He declared: “The opponents of this resolution fail entirely to present to this body any reasonable alternative ... There is no alternative except to act through governmental bodies.” Then he indicated whither the arguments of the opposition were inevitably leading them. “Is it coincidental, my friends,” Lindahl asked, “that the arguments used to strike down the resolution yesterday on the ‘Victory Through Equality of Sacrifice,’ is it coincidental the arguments were contained in a Trotskyite sheet passed out at the gates of the hall? Is it coincidental?” At this point the speaker was interrupted by boos expressing the displeasure of the oppositional delegates. After this interruption, Lindahl concluded: “Let me urge this, let us not be betrayed by Trotskyite councils, let us follow the path of patriotism in the leadership of Roosevelt that we set our feet upon months ago.”
Thus the spokesman of the administration pointed out to the opposition the logical goal of their struggle. But the opposition was not yet ready to take more than the first few faltering steps.
The program of the leadership rests on its alliance with Roosevelt and its support of his war program. The immediate steps which have placed the labor movement in the war strait-jacket are the surrender of the right to strike and the approval of the War Labor Board as the super-arbiter of the class struggle in America. As a minimum program for the UAW to regain its freedom, therefore, stands the necessity of reasserting its right to strike. But the top leadership stands panic-stricken before this demand. For the right to strike means the blowing up of the War Labor Board and what will then happen to the alliance with Roosevelt? The UAW top leadership, in common with Philip Murray and the rest of the CIO bureaucracy, is convinced that the labor movement will never survive if it must stand on its own two feet and rely on its own resources and solidarity.
The delegates comprising the opposition were likewise hypnotized by this same CIO program and did not yet dare suggest the alternative, the only alternative program. One delegate did speak on the convention floor about the union’s necessity to regain its right to strike, but the proposal found no response among the delegates.
That is why the convention criticism of the war policies of its leadership, although bitter and hostile to the extreme, constituted for all that no more than a protest. That is why the delegates, returning to the War Policy Committee its proposal on overtime pay, after a savagely conducted full-day debate, adopted virtually the identical proposal the following day. The delegates had no alternative. They could find no half-way house. That is why, for all the ferocity of its criticism, the convention adopted as its positive proposal the demand on Roosevelt to set up regional boards of the War Labor Board in order to eliminate delays! And that is why the convention, because the union has already freed itself, largely, of clique combinations and clique politics, could not create any alternative leadership and was forced to reelect the old leadership to office.
 
The Gap Between Leaders and Workers
The convention made clear that the auto workers still hold the illusion that they can retain their economic gains and living standards in this period of devastating war on the basis of a coalition of labor with the Roosevelt war government. And here becomes obvious the great difference and the coming source of cleavage between the rank and file workers and the leadership of the union.
The top leadership already understands that the economic gains of the workers are due to be swept away. Their speeches about improving economic conditions are sheer hypocrisy. As a matter of fact, they have already given up these things as a sacrificial offering to Roosevelt in return for the guarantee that they will continue to be recognized as the spokesmen for American labor. They gave up the right to strike, they gave up the independence of the union movement, and in return Roosevelt provided them with a mongrel closed shop: “maintenance of union membership.” The bargain is similar to that of the Dakota farmer who traded off his house and farm for a half-interest in the city hall.
The program of the UAW leadership: support of the war, coalition with the Roosevelt war government, elevation of the War Labor Board as super-arbiter, surrender of the independence of the labor movement – this program the membership accepts at the present juncture of affairs. But the inevitable consequences of this program are the weakening of the union, the demoralization of the membership, inability to organize the new unorganized war industries, general stagnation and decay, the worsening of working conditions and the lowering of wages and living standards. The leadership has already reconciled itself to these consequences, but the membership is determined to resist them.
The top UAW leadership, ground between two millstones, growing increasingly panicky between Roosevelt who demands that they make good on their promises and the increasing resistance of the membership, was inexorably forced into its attempt to destroy the democracy of the auto union. It is impossible for a pro-Roosevelt union leadership to balance itself in this war period, if it must continually answer for its deeds to an aroused, militant, alert and vocal rank and file.
 
The Defeats of the Leadership
And here the top leadership suffered a cruel blow at the hands of the convention. In contrast to the dilemma of the delegates over the political program, the convention displayed full ability to understand the organizational aspect of the union. The delegates easily defeated the campaign to rush the convention through in a few days on the ostensible ground that the men were needed back at work in the plants. The delegates now were on sure ground. They knew what they wanted and what they did not want. The debate was incisive and to the point. Boos and jeers greeted the Stalinist Levine of Plymouth Local when he began whining that “this convention will hold up these workers that are here, that are vital to the war effort. I am a welder and I weld on the M-4 tank, and I know my services are needed back at that plant.” The delegates shouted at him: “If you’re needed back at the plant, get your grips packed and get out of here.”
The same self-assured conduct was displayed on the proposal to delay the next convention to May 1944. The leadership threw all their heavy artillery into the debate on this question. All the Stalinist hacks took the floor and argued that it would virtually constitute sabotage for 2,000 people to use up precious railroad space when they were needed back in the shops on the production line. George F. Addes who, unlike the Stalinists, still has some credit left with the delegates, recited figures and facts to prove how much money could be saved by both the International and local unions if the convention period were extended. But all to no avail. The proposal was rejected as decisively as the delegates had rejected it the previous year at Buffalo. And so on down the line the delegates rejected the attempts to increase the dues, to cut down the size of the convention delegations, and anything else that smacked of the design to cut down the rights of the membership and increase the authority of the top Executive Board. The Chicago convention succeeded in preserving the democracy of the union.
Here it becomes doubly clear that the political program of the union leadership was put over at the convention not primarily through slick maneuvers or sleight of hand, but because of the political immaturity of the convention. The delegates proved to the hilt that they knew how to deal with parliamentary trickery when the subject matter involved was thoroughly understood by them.
 
The Progress Since Buffalo
The basic issues that were dealt with at the Chicago convention: the independence of the union movement, the democratic rights of the membership, Roosevelt and the war – all arose at the Buffalo convention a year ago. As a matter of fact, the formal program adopted in Chicago was not basically different from the program provided by the Buffalo convention. And yet, how obvious it is that the auto workers have taken a great step forward in the intervening year.
The Chicago convention was truly significant because the delegates revealed that, in spite of their support of the war, they have retained their excellent class instinct and have in reality not succumbed to the chauvinist wave. They passed several resolutions to the effect that winning the war was the No. 1 job of the convention, etc., etc., but they really belied these resolutions by their conduct. This was illustrated in many different ways. The debate on the Second Front, built up as the great publicity spotlight for the convention, proved a washout. The debate was perfunctory; no rank and filer was interested enough to take the floor. Debate was almost immediately closed, the resolution was adopted, out of the way, and that was that. The same half-hearted response was accorded to Captain Cecil Charles Poole, Labor member of the British Parliament, who attempted to get the convention excited about the war. The polite applause granted Captain Poole and others turned into downright annoyance at having the convention’s time wasted when two days later Irving Abramson, president of the New Jersey CIO, was introduced to appeal to the convention on behalf of the National Allied War Relief Committee. The confusion and noise was so bad that Thomas was forced to interrupt to lecture the delegates and plead with them to hear Abramson out. After passing high sounding resolutions on the war, the delegates apparently didn’t want to be bothered any more about it.
The growing cleavage between the auto union membership and the top officialdom was indicated even last year at the Buffalo convention. But it was expressed in a distorted and corrupted form then. As in all previous conventions of the auto union, the factional battle at Buffalo occurred between and through two sets of people of the top administration; the militants worked exclusively through Addes and his Executive Board supporters and that is what confused and distorted the whole struggle; Addes and his supporters had no principled differences with the Reuther faction. On all questions of policy and program they saw eye to eye and voted together. At the Buffalo convention they both condemned the North American aircraft strikers but launched a furious debate as to whether Michener, west-coast regional director, should be allowed to continue in office. A gigantic struggle likewise was waged on whether Frankensteen should be elected as vice-president. And the high point of the whole faction fight was reached when Leonard ran against Addes for the post of secretary-treasurer. Thus the desire of the militants for a more audacious union policy was frustrated and sidetracked by Addes into a struggle for posts at Buffalo.
 
The New Alignment
The war thoroughly cleansed the factional situation in the auto union. The war made it impossible to play at opposition. The alliance with Roosevelt is not a platonic one. Roosevelt demands payment on every single promissory note issued by the top UAW leadership. “Pearl Harbor” finished the comedy of the factional fight between the Addes and Reuther groups on the International Executive Board. They united organizationally as they had previously been united on principle and program.
At Chicago, therefore, the militants grouped around the leadership of the Buick, Dodge and Hudson locals could not rely any more upon their friend Addes or any other would-be progressive of the International Executive Board. For the first time in their experience, the militants were forced to rely solely upon their own strength, their own organization and their own program. This is a new development and it signifies an enormous step forward. Its beneficial results are apparent by contrasting the Chicago and the Buffalo conventions.
The key differences at the Buffalo convention were sidetracked in favor of the struggle for posts. The key differences at the Chicago convention were debated openly and squarely, on the level of political understanding of the delegates, without any consideration for unprincipled clique alliances or horse-trading of votes. The Chicago convention thus records the great achievement that at last, in the midst of the Second World War, the militants have cut loose from the unprincipled politics and intrigues of the UAW officialdom and have formed, at least potentially, an opposition group that rests upon adherence to principle.
 
The War Drives Them Forward
The war is already increasing the cost of living with terrifying rapidity. The Chicago convention has served notice that the war has not erased the militancy of the auto workers or their determination to resist the practical steps of the Roosevelt war program. The top leadership, on the contrary, is being forced to take on, more and more, the role of policeman crushing resistance. The coming repressions and terror, which Roosevelt will inevitably be forced to employ against individual local unions and groups of workers who defy him will further embitter the auto membership against the government and widen immeasurably the present cleavage between the membership and its top leadership.
The Chicago convention took the first step in the organization of a clear-cut opposition. The experiences of the coming period will push the auto workers to the left, will develop their social thinking, will increase the present dissatisfaction and must perforce lead to the adoption of a clear-cut militant opposition program.






(The following is the memorial address delivered at the funeral of Comrade Antoinette Konikow by E.R. Frank, editor of Fourth International, who spoke on behalf of the National Committee of the Socialist Workers Party.)



Comrade Antoinette Konikow was one of the, rarest spirits of our time. Her entire conscious life, from the age of 19 when she first entered the working class movement in 1888, right up to the hour of her death, was devoted to the revolutionary struggle; was dedicated to the cause of socialism, the emancipation of mankind from the horrors and fears and terrors of capitalism and the creation of a new society oi brotherhood, of comradeship, of freedom, of peace and plenty for all.
The life and deeds of Comrade Antoinette Konikow seem almost unbelievable, unreal on the background of this society – this brutal and harsh and cynical class society we live in today which exalts the self-seekers, the scoundrels, the schemers, the liars and tyrants and oppressors. Look at the people who are pointed to as examples, who are honored and praised, and for whom statues and monuments are built! Why, nine times out of ten these people are nothing but hypocrites, worthless careerists whose main aim is to feather their own nests and save their own skins.
Antoinette Konikow was of a different mold. She was made of different clay. Her whole life she determined not by thought of her personal ambition or career, but of serving best in the great crusade to cleanse this earth of its evil and terrible plagues—of exploitation of man by man, of human degradation and want, of the scourge of capitalist wars.
 
Never Wavered
And in this holy crusade – the greatest and the noblest that there is in this world – she remained faithful and true throughout her life. Others fell by the wayside. Others grew tired, or lost faith or heart, or became terrified of the difficulties and dangers, or succumbed to the pressure or the blandishments or the fleshpots of the Stalinist bureaucracy or the capitalist powers-that-be, but not Antoinette Konikow. She never faltered. She never wavered. She never lost courage or strength.
The great revolutionary faith with which, as a young girl of 19, she first plunged into the struggle in Czarist Russia, she retained to the last. And through it all she retained her womanliness, her poise and her beauty. She provided us with constant living reassurance that the spirit of mankind, in its striving for truth, for justice, for the solidarity of humanity – that that is indestructible – and that the fight will go on despite everything, until It achieves its purposes, until victory is won, until this terrible plague of capitalism, with its tyranny, barbarism, with its famines and wars, is wiped off the face of the earth.
I still can see in my mind’s eye Comrade Konikow at our last Convention, in November 1944, the 11th Convention of the American Trotskyist movement, how, despite her advanced years, she stood up, youthful and self-confident in.spirit and told us how she had been battling for years, and how she was going to continue to battle until her dying day.
 
Inspires All
What a picture, what an inspiration for all of us, for the young men and the young women who are first mapping out their life’s courses, what an example to cherish and to emulate.
Many things will pass away and the names of many men and women high in bourgeois society, today famous and acclaimed, will be forgotten and, in a few years, be unknown. But Comrade Konikow will not only be remembered, but future generations who will study this present age of ours in wonderment as well as sorrow, will come to know of Antoinette Konikow as one of the truest and most loyal and devoted of the original band of pioneers who blazed the trail for the socialist society.
And now I must in the name of the National Committee of the Socialist Workers Party of which she was an honorary member, give the last word of farewell to this wonderful comrade, this great, indestructible revolutionary spirit. Of course, grief is in all our hearts. But it is not the grief of prostration, of helplessness. No, let us say farewell to Antoinette as she would want it. Let us say farewell standing upright, with our eyes dry and our fists clenched with resolution. And with the pledge on our lips that we will, regardless of everything, carry on the revolutionary ’ struggle to which she devoted her life.
 



The first cycle of the great strike wave of 1945-46 has come to a close. The main bodies of the auto, steel, electrical, rubber, packinghouse, oil, telephone and numerous other unions have signed agreements with the corporations. It is now possible to assess this great class action as a whole, even though 75,000 workers are still forced to continue their strike against the Westinghouse corporation and the country’s half million miners are again battling for improved conditions.
The strike wave, which America has just experienced, will be recorded as an historic labor upsurge. It can be compared properly only with those major climactic battles of the American working class which, for good or for evil, outlined for whole periods ahead the road of labor’s travels. This strike wave was an historic one, first, because it was fought on the most far-flung battle front, with the unions challenging the bulk of the major monopolists. Second, because it involved the first major test of strength between the new industrial union movement and the ruling capitalist oligarchy, since the mass production unions first established their right to existence ten years ago. And last because it brought into focus the social development and revealed the vast, latent power of American labor, power enough to beat back the offensive of the employers and to win significant concessions.
We said in the February 1946 Fourth International:
The abdication of the labor leaders during four years of war, and their underwriting of a program of enriching and strengthening the capitalist rulers guaranteed and made inevitable the present war of the banking and industrial oligarchy against labor. No sooner did Wall Street bring its imperialist rivals to their knees than it turned with redoubled fury upon the main enemy—the working class at home. Instead of the “gratitude” which the labor leaders naively imagined they would receive in return for labor’s “sacrifices” in the war, they received a hail of wage cuts and anti-labor bills.
That is what started the fight. The battle between labor and capital began as an offensive of Big Business against the working class. Immediately on V-J Day, the industrialists let loose with a program of slashing wages, discharge of millions of workers, downgrading, etc. Philip Murray, CIO President, thus summarized the case:
There have been four major, whopping big cuts in wages and salaries that, according to the United States Commerce Department, have taken $20,000,000,000 out of the national pay envelope.
First: The cut in hours of work—generally from forty-eight to forty hours a week—with the elimination of overtime. The average manufacturing worker who earned $46.35 in June, is now making only $35.60—a cut of $10.75 a week. ...
Second: Unemployment. One month after V-J Day two million men and women were laid off entirely, and the number is mounting daily....
Third: Downgrading. The third big cut in the nation’s pay envelope came when—as production was cut down—wage earners and salaried employees were downgraded from higher paying to lower paying jobs.
Fourth: The last big cut in the nation’s pay envelope is a hidden one. During the war, according to the War Production Board, labor’s productivity rose about twenty-five percent over all. That is to say, what before the war took five men or women to make, now requires only four men or women. This means fewer people drawing wages or salaries.
The industrialists were unquestionably getting set to return to the “good old days,” when there existed no restraints on their tyrannical rule, when they had to brook no interference and could crush by force and violence all attempts at revolt or reform. The industrialists had convinced themselves that they had rewon the “moral leadership” which they had lost so ignominiously during the 1929-33 crisis and which they never succeeded in regaining in the first two terms of the “Roosevelt era.” It is significant that a good number of the plutocracy’s paid “brains” had begun openly playing with fascist ideas and experiments. One of these, Virgil Jordan, had this to say in the Economic Record, published by the National Industrial Conference Board, the private mouthpiece of the big manufacturers:
It does not matter to me what others may do or say ... but when some smooth-tongued wizard from Washington ... puts to me the typical twisted question with which the patriotism and pride of the American people has been slowly poisoned during the past decade, and asks whether I want to bring back the days of Harding and Coolidge and Hoover, of Teapot Dome and Ed Doheny and Albert Fall, and Insull or Musica or Whitney ... I shall look him straight in the eye without shame or fear and say: “Yes.”
After V-J Day, ensconced securely on the mountains of money bags, which had grown to fantastic size during the war, and shielded by the scandalous tax laws which permitted them to raid the public treasury again and again for their continued aggrandizement, the robber-barons of America decided this was the God-given opportunity to put the unions “in their place.” What were their precise aims? At the very least, to deal the unions a jolting blow; to demoralize the union rank and file, to dampen its militancy; to isolate the unions and reduce labor’s strength in the national scene; to drastically worsen the workers’ standard of living.
The monied autocracy launched its war upon labor at a time when the main advantages were with it; it had the advantages of initiative, superior preparation, superior ground and position and greater staying power. The class war of 1945-46 started out on the grounds and positions chosen by labor’s enemies.
The main lines of the union strategy, at this time, were virtually dictated by the circumstances of the situation. Here was organized labor confronted by American capitalism, whose leading circles were united as almost never before; determined to tame the unions and slash labor’s standard of living. The capitalists moreover, were sitting pretty on their piles of gold, secure in their profits regardless, with a subservient Congress at their beck and call; all set to wait it out and starve out the unions. Obviously labor could not win its fight to maintain its living standards by thinking in terms of the ordinary, mine-run trade union strike, which is won by simply shutting down the individual plant or concern involved and then making sure that it stays shut down until the boss agrees to terms. It was clear from the start that any single union was doomed to defeat in its engagement with capital if the fight was converted into a simple waiting game. The capitalists were far better equipped for waiting and could starve out any union long before the union could starve out the corporation.
Thus any real strategy of labor had to, perforce, be based on these fundamental propositions:

Labor was confronted with a fight that was national in scope against a more or less united and organized capitalist class.
Labor could not emerge victorious by dragging out the fight. On the contrary, labor had to bring things rapidly to a head. In other words, its strategy had to be one of progressively bringing the economy to such a state of paralysis as to provoke a deep social crisis.

The American plutocracy could not ignore a social crisis of magnitude. The Wall Street masters could not just sit on their gold and decide to wait out the hurricane. These bankers and industrialists are certainly a pig-headed lot. They certainly are gamblers of the craziest kind. They are unquestionably blinded by their class prejudices and savagery. But they are not completely insane. And that is why the government in Washington, the representative and spokesman of the capitalist rulers as a whole, would have been forced to step in and settle more or less rapidly such a strike crisis.
Such a strike crisis can be settled either by the use of trickery, or by violence or by making concessions. The use of trickery, that is, cheating the workers out of any gains by the use of a lot of involved double talk and slippery formulas, is just not possible when dealing with superbly organized and experienced mass unions, headed by seasoned trade union leaders. It could not be employed as the major tactic in the present situation. As for violence, that is, large scale violence, sufficient to crumble the force of the present mass movement—its use was out of the question. The capitalists could not throw the armed forces of the state into headlong combat against the labor legions, without provoking conditions of a near civil war. That is why a strategy based on the propositions outlined above would have proven successful, would have forced great concessions from the industrialists.
  
The CIO Strategy
How does this proposed strategy square or differ with the strategy actually employed by the CIO high command? The fact is there was no CIO strategy. As a matter of fact, there did not even exist an understanding or knowledge of each other’s plans among the leaders of the major CIO unions. During the General Motors strike there was a certain amount of talk, especially in the Stalinist publications, about a supposed CIO strategy. But this was invention. The CIO leaders simply blundered into the fight, one union at a time, and then improvised their battle tactics as they went along. The only union that can make out a claim for a plan of battle was the auto union in the case of the General Motors strike. And its plan was based on an absurd, utterly false one-at-a-time strategy of isolating the General Motors Corporation and winning the fight by bringing to bear the pressure of competition.
V-J Day unloosed a wave of bewilderment and resentment among the American people. Fear of the future began gripping the working class. Now that the war was over, were they to return to the horrors of unemployment, insecurity, want? The leaders of labor, Philip Murray, William Green and the others had nothing to propose. They didn’t even have the courage to declare that the no-strike pledge was revoked, or to withdraw from the hated War Labor Board. A rash of plant and departmental strikes swept through the steel and auto industries and the union leaders, out of sheer inertia, continued to stamp them out, as they had been doing throughout the war.
In this charged atmosphere, on September 27, 1945, one month after V-J Day, the Oil Workers’ Union called a national strike of its full membership against 16 major oil companies. The membership of this less powerful CIO union caught the spirit of the times and began to struggle for the demand which soon reverberated throughout the country: a 30 percent wage increase to retain the take-home pay—a 40-hour week with no reduction in pay. Paraphrasing a famous slogan of American history, the pickets carried signs which read: 52 for 40 or Fight!


 


To the oil workers must go the credit for dramatizing all over the country the demand for a 30 percent wage increase. But the oil workers, left to their own resources, proved too weak to carry through this ambitious program. Truman soon moved in and broke the oil strike by means of a governmental “seizure” of the oil properties under the provisions of the Smith-Connally Act. The oil workers’ demands seemed destined to be buried for a long time under reams of governmental red-tape. On this atmosphere of confusion and bewilderment the major CIO unions formulated their wage demands and began to inaugurate negotiations with the companies. The fight for the maintenance of take-home pay certainly began in an inauspicious manner.
The 30 percent demand lost the character of a pious hope or a lost cause only when the great auto union took up the struggle in earnest and served notice that it expected the 40-hour week with no reduction in pay. The auto union, the most volcanic and militant national union of the whole world, was experiencing a paroxysm of revolt at this time. Wildcat strikes were flaring throughout the industry. The Kelsey-Hayes strike, maintained for 6 weeks in defiance of the top officers, showed that the UAW membership was in a state of revolt against the leadership. It was in this heated situation that Walter Reuther, more perspicacious, farsighted and bold than his fellow bureaucrats, stepped into the breach. He took the program of the oil workers—a program advocated for months in the UAW by the more progressive locals—and began that remarkable series of negotiations with the General Motors Corporation that was finally climaxed by the strike of 225,000 GM workers.
 
Walter Reuther’s Leadership
Almost as soon as the GM negotiations got under way, it became clear that the leadership of labor’s fight for the maintenance of its standard of living had been taken over by the GM workers. And Walter Reuther, Vice-President in charge of the GM Department, who directly led this extraordinary fight, found himself again catapulted into the national limelight, this time as the leader of labor’s momentous wage struggle.
It is not difficult to understand why the workers all over the country eagerly accepted and looked to the leadership of the auto union. The GM union committee, headed by Walter Reuther, from the first, conducted its negotiations with the corporation in a fighting manner indicating that it was serious, that it meant business, that it was not simply going through a lot of motions for the record. Next, the working people all over the country knew that the auto union, and especially its GM section, was best suited to lead off this fight, because the auto union is strongest and has the greatest experience in warfare. Furthermore, Walter Reuther raised in the course of the negotiations several far-reaching demands which have already served to advance the American labor movement and have already left an indelible imprint on the minds of the American workers. His propaganda around the slogans of “Opening the books” of the Corporations and “Wage Increases without any Price Increases” served to dramatize to millions the unconscionable profits that have been amassed by the major corporations and dealt powerful blows against the insidious teachings of the corporations that wage increases are responsible for inflation. The labor movement has gained measurably, especially with the middle classes and the more backward workers, by exposing this fake economics a la Wall Street. And lastly, Walter Reuther conducted himself as a leader in the course of the GM negotiations. He showed he had the ability to stand up against the hired “brains” of the plutocrats, answer argument for argument and give blow for blow. As we had occasion to remark of John L. Lewis in the 1943 coal negotiations, the American workers admire leadership. They want leaders who can show up the Big Business representatives and who can voice in clear, forceful fashion the aspirations, the sufferings and the needs of the masses of people.
For all these reasons the union conduct of the GM negotiations inspired American labor and when the General Motors workers hit the bricks they had already won the sympathy and support of the great mass of the American people. But though the ranks of the GM strikers were determined, tenacious and strong, they could not win the battle alone. For they were facing not only the two-billion dollar corporation for which they worked, but the united ranks of America’s leading billionaires. And here the lack of a national strategy on the part of the CIO became painfully apparent. The leaders of the steel and electrical unions, the two other major unions of the CIO, proceeded with their own negotiations at a leisurely pace, as if these had no bearing on the GM strike. The other CIO unions in packinghouse, rubber, maritime, etc., conducted themselves in similar fashion. The Stalinist leadership of the electrical union even went so far as to refuse to call out on strike 30,000 odd GM workers under its jurisdiction. And the GM strikers were themselves prisoners of the “scissor-bill” one-at-a-time strategy authored by Reuther, which instead of isolating the corporations, threatened to isolate the GM workers. Instead of demanding the shutdown of Chrysler and Ford and thus preventing competition inside the union and the undercutting of each other’s conditions, Reuther insisted that Chrysler and Ford be kept working. Instead of howling for a steel strike to bring the strike crisis to a head, Reuther resented the steel strike, as interfering with his one-at-a-time strategy. Thus while the momentous battle between labor and capital was joined on November 21, only one division of labor’s army actually took the field. It was almost two months before the much needed reinforcements arrived on the field of battle and brought matters to a head.
In the course of these two months, as week wore on after week and no settlement seemed in sight, a lot of defeatist talk began going the rounds, some of it emanating right out of Philip Murray’s office and some spread by the Stalinists, that the General Motors strike should never have been called when it was, that it was badly timed. Why badly timed? Because the 1946 tax laws reduced the excess profits tax by so much that none of the corporations were interested in going into production in 1945. That was true. But then the 1946 or even 1947 tax laws guarantee the corporations huge profits even if they don’t produce at all. That would seem to indicate that no strikes ought to be called before January 1, 1948! All that the tax law argument proved was that the top trade union bureaucracy had permitted the capitalists to shamelessly raid the public treasury and to entrench itself into a superb position for warring on labor. And that only by a united, unified and powerful labor assault, which brought on a deep social crisis, could labor Overcome capital’s financial advantage. The tax law argument was nothing but an attempt at a fancy alibi to excuse the criminal inaction on the part of the other major CIO leaders.
 
The Strike Climax
The GM strike held out, virtually alone, for two months. Finally the much needed reinforcements began to arrive. On January 15, 1946, 200,000 members of the electrical union struck, closing down GE, Westinghouse, RCA and the GM electrical plants. The packinghouse workers both CIO and AFL struck the next day on January 16 and finally on January 21, three-quarter of a million steel workers walked out and brought the strike movement to its thunderous climax. Almost 2 million workers were on strike at the height of the strike wave. It was this display of big power that finally broke the log-jam and forced through the wage settlements, first in steel and then in the other major industries.
But by the time the strike movement was brought to a climax, the top CIO leaders had already given away a considerable part of their original demands. They had, in practice, already appreciably lowered the stake for which the strikers were battling. They did this when they completely reversed their previous stand against Truman’s Fact-Finding Boards scheme and agreed to cooperate with these so-called Fact-Finding Boards. By this one move, the CIO leaders actually scaled down their wage demands by almost 40 percent. Because once the authority of these boards was accepted, the unions were in effect bound by the board’s decisions. It was furthermore clear that these boards, given the existing relationship of forces, would split the difference between the workers and the employers and award the unions slightly better than half of their wage demands. The CIO leaders not only scaled down their wage demands by some 40 percent but saddled the labor movement with a new semi-compulsory arbitration governmental strait jacket.
The first Fact-Finding Board appointed by President Truman in the GM strike recommended on January 10 an increase of 19½ cents per hour to the GM workers or about 17½ percent increase as contrasted to the union’s demand for 30 percent. The union promptly accepted the board’s recommendation. On this 19½ cent front, then, one might imagine, the union forces would reform and rally to hold the line. But the leaders of the major unions showed as little unity in negotiating their strike settlements as they had previously displayed in the calling of their strikes. One week after a governmental body had awarded the GM workers a 19½ cents increase, Philip Murray agreed to accept a penny less—18½ cents—for the steel workers.
The Stalinists, not to be outdone, signed a contract with the General Motors Corporation for an 18½ cents increase in the plants organized by the UE while the UAW was still holding out for 19½ cents. The packinghouse workers, following the general pattern of everyone for himself and devil take the hindmost, agreed to scale down their demand to 17½ cents increase and finally settled for 16 cents. And the other leaders of the auto union itself signed contracts with Chrysler and Ford for wage increases of 18½ cents and 18 cents, respectively, while the GM workers were still holding out for the 19½ cents that a governmental body said they ought to get!
The CIO high command presented the spectacle of an army, where each divisional commander throws or fails to throw his troops into the battle, without any regard for the decisions or needs of the other commanders and without any concern as to the over-all disposition of the forces and the general line-up of the battle. Where, furthermore, every divisional commander negotiates his own peace terms with the enemy anytime he sees fit without any regard for the peace terms being negotiated by others and without any concern for the effect that the withdrawal of his forces will have upon his allies.
One can sum up and say that by their timidity, their lack of sufficient solidarity and a unified strategy, the CIO leaders unnecessarily dragged out the fight to its detriment, and gave up a somewhat bigger share of the wage stake than was warranted, than was absolutely necessary on the basis of the relationship of forces that obtained.
Any analysis of the strike wave would be completely one-sided and inadequate, however, if it confined itself to merely criticizing the shortcomings of the national CIO leaders, their strike program and strategy. The significant weaknesses and defects of the strike leadership are part of the picture. But they are by no means the whole picture.
 
Labor’s High Point
The big fact that stands out in the present strike struggle is that never before in its entire history has the American working class fought such a big battle on such a tremendous battle-front. Never before has the trade union movement shown itself capable of dealing such powerful blows, one after the other, on such a national scale. Never before have the trade unions displayed such perfected organization, such tenacity, such staying power and self-confidence. And despite the cross currents, the personal jealousies amongst the leaders, the factional bickering and the lack of a unified plan, the fact remains that never before has the labor movement displayed the unity and solidarity that was achieved in the present struggle. The recent strikes were better organized, the blows against the enemy were dealt more vigorously and decisively and the strike movement—which was brought to a smashing climax within two months and began to ebb a month after that—embraced a larger section of the American working class than ever before in American history. The very length of some of the strikes is unprecedented. The General Motors strike lasted 113 days, and a considerable number of the GM locals struck several weeks beyond that. Despite this long, drawn-out character of the fight, the union ranks never faltered; morale remained high throughout. Truly an unprecedented achievement! (While on the record many strikes of the past probably are recorded as longer-lasting, in actuality in all these past strikes, the majority of workers returned to work after the first period and only a small minority of the most determined and militant held out.)


 


This series of strikes, it must be remembered, involved the first major test of strength between the industrialists and the unions since the sit-down strikes of ten years ago. Coming immediately at the conclusion of the war, after 4 years of the no-strike pledge, the wage and job freeze, and the rule of the War Labor Board, the union movement unleashed a power that amazed everyone—its enemies as well as its friends. This power was so persuasive and palpable that it swept into its wake even the white collar slaves, as witness the strike of the independent telephone union, the bulk of whose membership is in the white collar field. It won the warm sympathy of the middle classes and the veterans. It smashed, by its sheer social weight and strength, the 4-year old campaign of the Big Brass and their Big Business associates to organize the veterans into anti-labor vigilante gangs. The labor movement has won the ardent sympathy of the veterans and its strike struggle directly inspired the great soldier protest that was heard round the world.
The working class was able to answer the attempts at violence by general strike action, in such out-of-the-way places, to boot, as Stamford, Conn, and Lancaster, Pa. This explains, incidentally, the more or less peaceful character of the great fight. The two sides were very evenly matched; the labor movement was too strong to tolerate large scale violence and strikebreaking on the part of the regular government police and state troops; the plutocracy possessed no private fascist armies of its own; the struggle was not yet of a decisive social character. Both sides were testing each other’s strength.
There is no question that the labor movement emerged out of the fight stronger than it was when it went into the fight. The battle originated as an offensive on the part of capital and labor was fighting defensively to maintain its standard of living. But the battle soon took on the character of a counter-offensive on the part of labor. Despite the indecision of the top union officers, the working class by the sheer strength of its organization, by its discipline, self-confidence and will to fight brought things to a head within two months after the GM strike first began. They were thus able to frustrate the design of the industrialists to wear out the unions and were able to smash through to a victory—a victory, because they hurled back the anti-labor offensive of the employers, because they came out of the fight with a strengthened position on the national scene and because they won significant concessions.
This estimate of the results of the strike movement is the accepted one, in a general way, on the part of all the leading militants in the leading CIO unions. But the pseudo-Marxists of Shachtman’s New International, we note, have come forward recently to challenge this estimate. Their writings show that they are obviously badly disappointed and even annoyed with the American workers. Rather than a victory, the Shachtman magazine believes the working class suffered a straight-out defeat. “The first great post-war trial of strength,” we read in the March 1946 New International, “between American labor and capital is drawing to an end. The over-all result is a defeat for labor.” Why a defeat? Because the unions demanded a 30 percent wage increase which they proved they were entitled to, but only got a little better than half. That’s why it was an “over-all defeat!” We are not making this up out of our heads. This wisdom is to be found in the New International.
“Labor did not get its war-time ‘take-home’ pay demand. It did not get what its spokesmen had proved was necessary to again bring wages up to a pre-war parity with the cost of living. If an army that takes the offensive and fails to dislodge the enemy from its positions has suffered a defeat, then labor suffered a defeat in the present strike struggles.”
 
A Marxist Analysis
One might first point out that it is very improper for people who call themselves Marxists to ignore all other factors in such a titanic class struggle as the recent strike wave and center their analysis exclusively on the money factor, like a bunch of “scissor-bills.” Even if the recent series of strikes succeeded only in repulsing the industrialists’ offensive and preserving the union organizations and the morale of their membership, even in that case these strikes could not by any manner of means be called defeated. Even in that case they would have to be described as having achieved some partial successes. A veteran militant trade unionist understands this. Is it too much to expect that people who call themselves Marxists should show a similar breadth of view?
Furthermore in what strike manual or work of Marxism is it written that a strike is to be considered defeated if it does not achieve its full declared objectives? Under that rule there have been very few strikes that have ever been won. The Shachtmanite writer repeats over and over again the thought that the workers needed the 30 percent wage increase to maintain their living standards. Sure. They needed it. Their cause was just. We stand with Ben Hanford who said that justice is always on the side of the working class. But that does not mean that when labor wins only half-a-loaf it has been defeated. No. It has won a partial victory.
A real strike analyst in casting a balance of a strike will ask himself these questions: Is our union stronger or weaker as a result of the strike? Is the morale of the membership up or down? Have we made gains in wages and working conditions? Or, if there are no gains, have we at least minimized the losses that we would have otherwise suffered? A balance based on a rounded and thoughtful analysis will show gains on all counts in the recent strikes: The unions are stronger, morale is heightened, outright gains in wages; as well as the other key factor that we discussed before.
Some pseudo-leftist wiseacres have adumbrated a somewhat more pretentious idea. Their argument runs like this: “True the workers won about 18 cents an hour wage increase. But prices are being boosted all along the line. Thus the wage increase is wiped out and in practice the workers haven’t won anything at all.” Underneath its aura of profundity, this argument betrays a wretched misconception of economic laws under capitalism and an ignorance of the relationship between wages and prices, explained by Marx fully 80 years ago in his debate with Weston.
We can only touch, at this time, on a few high points of the inflationary process that is now going on in the United States and the reasons for it. American capitalism is in the monopoly stage. The economy is owned and controlled by a few billionaire cliques. Due to the specific conditions of the market, both domestic and foreign, which we have previously discussed in the magazine, the capitalists are in a position to boost prices to fantastic heights. (We, of course, struggle for price control by consumers’ and workers’ committees in the same spirit as we struggle for our other transition demands.)
With the end of the Second World War the dominant capitalist community was determined to sweep away most of the governmental price controls. And they have the power to do so. They simply refused to produce after the war except under their own terms, just as they refused to go into war production five years ago until Roosevelt told them to write their own ticket. Now this capitalist control of economy cannot be fundamentally eliminated until capitalism is destroyed. The inflationary process in the US had been predicted before the recent strike wave got under way and would have taken place if the strikes had never occurred. The capitalists simply seized on the wage increases as a convenient excuse to attempt to place the onus for inflation upon the labor movement. Reuther attempted, not without success, to expose this fraud and to place the onus where it belongs, on the profit-greedy capitalists. The falsity of the argument of the pseudo-leftists is thus clearly seen. It incorrectly implies that the present price increases are due to the wage increases.
What is correct to say is that the gains won by the workers will soon be dissipated because of the violent inflationary rise. Therefore the trade unions must gird their loins for continued struggle for wage increases, must begin the propaganda for a sliding scale of wages to meet the increases in the cost of living.
The heightened morale of the whole labor movement is again being displayed. We see it in what is an almost infallible sign: The drive to organize new millions of unorganized workers. The CIO is going into the South. It is launching another million-dollar campaign. The older CIO unions are likewise undertaking their own organization campaigns. The UAW has already pledged to organize the tens of thousands of white collar workers of the automobile industry. This organizing campaign spells new big struggles. This added to the fact that all labor will be goaded into fighting in order to keep up with rising prices means that the coming period will, indeed, be a turbulent one.
The unions revealed superb power in the strike wave. Such power that the capitalist masters saw in them a dangerous threat to their very existence. The capitalists will now prepare more thoroughly for the next engagement. That is why in the major industries, guerrilla warfare is a thing of the past. The trade union struggle is passing over into a social struggle. That is what the present strikes proved. In this sense, American trade unionism is at the crossroads. The objective conditions demand that the trade unions now discard the old, outworn hit-and-run tactics and narrow trade union aims which were of value when the unions were weak and their objectives small and now adopt a broad social program and strategy that the times demand. That is what the American working class is instinctively reaching out for, as the victory of Reuther in the UAW indicates.
Great social ideas were raised in the course of the strike struggle, such as the demands voiced by Reuther and Murray’s radio speech in which he broke with Truman. But these were left dangling in mid-air. Reuther did not propose any political action to implement his social demands. Murray refused to work for a labor party after his break with Truman. The social aims remain to be realized.
The growing numbers of left-wingers in the key mass production unions have the task of convincing the broad ranks that the labor movement must now become a social movement if it is to survive and prosper.




It is interesting to reread today the resolution on Europe adopted by the 1944 Convention of the Socialist Workers Party.
This resolution, written in the summer of 1944 and adopted in November 1944, foresaw to a remarkable degree the kind of Europe that the Allied “liberators” would establish; it foresaw the revolutionary explosion that broke over Europe and with equal clarity predicted the inevitable conflict between Anglo-American imperialism and the USSR. The general estimates and prognoses embodied in this resolution have unquestionably been fully confirmed by the events. [1] But certainly it cannot be claimed that the American Trotskyists, or anyone else, foresaw in 1944, the present European lineup in all of its concreteness, its irrationality, its stark tragedy. As Lenin once remarked, things have turned out more originally; more unique, more multicolored, than could have been anticipated by anyone.
Who could have painted a picture in 1944 which would have done full justice to the barbaric decline that is Europe today? Who could have drawn in all its ghastly details its present crazy patch-quilt? Who could have been sure in 1944 that the scoundrels of Stalinism would again succeed in stemming the revolutionary tide, in resuscitating half-dead European capitalism and providing it with another breathing spell? What prophet could have foretold that the Peace Conference after the war would furnish the very stage from which the representatives of Western imperialism and Russia would direct upon each other the most savage attacks – attacks unprecedented in the history of modern diplomacy? That atom bomb tests, the dispatch of US dreadnoughts into the Mediterranean, and the delivery of an ultimatum by one “ally” to another “ally,” would constitute the off-stage music to give added effect to the debates at the Peace Conference? We Trotskyists understood better than anyone else the flimsy material from which was woven the imperialist-Kremlin war alliance. We never forgot that the social clash was inevitable between the State that rests on nationalized property and Western imperialism. But even we did not know that the struggle between these two social systems would break out so rapidly after the conclusion of the war, and with such unabated ferocity. No sooner did Stalin help the capitalists dam the waters of the revolutionary flood, than the Kremlin itself became one of the chief victims of its counter-revolutionary handiwork. Now that European capitalism has temporarily regained its political equilibrium, Anglo-American imperialism is beginning to crowd its erstwhile ally and to mobilize world public opinion against it.
The chief, the fundamental, the underlying reason for this acute and growing conflict is the incompatibility between the two divergent social systems. What murderously aggravates this historical incompatibility at the present time, is the fact that the Soviet Union is expanding and reaching out to consolidate its “spheres of influence.” What drives the imperialists to frenzy and spurs them to hasten their war preparations against the USSR is not simply the conflicting strategic and commercial interests of world states, but the incompatibility of the antipathetic social systems. They fear – and with reason – that despite Stalinist counter-revolutionary policy, the very existence of the USSR and its expansion are progressively undermining their social system and endangering its very existence.
It is well to recall today that Roosevelt and Churchill agreed to predominant Soviet influence in the Balkans at the Teheran Conference in 1943. For its part, the Kremlin promised to preserve capitalism and to join with Britain and the United States in crushing the revolutionary manifestations. It is our impression that the Kremlin had every intention of living up to its agreement of preserving capitalism in Eastern Europe. However that may be, in at least two countries, Poland and Jugoslavia, capitalism is already badly undermined. And in the case of Rumania, Bulgaria, Eastern Germany, etc., a closed economy is being built up which ties these countries completely to the USSR and by the same token excludes the possibility of economic infiltration and therefore influence of Western imperialism. In this sense Churchill was entirely correct when he said that Europe is divided by an iron curtain that extends from Stettin to Trieste and has divided the continent into two distinct parts.
While the Kremlin is not living up to its agreement to preserve intact the social structure of Eastern Europe, it carried out, unfortunately, only too faithfully its promise to crush the revolution. Without Stalin, without Stalinist treachery in sidetracking the revolutionary mass movement in Western Europe, and Stalinist treachery plus direct counter-revolutionary terror and violence on the part of Red Army troops in Eastern Europe – without that, Western imperialism could never have even hoped to pacify the revolutionary upsurge and prop up the sagging capitalist regimes. In other words, Roosevelt and Churchill did not succumb to Stalin’s craftiness at Teheran, they did not toss the Balkans to Stalin because of humanitarian soft-headedness, they did not give anything away. They simply had to make the necessary concessions to secure the Kremlin’s indispensable aid in preserving capitalism on a continent that they knew would be torn by revolutionary upheavals. After the revolutionary onrush was successfully repulsed, they could turn their attention to bringing these countries again under the imperialist sway. This may have been a bitter pill for Churchill, as the head of a crumbling empire, to swallow. But Roosevelt was sanguine that the concession was only of a temporary character; that at the next stage, American imperialism, with its incalculable wealth, its unrivalled industrial machine and its military might would break down all doors that stood in the path of its world domination. It is clear today that Roosevelt saw further than Stalin at Teheran in 1943. American imperialism has already cashed in on the first, decisive half of its bargain with Stalin. The revolutionary flood-tide, for the time being, has been halted and sluiced off in Europe. Now Washington is moving aggressively to its next task: Opening up Eastern Europe and bending it to its imperialist purposes; plus isolating the Soviet Union and mobilizing the world against it. That is the real balance sheet of Teheran.
Why, we may ask, is the Kremlin oligarchy, which displayed such timidity and caution in its foreign policy of pre-war days, now embarked on a course which throws it into such irreconcilable contest with Britain and America? Why is the Kremlin persisting in a policy so fraught with danger, which can only hasten the military clash between itself and its capitalist world opponents? What precisely is it doing in Eastern Europe and what kind of economies and states are being created there?
* * *
Soviet Policy
It is easiest to understand Soviet policy and the developments in its “sphere of influence” by reviewing the events in chronological order.
The approach of the Red Army in Eastern Europe in 1944-45, in the case of every country, gave an impetus to the revolutionary uprising. The masses, believing in their ignorance that the Red Army was still the banner-bearer of the socialist revolution, took over the factories and various governmental institutions, upon the retreat of the Nazi armies, confident of the support of the approaching troops. By the same token, most of the big capitalists and landlords, who had all collaborated to one degree or another with the Nazis, fled before the Red Army, fearful not only for their property but their lives.
In the existing circumstances, with the absolute breakdown of the capitalist apparati, it would have been almost child’s play for the Red Army to consolidate the people’s victory, to protect and secure newly-created Soviet states and thus to set all of Europe aflame. But alas, the Red Army entered Eastern Europe as an executor of the counter-revolutionary politics of the Kremlin. It did not support the uprisings of the masses; it suppressed them.
In April 1944 as the Red Army was moving eastward toward Rumania, Molotov issued a statement assuring the capitalists of the world that “the existing social structure of Rumania” would not be interfered with. The CBS picked up a broadcast from Moscow on September 20 at a time when the Red Army was already in Eastern Europe, which similarly declared: “The Soviet Union will not introduce its order into other states and it does not change the existing order in them.”
The Balkan masses paid no attention to these stern warnings, and very likely were unaware of them. They rose up against their agelong tryants and oppressors and trustingly believed that the Red Army would help them take their destiny into their own hands.
The Western correspondents reported that a great revolutionary upsurge occurred in Rumania coincident with the approach and entrance of the Red Army. With their rule desperately menaced by the mass revolt from one side and the avenging Red Army from the other, the Rumanian capitalists and landlords organized a coup d’etat in August 23, 1944 under the leadership of King Michael. The king suddenly appeared in the guise of a great “democrat”; he denounced the previous pro-German policy of the government and set up a new coalition People’s Front cabinet, composed of the traditional Rumanian parties, headed by a reactionary army general, Constantin Senatescu. The Stalinists and Social Democrats hastened to enter the Cabinet; and through their able assistance, the revolutionary upheaval was successfully quelled. The old ruling cliques were permitted to reestablish themselves, and the creaking, half-expiring landlord-capitalist regime of Rumania was provided with a new lease on life. Isolated workers’ groups, who persisted in defying or seeking to upset the reestablished “law and order,” were quickly suppressed by the Red Army authority and later by the reestablished internal police, which was likewise headed and manned by the Stalinists.
In Bulgaria, the entrance of the Red troops was the signal for a full-scale revolutionary uprising. The dispatches stated that in the Capital, the Red flag was flying over all the government buildings as well as over thousands of homes. We read of the immediate arrests of fascists by the armed masses; of huge demonstrations in the major cities; of a railway strike that paralyzed the government; of the military authorities losing all effective control over the situation. Civil war had started. The Bulgarian masses were preparing for the new Red dawn.
 
Stalinist Reaction
But all the revolutionary hopes aroused in the masses were quickly dashed to the ground. The local Stalinist leaders working hand in hand with the Red Army authorities stamped out the fires of the civil war. Joseph M. Levy, correspondent for the New York Times, telephoned from Sophia on September 21 that “In a few of the provinces ... pillaging and even killing of the suspected fascists occurred, but these acts were soon stopped by the militia, composed of strictly disciplined young men and women.” He continued that “Communist (Stalinist) leaders are doing everything they can to prevent extremists in the party from agitating for Sovietization of the country.”
When the local Stalinists were unequal to the counter-revolutionary task at hand, the Red Army stepped into the breach. Levy stated:
On several occasions when local Communists in the provinces tried to displace city officials and take matters into their own hands they were ordered by the Russian military authorities to return the jobs to the old officials until orders were received from the Fatherland Front government in Sophia.
A quisling People’s Front regime, similar to the one in Rumania, was set up under the title of the Fatherland Front Government. The Cabinet, including its quota of Stalinists and Social Democrats, was headed by Premier Kimon Georgieff and War Minister Damian Velcheff, both members of the so-called Zveno Group, a semi-fascist military clique.
The new government, propped up by the bayonets of the Red Army, proceeded immediately to “pacify” the turbulency of the masses and reestablish “order.” John Chamley, special correspondent of the London News Chronicle reported that the government printed an appeal ordering Bulgarian soldiers to return to their barracks. They promised that part of the antifascist militia would be absorbed into the regular army. They furthermore instructed all armed civilians to report to designated places and surrender their arms. Thus the new government, a bloc of traditional capitalist politicians, semi-fascist Bulgarian militarists, and Stalinist Social Democratic quislings, supported by the Kremlin, began its work of governing in the classic manner of all counter-revolutions – the disarming of the insurgent masses. Anton Yugoff, the Stalinist Minister of the Interior, in charge of the police, went out of his way to reassure the capitalists that they had nothing to fear, that the Stalinists were absolutely “reliable.” He said:
“The government of which I am a member and on whose behalf I speak, categorically denies that it has any intention of establishing a Communist regime in Bulgaria. There is no truth in rumors that the government intends to nationalize any private enterprise in the country.”
In Czechoslovakia, the approach of the Red Army produced a sweeping overturn. The Prague correspondent of the London Economist (February 9, 1946) reported that Czechoslovakia was the scene of a “revolution” in May 1945, that “Councils were established in every town, village and hamlet”; that “the committees, which took over control in practically every factory during the Revolution, were mainly the achievements of underground Communist fighters.” When the country was “liberated,” the Councils and Committees possessed, in reality, far more actual power than did the central government which had no armed forces at its disposal and which came in from abroad on the heels of the victorious Russian troops.
Here too the Kremlin authority, employing both the prestige of the native Stalinists and its own power, propped up a four-party coalition regime of the pro-Allied Czech bourgeoisie plus the Stalinists and Social Democrats, in accordance with the agreement which Stalin had previously worked out with Beneš. The Stalinists, as usual, made use of their prestige as Communist underground fighters and as spokesmen of the Russian Revolution to gradually drain the Workers’ Committees of their power and transfer all power to the Coalition regime. Bohumil Lausman, the Minister of Industry, told the representatives of the Factory Committees immediately upon his return from a trip to Moscow that they were exceeding their authority and pointed out that in the Soviet Union he found that the factory manager is supreme! Antonin Zapatocki, Stalinist head of the trade union movement, immediately began making speeches in the manner of a British Labor Party “statesman.” At a trade union meeting in Prague, he advised the workers that “although working morale has definitely improved and in some sectors great results have been achieved, total results are far from satisfactory. More efficient work and greater efforts are necessary for the speedy rebuilding of our state.”
Even in Poland, despite the debacle of the Warsaw uprising, the entrance of the Red Army stimulated a revolutionary movement with workers taking over the factories and peasants seizing the land. The developments in both Poland and Jugoslavia, however, proceeded along somewhat individual lines and will therefore be discussed in a separate connection.
Even in Eastern Germany, despite Goebbels’ campaign to incite fear of the Russian forces and the Kremlin’s own chauvinist anti-German tirades, the approach of the Red Army stimulated the revolutionary actions of the working masses. “Here, as elsewhere,” the London Economist reports, “the collapse of Nazism was followed by demonstrations of a socially revolutionary spirit. Workers seized factories and settled accounts with Nazi or Nazified managements.” The Economist contrasts “the revolutionary myth that preceded the Red Army, the certainty of whose arrival encouraged radical elements among the working class to revolutionary acts” and “the myth of social conservatism which preceded the British and American armies in the West ... discouraging the radical elements among the German population and encouraging the conservative elements.”
We can sum up the first stage in Eastern Europe after the retreat of the Nazis and the entrance of the Red Armies as follows: Everywhere, the approach of the Red Army stimulated and inspired mass uprisings. The old state apparati collapsed. Many of the big industrialists and landlords fled. The workers took over the factories. Armed militia bands sought to arrest the old officials and collaborators and to wipe out fascism by direct methods. To a greater or lesser extent, organizations of dual power sprang up, under conditions of the utter crumbling of the capitalist institutions. The path was thus wide open for the extension of the Workers Committees, toward the establishment of Soviet power.
The Kremlin stepped into the breach to refurbish the old capitalist apparati and prop them up with its bayonets. Utilizing the combination of native Stalinist influence and its own direct military authority, the Kremlin everywhere sidetracked and quelled the mass uprisings, proceeded to disarm the irregular militias and armed bands, moved to bureaucratize and house-break the independent organizations of dual power and impose on the masses hand-picked, subservient People’s Front regimes. In this earliest stage of “liberation,” the Kremlin occupation authorities played a role not too dissimilar from the Anglo-American “liberators” in the West. But once the Kremlin broke the back of the mass uprisings, restored a modicum of equilibrium and guaranteed the authority of their newly-hatched Coalition governments, the similarity with the West abruptly came to an end.
 
A Different Course
Now, the native Stalinist leaders pursued a far different course from that of the West-European Stalinists, and the Kremlin organization of its “sphere of influence” diverged sharply from the policies and methods of the Western imperialists. The reasons are obvious: They derived from the different social basis of the USSR and the consequently different needs and aims of the USSR under its present rule of the Stalinist oligarchy.
The peculiar way in which the Nazi power declined and then crumbled provided the Kremlin with its unparalleled opportunity to move its legions into half of Europe. The mouths of the Stalinist satraps must have watered as they saw one country after another fall, like a ripe plum, into its hungry maw. The Kremlin saw in this blessed newly-opened backyard the opportunity of overcoming many of its internal difficulties and solving many of its growing problems. Of course, their vision being strictly circumscribed by national considerations, not to speak of bureaucratic cynicism, prejudices and narrow-mindedness, they could only view these countries as milch cows to be milked dry.
At first, the Kremlin oligarchs marched their armies into Eastern Europe like the marauding armies of ancient days. They pillaged and looted and raped. It was truly as if a horde of barbarians had descended on the land. This pillaging and picking the countries clean was not limited to the “enemy” countries; it was practiced impartially on “enemy” and “ally” alike. The barbaric conduct of the Red Army soldiers is scarcely surprising. What other results could have been expected? Under Stalin’s rule, these soldiers have been brought up in constant want and penury, living under conditions of indescribable brutality and violence, and subjected especially during the war years to the fiercest kind of chauvinist propaganda and incitement for revanche.
Then the mortifying reports began coming in that the Red Army authorities were dismantling plants and shipping them to the USSR. This became an increasingly common practice again in both “enemy” and “ally” countries alike. No reliable figures exist as to the number of such plants that have been dismantled. But estimates have run as high as 20 per cent of Czech industry, 30 per cent of Polish industry, a third of the industrial equipment of Eastern Germany.
It was unquestionably this policy of plunder and violence which turned the anger of the peoples upon the Red Army and was responsible for the trouncing that the Stalinists received in the elections in Hungary and Austria. The motive for this incredibly shortsighted and reactionary conduct is obvious. Russia was starved for consumers’ goods; the country was horribly ravaged and desperately short of all industrial tools and products. The temptation to steal everything it could lay its hands on to alleviate its own raging internal crisis was too great for the Kremlin to resist. It was only after the anger of the masses rose to a furious pitch and the Kremlin bureaucrats feared that by their ruthlessness they were killing the goose that they were intending should lay golden eggs for them, that they put a halt to their wholesale looting, even returning here and there a dismantled plant, and made other gestures to mollify the antagonize working masses.
Using the four defeated Axis satellite countries as their wedge, the Kremlin soon installed itself as the overlord of all of Eastern Europe, reorganized its economy to serve its needs, tied it firmly to the economy of the USSR as a serf is tied to the land of his lord, and closed it to Western capital. Russia signed Armistice terms with Rumania on September 12, 1944; with Finland on September 19, 1944; with Bulgaria on October 28, 1944; and with Hungary on January 20, 1945. All the Armistice terms followed the same general pattern: They provided for an Allied Control Commission under Soviet direction, which meant in practice a Kremlin overlordship. The Control Commission was granted authority over all communications, transportation and censorship. The four countries undertook to repeal all Fascist legislation, purge the pro-Nazi elements and restore all stolen allied property. In addition Rumania, Hungary and Finland were obligated to pay reparations to Russia of $300,000,000 to be paid out over a period of six years.
These reparation sums represent considerable percentages of the total wealth of these countries, as they have to be squeezed out of economies that have been sucked dry by the Nazis, and in addition, thoroughly shattered by the war. The sums furthermore are larger than the figures would indicate as reparations are based not on present but on 1938 prices. Furthermore these countries are groaning under the weight of Red Army occupation, an army which lives off the land and voraciously eats up the substance of its wealth.
Through these means the four countries have been rendered completely dependent on the Soviet Union and tied to its economic needs.
In the case of Austria the same result was achieved by military pressure and plunder. Although the Moscow Conference of 1943 guaranteed a “free and independent Austria,” the Kremlin maintains an army of occupation of 60,000 soldiers and has been seizing for its own, whole segments of industry under the clause of the Potsdam agreement which permits it to confiscate Nazi-owned wealth.
Thus by a combination of military pressure, the exercise of conqueror’s “rights,” looting, and maintenance of huge armies of occupation, the Kremlin has placed virtually all of Eastern Europe at its mercy and has converted it into a vast hinterland subservient to the economy of the USSR. As a consequence the Soviet Union occupies the place in Eastern Europe that was held recently by Germany and after the last world war by France.
No sooner did the East-European regimes achieve a kind of equilibrium with the passing of the first revolutionary wave, than the capitalist politicians in the People’s Front combinations began to balk at the Kremlin’s ruthless economic demands and to intrigue against Stalinist control of the governmental machinery as well as the social-revolutionary measures which the Stalinists were carrying through. Their actions against Kremlin military rule were, of course, encouraged and often instigated by the Western imperialists. The United States and Britain were by this time viewing with increasing alarm the conversion of Eastern Europe into a closed preserve of the Russian colossus. Anglo-American imperialism felt that the time had come to “get tough” with Russia. That is why they embarked on an energetic policy of building up points of political support within every one of these countries in the Soviet sphere. And because the Kremlin’s policy was so unashamedly predatory, fascist and semi-fascist Balkan politicians, allied with Western imperialism, could pose as democratic knights-in-armor and carry on their pro-capitalist struggle under the banner of “democracy,” “free elections,” “freedom of the press,” etc., etc.
Confronted with this growing resistance from the native capitalist elements from within, and on the part of imperialism from without, the Kremlin sought refuge in tightening its stranglehold upon these countries. They forced the recalcitrant bourgeois politicians out of the governments, they harassed the “non-cooperative” political organizations, arresting their leaders and suppressing their papers; they bought off other leaders who set up new rival parties, etc., etc. Thus in a short space of time, the East-European People’s Fronts, while retaining their formal coalition character, were converted into outright Stalinist-dominated police dictatorships, that ruled by terror and repression and rested on secret police systems modelled after the Russian.
 
Governmental Evolution
A few examples will illustrate this process. The first People’s Front Cabinet set up in Bulgaria in September 1944 was broadly representative of the leading capitalist parties plus the Stalinists and Social Democrats. Soon the Kremlin was alarmed by the attitude of Dr. G.M. Dimitrov, the leader of the Agrarian National Union, probably the most influential party in Bulgaria. Dimitrov did not wish to integrate himself in the Kremlin-dominated government and insisted on retaining his close and friendly connections with the Western powers. A political struggle developed between the Stalinists and the Agrarians, which, for a while, became the central axis of Bulgarian politics. In January 1945, the Stalinists forced Dimitrov’s resignation from the secretaryship of his party, and when his successor continued to follow Dimitrov’s policy, the Fatherland Front sponsored a rival Agrarian party under the dissident leader Alexander Obbov. When the Social-Democrats followed suit in opposing the Fatherland Front Cabinet, they were promptly deprived of their newspaper which was handed to a minority group. The latter blossomed forth immediately as the Social Democratic party. It condemned the Social Democratic Ministers and pledged allegiance to the Fatherland Front Government.
Encouraged by the attitude of Britain and the United States, who were making use of this Kremlin terror to scandalize and discredit the Soviet Union, and emboldened especially by the Yalta declaration, all four Agrarian members of the Cabinet, and one of the two Social Democrats resigned in July and August 1945 in protest against the electoral law which made mandatory the single Fatherland Front ticket. The reign of terror unleashed by the Stalinists in Bulgaria at that time has not yet ceased.
The evolution of the government followed a very similar course in Rumania. The first People’s Front Cabinet was set up after the coup d’etat of King Michael in August 1944. This Cabinet included practically all important “non-collaborationist” bourgeois groups and the Stalinists and Social Democrats. Within a few months the National Peasant Party headed by Juliu Maniu, and the National Liberal Party headed by Constantin Bratianu, began to complain and balk at the Cabinet’s policy, for the same general reasons that animated the opposition in Bulgaria. This led to the break-up of the National Democratic Bloc. The Rumanian bourgeoisie, acting through King Michael, displayed considerable truculence toward the Kremlin, encouraged as they were by the Western powers and feeling that Britain and the United States were determined not to permit Rumania to get sucked into Russia’s orbit. But the Kremlin was in no mood for shilly-shallying. Vyshinsky, Soviet Foreign Vice-Commissar, immediately arrived in Bucharest and delivered an ultimatum to King Michael. The latter, powerless to resist, approved the new Cabinet as proposed by Vyshinsky, and the Groza government came into being on March 6, 1945. The Peasant and Liberal parties were now excluded from the government and their press was suppressed; only the pro-Kremlin Social Democrats were included in the Cabinet. The Social Democratic Party itself was subjected to increasing attack and finally on March 1946, Petrescu was ousted from its leadership in favor of the pro-Stalinist leader Stefan Voitec. The Groza government is a Stalinist police dictatorship ruling by terror, although according to the reports, it has never approached the Bulgarian bloodbath in ferocity.
The Hungarian government which signed the Armistice was established in December 1944. It followed the general pattern of the other East-European coalition governments and included the four principle Hungarian parties; the Smallholders representing the middle classes, Stalinists, Social Democrats and the National Peasant Party. As we shall see later on, the economic and social evolution of Hungary follows very closely along the same lines as the other countries in the Soviet sphere. But although the Stalinists are powerful in the government and control the political police, the regime has been much milder and the original coalition bloc has been retained. Hungary was the one country in the Soviet sphere which was permitted to hold a more or less free election, which resulted in a big victory for the Small Landowners party and a defeat for the Stalinists. Nevertheless, whether due to fear of the West or other reasons, the Kremlin has not disturbed the existing coalition and is relying on integrating Hungary into its sphere by means of reparations and an economic squeeze.
Poland, Jugoslavia and Czechoslovakia fall into the same general pattern of development as the rest of the Soviet sphere. Nevertheless the development of each of these countries has been peculiar to itself and will have to be discussed individually.
First on Czechoslovakia. Here, German capital even before the war played the decisive role. All the leading sections of the capitalists went over to the Nazis after the Munich agreement. Beneš, representing the pro-Allied Czech capitalists and middle classes (in much the same way that de Gaulle represented the Pro-Allied French capitalists and middle classes) organized in London a government-in-exile after the Germans had overrun the country. But unlike all the other governments-in-exile, Beneš and his supporters, from the first, demonstratively adopted a pro-Russian orientation. The Czech liberal bourgeoisie proved itself far-sighted enough to understand that it could survive only by agreement with and by making all the necessary concessions to Moscow. Unlike the other governments, Beneš set up in London a broad People’s Front Cabinet, which included the Stalinists. As soon as the Red Army began moving eastward, Beneš hastened to Moscow and then to Kosice in Slovakia where in April 1945 a new People’s Front Cabinet was set up along lines similar to the first cabinets of Rumania, Bulgaria etc. Beneš’ whole policy has been one of not crossing Moscow and in holding firm to the alliance with the Czech Stalinists. He has gone along with the Stalinist social program; when the Kremlin demanded the cession of Carpatho-Ukraine, it was given up without a murmur. Beneš did not even quarrel when a sizable segment of Czech industry was dismantled and shipped to Russia, under the legalism that it was Nazi-owned property. He has displayed such a spirit of exemplary “cooperativeness” that he succeeded in securing at an early stage the withdrawal of practically all the Red Army occupation troops, and recently, according to the London Economist, the Kremlin has “generously presented as a free gift” to Czechoslovakia “the big German synthetic petrol works at Baix in Bohemia.”
Because the Czech liberal bourgeoisie is bending over backwards to keep on friendly terms with the Kremlin, the People’s Front government has survived in Czechoslovakia in more or less its original form. Another key factor, of course, is that the country is far richer, far more industrially developed, far less devastated by the war than the rest of its Eastern neighbors. Its recovery has therefore been more rapid, and has made somewhat easier the government’s problems. The Stalinists, who were powerful even in the pre-war days, have now emerged as the strongest single party. The regime, therefore, while by no means liberal in the traditional sense, has been far milder than that of its neighbors, and the Stalinists felt sufficiently secure to permit recently the holding of a more or less free election from which they emerged as the leading party.
In sharp contrast to Beneš and his policy, the Polish government-in-exile in London, dominated by the same “colonels” who controlled Polish politics for two decades, remained obdurately anti-Soviet. Even in exile, they continued their mad, adventuristic game of trying to play off the Western powers against Russia. The Kremlin constantly grew more hostile to this government and increasingly suspicious of its intentions. Finally in 1943, when the Anti-Soviet orientation of the London government was dramatically flaunted, the Kremlin broke off diplomatic relations, and set up its own rival puppet Polish government-in-exile. In the winter of 1944, in agreement with the Kremlin, a new provisional government was set up in Lublin composed of the Polish Democrats (PPS), the Stalinists, the Peasant Party and the Democratic Party, on the basis that all participants favored “friendly relations” with Russia, were willing to collaborate with the Polish Stalinists, and agreed to the partition of Poland, that is the giving up of Poland’s prewar eastern frontier.
 
The Polish Regime
This new government, while formally a coalition of the same type as elsewhere in Eastern Europe, constituted in reality little more than a Stalinist-front government, composed of obscure Polish Stalinists, outright GPU agents, Social Democrats with no political past and a variegated assortment of reactionary bureaucrats and generals of the pre-war Polish regimes. As usual, the police was in the hands of a reliable Stalinist, M. Stanyslaw Radkiewicz, a GPU agent, who assumed in the new government the Ministry of the Interior. The Kremlin could not help itself: All the leading, well-known Polish Stalinists had long since been liquidated in the blood purges. So were many of the prominent Social Democrats. The rest had fled abroad. As for the prominent and influential bourgeois politicians – they were adhering to the London government. The new Polish government was thus strictly a handpicked proposition resting on the bayonets of the foreigner; with little support in the native population. It must be recalled that Stalin felt so unsure of his position and was so fearful of the London government, that he did not want it to have any share in “liberating” the country and that he permitted the Warsaw uprising to be drowned in blood by the Nazis, rather than conquer Warsaw in partnership with General Bor.
The savage character of the Polish regime was determined by its negligible influence in the population and the unrestrained campaign which the exiled Polish leaders were directing against it. Three distinct military organizations operate on Polish soil today and fight the existing Polish government: the Polish Home Army (Armja Krajova), the National Military Force (NSZ) led by Bielicki of the London Government, and the National Democrats. All three constitute semi-fascist or fascist formations, with their own underground press, political organization etc. The Polish Government – an unalloyed police dictatorship – thus has its hands full sending out constant punitive expeditions, arresting thousands of oppositionists, etc. In the early days, the Red Army itself arrested thousands of dissidents and deported them to Russia. According to Radkiewicz these numbered about 5,000. The bourgeois correspondents give far higher figures. As this evoked tremendous indignation among the highly nationalistic Poles and redounded against the government, the practice was discontinued, and the Polish Security Police took over the job of “pacifying” the population.
After the Yalta Conference, where Britain and America demanded that the Polish regime be “democratized,” the Cabinet was enlarged to include several prominent bourgeois political figures headed by Mikolaczyk, leader of the Peasant Party, and including Jan Stanczyk, prominent Social Democrat. But the attempt to stabilize a Coalition between the representatives of the bourgeoisie and the Stalinists was no more successful in Poland than in Bulgaria or Rumania. The two divergent social trends that the two contending sides espouse proved incompatible. Soon Mikolaczyk became the rallying point for all the variegated groups which constitute the capitalist opposition to the government: The fascist military formations; the Catholic Church hierarchy, which is headed in Poland by the Pilsudskist politician, Cardinal Hlond; the dispossessed landlord and factory owners; elements of the middle class and peasantry, who are suffering grave hardships and are outraged by the seizures of the Red Army and the brutalities of the police regime which governs over them. While formally Mikolaczyk is still part of the governmental bloc, in practice he is leading this capitalist-reactionary opposition to the government. Encouraged by the world diplomatic offensive against the USSR, and the demonstrative applause of the Western press, the opposition has renewed its attack with great vigor. The government for its part still feels too weak to chance an election in which Mikolaczyk would run in opposition.
The Tito regime of Jugoslavia has a considerably different origin than the other East-European governments. Tito, a veteran Stalinist functionary, was the leader of the Jugoslav Partisan movement, which was organized in 1941 to harass the German armies, in support of the Soviet Union. This so-called National Liberation Movement grew to stormy proportions and assumed, in the cause of the war, the character of a social revolutionary movement. It not only fought the Nazi and Fascist invaders, but fought the armies of Mikhailovich, which represented the old landlord-capitalist classes. The march of its armies through the country took on the character of a social revolution. The old landlord and capitalist classes were driven out and Committees representing the workers and peasants took over government administrative organs, the factories, the land. Tito, as well as a number of other Stalinist leaders, became legendary figures. The new government began to rule under far different circumstances than its Polish counterpart. It unquestionably enjoyed tremendous support among broad layers of the population. It was, as a matter of fact, the one government in Eastern Europe not installed or directly propped up by the Red Army.
Nevertheless, during the war, Stalinist bureaucratization and suppression must have proceeded apace along with the growth of the popular movement and the promulgation of the social revolutionary measures. For no sooner was the present Tito government installed than it began to emulate all the other East-European police regimes in its savagery and terror. The correspondents reported that an atmosphere of fear pervaded the Capital and that the dreaded secret police, the OZNA, were operating everywhere. Tito is imitating Stalinist Russia even to copying the elegantly cut uniforms of the Kremlin bureaucrats and weighing down his military tunic with countless shining medals. The black reactionary character of Stalinism is exposed by its need of a police dictatorship in Jugoslavia – a country where it enjoyed tremendous popularity and support. This development cannot be explained solely on the grounds of the horrible economic dislocations. It was unquestionably bred by Tito’s twin needs of not only suppressing the old counterrevolutionary classes but at the same time keeping an iron hand on the working class and preventing their emergence as an independent non-bureaucratized – and therefore anti-Stalinist – force.
As in the case of the other countries, Britain and the United States attempted to secure the “broadening” of the Tito regime in order to strengthen the capitalist forces inside Jugoslavia. To this end the Yalta Conference recommended that a new government be formed on the basis of the Moscow agreement between Tito and Dr. Subasich, the head of the Jugoslav government-in-exile in London. But this forced marriage proved no more successful than the one in Poland. Subasich and his supporters were soon clashing sharply with the Tito government. Finally Dr. Milan Grol, the Serb leader demonstratively resigned, followed on October 11, 1945, by Subasich’s resignation as Foreign Minister. The whole opposition thereupon decided to boycott the scheduled elections. Jugoslavia, in its present political administration, is similar in essentials to Stalinist Russia: a police regime headed by an individual leader; a Stalinist-led army, courts, secret police, and a totalitarian press and educational system.
Thus throughout Eastern Europe we find a common political pattern: The establishment upon “liberation” or soon afterwards of a Coalition regime with important Stalinist participation. This broad coalition is soon narrowed down to the point where the coalition becomes a facade for essentially Stalinist-dominated police governments. (Finland is a special case and lies outside the framework of this study.) Only in Czechoslovakia and Hungary can one speak of actual Coalition regimes which still enjoy a measure of popular support.
 
The Kremlin Master Plan
The Kremlin master plan to convert Eastern Europe into a pro-Russian hinterland is not exhausted by its lootings, its policy of extracting the maximum in reparations and plunder, or its imposition of reactionary police regimes. In addition, the Red Armies entered Europe as carriers of new socio-economic relations. This has been demonstrated by the social revolutionary program that the Stalinists led in carrying out throughout the Soviet sphere, exemplified in the land reform and the nationalization of industry. In 1939 Trotsky explained that the Kremlin would be forced to extend its social-economic basis to the newly incorporated territories in Eastern Poland and the Baltics. Not because of the Kremlin’s devotion to Sovietization, but because it could not tolerate the existence of another ruling class within its borders. To safeguard its own regime, it was compelled to expropriate the landlords and capitalists of the newly-incorporated lands, and nationalize both land and industry, to conform with the economy of the rest of the USSR.
The Kremlin, however, did not dare attempt to incorporate half of Europe into the USSR at the conclusion of this war. For obvious reasons. First, it might disrupt dangerously its own police control over the Soviet peoples and saddle the regime with insoluble national difficulties. Secondly, and what is decisive, it dared not – in the face of the opposition of Western imperialism.
But while it found itself unable to incorporate the East-European countries into the USSR, it also could not tolerate the continued existence of the old, bitterly anti-Soviet ruling classes, who were firmly tied to the apron strings of the West. The Kremlin oligarchs attempted to solve this dilemma by encouraging and setting into motion a managed and partial revolution in the occupied territories. The revolution, and the new socio-economic relations that it brought into being, was intended to wipe out the old ruling groups; create an independent yeomanry on the countryside tied to the new regimes and grateful to them (in the manner of the French peasantry after the great French revolution) ; place the main levers of economic power in the hands of the new States and build up new bureaucracies dependent upon and loyal to the Kremlin. Stalin, as the years go by, has gained more and more faith in his ability to flout the historical process; and where he possesses the military or police power, to directly manipulate and control it. By setting into motion this controlled and partial revolutionary wave, Stalin believed he could have his cake and eat it too. The old ruling cliques would be destroyed; new States – neither capitalist, nor Soviet – would come into being completely dependent upon and firmly tied to the Kremlin – and Western imperialism would be sufficiently confused and bamboozled to acquiesce in the fait accompli. It is clear from the uniformity of the measures adopted in purging the old pro-fascist bureaucracies, in expropriating the landed estates and parcelling out the land to the peasantry, in setting up coalition Cabinets, in nationalizing the banks and credit institutions, that the Red Army occupation authorities and the native Stalinists were working from a previously-conceived master plan. Only in the case of the nationalization of industry has there appeared a wide disparity from country to country; only here have the Kremlin governments proceeded empirically, suiting their actions to the particular developments and needs.
The different class approach in the East as against the West was exhibited from the start in the carrying through of the purge of the pro-fascist bureaucracies and collaborators. Throughout Western Europe, the bourgeois-dominated governments stifled the “purge”; the courts run by the old bureaucracies procrastinated and dragged out matters to the utmost, and leaned over backwards in their leniency toward the pro-fascists. And as soon as the masses were tired out and their anger had abated, the whole “purge” was abruptly discontinued. The case was qualitatively different in Eastern Europe. Here, the State institutions cooperated fully with the militias and Resistance groups. The guilty ones were promptly brought to trial and sentences were swiftly carried out. In Bulgaria for instance 11,000 “war criminals” were brought to trial. Almost 3,000 of these, including former Regents, Cabinet ministers and numerous deputies, received death sentences, which were promptly executed. The clear-cut class difference between the “purges” in Eastern Europe and Western Europe should not be lost sight of, because here, as in all cases and spheres, the Stalinists made amalgams, shot down worker-oppositionists along with real fascist collaborators, shielded other fascists and gave them high government offices, carried through the whole offensive under sickening nationalistic formulas, and utilized the purges to consolidate its own police regimes. In the West, despite all the hullabaloo about “purging” the “collaborators,” the big capitalists felt safe and continued their machinations and intrigues against the people. In the East, the big capitalists and landlords fled before the Red Armies.
In this is revealed once again the two-sided character of the Stalinist bureaucracy. On the one hand, it cannot tolerate the existence of powerful capitalist groups; it undermines the capitalist class structure. On the other hand, it must stifle the masses and impose over them a dictatorial rule. Under the different conditions of Eastern Europe, the Kremlin duplicates the essential mechanism of its rule inside the USSR.
 
The Land Reforms
Concomitant with the purge of the old capitalist bureaucracies, all the new governments expropriated the landed estates, and thereby destroyed the semi-feudal landlord class of Eastern Europe. This agrarian revolution – a task of the bourgeois revolution – the East-European ruling classes proved incapable of accomplishing, despite agitation for land reform which lasted half a century. It was now finally accomplished by the masses under Stalinist leadership, in the tempest of the Second World War. The importance of the agrarian revolution in Eastern Europe is underlined by the fact that agriculture still remains the most important segment of its economy.
In Poland, the Lublin government issued a decree as early as September 6, 1944 confiscating all large estates, wiping out the landlord class and guaranteeing property rights to the individual farmer. Premier Osubka-Morawski informed Edgar Snow in an interview that
“... there wouldn’t be any large estates left in Poland, except for land owned by the Church ... Land of the Germans, traitors to the Polish people, and landed estates of over 50 hectares (123 acres) were confiscated ... In the case of lands taken from the Reich, individual landowners would be permitted to retain estates as large as 100 hectares ... the bulk was divided among small and middle peasants, small tenant farmers with large families and agricultural laborers ... taking as a basis five hectares of arable land for the average family.”
The Land Reform Act affected 9,000 big estates covering about 5 million acres of land, which represents approximately one-seventh of Poland’s present farmland, excluding the new western territories. About 3¾ million acres have been parcelled out to poor peasants, involving about 2 million people. About 1 million acres have been set aside for special government use. The remainder is still to be distributed. Poland possesses, in addition, some 20 million acres of land in the new western regions. But much of this land is unarable, and the whole territory is today barren and war-scarred. No reliable figures exist as to the number of Polish farm settlers who have entered these lands.
In an important policy speech at the Ninth session of the Polish National Council (December 29, 1945) Hilary Minc, the Stalinist Minister of Industry and Commerce contrasted the government’s policies in industry and agriculture.
“This is not a socialist revolution,” he declared, “and therefore like Czechoslovakia, France or Britain, we pay indemnities. The agrarian reform, on the other hand, was a revolution, an agrarian revolution, that has long been overdue in our country where our obsolete system kept us far behind the other countries of the West. In 1945 the system of feudal overlordship was abolished in Poland in much the same way as was a similar system in the France of the Nineteenth Century.”
Czechoslovakia followed the same course. No sooner was the new government set up at Kosice in Slovakia than it promulgated a land decree on April 5, 1945. The Prague radio announced that a National Land Fund was created which was to consist of “all land, buildings, live stock and implements formerly belonging to the German and Hungarian gentry or large estate owners irrespective of their citizenship, or citizens of enemy countries ... or to Czechoslovak citizens of German or Hungarian nationality who actively assisted in the dismemberment and occupation of Czechoslovakia, and of citizens who betrayed the nation by actively supporting the occupation forces ... All of these estates and holdings will be confiscated without compensation” and their temporary administration will be entrusted to regional committees until a distribution method is perfected to allocate the land. “For land given in full ownership to the farmers, the payment must not exceed the value of the average harvest of one to two years and actual payment will be spread over a period up to fifteen years.” (News Flashes From Czechoslovakia, June 15, 1945.) The maximum for land holding was fixed at 50 hectares (123 acres). Approximately 2,300,000 hectares of forest and arable land are available for distribution to peasants who may receive from 8 to 13 hectares per family.
The gold of the “agrarian revolution” in Czechoslovakia was generously compounded with the alloys and dross of rampant chauvinism, which seems to characterize every feature of the new Czechoslovak Republic. In addition to landlords, tens of thousands of Hungarian and German farmers had their lands confiscated and were driven out of the country for no other crimes but that of belonging to “enemy nations.”
In Rumania, the original Sanatescu government announced almost immediately after its formation that it would break up all estates exceeding 50 hectares, including Church, royal and all other properties (with the exception of model farms). In addition, all lands belonging to German and Rumanian collaborators were to be confiscated in full. The Moscow Radio announced that the lands of over 500 estates consisting of 1,000 or more hectares each have been distributed to landless peasants who received land parcels of up to five hectares per family.
Bulgaria was the only country in the Soviet sphere where very little has been heard about land confiscation or redistribution. The reason, probably, is that Bulgaria has been a chronic sufferer from rural over-population, the smallness of the individual plots of land, and the backwardness of its agricultural technique, rather than from the existence of large estates. This would explain the agricultural law passed by the Fatherland Front Government shortly after Bulgaria’s “liberation” in November 1944. This law called for the cooperative cultivation of the soil. It aimed at increasing production and modernizing farm methods – where the peasants of a given region agreed to join a cooperative. The law pointed in the correct direction to a solution of Bulgaria’s ills in agriculture. But Stalinist brutality plus the fears of the peasantry that they were faced with a repetition of the 1929 horrors of “Stalinist collectivization” in the USSR, led to serious unrest in the countryside and the government was forced to suspend the enforcement of the law.
Agrarian Reform in Hungary
Of all the East-European countries, Hungary was the one where the agrarian revolution was most overdue. Here too, no sooner was the first People’s Front regime constructed than it initiated land reforms, first publicly announced on March 17, 1945. This law decreed that all lands owned by individuals of pro-fascist record would be confiscated. In addition all estates larger than 142 acres, comprising a total of 7 million acres, would be expropriated. It was expected that 4 to 5 million acres would be distributed to some 600,000 peasants in lots of five to twenty acres each. The remainder of the land would be assigned to local communities or held by the state. The International Federation of Trade Unions Bulletin carried the information in its August 1, 1945 issue, which it received from the official Hungarian radio service, that local committees operating in 3,000 municipalities were dividing up the big estates, and that out of 682,000 agricultural workers and peasants who had made application up to that time, 524,000 had received their allotments. It was estimated that the final number of applicants would be 800,000. The radio announcement also stated that there had been numerous attempts to circumvent or sabotage the land reforms, but that it was nevertheless being speedily carried through.
In line with the other Eastern states, the Tito government issued a Land and Colonization Act which proposed to break up the big estates into units of 25 and 30 hectares (60 to 75 acres), including specifically the Church lands and the properties of banks and other institutions. The law further proposed to confiscate the properties of collaborators. But the land problem in Jugoslavia is somewhat analogous to Bulgaria. Jugoslavia, throughout the pre-war period suffered from overpopulation in the rural areas – the lack of land plus its poor fertility. A special study on Jugoslavia appearing in Business Week (August 25, 1945), informs us “that the far-reaching land reforms have not yet satisfied land-hungry peasants, 75 per cent of whom own less than twelve acres of exceedingly poor soil.”
Finally, in Germany, the Soviet authority, by special decrees, confiscated in its zone the big land estates (Saxony, Mecklenburg and Brandenburg) of all “war criminals,” big landowners and Junkers (possessing holdings of over 100 hectares). The confiscated lands were parcelled out among the small farmers and landless workers to permit them to work holdings of from 5 to 10 hectares (12½ to 25 acres). The Director of Land and Forest Economy for the Russian Zone, Edwin Hoernle, estimated that about 4,250,000 acres had been confiscated and distributed among the small farmers. “Even with division of all these estates there will still not be enough land for those who want it,” he explained.
The AP provided an interesting description of the actual process of this land redistribution in the province of Mecklenburg. Its dispatch of September 9, 1945 states:
“The Soviet land reform in Meckenburg will be relatively easy, it was believed, partly because many of the feudal owners fled with the approach of the Red Army, and most of those who remained were killed during a peasant revolt in the province when the Hitler regime fell.”
We can sum up the land reforms by stating that throughout Kremlin-dominated Europe, the old landlord class is no more. It has been wiped out. Regardless of the future development in these countries, it is doubtful that the old landowners can ever return. Nevertheless this so-necessary and basic reform has not achieved any popularity for the Stalinists. The peasantry of Eastern Europe has been land-hungry for decades. The Kremlin-designed measures have undoubtedly satisfied the peasant’s land-hunger at least in Hungary, Rumania and Slovakia and to some extent in Poland. Still nowhere has the peasantry turned to the Stalinists. In Poland it remains virulently hostile to the present regime. In Hungary, the peasantry voted overwhelmingly for the Conservative small Landowner Party. In Rumania and Bulgaria it continues in sullen opposition to the government. Even in Czechoslovakia where the Stalinists emerged as the first party, their support came from industrialized Bohemia-Moravia. They were badly defeated in Slovakia, the agricultural section.
Undoubtedly this is to be explained by the fact that the land redistribution has not solved the present problems of the countryside. Agricultural conditions throughout Eastern Europe are in a state bordering on the catastrophic. The peasants, furthermore, are forced to sell approximately a quarter of their produce to the government at extremely low fixed prices. They have been subjected for years to military requisitions, to war destruction, to looting, and at the very last, the wholesale seizures of the Red Army. To this day, the Kremlin maintains, according to American military intelligence reports, 750,000 troops in Germany, 450,000 in Poland, 10,000 in Czechoslovakia, 60,000 in Hungary, 300,000 in Rumania, 7,000 in Jugoslavia, 90,000 in Bulgaria. And all these vast armies of human locusts continue to live off the countryside. Small wonder that the Stalinists are not very popular among the peasantry.
To really improve conditions in agriculture it would be necessary to either fuse or group together the small holdings to provide agricultural machinery, seed, fertilizers, research stations and industrial goods. But the USSR is itself desperately short of these very same things. The mere acquisition of increased land holdings – pitifully small at that – does not at all alleviate the crisis. The peasant lacks livestock, machinery, seed, fertilizer. Previously Germany supplied these as well as manufactured goods to Eastern Europe. But Russia cannot take Germany’s place in this regard for a long time. The USSR itself lacks all these goods. Local capital is likewise lacking and Western capital cannot and will not come in under the present political conditions. Agriculture thus continues to dangerously stagnate and no hope exists for its rapid improvement. It is undoubtedly this economic blind alley that the East-European peasantry is in that accounts for the peasant’s opposition to the Stalinists.
 
Nationalization of Industry
The industrial policy of the Kremlin in Eastern Europe and Germany has to be approached very cautiously as the information is still fragmentary, the pattern is not completed or fixed, considerable differences are to be found from country to country and the governments themselves are putting into effect their rehabilitation schemes very cautiously and evolving their policies in empiric fashion.
In the course of the war, German capital became dominant throughout Eastern Europe, so much so, that every major industrial or banking enterprise was in the grip of the German banks and cartels. This prison-unification and integration of European economy effected by the Nazis could have served as a starting point for a vast socialization of the economy and its harmonious unification – the first step in the organization of the Socialist United States of Europe. The Kremlin, however, viewed these countries not as potential allies in the struggle for socialism, but as victims who were now at its mercy and could be turned into serfs of the Russian overlords. This German predominance in the majority of the economic and financial enterprises served for the Kremlin as the legal starting point and justification for its policy of large scale plunder.
First, let us review the events in the “enemy” countries – Rumania, Hungary and Bulgaria. By the collection of big reparations in kind, the extraction of additional huge sums for costs to maintain the occupation troops and by additional seizures of “German” property, the Kremlin has bled these countries white and has gained complete domination of their economies. According to a recent American estimate, the Kremlin in the course of two years has extracted about $2,200,000,000 in property and services from these three countries and Finland.
On May 8, 1945, Rumania signed a treaty of economic collaboration with the USSR which guarantees Russian hegemony of Rumanian economy. This treaty provides that

the two countries will set up joint companies in various economic fields.
Each country will put up one-half the capital, the board of directors will be made up of equal numbers of Russians and Rumanians, but in each case the manager of the company will be a Russian.
Russia’s capital contribution will come from former German property in Rumania seized by Moscow for reparations.
The companies will operate as strict capitalist enterprises.

Already four such joint enterprises have been set up: Sovrom Transport, a joint shipping company, Sovrom Petrol, for petroleum production and distribution, Sovrom bank, comprising a merger of three Soviet industrial and foreign trade financial institutions and a group of Rumanian banks and an insurance society, which is designed to finance trade between the USSR and Rumania and to develop Rumanian industries. The fourth joint company is Tars, an air transport enterprise, to establish Rumanian air services with connecting lines to the USSR and the neighboring Balkan countries. Three more similar joint-stock enterprises are planned for forest products, chemicals and insurance.
Rumania, wracked by a galloping inflation, with its economy creaking at every joint, thus finds itself helplessly reduced to that of an economic dependency of the Kremlin. In 1945, its steel output was barely half of 1937 production. This year’s production is still lower. Last year petroleum totalled 65 per cent of 1937 output (and in the last quarter 68 per cent went to the USSR as reparations). Coal and lignite were only 70 per cent of 1937 output. Its basic equipment has been ruined by the war and its trade has been reduced to pitiably low levels.
In its present bankrupt condition it is desperately in need of loans and manufactured goods. But the Kremlin’s expansionism is predicated on poverty, not wealth, on shortages, not surpluses. As for the West, it will not make loans given the present political set-up.
The situation is very similar in Hungary. On top of the war depradations which ruined the country, Hungary must pay out 37 per cent of all present expenditures as reparation costs. Together with occupation costs these total 65 per cent of all its State expenditures. The poverty-stricken country does not have the wherewithal to meet these onerous demands, and thus is constantly falling behind in its payments. And as the reparations agreement carries a penalty of 6 per cent a month for arrears, Hungary is sinking deeper and deeper into the quagmire. Its present income is estimated at half its pre-war level. On top of that, all of the country’s gold as well as its shipping is held by the United States.
The Kremlin has seized hold of Hungarian economy in much the same manner as Rumanian. In October 1946 a “50-50” Russo-Hungarian economic pact was signed in Moscow under identical terms as the Rumanian agreement. Under its proposed conditions, which are to run for five years, joint-stock companies will be set up in the bauxite, oil, coal, chemical, river transport, civil aircraft, and other fields. Thus the Kremlin in five years will be the absolute economic master of Hungary. All of the key levers of Hungarian economy including the National Bank, which issues currency, and the National Credit Bank, which owns a third of all Hungarian industry, will rest securely in its hands.
Bulgaria is very weak industrially; only 10 per cent of its population is engaged in industry. While the Kremlin has not yet exacted any reparations from her, the country nevertheless, has fallen into the status of an economic dependency of Russia by its necessity of paying out the huge occupation costs to Russia, and the latter’s seizure of German-owned properties in its territories. A Bulgarian-Soviet trade pact was concluded in March 1945 which, it may be presumed, guarantees Russian hegemony of Bulgaria’s economy.
Thus we see how in these “ex-enemy countries,” the Kremlin, by means of reparations, occupation costs and seizures of German-owned properties has installed itself as the major owner and controlling power of the whole economy. By means of this control, it is now redirecting all efforts to dovetail the economies of these countries with its own. It has displaced pre-war Germany as the foreign master of the Balkans. But the USSR is not able to play the role of the industrially powerful prewar Germany. Especially now after these normally poor countries have been ruined by the war, they stand in dire need of capital and manufactured goods. But, as we have seen, the USSR stands in need of the very same things. The USSR is not a capital-exporting country. It is a country desperately in need of capital. The USSR is not an exporter of manufactured goods. It is desperately short of all varieties of manufactured goods. Hence it cannot gain the support of the Balkan ruling classes or gain control of its economies by “normal” economic pressures or loans. The Kremlin is unable to organize harmonious economic and commercial relations with these countries. It has sought to get around this difficulty by converting the Balkans into its dependency and holding sway over its economy primarily by military and bureaucratic means. This explains its desperate need to shut off the entrance of Western capital and convert Eastern Europe into a closed economy.
 
The Balkan States
How has this Kremlin overlordship affected the class character of these Balkan states? To all appearances, the basic capitalist relations have been left undisturbed. The land distributions, as we have seen, were on a capitalist basis. The old semi-feudal landowning class has been wiped out. But agriculture continues under the ownership of petty proprietors who enter the market on a capitalist basis.
In industry, the capitalist relations likewise continue. The individual entrepreneurs, managers and bond holders of old remain. No nationalization of industry has taken place in either Rumania or Bulgaria, although in Rumania certain industries were State-owned before the war.
But even in Hungary, where because of the absolute breakdown of the economy, the State has instituted rigid controls and undertaken to nationalize coal, bauxite, oil wells and refineries, electric plants and metal works, this will be carried out on a capitalist basis as in Czechoslovakia, or for that matter, in England. The industries will continue to operate with capitalist managements on a capitalist foundation, to be supervised by a capitalist bureaucracy; and the State will continue paying out profits in the form of interest on State bonds.
The capitalist nature of the Hungarian nationalization is furthermore made clear by an interesting side-light. As in Austria, but for somewhat different reasons, many of the Hungarian capitalist representatives even took the lead in advocating the nationalization measures. The Kremlin thus enters into Balkan economic relations today as a capitalist partner, drawing its 50 per cent profits from industry on the basis of capitalist ownership.
The Kremlin certainly gathered together its “primitive accumulation” of capital, which furnish the basis for its 50 per cent ownership of Balkan industry, in a violent and roughshod manner. In this it is emulating the great-grandfathers of the present British Tories, who likewise achieved their “primitive accumulation” by means none too pacific or gentle.
It is of course true that these Balkan countries by no means present a picture of classical capitalist relations. It is a rather bizarre capitalism, where a Soviet bureaucracy owns half the capital of the key sectors of the economy, where the countries are under occupation by Soviet armies, where the Stalinist-controlled police governments are in control, and where bureaucratized, Stalinist-controlled factory committees continue to exercise a measure of influence over industry.
But the period of the death agony of capitalism is obviously not favorable for the flourishing of classical capitalism. Even once mighty England, home of “free trade” and “laissez faire” has had to bend before the storm to the extent of permitting the State to take over some of its key industries. It is certainly a sickening as well as a bizarre spectacle to see the usurpers of the proud State that was formed by the Russian Revolution emerge as the caretakers of this neo-capitalism in the Balkans. But all normality and normal concepts have been swept off this planet in the period of capitalism’s death agony. And so yellow “socialists” step forth to try to hold back the revolutionary tide and hold together the perfidious British empire. And Stalinist oligarchs enter the Balkans to quell the mass insurgence and to prop up on their bayonets a sickly, scarcely recognizable but nonetheless authentic capitalism.
From the defeated Balkan countries, let us proceed to Czechoslovakia. This country was the most industrialized and prosperous in the pre-war days of Eastern, or as this particular area used to be called, Central Europe. Czechoslovakia was particularly fortunate in rapidly ridding itself of all occupation armies, and being an “ally,” it has to pay no indemnities to its “liberators.”
The springing up of Factory Committees and Councils, their seizure of the factories and establishment of a de facto dual power in the first phase of “liberation,” which occurred to one extent or another throughout Eastern Europe – this movement swept through Czechoslovakia with more power and effectiveness and on a larger scale than anywhere else. Here the Factory Committees established themselves more securely, exercised more real control, disposed of more real power and held on longer. To this day, vestiges of this workers’ control of production remain.
The four major parties that made up the first Coalition Government agreed even in April 1945 in Kosice to the principle of nationalizing industry. But no one anticipated at that time that fully 70 per cent of all industry would be converted into State property. The revolution that took place in May 1945 was expected by all the parties, but no one anticipated its great sweep. All the big industrial undertakings and many small ones were taken over from their owners by the Workers’ Committees. The workers of Czechoslovakia had put through a genuine overturn. The fact that their Workers’ Committees have gradually been drained of their power; that the nationalization is being drained of its socialist content, that capitalism has again succeeded in restoring itself in Czechoslovakia – all this is due exclusively to the treachery of the Stalinists who enjoyed the confidence of the masses, and who used this confidence to betray them.
The nationalization of Czech industry was furthermore forced upon the government by the fact that in its decisive sectors industry was in German hands. A vacuum of ownership was thus created in nearly two-thirds of Czech industry after the German defeat. In some industries, the proportion of German ownership was even higher. Practically the whole of the porcelain industry, 90 per cent of the paper industry, 75 per cent of the chemical works were German-owned.
Next, the government faced the compelling necessity of overhauling the whole structure of the economy, as the most important industries, such as aircraft, synthetic oil, etc., were monstrously expanded for German war needs, and either had to be sharply reduced or eliminated altogether.
 
A Farsighted Bourgeois
Eduard Beneš, the farsighted Czech bourgeois, the President of the newly reconstituted Republic, wrote an article in the December 15, 1945 issue of the Manchester Guardian, (and a similar article in the April 1946 Foreign Affairs), wherein he tried to make clear to Western capitalism that the nationalization measures were unavoidable, but that nevertheless the Western capitalists need have no fear, that despite the thoroughness and far-reaching character of the nationalization law, the country would continue to move within capitalist grooves.
When, after the liberation of Czechoslovakia, we made an economic war balance sheet in our principle industries and banks [Beneš wrote] we ascertained that the banks had been totally plundered and ruined by this German procedure and industries either alienated or expropriated from the hands of the original owners, for they were to a large extent in the hands of the people of German origin. To return this property and the banks into the hands of Czech individuals or to consolidate them without considerable state assistance and without new financial guarantees was simply impossible. The State had to step in, partly in order to save labor and employment for the large masses of the people and partly to save people’s savings in the looted Czechoslovak banks ... But what to do with the big German industries and banks in Czechoslovakia? We confiscated this property as the property of traitors. Are we now to divide it among Czech capitalists and industrialists in accordance with some arbitrarily chosen principle and criterion, or is not better to give it to the State and nation, also as a partial reparation for the enormous war damages caused by Germany?
Beneš further calls attention to the great leftward swing throughout Europe: “This can also be seen in Czechoslovakia,” he states. “Perhaps in our case there is a difference because we are one of those states which are mature enough and whose citizens are sufficiently enlightened and do not need to be forced into any Socialist measures by strikes, revolts, and conflicts, or even by a civil war, but who try to avoid all this by a wise and progressive policy.” Beneš adds significantly: “The French rightly say, ‘Gouverner c’est prevoir’ (To govern is to foresee), and that is what we are doing.”
By his policy of “rolling with the punch,” Beneš hoped to drag out things interminably and reduce the final nationalizations to a minimum; and with the help of his Stalinist and Social Democratic allies, housebreak the obstreperous Factory Councils. But the pressure of the unions and Workers’ Committees proved too strong. In October 1945, just before the first meeting of the Provisional National Assembly, Beneš reluctantly had to sign the far-reaching nationalization decrees, saying publicly that he wished the Government had proceeded more gradually, but it was they and not he, who had decided on the thorough-going nationalization measures. This law provides for State ownership of commercial banks, insurance companies, mines, mineral deposits, defense industries, steel plants, the Bata Shoe factories, manufacturies of drugs and phonograph records, glass, chemical, power plants, gas works, and flour mills. It also includes paper industries with more than 300 workers, spinning mills with more than 400 workers and clothing factories with more than 500 workers.
Over 10,000 concerns including all the key industries and plants had already been nationalized by the end of 1945. These State enterprises, Beneš assured the West, will be run strictly “according to the principles of private enterprise.” All these enterprises are being placed under managers; most of them remaining, as a matter of fact, under their old managements. They are formally run by the manager and a managing committee – the Works Administration. The members of this body are one-third elected by the employees, one-third nominated by the Central Authority for the industry, and one-third selected by the government. The over-all plan for the country as a whole is drawn up by the Economic Council, which is composed of six cabinet Ministers and the representatives of the Trade Unions and Cooperatives.
As the workers’ organs of dual control have been largely suppressed and their initiative stifled, the new State industries now fall increasingly under the sway of a growing bureaucracy composed of the old owners, managers, capitalist officials and functionaries, plus a new crop of Stalinist and Social Democratic functionaries and bureaucrats. We have previously quoted Lausman who approvingly pointed to the Russian example and informed the Factory Committees that in Russia the manager rules supreme. The Works Councils are now required to concern themselves exclusively with workers’ welfare problems and leave the running of the factories to the managers.
The capitalist character of this nationalization was further guaranteed by the issuance of State bonds, in lieu of the previous individual shares, to all former owners (except enemies whose property was confiscated), and interest on these bonds will be the first charge on the profits of these works. All State concerns, moreover, will be run independently, subject only to the direction of the State planning authority. In many cases the former owners will be consulted as to the running of their works, even to the extent of permitting them to appoint managers.
The foreign (non-enemy) owners of Czech industry are being treated with no less generosity. Business Week of August 31, 1946, announces that “the Czech Cabinet has finally approved the conditions for compensating foreign owners ... Principal American companies involved are Socony-Vacuum and IT&T ... Terms of the offer about to be made by Prague are said to be acceptable to the American companies, but Unilever of Britain is reported to be asking a price that Czech officials consider exorbitant.” (Unilever is demanding a modest $44,000,-000 compensation for the Schlicht Margarine factories which have been nationalized.) Business Week attributes “the sudden outbreak of good will in Prague” to its desperate need of loans from the United States. The Western imperialists know how to collect their pound of flesh. In June, “our” Ambassador to Prague, the outstanding “democrat,” Laurence Steinhardt, wrote a letter to Harold Sheets, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Socony Vacuum Company, where he expressed the hope that the Stalinists would be defeated and “it should be possible to get under way very soon thereafter in discussing claims for American nationalized property. Should you hear reports of an Export-Import Bank reconstruction loan to Czechoslovakia, do not let this alarm you, as one of the conditions of the loan will be adequate and effective compensation for American nationalized properties.”
Steinhardt’s hopes for a Stalinist set-back did not materialize. Nevertheless, as we see, “American interests” have been fully taken care of even under the Stalinist-dominated government.
 
State Capitalism
Czechoslovakia is today the exemplar of State capitalism. Privately-run and managed establishments now comprise only 1/3 of the smaller works, the cooperatives and agriculture. Nevertheless, the Czechoslovak nationalizations, despite their sweeping character, can be compared in their essentials, with the nationalizations in England.
It is true, of course, that the Czech nationalizations took place under far different conditions, and the actual state of political and social affairs is far more left in Czechoslovakia than England. First, nationalization was decreed while workers’ control existed throughout industry. Next, the Stalinists dominated the government. Last, the country was under Red Army occupation. But the Stalinists succeeded in pressing back the revolutionary tide and infusing the socialist forms with capitalist content.
If the Stalinists succeeded in preserving the capitalist system in Czechoslovakia on the basis of State capitalism, the same bald statement cannot be made in the case of Poland and Jugoslavia. In these two countries the situation is far more chaotic and unsettled, and capitalism has been far more seriously undermined.
If we begin with Poland, we find that here as throughout Eastern Europe, the workers took over the factories in the first flush of “liberation.” If the factory committees were but anemic counterparts of the virile committees in Czechoslovakia, let us not be surprised. After all the Polish workers had probably still not forgotten how the Red Army commanders in 1939 had arrested the leaders of the newly-formed Soviets and had replaced them with hand-picked party representatives; they had probably not forgotten the murder of Ehrlich and Alter and countless other working class leaders of Poland; they had probably not forgotten how the Red Army permitted their uprising in Warsaw to be drowned in blood, after the Kremlin had urged them to rise up against the Nazis, arms in hand.
Poland, like Czechoslovakia, was confronted with a herculean task of reconstruction, after the “liberation” but – in the case of Poland – many, many times more difficult. Nationalization of industry was the only way to get industry in motion at all after the war. The German retreat left the bulk of Polish industry with neither owners nor managers. They had all fled. Poland was one of the worst devastated of all countries. Warsaw, Poland’s Capital, with a pre-war population of over a million, was demolished block by block. Many factories, as a consequence, were either burned or shattered, but still contained much machinery that was repairable or usable. Furthermore, the whole of the newly acquired western territories was an economic no-man’s land, with most of the industries similarly without managers or owners. Under these circumstances it was not only a simple matter to carry through the nationalization projects. It was also mandatory.
Throughout 1945 the government was taking over plants and industries and operating them under improvized methods of production. The workers played a tremendous role in this work of reconstruction. Irving Brant, Polish correspondent for the Chicago Sun, wrote in the fall of 1945:
“Among the workers themselves, the feeling of social revolution is strong. It has run Polish labor unions up to a membership of more than 1,100,000 ... When Minister of Industry Mine, a Communist, shows himself ready to deal with old factory owners and managers in order to get production going, the workers are likely to say to him: ‘Who repaired this factory? We did. We will operate it. Give us a manager from our own ranks.’”
Only on January 2, 1946 – fully a year later – was the law adopted authorizing nationalization of key industries. The nationalization measures followed very closely along the lines of those in Czechoslovakia. The works of all Germans or “enemy aliens” was confiscated. Compensation was to be paid out to all Poles or “Allied aliens” whose establishments were taken over by the State. The motivation for full compensation was likewise the same as in Czechoslovakia: “We are in favor of maintaining normal economic relations with the Western countries by indemnifying foreign capitalists justly and adequately for their property.” (Report of Hilary Minc to Polish National Council, Poland of Today, May 1946.) In a word, Poland, even more desperately than Czechoslovakia, needs American loans.
In Poland the nationalization law applies to all enterprises employing 50 or more workers per shift. Although this sounds more sweeping even than Czechoslovakia’s law, in actuality a far smaller proportion of industry has been nationalized. According to the pre-war figures, 2,775 plants would fall into this category ; almost 2,000 of these employ from 50 to 200 workers. 20,014 plants in Poland employ less than 50 workers and thus remain in private hands. In the absence of new statistics, it is impossible to analyze any later data on what the nationalization decrees mean in practice. According to the report of Mine, the Minister of Industry and Commerce, private industry will continue to absorb 60 per cent of all employees in trade and industry, while the nationalized sector will employ 40 per cent. The industries to be nationalized will employ about 25 per cent of all industrial wage earners, while the total percentage of persons involved in the whole nationalization program will amount to 10 per cent of all wage earners.
Thus, according to the figures, the sector of State property, although including all the key and decisive portions of the economy in industry, finance, transportation etc., will comprise a far smaller proportion of total property than was the case in Czechoslovakia. It must be remembered that pre-war Poland was far less industrialized than its Czechoslovak neighbor and that the greater part of its industry was carried on in small shops and plants.
In the pre-war days, 40 per cent of total capital investments in Poland lay in foreign hands, and the most important industries were completely foreign-controlled. For example, foreign capital owned 52 per cent of mining and smelting, 57 per cent of petroleum, 66 per cent of the electrical industry, 60 per cent of chemical, 52 per cent of lumber, 81 per cent of public utilities, 59 per cent of insurance companies etc. The bulk of these holdings were German-owned. Thus Minc estimated that under the principles previously outlined, three-fourths of all enterprises will be confiscated outright, while one-fourth will be indemnified.
In many important respects Poland has not proceeded as drastically as Czechoslovakia in its nationalization measures, and Polish private capital continues to dominate a far larger segment of the economy. The statistics, however, while probably accurate enough in and of themselves, do not tell the whole story. The first important difference between Poland and Czechoslovakia is that in the latter country the bourgeoisie is working in agreement with the Stalinists; the bourgeois cliques and bureaucracy have survived and continue to play a dominant role in industry as government officers and State rentiers. In Poland, the bourgeoisie is in opposition to the regime. The leading capitalist cliques are abroad intriguing and organizing military forays against the government. The Stalinists are unable to lean upon any of the pillars of the old “colonels” administrations.
 
A New Dual Power
In addition, a kind of dual power can be said to exist in the country today, but it is wholly unlike the classical Marxist conception of dual power. The government, the police, the army, the courts, the press, public education are in the hands of the Stalinists. The clandestine, illegal, dual power, in the form of military formations, the Catholic hierarchy etc., is in the hands of the bourgeoisie. Thus if Czechoslovakia could be defined with absolute precision as State capitalism, the definition of Poland will have to be more involved and lengthy, if it is to correspond to the complex, contradictory and baffling reality. Poland is ruled by a Stalinist police regime, engaged in a savage war with the fascist-minded Polish bourgeoisie, which has brought the devastated country to the brink of civil war. The Stalinist regime is acting, to the best of its abilities, as the care-taker for the oppositionist bourgeoisie and has laid the legal groundwork for the recreation of a Polish State on State capitalist lines similar to Czechoslovakia. Why do we say that the present trend of the Polish nationalizations is one of establishing a State capitalism, based on a mixed economy (State capitalist and private property) such as in Czechoslovakia and not toward a workers’ state such as the USSR?
He is a poor Marxist who permits himself to be dazzled by a common formula and neglects to examine the essence of the process. We have seen in the past year nationalizations in England, France and in Eastern Europe. In their totality they constitute an unanswerable demonstration that society cannot go on in the old capitalist manner and is straining at the leash to socialize economy; that the whole trend of modern society is toward an unavoidable collectivization. This, of course, the Comintern pointed out as far back as 1919 in its first Manifesto to the workers of the world. But what class is to carry out this State-ization of economy? And in whose interests is it to be accomplished? In the interests of the capitalists? Or in the interests of the working class, and therefore of all humanity?
In England, as we know, it is being done in the interests of the capitalists. To weather the storm, the capitalists are permitting large scale nationalizations. But these are so arranged as to empty the measures of all real content. The form is there; but the essence is gone. In other words, basically, the measures are a fraud, and the old capitalist relations and exploitation continue as before, with only the administrative forms modified and altered. That is why Marxists explain that the nationalizations in England are not socialist measures at all, but simply measures of State capitalism.
As we have demonstrated, the same process is taking place in Czechoslovakia, in its fundamental aspects. In Poland, the pattern is not as clear, because the country is in a state of latent civil war, and therefore the State forms have not jelled to the degree that they have in Czechoslovakia. But the policies and aims are the same and the legal structure is the same. The policy of the Stalinists is pointed toward arriving at an agreement with the bourgeoisie; it has bureaucratized the Factory Committees and is attempting to operate nationalized industry along capitalist lines; it is acting as a caretaker of capitalist property; it is seeking to encourage the development of private capital in small industry and trade; it has preserved capitalist relations in agriculture; it is seeking to build up a new bourgeoisie which will consent to cooperate with it. The Polish Stalinists are, with might and main, trying to duplicate the achievement of the Czech Stalinists – thus far not too successfully.
The State in Eastern Europe which is modelling itself most closely after the USSR is Jugoslavia. In Poland, the Kremlin entered as a foreign conqueror and installed by force, in defiance of the major cliques of the Polish bourgeoisie, an unpopular government. In Jugoslavia, the government took power in the normal course of creating a massive people’s revolutionary movement, driving out the foreign invaders, and destroying the armies of the old ruling classes. The government, in its origin, rested on broad popular support, and the masses had wiped out the power of the old ruling groups in the course of a fiercely-fought civil war.
Despite its present savage repressions and unrestricted police rule, the Tito regime displays in many characteristics its social-revolutionary origin. The actual content of its nationalization and reconstruction measures scarcely differ from those of Poland or Czechoslovakia. But they were carried through under socialistic and not exclusively nationalistic motivations. Andria Hebrang, Minister for Industry, explained in the early part of this year the purposes of the “State General Economic Plan,” since adopted, to the People’s Skupchina, employing the following arguments:

As planned economy has defeated the anarchic economy of the capitalist world, as it has proven its superiority in the USSR, it should be adopted by Jugoslavia.
Since private industry and commerce still exist, and there are 2 million small peasant proprietors, the full program of State planning cannot be immediately introduced completely and effectively. But the present should be considered a transitory stage toward planned economy.
The General State Plan is intended to apply not only to industry and husbandry, but cultural development, education, science, art, public health, social insurance, etc.

Of course, the reality, the actual prospects for genuine State planning are far less radiant in Jugoslavia. The country is one of the worst sufferers of the war. It emerges from the conflict minus a third of its industry, a fourth of its peasants’ households, a tenth of its population. It has drawn up a reparation bill for damages totalling 61 billions. The country has always been weak industrially; 75 per cent of its population are on the land.
According to the most reliable figures, industrial production stands today at about 40 per cent of 1938. And whereas the bulk of 1938 productive effort was devoted to consumer goods or to raw materials that could readily be exchanged for consumer goods, Jugoslavia is now compelled to devote a major part of its productive labors to repair and reconstruction.
As “enemy” property is confiscated by the government for war booty, the State will run and operate more than 50 per cent of all industry and practically all of heavy industry. In addition, the government issued a decree in August 1945 cancelling all existing mining concessions and nationalizing all mines. This involves especially the French-owned Bor Copper mines, and the British-owned Trepca lead and zinc mines. Although the principle of compensation has been accepted, unlike Czechoslovakia, Jugoslavia has not yet come to terms with the foreign owners.
As in Czechoslovakia or Poland, private property is permitted by law, and continues to function in small industry, trading and agriculture. Even for foreign trade, the policy is not to conduct State barter but to license private importers and exporters. Tito himself declared at a reception of foreign correspondents “that private property was respected in Jugoslavia.”
 
Resembles USSR
Jugoslavia, however, resembles the USSR far more than any other East-European country, because, arising on the crest of a social revolutionary movement which wiped out the power of the capitalists and landlords, it proceeded to consolidate its rule by bureaucratizing the mass movement, destroying the democratic rights of the toiling masses, suppressing the workers’ committees and independent organs of expression, and ruling by police measures and terror. Because of its origins, so dissimilar from Poland, or any other East-European country, it was able to totalitarianize every phase of Jugoslav life in far more thorough-going and widespread fashion. Nevertheless, despite the fact that the power of the old landlord-capitalist classes has been broken, Jugoslavia must still be considered as being in the capitalist orbit, because of the following facts: The continued existence of capitalist property in agriculture, in half of industry, in trade and commerce, including foreign commerce. Furthermore, the creation of a huge capitalist-like governmental bureaucracy composed of old pre-war bureaucrats, dispossessed landlords and factory owners, Stalinist functionaries, “reconstructed” Fascists, monarchists, generals and the like. No clear information exists as to the precise manner in which State-owned industry is being operated. In the absence of functioning factory committees and workers’ control, it can be assumed that the methods are very similar to those employed in Czechoslovakia or Poland.
In the Soviet sphere of Germany, the ambiguity of economic forms, the provisional character of economy, has been commented upon by all the leading correspondents. The correspondent of the London Economist asks the question (March 1946):
“What social system are the Russians establishing in Eastern Germany? Has private enterprise been abolished there? Is a socialist economy, on the Soviet model, being set up? Conditions are still too fluctuating for any definite answers to be given to all these questions.”
The New York Times correspondent, Dana Adams Schmidt conveys the same impression. Writing in July 8, 1946, he states:
The evidence of this tendency (public ownership or control) contained in key measures – land reform, the confiscation of businesses allegedly belonging to active Nazis and war criminals and the freezing of all old bank accounts – was, however, frequently ambiguous. It led me to conclude that the developments, instigated in the final analysis by the Russian occupation administration, were not intended to socialize economic life in the Russian sense. Rather they appeared primarily designed by various devices to give dominance, in the economic as in the political sphere, to elements that the Russians would consider dependable and could control. The steps in this direction during more than a year of occupation have been progressive and circumspect, taking local traditions into careful consideration.
While Russia, like Britain and the United States, exercises naked military control over its sphere of Germany, and while it has the “legal right” to plunder Germany, the economic measures undertaken have not been as radical as in a number of East-European countries. While all “Nazi-owned” industries have been confiscated and turned over to the State or municipal authorities for operation, the final disposition of these enterprises, whether they would pass into State ownership or be turned over to new private owners, has been left open. Outside of the land expropriations previously discussed, the Russian administration has not carried out a single act of expropriation in industry comparable to the British expropriation of the coal mines of the Ruhr. In addition, owners of medium and small plants who did not flee before the Red Army have been left in possession and permitted to continue operating their plants.
The large factories are mostly managed by four directors, often representatives of the political parties, with the technical directors of the old managements often retained. The directors are supposed to work in close contact with the Works Councils, which are very similar to the set-up in Czechoslovakia. Because East-Germany is geared to the economy of the USSR, which does not fear German competition and is desperately hungry for all manner of goods, the German plants have been showered with Russian orders and have been experiencing a false prosperity. In contrast to Western Germany, the wheels of industry are turning ever more rapidly, but most of the goods are carried away to Russia as reparations. No official data are available, but business representatives claim that at least 50 per cent of all products go to Russia.
Recently the Kremlin has established legal relations with part of German industry in its sphere along lines that closely resemble the joint stock companies set up in Rumania and Hungary. According to Time magazine (August 26, 1946), a joint trust has been set up in Soviet-controlled Germany called Sowjetische Industrie AG, owned 51 per cent by the USSR and 49 per cent by Germans. The corporation is to be officially capitalized at over 8 billion marks ($800,000,000) and to employ nearly 400,000 workers. Its plants are said to embrace 30 per cent of German industry in the Soviet zone, including IG Farben. The trust is headed by a Russian, Alexei Resnikov.
 
Summary of Developments
We are ready to summarize the developments: The Red Armies occupied half of Europe – a Europe absolutely shattered by the war. They moved to break the power of the old ruling classes by expropriating landed estates, confiscating industries owned by “war criminals,” and turning them over to States run by loyal puppet governments, or setting up joint economic enterprises under their own control. If a social revolution signifies the transfer of power from one class to another, than certainly a social revolution was set in motion in Eastern Europe after “liberation.” But these revolutionary developments were not the direct consequence of mass uprisings, but were in every case dominated and controlled by the iron bureaucratic hand of the Kremlin conqueror. The upsurge of the peoples was stamped out. Their initiative was thwarted and prohibited. While Stalin for his own purposes and security, was determined to crush the old ruling cliques, he was equally determined to crush the revolutionary mass movements and to preserve the capitalist structure, in order to appease Western imperialism. Thus these revolutionary developments were in every case cut short of their goal. The consequent results are bastard formations; so-called “mixed economies,” resting on capitalist juridical foundations, and with the emergence of new capitalist groups in small-scale industry, agriculture, trade, the governmental bureaucracy, etc. This development, directly attributable to the counter-revolutionary Kremlin policy, demonstrates that the Stalin bureaucracy has no historical perspective, that it rests on no firm ground. It cannot tolerate Sovietization, as it showed in Eastern Europe. At the same time, it fears to the death and cannot tolerate capitalism. That is why Stalinism is a doomed ruling clique. It has no historical future. It will be engulfed in the coming events.
But perchance the Kremlin has created some new State forms, which represent its peculiar mode of production? The facts do not bear out such a hypothesis. The East-European countries reveal no new modes of production. The facts demonstrate very conclusively that the new States represent the attempt at unnatural union between the Soviet property forms and capitalist property. Stalin’s power may seem unlimited to him wherever his armies hold sway. Nevertheless, it is not given to him to create a new historical class, neither in the USSR, where his regime still rests on the property relations founded by the Bolshevik revolution, nor in Eastern Europe, where Stalin is attempting to act as the caretaker and beneficiary of capitalism.
Here is the balance sheet of Stalinism in Eastern Europe. By the Kremlin’s sell-outs and dirty maneuvers, their crushing of the revolution, their destruction of the organs of workers’ dual power, their preservation and legalization of capitalist property, their looting and marauding, the Kremlin has succeeded in antagonizing and earning the enmity of the bulk of the working masses. As for their agreements with the East-European capitalists – these are of the flimsiest kind, destined to be broken at the first real crisis. And the Kremlin’s hopes for friendship with the Western imperialists have already gone up in smoke. Stalin’s treacheries and crimes against the working class invariably deal blows to the world revolution and undermine the Soviet Union. But they cannot win for him friendship with the Western world. Because the USSR – despite the Stalinist counter-revolutionary ruling clique – represents by its very existence a mortal threat and a disintegrating influence upon world capitalism. That is why America and England refuse to reconcile themselves to Stalinist control of half of Europe and are bent upon wiping out this threat to their reign.
All these little Eastern States, wracked and ruined by the war, are now caught in the swirl of the raging battle between the USSR and world imperialism. They are all in a state of most acute crisis; their economies are obviously of a makeshift, episodic and transitional character; their regimes are jerry-built. They are geared to the economy of the USSR by main force. But they can secure capital, manufactured goods, loans, only from the West. And the United States is already putting on a murderous squeeze. It is holding Hungary’s gold. It has captured most of the fleets plying the Danube, and will not return
them until the Danube is opened up and made “free.” UNRRA is ending, and all the East-European governments will be forced to come to Washington, begging for loans, to arrest the famine. The Kremlin’s policy of “closing” Eastern Europe to Western capital will thus be far more difficult to enforce, than is the case with its own monopoly of foreign trade. We have already witnessed many small breaks in the “iron curtain,” as witness Czechoslovakia’s compensation agreement, Poland’s concessions to secure two small loans, etc. The fate of all the small countries in the Balkans, the Danubian area, and what used to be called Central Europe, cannot be gleaned by riveting one’s gaze upon these small dependent countries themselves. Their fate, and the evolution of their State and property forms, will be determined not through their own internal independent developments, but by the outcome of the world struggle between the giants – Anglo-American imperialism and the USSR and the course of the socialist revolution.
In 1939 Trotsky observed that if the Kremlin did not incorporate its newly secured border areas into the Soviet Union, but attempted to exercise control over them after the Nazi manner, this could become the starting point for new profound changes inside the USSR. Given an extended period of development, the new Kremlin-owned capitalist trusts in Eastern Europe, plus the emergence of a new Stalinist bureaucracy resting en capitalist foundations, would undoubtedly lead to decisive conflicts and changes in the structure of the USSR. But the present conflict between the Kremlin and Western imperialism has grown so sharp, and dominates so completely the international scene, it seems most likely that the further evolution of the East-European states, as of the Soviet Union itself, will be determined in the main by the outcome of this monstrous tug-of-war.
It might be objected that this analysis tends to give too much credit to the Stalinists; that there might be the implication that Stalinism can fulfill a progressive function in the capitalist world. Of course, the overturns in Eastern Europe possess many highly progressive features – the redistribution of land; the confiscation and nationalization of industry. World Trotskyism has already taken an unambiguous stand in defending these progressive measures from all attempts at capitalist reaction and restoration of the status quo ante bellum. But just as Trotsky pointed out in 1939 that the progressivism of Stalinist nationalizations in Eastern Poland and the Baltics were far outweighed by the Kremlin’s antagonizing the masses of the world and thereby weakening the world socialist movement, so today we must declare that the progressive aspects of Stalinist land redistributions and nationalizations of industry do not compensate by a tenth the mortal blows the Stalinists have dealt the proletarian revolution, the socialist cause. Their unspeakable treacheries, their stamping out of mass uprisings, their counter-revolutionary terror, their depradations and plunderings – these are discrediting in the eyes of the toilers the very word, the very idea of communism. How weighty are the East-European nationalizations on the scales as against Stalin’s crimes against the working class? The Stalinist counter-revolutionary adventures in Eastern Europe, rather than endowing it with the aura of a progressive mission in history, have made more urgent the necessity of crushing this bloody fiend, and preventing it from doing any more damage than it already has done to the world working class and its struggle for emancipation.
The blindness of Stalinism, its unutterably reactionary character, its historical bankruptcy is exposed glaringly above all in Eastern Europe. For the sake of paltry loot, for the sake of the small change of reparations – completely meaningless so far as solving the USSR’s economic needs – the Kremlin has raised against itself a wall of hatred throughout Eastern Europe and the world. For the sake of military control over the poverty-stricken, bankrupt Balkans, the Kremlin has helped the Anglo-American imperialists crush the revolution and prop up decaying capitalism. And now having done this butcher’s work for imperialism, the Kremlin is face to face with the Wall Street colossus, which is already mobilizing its world resources to crush the USSR.
 




I.
The recently concluded convention of the United Mine Workers
ushered in a new stage in the history of American labor and revealed
once again that the CIO is the progressive wing of the trade union
movement, because it is based on the workers of America’s mass
production industries.
After the smashing defeat of the “Little Steel” strike
in the fall of 1937, the CIO lost the momentum of its splendid
offensive and retreated slowly before the counter- drive of the
employers. As the militancy of the workers cooled off after the first
taste of defeat, the rear line trenches of the capitalist class
opened fire. What they dared not attempt during the period of labor
upsurge, they found the courage to do in the days of labor’s
retreat. The courts began harassing the labor movement with
anti-union judicial legislation. The state legislatures regained
their lost courage. Beginning with passage of oppressive labor
legislation in Washington and Oregon, the reactionary wave swept
eastward, until today almost three- fourths of the states have new
tyrannical laws designed to cripple the labor unions.
 
Union-Busting Campaign Taken Up by FDR
In the past year, this union- busting campaign has been taken over
by the federal government itself. The campaign against the WPA
strikers and the infamous Thurman Arnold “Anti-trust law”
indictments are but highlights in the anti-union campaign launched by
Roosevelt as a part of his feverish preparations for war.
The index of business activity stands today about 10% higher than
in 1929. Ten million workers still remain unemployed without the
possibility of being re-absorbed into private industry. This huge
army constitutes an ever-present threat to the unions, menaces the
wage standards of the employed workers, and hinders the progress of
the labor movement. Partly because of these employment conditions,
the unions have made no important advances during the past year. And
in the labor movement, as in other great ventures, it is impossible
to stand still. Either you move forward or you are ruthlessly pushed
backwards.
 
Lewis Could Not Ignore The Permanent Crisis
Lewis chose to ignore the existence of this permanent economic
crisis and its significance for the labor movement, at the CIO
convention held in November at San Francisco. But Lewis could not
afford to ignore these matters for long. He is not some Matthew Woll,
who bases himself on the aristocratic Photo-Engravers and a million
dollar insurance company. Lewis is the leader of the unions in the
mass production industries: coal, steel, auto, rubber, glass, oil –
the nerve centers of American economy.
These mass production workers are not experts in economics or
statistics. They have not delved into reports of the Federal Reserve
Bank or the Department of Labor. But they have seen with their own
eyes production stepped up to the highest level of the last ten years
and they know that, in spite of this, one third of the labor
population still remains unemployed, and given present conditions,
will always remain unemployed.
This industrial proletariat, employed in the huge plants, mills
and factories of America, feels in its very bones how important and
indispensable it is to the economic life of the country and it
understands better than anyone else the full potentialities and
latent strength inherent in the labor movement. These workers are
determined to win economic security for themselves and their families
and they are groping around and looking for the labor leaders who
will show them the path to achieve this goal.
 
Why Lewis Broke with Roosevelt
For the last two years, they have seen the courts and the
legislatures attempt to hurl them back to the slavery of the open
shop. They have further seen Roosevelt and the New Dealers, whom they
considered to be labor’s friends, take the lead of this
reactionary open-shop campaign. The bitterness and hatred of this
industrial proletariat is storing up and creating a powder keg of
social dissatisfaction and revolt that will inevitably explode. Lewis
Murray and their associates understand this fact. They know full well
that they must adapt themselves to this mood, if they are to retain
the leadership of the CIO. This is the explanation and the only
explanation for Lewis’s dramatic break with Roosevelt.
But where is Lewis going? Where is he leading the CIO? Lewis
himself does not know. He is extremely bold in method and violent in
speech, but very timid and hesitant in his policies.
The indicated policy for the CIO is to break once and for all with
all capitalist politics, correctly dubbed “company unionism”
in the political field, and march forward onto the broad highways of
an independent political party of labor, with an aggressive, fighting
program for jobs and security. Such a policy would open up new vistas
for the entire labor movement and would, by comparison, pale into
insignificance the advances made by the CIO in its golden period from
1935 to 1937. But this step Lewis will not take. He does not have
confidence in the independent strength of labor.
 
AFL-CIO Split Doesn’t Explain Weakness
Many bourgeois writers, commenting on the lack of progress of the
American labor movement in the recent period, have ascribed this
decline solely to the split in labor’s ranks and the consequent
warfare that ensued between the two labor factions.
Is it true that the decline of two years can be ascribed solely or
mainly to the split in labor’s ranks? No! Of equal and even of
greater importance is the policy of the labor movement. Labor
is today marking time, first of all, because of the inadequate,
conservative, class-collaboration policies of its leadership; the
lack of a militant, realistic program to point the way for a genuine
solution to the problems of unemployment, insecurity and the
threatening war.
For example, the AFL is today being subjected to an attack
unprecedented in recent labor history, in the form of the “antitrust”
indictments, which threaten the very existence of numerous AFL
Internationals. How is the AFL responding to this mortal threat? It
is confining its resistance to the hiring of lawyers, the drawing up
of briefs and the button-holing of individual politicians. A pitiable
campaign! Is this poor resistance, perchance, to be explained by the
split in labor’s ranks? No! It is explained by the timid and
cowardly policies of the AFL national leadership.
These timid and cowardly policies make those of the CIO leadership
shine by comparison. But only by this comparison. By the measure of
the problems which the CIO faces, by the measure of the desperate
needs of its membership, the policies of the CIO leadership are
almost as bankrupt as those of the AFL. Lewis’ lack of
confidence in the independent strength of labor, in the ability of
the working class to march forward onto the broad highways of an
independent political party of labor, merely means that he does not
visualize the policies which organized labor would require on that
road. His vacillating policies won’t work on that road. But
that only means that the necessary policies must be put forward in
place of those of Lewis. There is no short cut to pushing the CIO
along the road it must go to solve the needs of the masses. Only as
voices arise which articulately and accurately reflect these needs,
will the CIO move in the necessary direction.
(Part II)
 




II.
John L. Lewis took a fall out of Roosevelt in their
exchange on the question of labor unity. In Washington on Saturday,
Lewis read with malicious pleasure the reply he had sent last October
to the president’s “peace” proposal; that took care
of Roosevelt’s assertion that Lewis had not deigned to reply.
What is more, Lewis was able to repeat his proposal of last year:
labor unity by the simple method of each CIO unit being chartered by
the AFL, with all “questions of detail” settled within
the joint organization – i.e., an organization in which the CIO
forces would have a decisive voice.
Progressives in the labor movement, whether in the
AFL or CIO, must clearly understand why the only worthwhile kind of
unity for the labor movement is that in which the industrial unions
will remain the leading tendency in the labor movement.
The split neither originated nor is it continuing
today because of the personal hostility of Green or Lewis or any
other individuals. Such an explanation is only for little children.
The split originated on the basic question of organizing the
unorganized industrial proletariat of America’s mass production
industries.
The split continues today over the question of which
unions and which policies shall possess the hegemony of the labor
movement; the industrial unions under Lewis, Murray, etc., or the old
craft unions under the domination of the Hutcheson-Frey-Woll clique.
A bitter personal antagonism exists between these two groups of men,
to be sure. But this conflict originates from the different type of
unions that the two sets of leaders control, the different interests
involved, the different policies pursued, and not merely an
expression of personal dislike or hostility.
 
The Kind of Unity Roosevelt Wants
Roosevelt is not interested in a united labor
movement because of solicitude for the welfare of the American
working class. His interest arises solely out of his war program. He
fears that the continuation of the labor split makes more difficult
the realization of his goal: to reach a definite understanding with
the top officialdom on putting the unions into the strait-jacket of
his war machine. Roosevelt is working for a united labor movement
that will be headed by a servile and cowardly leadership, willing to
act as the agent of the War Department inside the labor movement.
That is why Roosevelt is today putting the squeeze on Lewis and
through Lewis on the industrial workers who make up the unruly, the
untamed, the aggressive type of unions, whose industries constitute
the nerve centers of America’s war machine. Roosevelt wants to
mobilize public opinion against the CIO industrial unions in order to
force them to subordinate themselves to the servile, house-broken
bureaucrats of the Frey-Woll-Hutcheson stripe. This is the meaning
and the aim of the Roosevelt Peace crusade.
 
The Meaning of Tobin’s Unity Demand
Tobin’s recent attack against “less than
a dozen men” who are “responsible for the division of
eight million men” and his call upon the rank and file to “rise
up and demand” the complete cessation of hostilities between
the two labor organizations, has an entirely different meaning and
purpose than the Roosevelt peace campaign. Tobin’s call-to-arms
is an attack primarily upon the reactionary clique that runs the AFL
Executive Council and was so understood and received by the entire
AFL leadership. Tobin is demanding, in effect, that the craft unions
drop their stiff-necked attitude and give in to some of the demands
of the CIO.
The Teamsters Union and Tobin have travelled a long
way since the 1934 San Francisco convention, when Tobin denounced the
“rabble and riff-raff” that were attempting to invade the
AFL. Tobin today heads a powerful semi-industrial union of 400,000
men; he is, in a way subject to the same influences and pressures
that operate on the CIO leaders. Because of the changed status of his
union, Tobin’s whole labor philosophy and approach is today
much closer to that of Lewis than to the policies of Tobin’s
colleagues of the Executive Council. Tobin envisages today a united
labor organization, stronger and more aggressive than the federation
of the past, with the power divided somewhat evenly between the new
industrial and semi-industrial unions and the old line AFL craft
unions. Tobin
is a logical compromise candidate for the leadership
of such a united labor organization and unquestionably so considers
himself. Tobin remains an ardent New Dealer, but he is above all the
president of an important labor union, and that is why his unity aims
are so different from those of Roosevelt. That is why Tobin is
putting the squeeze on the AFL Executive Council to “give in”
and make peace with the CIO.
 
The Kind of Unity Green Wants
Green, who has the responsibility of the AFL national
office and who has no base in any International union, fears even
more than the other old line craft union officials, the eventual
decay of the AFL unless the labor split is healed and the federation
is allowed to absorb the young blood of the modern industrial unions.
Just the same he, like the craft union clique, to which he has tied
his fortunes, fears the new unbridled masses of proletarian workers
as he fears the plague itself. The AFL leadership want unity, but
unity with the assurance that the new unions will keep their place,
pay their per capita taxes and not challenge the leadership of the
Executive Council.
 
How Lewis Estimates the Coming Period
Lewis is convinced that the coming period will be
marked by a huge expansion of all mass production industries, feeding
both the American and European war machines. He remembers the
marvelous organizational union growth of the last war period of a
decade ago, when the AFL, its membership. He is convinced with little
effort, almost doubled that the CIO with its centralized authority,
its industrial union structure and its modern and aggressive methods
of organization will achieve huge gains in membership in the coming
period and thus establish unquestioned hegemony over the trade union
movement. Firmly convinced that the future is with the CIO, he is
determined not to subordinate the CIO unions and their freedom of
action to the majority of the AFL Executive Council, come what may.
He wants unity and a united labor organization with the upper hand
and the determining policy vested in the leadership of the industrial
unions.
Progressives have the task of explaining to the
membership the full meaning of the unity campaign. The progressives
must fight for a united labor movement, achieved only by the action
and the pressure of the rank and file itself. They must condemn
unreservedly any interference into their internal affairs on the part
of Roosevelt or any other capitalist politician. They will then, in
every case, put pressure, first, upon the old line craft union
officials, in order to force through a united labor organization,
with the hegemony in the hands of the industrial unions and the
industrial proletariat – the most advanced section of the
American working class.
 




Some Lessons of the Recent UMW Convention

What Is at Stake in the Fight on Labor Unity?
 




John L. Lewis dramatically broke with Roosevelt and his
administration at the “Cross Roads of Destiny” Golden
Jubilee convention of the United. Mine Workers of America, meeting
this week at Columbus, Ohio. In scathing terms he denounced the New
Deal and its recent attacks on the labor movement.
Reading a prepared statement at Wednesday’s session of the
convention, Lewis stated :
“As the current year opens the Democratic Party is
in default to the American people. After seven years of power, it
finds itself without solution for the major questions of
unemployment, low national income, mounting internal debt, increasing
direct and consumer taxation and restricted foreign markets. There
still exists the same national unhappiness that it faced seven years
ago. I am convinced that, with conditions now confronting the
nation and the dissatisfaction now permeating the minds of the
people, his (Roosevelt’s) candidacy would result in ignominious
defeat.”
Lewis accused Roosevelt of breaking “faith” with
organized labor and complained that “in the last three years
labor has not been given representation in the cabinet, nor in the
administrative or policy-making agencies of government.”
“In the Congress,” Lewis pointed out, “the
unrestrained baiting and defaming of labor by the Democratic majority
has become a pastime, never subject to rebuke by the titular or
actual leaders of the party.”
 
Where is Bread?
Speaking the following day to newspapermen at the Neil House,
Lewis remarked:
“I see by the papers that William Green hauled a
cake over to the President on a truck. While the people are crying
for bread, Mr. Green hauls a cake over to the President, if the
President eats the cake that Mr. Green provides him, the common
people feel entitled at least to have bread.
“Those democrats who are good historians might see
an historical allusion and say ‘Let them eat cake.’
Rather than spending my time toadying to the President with cake, I’m
going to spend my time and efforts trying to get bread for the people
who are crying for it.”
 
Lewis Reflects Masses
On more than one occasion, John L. Lewis has revealed his
sensitivity to the feelings and needs of American labor. Lewis knows
that the existence of a permanent economic depression with ten to
twelve million workers doomed to unemployment and insecurity, and the
Roosevelt policy of steering America headlong into the European
bloodbath, is storing up tremendous dissatisfaction, bitterness and
hatred, that is bound, before long, to explode in the face of the New
Dealers.
The CIO is based on the mass production industries, steel, coal,
auto, rubber, oil – the very nerve centers of American economy.
Lewis has seen the militant workers of these industries in battle. He
knows their indomitable courage and their determination to win
economic security for themselves and their families.
 
Knows What Is Coming
Lewis has learned, in the recent years, to understand what
independent strength the American trade unions possess. Disturbed by
the deep, subterranean rumblings of dissatisfaction throughout the
country, Lewis is beginning to roar out against the New Deal and its
agents. He is demanding a higher price for the support of Labor. He
understands the impending revolt and is determined to lead it. To
lead it, of course, in a “safe” direction, not toward the
necessary Labor Party but back into a deal with capitalist
politicians.
Obviously, Lewis made no effort to reach an agreement on his new
anti-Roosevelt policy with the other top officials of the CIO, prior
to its presentation to the Miners convention. The next day, Hillman,
President of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America and Emil
Rieve, President of the United Textile Workers of America, rejected
the Lewis policy and urged continued support for a Roosevelt “third
term.” David Dubinsky, President of the International Ladies
Garment Workers Union, independent of both the AFL and CIO, is
expected to take a similar stand this week in the magazine
Newsweek.
 
Sure of His Ground
Lewis is keenly aware of this opposition inside the CIO, but is
convinced that economic conditions and the dissatisfaction on the
part of millions make it obligatory to break with Roosevelt and take
the leadership of this new movement. This, Lewis believes, will fully
compensate for the non-support of Hillman. It is, of course, a
foregone conclusion that all mid-western unions will follow the Lewis
policy and that it will carry in the CIO Executive Board.
Lewis and his lieutenants are convinced that the coming period
will be marked by great expansion of all war industries and that the
CIO, with its industrial structure and its modern and aggressive
methods of organization, will be enabled to win definite hegemony of
the trade union movement. That is why he is determined that the CIO
unions and policies, under no conditions, be subordinated to the
moribund AFL Executive Council. This constitutes Lewis’s
answer, in effect, to the “peace campaign” of Dan Tobin
of the Teamsters Union.
 
Fight For Labor Party!
Progressives in every local union must now convince all rank and
file unionists of the utter bankruptcy, not only of the old-fashioned
Gompers’ “reward your friends and punish your
enemies” politics, but also the streamlined Lewis version of
playing around with capitalist politicians. The bankruptcy of the old
policies in this field must be utilized to force the unions to break
completely with all “company unionism” in the sphere of
politics and to utilize the energy, finances, and strength of the
unions to build an independent political party of labor, based on
a fighting program for jobs, security and the struggle against
fascism and war.
 




In the January 6 issue of the Socialist Appeal, we called
attention to the signing of a new agreement between Local 160,
attached to the out-of-town department of the International Ladies
Garment Workers Union, and the Maiden Form Brassiere Company of
Bayonne, New Jersey.
The negotiations revealed, we pointed out, the absence of all
democratic procedure in the out-of-town department and the
reactionary policies pursued by its general manager, Harry Wander.
In the January 15 issue of Justice, official publication of
the ILGWU, Harry Wander attempts to answer our accusations.
He states:
“Their (Socialist Appeal) accusation is that
we refused to support the action of the shop when in the midst of
negotiating a contract, one committee was abruptly withdrawn and
another committee substituted.
“To this accusation I plead guilty as charged. My
action was that of a responsible unionist,” etc.
 
A Dictator’s Idea of Unionism
Doesn’t it strike you as strange Mr. Wander, that you, one
man, should possess the power to overturn the decision of a thousand
union members? You state you did not think their decision was a wise
one, therefore you would not recognize their regularly elected
negotiating committee and you decided to discontinue the negotiations
with the company. Doesn’t that bear out every one of our
accusations that the local unions attached to your department enjoy
no autonomy and that the appointed out-of-town department
leadership exercises autocratic powers?
Doesn’t your own explanation, Mr. Wander, reveal that you do
not believe that the workers have sufficient intelligence to conduct
their own union affairs and decide their own policies, but must be
supervised by union officials who possess dictatorial powers and can
veto the decisions of the rank and file membership?
Your explanation of why you opposed the election of a new shop
committee is positively humorous. You state that “changing
committees while negotiations are in progress is almost always a bad
procedure,” and besides such an action “offends members
of the original committee.” Isn’t that a real gem ? Here
is a group of workers, staging a revolt against your autocratic
conduct and your reactionary policies as displayed in the
negotiations; they remove the old shop committee, because it is
apparently too subservient to you. You proceed to veto their action
and toss their democratic votes into the waste paper basket, because
it is going to hurt somebody’s feelings. How about the feelings
of the one thousand workers whose democratic rights you have violated?
Your reply, in my opinion, serves only to underscore the crying
need for reforms in the out-of-town department of the ILGWU by the
introduction of democratic procedure in the negotiation of union
contracts and the granting of full autonomy to all local unions.
Your article, I suppose, would be incomplete without its tearful
reference to “Russia’s ruthless attack upon Finland”
and the “cold and deliberate mass slaughter, including the
bombing of open cities.”
When Hoover, Roosevelt, the U.S. Steel Corporation or the Chase
National Bank get all worked up about “poor little Finland,”
it is easily understandable. Finland is a semi-colony of the U.S. and
the Wall Street men have a stake in a Finnish victory. What are you
all excited about, Mr. Wander? Your trepidation is as indecent as
that of a butler, who is in seventh heaven when his master’s
stocks and bonds soar upward and who is down in the dumps when the
master’s securities sharply decline.
Stalin’s invasion of Finland has been used by all of the
open shop manufacturers and their lackeys to divert attention away
from America’s ten million unemployed, the starvation and
suffering stalking Cleveland and hundreds of other American cities,
the billions of dollars that are being spent on armaments in
preparation for war. These phony democrats have one-track minds. They
can understand suffering and starvation in Finland. But they cannot
recognize it in the United States.
You and your friends are the younger brothers of these phony
democrats. You are ready to fight for democracy in “Poor Little
Finland.” But you do not have a very great interest in
democracy in the ILGWU. Like all worshippers of “bourgeois
democracy,” you do not have a very high regard for it in your
own labor organization. Before you get worked up about “Poor
Little Finland” again, remember the words of a very wise man:
“Charity begins at home.”
 




The CIO drive in the building industry, started with so much noise
and fanfare by John L. Lewis and his brother, A.D. Lewis, Chairman of
the United Construction Workers Organizing Committee, may yet end as
a minor disaster for the CIO.
Lewis is playing with dynamite.
First, because he is invading an industry that is organized by the
building trades unions, the most powerful and richest group of
International unions in the AFL.
Secondly, because he is attempting to sign contracts with the
building trades bosses by establishing lower hourly wages and poorer
working conditions than prevail in the organized section of the
industry at the present time.
Third, because he is enlisting the aid of and cooperating in the
reactionary anti-union drive of Thurman Arnold and the Department of
Justice.
 
FBI Snooper Hired
In last week’s issue of the Socialist Appeal, we
pointed out that Russell Turner Sr., an aide of Assistant Attorney
General Thurman Arnold, was appointed by Lewis to the staff of the
UCWOC and pointed out that this short sighted move constituted “a
shameful violation of union solidarity.”
The CIO News of January 8 seems to be all puffed up about
this marvelous new acquisition to its organizing staff and with great
pride points out that “for the past year Mr. Turner has been on
the staff of the Justice Department where he took part in anti-trust
law inquiries into the building trades.”
 
CIO Features Prosecution
The same issue of the CIO News carries the following story
in connection with the Construction committees organization work in
Washington, D.C.:
“Several indictments of AFL officials are pending
in Washington as a result of jurisdictional disputes and Justice
Department agents are reported investigating the current tie-up. [A
strike of AFL laborers on the 12-story RFC building structure.] The
Department’s theory is that these disputes are in restraint of
trade and hence illegal under the anti-trust statutes.
”Government officials have recently recognized
jurisdictional strikes and craft union, restrictions as a major
factor in retarding the construction industry. Witnesses before the
anti-monopoly Committee have offered sensational testimony showing
the extent of craft union abuses in this industry ...”
 
A Suicidal Policy
The CIO News gives the unmistakable impression that it
favors the insidious union busting campaign of the Department of
Justice. It is either passively tolerating or actively cooperating in
this campaign, which if successful would not only weaken and
eventually destroy the AFL building trades unions, but the whole
trade union movement of this country, CIO included.
It is the duty of all progressives in the CIO today to demand that
Lewis call a halt to these suicidal policies and devote his time and
energies to uniting both wings of the trade union movement, not
pushing them further apart.
 




The signing of the Stalin-Hitler pact and the subsequent march
into Poland caught the American Communist party off guard and unprepared.
Right up to the moment of the signing of the pact, the Stalinists
kept up an incessant and uproarious din in the trade unions with
thousands of resolutions and an equal number of speeches for
“Collective Security” – an alliance of the United
States and the other “democracies” with the Soviet Union,
to “quarantine the aggressors” – Germany, Italy and
Japan – and for full, enthusiastic and unconditional support
for Roosevelt and his “peace program” – the cynical
name for the construction of the largest peace-time military machine
in American history.
They kept up this propaganda through the better part of 1939, in
the period when Roosevelt signed the Woodrum Bill, which dumped three
quarters of a million WPA workers out into the streets, destroyed the
“prevailing wage-scale” principle hitherto observed on
the WPA, slashed the wages of the remaining WPA workers and
introduced the infamous “eighteen month” clause.
They continued lining up the labor movement behind the Roosevelt
machine, even when the conservative building trades unions were
forced to answer the Roosevelt anti-union drive with a national
strike on the WPA. They continued shouting for Roosevelt even when he
openly announced his intention of smashing the WPA strike, and issued
the arrogant dictum that “you cannot strike against the
government”, followed by the arrest and indictment of 162
Minneapolis WPA strikers on charges of conspiracy.
The cynical bureaucrats who run the Communist party were not even
abashed when Roosevelt, through the FBI, began handing out dozens of
indictments against union officials as part of the Thurman-Arnold
anti-trust drive, the worst-union busting campaign undertaken by
any U.S. President in the last two decades.
 
They Loved Roosevelt Though He Smote Them
No! The Stalinists unconcernedly continued using their influence
and strength to hog-tie the labor movement and to confuse and
befuddle the minds of the union militants. The Stalinist- controlled
Workers Alliance is sued a call to labor to back Roosevelt for a
third term, the man who had just slashed relief and WPA
appropriations. The Stalinist-controlled Maritime Federation of the
Pacific (mostly landlubbers, the sailors had left) ran a “Draft
Roosevelt in 1940” campaign throughout last summer for the very
man who was responsible for saddling the East Coast maritime unions
with the anti-union, “fink hall” U.S. Maritime
Commission, etc., etc. (The West Coast seamen not under Stalinist
control, kept union hiring halls)!
Why not? The Stalinist leadership was responsible only to the
Stalin bureaucracy. The instructions were to line up the American
labor movement behind Roosevelt who, it was believed, was friendly to
the idea of concluding an alliance with the Soviet Union. What about
the real needs and requirements of the American trade unionists? That
was not the concern of the cynical bureaucrats who run the Communist
Party.
You can understand how criminal was this policy of the Communist
Party, when you realize that it is precisely this policy of putting
faith in Roosevelt and all the other phony “friends of labor,”
rather than relying on the independent strength and power of the
labor movement, that has brought the CIO, as well as the rest of
organized labor, to its present impasse. The futility and bankruptcy
of this policy was nowhere better illustrated than in the ill-fated
“Little Steel” strike, when the steel workers of Ohio,
under the influence of these false teachings and policies, welcomed
and cheered the very troops of the National Guard that several days
later broke their picket lines and smashed their strike.
 
The Flip-Flop Came Overnight
With the signing of the pact, the Stalinist policy changed
overnight. Never before in recent history, has a political party
executed such a fantastic, rapid fire, flip-flop. Everything that was
black became white. Everything that was white became black. England
and France, the “peace- loving democracies” became
transformed into “war-mongering aggressors.”
“Peace-loving democratic” England was suddenly revealed
by the Daily Worker to be “the age-old British
imperialism, whose hands drip with blood.” Germany, the “bad,
war-mongering, fascist” suddenly changed roles and became a
“peace lover.” Roosevelt, who supposedly had been
pursuing a “peace program” for the past four years, was
discovered to be America’s worst “war monger”
intent upon hurling the U.S. into the imperialist blood-bath.
“Collective Security,” the “democracies against
fascism,” “quarantine the aggressors,” “boycott
Hitler Germany” – all disappeared with the snows of
yesteryear.
Since the signing of the pact, the Stalinists have been screaming
that labor must join ranks to “Keep America out of the
Imperialist war” and have begun introducing resolutions by the
yard denouncing Roosevelt’s war budget, denouncing his war
program, denouncing his union-busting campaigns and calling for the
building of a third party for Jobs, Peace and Civil Liberties.
 
Union Militants Must Study C.P. Politics
It is impossible for the ordinary trade unionist to make head or
tail of the dizzy turns, twists and changes in the Communist party
line on the basis of trade union experience alone. And yet, a
knowledge of the methods and the moving forces of the Stalinist party
is an indispensable part of the education of the genuine union
militant. A lack of this elementary knowledge has led many union
militants astray, driving them back into the arms of reactionary
leaders or making them easy victims of Stalinist demagogy.
It must be understood that the Stalinist party is run
bureaucratically by a top officialdom, responsible only to its
masters in Moscow. The rank and file members of the party had no more
to say about the recent change in the party line than any outsider.
The new line was handed down from the top, by decree. The basic aim
and policy of the Stalinist party consists of this: that at every
stage of the game, the influence and strength of the labor movement
should be so maneuvered, directed and channelized to bolster up and
support the foreign policy – not of the people of the Soviet
Union – but of the corrupt, reactionary Stalin bureaucracy,
that runs the government of the Soviet Union. This was true for the
period before the signing of the Stalin-Hitler pact. It remains true
today.
 
Why Stalinists Now Oppose Roosevelt
Instead of Stalin making an alliance with the “democracies,”
as was envisaged in the period of the People’s Front, Stalin
confounded his parties all over the world, by making an alliance with
Hitler, against England, France and the United States. If the United
States enters the present war, as it is preparing to do, it will
unquestionably put its power on the side of the Allied imperialists
against the Hitler-Stalin alliance. On behalf of Stalin’s
alliance with Hitler, therefore, the U.S. must remain neutral at all
costs. This is the explanation and the only explanation for the
Stalinist change of policy.
The present foreign policy of Stalin demands of the American party
that it line up the labor movement against Roosevelt and his war
program. Shortly after the signing of the pact, the Stalinists went
to work on a new campaign to put the “line” across. Mike
Quin, an editor of the West Coast Stalinist paper, People’s
World wrote a pamphlet called The Yanks are not Coming,
which rolled off the printing press just in time to greet the
delegates of the San Francisco CIO convention. The pamphlet, which
gives the new line of the Stalinists in popular “trade union”
style, was published under the auspices of the Stalinist-controlled
San Francisco district of the Maritime Federation of the Pacific and
has since been circulated in systematic fashion by the Stalinists
throughout the CIO and in numerous unions of the AFL.
Using the pamphlet as an opening wedge, the Stalinists have pushed
through in many local unions endorsements as the preliminary step to
the actual setting up of “peace committees” or “The
Yanks are not Coming Committees.” All of these committees which
have been springing up in many local unions all over the country,
have this in common: they are all inspired and organized by the
Stalinists and all propagate the present line of the Stalinist party.
The Stalinists plan to eventually call a Congress or national
conference of all of these phony “peace” groups in order
to form a new national peace organization to agitate and work for the
new line of the Stalinist party in this post Stalin-Hitler pact
period.
 
New Line No Better Than the Old
In a sense, the new Stalinist line is the complete opposite of the
previous “People’s Front” program. But it has this
similarity, or more correctly, identity: the new “anti-war”
line, like the preceding one, is steered, planned and directed by the
same gang of unscrupulous union wreckers that manipulated and pursued
the old “People’s Front” pro-Roosevelt, pro-war
line. Unconcerned and uninterested in the actual needs and desires of
the labor movement, they remain today as before intent only on
exploiting the trade unions for the selfish interests of the
Stalinist party, which is the American agency for the corrupt and
savage bureaucrats who rule the Soviet Union. Their “anti-war”
line is no better for the workers than their pro-war line of
yesterday.
(The third article of this series will appear next week.)
 




A History of Union-Wrecking and Corruption

After the Hitler-Stalin Pact

The Growing Break Between Them and John L. Lewis
 




The Stalinists poisoned the whole labor movement, in the “People’s
Front” period, with their fantastic, lying propaganda that the
population of the country was divided between “progressives”
and “reactionaries” and that it was the sole duty of the
labor movement to support the “progressives” and oppose.
the “reactionaries.” The Stalinist propaganda, however,
did not change the reality.
The capitalists still run the United States. The bankers and
industrialists still own the country’s economic resources and
wealth, gobble up the hog’s share of its national income and
constitute what Woodrow Wilson once called the “invisible
government” – the real government – of the United
States.
The Roosevelt administration is identical with all previous
administrations in this fundamental quality: that it is the political
agent of America’s ruling class – the capitalists who own
and run the country. It is only on this cold practical class basis
that it is possible to understand why Roosevelt tolerated the
Stalinists during the “People’s Front” period and
why he bitterly opposes them today. Roosevelt understood the
Stalinist party. He knew that it was not a genuine socialist
movement, but merely the venal tool of the rotten Stalinist
bureaucracy.
Unofficially allied with England and France, the United States was
lined up against Germany. That is why, the minute the Hitler-Stalin
Pact was announced, Roosevelt and the capitalists launched a campaign
to mobilize the full force of “public opinion” for a
furious assault upon the Stalinist party. The end of the “People’s
Front” thus saw the end of the popularity of the Stalinist
party with official public opinion. From a “bandwagon”
movement, the Stalinists were converted into pariahs and social
outcasts.
That meant a change in relations between the Stalinists and Lewis.
The official leadership of the CIO, like the leadership of the AFL,
is tied to the capitalist class by a thousands different threads and
connections. The whole top leadership of the CIO, to a man, believes
in the eternal existence of the capitalist system in the same way as
a small town banker in Iowa. These labor leaders have been correctly
described as the “labor lieutenants of the capitalist class.”
 
Lewis-Stalinist Alliance from 1936–1939
At the time of the Stalin-Hitler pact, Lewis had bee in an
alliance with the Stalinists for more than three years. He had
thereby secured the aid of their well-oiled national machine in his
early organizing activities. He thought he could use them and
outsmart them.
Throughout this period, Lewis constantly received indignant
protests of the union membership against the union-wrecking
activities of the Stalinist crew. The West Coast sailors and firemen
protested against the wrecking of the Maritime Federation of the
Pacific. A petition signed by four powerful unions of Los Angeles,
the ILGWU, the Auto Workers, the Rubber Workers and the SWOC,
submitted a detailed account of the autocratic rule and
union-wrecking activities of Bridges and his crew, and demanded the
removal of Bridges as CIO West Coast director. Beginning with 1938,
the factional maneuvers of the Stalinists in the Auto Workers Union
became a national scandal, etc., etc. Lewis heard all of these
protests, received all of these requests and petitions, but did not
budge an inch.
In addition Lewis was well aware of the rotten union agreements
that the Stalinists signed in the NMU, the Longshoreman’s
Union, etc., etc. – agreements which were a disgrace to the
labor movement. Lewis knew of the hounding and expulsion of union
militants, in the West Coast office workers, in the east coast NMU,
in the Gulf NMU, where Curran practically wrecked the local unions in
order to rid himself of a rank and file opposition. Lewis was
cognizant of these facts, but he forgave and forgot. He was so
liberal, as to even condone outright scabbing, as occurred last year,
when Bridges led a crew of workers through the picket lines of the
Sailors Union of the Pacific. Why not? Judging by Lewis’s own
labor record and methods, he probably considered all these practices
as wholly legitimate and certainly permissible.
 
Lewis’ Break with the Stalinists Begins
But when the Stalin-Hitler pact was signed and the American
Communist Party found itself under ferocious attack of all official
“public opinion” – that neither Lewis nor Hillman
nor Murray could ignore or tolerate. That called for action! Lewis
decided then and there that the bloc with the Stalinists must be
broken.
Of course, great democrats that they are, these labor leaders did
not bother to inform anybody of their decision. The San Francisco CIO
convention, meeting two months after the signing of the pact,
proceeded about its business, without Lewis giving the delegates so
much as a hint that a drastic revision in policy was forthcoming. The
only inkling that something was brewing came at the end of the
convention, when neither Bridges or Curran were elected as
Vice-Presidents, positions they deserved, from the point of view of
the prominence and importance of their unions.
In typical fashion, Lewis, without warning, exploded the bomb, at
the Executive Board meeting immediately following the convention. In
scathing terms, for the first time since the formation of the CIO, he
denounced the Communist Party, and warned that he would not tolerate
a double allegiance on the part of any CIO officials. He assured the
board members that a great career awaited every one of them inside
the labor movement, but only on condition that they have no outside
allegiances. As a further warning, to indicate that this was no idle
threat, Brophy, who had been a fellow traveller of the CP, was kicked
out as Organization Director and replaced by an old Miner’s
Union wheelhorse, Allan Haywood; and Harry Bridges, the most
prominent Stalinist in the CIO, was removed as West Coast Director
and instructed to confine his activities to California.
 
Why the Purge Proceeds Slowly
Since the Executive Board meeting, the purge of the Stalinists has
proceeded very slowly and hesitatingly. Lewis has discovered that it
is not easy to drive the Stalinists out of the CIO. The Stalinists
have been working in the new CIO unions from the ground up and have
intrenched themselves in numerous strategic positions of influence
and power. In many of these unions, as in the National Maritime
Union, the West Coast Longshoreman, the Agricultural Workers, the
United Electrical & Radio Workers, the white collar unions, the
Furriers, etc., they control the entire union apparatus from top to
bottom – the key locals as well as the International offices.
It is obviously impossible for Lewis to just walk in and purge the
Stalinists in these unions without, at the same time, wrecking the
unions. Lewis cannot afford to adopt such an adventuristic policy at
this time, in view of, the fight with the AFL as well as the
employers’ anti-union offensive.
While Lewis has definitely broken with the Stalinists, the
Stalinists are still trying to patch up their alliance with Lewis.
They have not as yet changed their People’s Front policy of
sycophancy and grovelling before Lewis. To this day, every local
Stalinist official prefaces every speech by a tribute to Lewis –
the great leader who can do no wrong. This belly-crawling policy aims
to hide behind Lewis’ skirts, while pushing through in the
unions the new Stalinist line.
The Stalinists are temporarily aided in these attempts, because of
the episodic disagreement between Lewis and Hillman on the CIO
attitude towards Roosevelt and the war crisis. The differences
between Lewis and Hillman, however, are temporary and unimportant.
They resolve themselves merely into a question of tactics.
 
But The Purge Will Go On
But the differences between Lewis and the Stalinists are profound
and fundamental. Lewis is a labor lieutenant of the American
capitalist class. His labor bureaucracy rests upon American
capitalism. The Stalinist party is the American agency of the Kremlin
bureaucracy. Between the two lies an unbridgeable gulf.
Lewis, and this is true of his whole machine, has so little class-
consciousness that he is, right now, cooperating with the FBI, the
detested anti-labor G-men, in order to gain a temporary factional
advantage over the rival AFL unions. Lewis will hesitate infinitely
less, as the war crisis sharpens and the army moves to jam the unions
into the strait-jacket of the war machine, to cooperate with these
same G-men to purge every Stalinist, big and small, out of the CIO.
(The fourth article of this series will appear next week.) [1]

Note by ETOL
1. This article was never published.
 




Prior to the signing of the Stalin-Hitler pact, the Stalinists
constituted a major force in the American trade union movement.
Posing as the best union fighters, the true champions of honesty,
militancy and democracy in the labor movement, supported by a
well-organized national apparatus, a strong press, with huge funds at
their disposal, the Stalinists caught the rising CIO movement of
young unsuspecting workers completely unawares and easily wormed
their way into control of numerous unions.
Once in the saddle, they showed the American labor bureaucrats how
to really organize an autocratic, reactionary and corrupt machine.
They signed agreements that disgraced the labor movement. They
blandly united with racketeers, gangsters and any reactionary forces
in the unions, in order to gain control. They systematically hounded,
slandered and persecuted all genuine militants and progressives who
dared to revolt against these high-handed practices.
It was the “Peoples Front” period of Stalinism. In
this scheme, the unions constituted the most important battle
grounds. The labor movement, suspecting nothing, was to find itself,
according to the Stalinist plan, one fine day, lined up to a man
behind the Roosevelt war machine and hellbent on shoving through a
“collective security” war alliance of America, England,
France and Russia, against the “bad, war-making fascists.”
 
Were Roosevelt’s Most Servile Agents in Unions
To push through this infamous scheme, the Stalinists converted
themselves into the most servile, belly-crawling supporters of
Roosevelt’s New Deal, picturing it as an almost suitable
substitute for socialism itself. They hounded and slandered any
worker who had the temerity to question this dishonest, reactionary
policy. Thus, this crew of union wreckers, posing as the left wing of
the unions, sidetracked the whole labor movement and helped destroy
its fighting power.
The Roosevelt government, in this period, was on passively
friendly terms with the Soviet Union. And since the American
Stalinists were laboring with might and main to line up the trade
unions behind his war machine, Roosevelt displayed an attitude of
toleration towards the Communist Party and its activities. Many of
the lesser New Deal officials actually became outright supporters or
fellow-travellers of the Stalinist movement.
The Stalinists had the additional support of John L. Lewis and
were in an official bloc with the latter throughout this “People’s
Front” period. Why did Lewis make a bloc with the very people
against whom he had waged a bitter struggle in the miners union? It
was not Lewis who had changed his basic philosophy! The Communist
Party, during the “People’s Front” period cynically
dumped overboard all talk and pretense of working for socialism or
militant union policies. It began to drape the Stars and Stripes
around itself and bellowed more patriotically than even the Daughters
of the American Revolution.
 
Lewis Was Sure He Could Break Them
Lewis and his lieutenants, drunk with victory as a result of the
first brilliant successes in rubber, auto, steel, maritime and other
industries, thought they could work with everybody, use everybody and
outsmart everybody. The Stalinists had a machine, a national press,
experienced journalists, speakers and organizers. In return for the
services of this machine, Lewis made the alliance, handing over to
the Stalinists the maritime unions, the whole west coast CIO
movement, the radio workers, the agricultural workers, the white
collar unions, etc. He was positive that he could always get rid of
the Stalinists, if he so desired.
The period from 1936 to 1939 was the hey-day of Stalinist rule and
marks a fever chart in the history of the unions which the Stalinists
controlled. Determined to line up the unions behind their "collective
security" program regardless of cost, feeling no responsibility
for the unions, cynically indifferent to the real needs and desires
of the union membership, the Stalinists pursued a deliberate policy
of “rule or ruin.”
In those unions that would not bend to their will, as in the
Sailors Union of the Pacific, the Auto Union, etc., they engaged in
bitter, irresponsible factional wars that threatened the very life of
the unions. Where they seized control, their rule was marked by
the signing of wretched contracts, making outrageous deals with
the employers, belly-crawling before any two by four politician or
public official, and a disloyal, ruthless suppression of all
opposition. The Stalinists left in their wake a trail of wrecked
unions, honest union militants corrupted into cynical officials and
thousands of disillusioned, disoriented rank and file workers.
 
Wave of Revolt Against the Stalinists
The Stalinists were driven to be more cautious and diplomatic in
the last period just preceding the signing of the Stalin-Hitler Pact,
as great rank and file movements sprang up in union after union,
challenging their autocratic rule and exposing the union-wrecking
activities of the Stalinist gang.
In 1939, this rank and file revolt gained strength and swept
through both CIO and AFL unions – in the Pocket Book makers,
the Maritime unions on both the coasts and the Gulf, the Teachers
Union, the West Coast Office Workers, the secession of important
unions from the Los Angeles CIO Council, the New York Painters and
Food Workers. This imposing rank and file revolt against the
Stalinist machine was climaxed by the titanic struggle in the Auto
Workers Union.
By 1939 the American trade unions presented a far different
picture than at the beginning of the CIO movement. The unsuspecting,
inexperienced union militants of 1934 and 1935 had undergone a
profound transformation. The new officials of the new unions had
become more cautious and more conservative both under the pressure of
capitalist public opinion and because of their lack of class
consciousness and working class philosophy.
The union movement represented to these officials, however, their
life’s career. They became therefore extremely suspicious of
and antagonistic to the Stalinists who viewed the unions merely as a
pawn and tool to realize the “Line” of the Stalinist
Party. The union officials knew one thing for sure: that their
importance and prestige, as well as their salaries, depended upon a
strong, virile union and they were interested in preserving that.
Even more hostile to Stalinism were the rank and file leaders who
were arising in different localities, veterans of the strike
struggles of the CIO, hardened and toughened by their experiences.
They had learned the hard way the meaning of Stalinism and the fact
that it was the most reactionary force in the American labor
movement. They were determined to destroy the Stalinist cancer, in
order that the labor movement might advance and grow.
(A second article on the Stalinists in the CIO will appear next week.)
 



TOLEDO, O., Nov. 5. – The fight for industrial unionism at the 55th convention of the A.F. of L. gave encouragement and hope to every trade union progressive for the establishment of a more aggressive and a more militant unionism in America in the future. But the decisions of the Convention gave no immediate encouragement to unionism in the automobile industry. The industrial union struggle may give renewed courage to workers already inside the A.F. of L., by revealing to them the possibilities of cleansing the unions of the rotten and cowardly bureaucracy that today holds the leadership, but it is almost impossible to rouse the still unorganized workers with the promise of a better unionism in the future.
 
Workers Split into Crafts
In Detroit, the shameful scene of the first constitutional convention of the United Automobile Workers is still fresh in the memory of the automobile workers. It is enough for them to know that the A.F. of L. has chopped up the automobile industry into half a dozen different crafts with half a dozen different unions, one overlapping on the other one, claiming jurisdiction. Because of the timid and cowardly policies of Dillon and Green, the situation has only become more confusing, more involved. Everywhere there is an element of uncertainty, of hesitation. Every move of the automobile International in Detroit bears a temporary, provisional character, as if Dillon himself realized that the last word has not yet been said in automobile unionism.
At Atlantic City there was expressed a certain concern over the recent excursion into the field of unionism on the part of the Sage of Port Royal, Father Coughlin. Today, Dillon, just returning from Atlantic City, has even greater cause for concern. His office has just informed him that three independent unions: the Mechanics Educational Society, the Associated Automobile Workers of America (Greer Union) and the Industrial Automobile Workers Union (Coughlin Union) have been conducting negotiations for amalgamation. These three bodies have agreed on a program and are shortly to conduct a referendum vote among their respective memberships for ratification. The program of the new union is understood to be substantially the old program of the M.E.S.A., which is based upon the recognition of a class struggle in modern society and the necessity for an aggressive, militant unionism.
 
Background of the M.E.S.A.
The Mechanics Educational Society of America is well known to all automobile workers in the Detroit area. It arose on the crest of the first strike wave at the inception of the NRA; tied up with mass picket lines all four Briggs plants in the Detroit area and held up production of the Ford model for over a month. Basing themselves upon the key men of the industry, the tool and dye makers, they led a series of daring and spectacular strikes which electrified the whole labor movement and provided the basis for the further organization of the automobile workers. The American Federation of Labor, quick to seize the opportunity, sent in organizers and granted federal charters with a liberal hand. After the first major betrayal of the automobile workers by Collins and Green on March 25 of last year, the M.E.S.A. proved too weak to act as an independent factor and suffered as heavily as the federal unions themselves. The M.E.S.A. soon realized that it could not survive in the industry if it was limited to tool and dye makers; it therefore broadened its jurisdiction to include all workers engaged in the metal industry at its second convention in Cleveland. Since then it has had a similar experience to that of the A.F. of L. unions. In the Detroit area the union membership sharply declined and the unions are stagnating. In Toledo and Cleveland comparatively strong locals have been built up and have recruited a considerable number of production workers.
 
Evaluation of the Associated
The Associated Automobile Workers of America has a novel history. It was first organized as a federal local of the A.F. of L. in the Hudson plant. There the workers, under the careful tutelage of Collins, were initiated into the mysteries of class collaboration. About a year ago the local seceded from the A.F. of L. and formed the Associated Automobile Workers of America with a strong local in the Hudson plant and a base in several of the other Detroit plants. Under the guidance now of their president, Arthur E. Greer, they were carefully coached in the spirit of humility; grievances were to be adjusted by arbitration, etc. Greer finally got hooked up with Byrd, of the Automobile Labor Board and tried to take the whole A.A.W.A. in tow with the company union. The workers refused to follow. And since then they have been feeling their own way along, step by step, and are cautiously moving to a realization that the only unionism worthy of the name must be based upon a clear-cut fighting policy predicated on the fact that a class struggle exists in modern society.
 
The Coughlin Union
The evolution of the Industrial Automobile Workers Union takes on an added importance from the recent events in Akron and the company union steel convention in Canton, Ohio. This union originated during the great days of “union building” of Wolman and the Automobile Labor Board. The Dodge workers elected their representatives to the collective bargaining board of the Dodge plant, as per instructions of the Automobile Labor Board. After a month of this “collective bargaining” they found that they could register their complaints and had the power to air their grievances before the management, but beyond getting a light bulb replaced or a water bubbler repaired, their power did not extend. So having passed through all of the devious mazes and windings of the New Deal merry-go-round, they found themselves in the same place where they started from: only more experienced, more hardened, more suspicious of the glib promises of employers and government officials. Today they have an increasing sympathy for a program of militancy, class struggle, a fighting determination to win, and a trade unionism based upon such principles.
 
Green Policy Repulses Independents
Under ordinary circumstances, independent unions in their natural evolution would gravitate towards the A.F. of L.; and unless insuperable obstacles were placed in the way of their joining, would become a part of the official family. The A.F. of L., by its size, its prestige, tradition and treasury, is naturally the main attractive force in the trade union field. The fact that these independent unions at Dodge and Hudson are looking instead to an amalgamation independent of the A.F. of L. is striking proof that Collins, Dillon and Green have in the course of a year and a half run through all of their accumulated credit and will now have to take the path of some real, old fashioned organizing in the automobile field or lose all standing in the Detroit area.
The emergence of a powerful, aggressive, fighting union in the automobile industry (it is estimated the amalgamated union would number 40,000) can have a highly salutary effect upon the automobile workers. First, it will clear the field of all the different small independent unions and will eliminate a considerable amount of the confusion. Second, and this is the more important reason, the pressure upon the treacherous bureaucracy of the A.F. of L. from within and without will become enormous. With the proper perspective and strategy, the possibility will emerge of forming a powerful, fighting union through an amalgamation of the independent union and the A.F. of L. International on the basis of a convention, democratically called, democratically selecting its own officers and commanding jurisdiction over all employees working in or around all automobile and auto parts plants.
 



DETROIT, Mich., Sept. 15. – On the heels of the betrayal of the automobile workers by the top-officialdom of the American Federation of Labor in setting up the International union in the automobile industry, the Mechanics Educational Society of America has inaugurated an organization campaign to stage a comeback in the Detroit area, today, at its first mass meeting, held at Carpathia Hall. Mathew Smith, national secretary of the society, reported on the plans for the campaign and the enthusiasm which the Detroit locals have shown in the organization drive. The recent action of Green in handpicking the executive committee of the new automobile International has made joint action and cooperation between the A.F. of L. and the M.E.S.A. much more difficult and has convinced anew the members of this society that they must remain as an independent union, at the present time.
* * *
The automobile unions in Detroit are still in a very precarious state and the recent action of the A.F. of L. at its automobile convention has helped sow more confusion in the trade unions and has added indecision and hesitation to the whole movement.
The various federal locals of the A.F. of L. in Detroit continue stagnating; Dillon is threatening that “a campaign to unionize 141 U.S. auto plants will be in full swing by Oct. 1”; but Dillon has been threatening the automobile workers with an organization drive for the last year.
* * *
A new savior of the automobile workers has entered into the Detroit ring; none other than the justice-loving radio priest – Father Coughlin. This unscrupulous demagogue is already beginning an attack against the A.F. of L. International union on the grounds that the officials were appointed and were not democratically elected by the membership. Without question this attack will meet with a sympathetic reception on the part of many automobile workers.
At the Dodge-Chrysler plant, the local union, which arose out of the collective bargaining board of the Automobile Labor Board, has after a long evolution become a bona-fide independent union with considerable influence at the Dodge plant. Recently it has decided to start an organization drive for all Dodge workers and, at the suggestion of some member. Father Coughlin was invited as the first guest speaker. The Father has remained to help the union officials “direct” the campaign; he is attempting to use his position at the Dodge local to organize new “Coughlin” unions, based upon peace and justice and to take the whole thing in tow to his “League for Social Justice.” As a result, the union is now engaged in a death struggle between two factions – “Pro-Coughlin” and “Anti-Coughlin.”
* * *
Those workers who favor allowing Coughlin to remain only have in mind, of course, the building up of their union; but they must realize that Coughlin can only wreck their union and make it an adjunct to his reactionary “League for Social Justice.” Father Coughlin demagogically attacks the A.F. of L. leadership for a lack of democracy, but as was suggested at a recent meeting of the Dodge local, no one has ever heard of any elections ever taking place in the “League for Social Justice.” These attacks have all the ear-marks of a home-grown variety of propaganda used by Hitler or Mussolini in their own respective countries prior to their seizure of power; after they seized power, they smashed the trade union movement by open and undisguised terror. Coughlin is interested in exploiting the dissatisfaction of the workers with their own treacherous trade union officials only for his own reactionary ends; the automobile workers, in order to grow and build fighting unions must steer clear of Coughlin!
 



TOLEDO, Ohio. – As a culmination of a year’s hard work, during which time their forces were tested in a dozen different battles, the automobile workers sent delegates to Detroit to set up an International union in the automobile industry with full autonomy within the statutes of the American Federation of labor. The union they expected was to have full jurisdiction over all who work in ,or around automobile or auto parts plants, it was to be democratically controlled and officers were to be elected by a majority of the delegates in the convention and they were to receive salaries comparable to the wages received by the workers in the plants. Instead the delegates came back with a charter of a craft union with jurisdiction over production workers, with all officers of the new International hand-picked by the president of the A.F. of L., Bill Green, and salaries of officers racked up to as high as $6,500 per year.
The cruel blow that struck the automobile workers was deliberately aimed and it has weakened their organization as effectively as a successful onslaught of an open shop campaign. But that roar of mighty protest which rose from the floor at the Tuesday session of the convention, when the delegates rejected with indignation and scorn the proposal to appoint Dillon, is a sign of that inexhaustible vitality which has carried the automobile workers forward despite the sabotage and betrayals of the corrupt bureaucracy.
Although most of the union delegates are comparatively new to unionism, the majority of them expected some railroading and were doing all they could to prepare themselves for it; but such open, cynical perfidy, such an arrogant disregard of even the formalities of democratic procedure; such flagrant violations of their expressed wishes – that came as a surprise to even many a die-hard.
 
The Work of the Bureaucrats
The executive council of the A.F. of L. deliberately pushed the young automobile unions into the labyrinth of craft unionism; it artificially created craft divisions which do not exist in the industry and cynically imposed upon the automobile workers a leadership which they do not want and for whom they have no respect. They have placed their heavy hands around the throat of the young International and deliberately attempted to involve the union with the plague of jurisdictional disputes They are attempting to cut the membership up into half a dozen different unions and thus effectively paralyze their activity and destroy their militancy. In addition they harnessed the automobile workers to an incompetent and corrupt bureaucracy which has taken over the powers of the organization with a heavy dictatorial hand, although it heard expressed on the floor of the convention the contempt and hate for it, on the part of the overwhelming majority of the delegates. Ostensibly, Green and Dillon routed the progressives at the convention. The charter of the International limits its jurisdiction to production workers; Dillon and his machine hold the entire national apparatus in their hands. Actually, Green and the executive council suffered one of the most serious setbacks in recent years. The heavy, cumbersome machinery of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy, which appears cunning and well oiled only when serious opposition is lacking, was forced to reveal itself in all its nakedness. No camouflage, no subtle maneuvers were possible here. All of Green’s eloquence went for naught. After his first defeat on the floor, he no longer dared chance
a vote on any important question. He bluntly informed the delegates that their voting one way or another made no difference. He was forced to come out with the cold, unadorned ultimatum that the delegates must accept his conditions, or he would smash them! The reverberations of this ultimatum will be heard for many a day in the labor movement of this country.
 
Strength of Progressives
The progressives, who have organized themselves in a very serious manner since the Chevrolet strike, in their determination to oppose the Dillon machine, have now the duty of reconsidering the scope of their work, in the light of what happened at the automobile convention.
At the Detroit convention, the progressives commanded more strength than they themselves expected. Almost every delegation representing the real unions: Toledo, Cleveland, Norwood, South Bend, Kenosha – voted with the progressives. The only real large local supporting Dillon was the Seaman Body local 19059 of Milwaukee. Otherwise the Dillon machine received most of its strength directly from the small locals of a membership of twenty to perhaps a hundred and some who probably came representing not so much membership as their good intentions; locals such as the ones in Detroit, Flint, Lansing, small locals in Wisconsin, etc., etc. The progressive strength proved larger than expected not because of last minute additions to their bloc, but because the early stages of the fight on the convention floor revolved chiefly on the basis of anti-Dillon sentiment and against any appointment of officers. The Toledo delegation, counting some 38 votes, were actually the opponents of the progressives in their own local, and were not elected by their local membership, but hand-picked by the local executive committee. The pressure of the progressives in Toledo was great and was keenly felt; the fact that the other side had no other program of their own, plus the combined pressure of the progressives from the other cities at the convention pushed the entire Toledo delegation to support the progressive bloc at the Detroit convention.
The progressives, although they had come to the convention partially prepared to do battle were not anywhere near organized to the extent of the reactionary machine. The progressives had no slate, and no possibility of agreeing on one at the convention. Had the question of candidates come up for a vote, the delegations would have split wide open.
 
The Enemy to Overcome
The progressives made a splendid showing at this first convention, but even the short experience has made it obvious that a real progressive group that is to challenge the “leadership” of Dillon, cannot be made up of scraps and patches. It must be systematically built up around a broad program which can command the interest of the great majority of the automobile workers. All unreliable elements, all local union “politicians” who sprout up around election time, must be ruthlessly eliminated.
Long ago the progressive movement of the A.F. of L. in this country came to the conclusion that the fight for a progressive program in the trade unions involves simultaneously a struggle of ruthless extermination with the present “leadership” of the A.F. of L. which is the most venal and stupid of the whole world. To these leaders, the needs and desires of the rank and file workers are as foreign as the customs of the Zulu tribes They dread the very thought of struggle and fear the development and growth of young progressive movements, as they fear the plague itself. When they find their positions and salaries endangered, they are ready to collaborate with the police, the bosses, with anybody to smash the insurgent movement even though they may wreck a whole movement in the process. The present fossilized leadership of the A.F. of L. stands today as one of the greatest obstacles in the path of the automobile workers. They will have to be swept aside, before the automobile unions can develop to their fullest potentialities.
It seems, from observing recent trends in the American Federation of Labor and the trade union movement in general in this country that many of the new unions, in the mass production industries are beginning to occupy a more conspicuous place in the A.F. of L. and are beginning to displace in importance, to a degree, the older building trades unions.
The automobile industry is led by the most self-confident and aggressive combination of industrial magnates and financiers. It is one of the few remaining branches of industry which is still able to create its own “prosperity” without benefit of the federal government. This business combination is least inclined to “sentimentality” in relations with its employees. They will not yield an inch of ground until they are forced to do so by the combined strength of the automobile workers. That, it is obvious, can only be accomplished on the picket line; but that is precisely the place where Dillon is least interested in going. The automobile industry is super-centralized and integrated. The automobile workers, split up into a dozen different craft unions, are least capable of fighting the confident and ruthless barons of the automobile industry. Again the present leadership and its policies block the road!
The reaction, on the part of the progressives to the treachery of the Green-Dillon machine was very healthy. They did not allow themselves to be provoked, or fall into the trap of quitting the unions, and leaving, at this time, the bulk of the inexperienced workers to the tender mercies of Dillon. They are preparing to appeal the decision of the executive council to the A.F. of L. convention in October; meanwhile they are going back to their locals to strengthen their numbers and to prevent all attempts at splitting them up.
They are beginning to realize that to challenge the leadership of the bureaucracy means the beginning of a battle of ruthless extermination; and that the battle once undertaken, cannot be stopped halfway. Dillon will spare no effort in building np his machine. He will spare neither effort nor cost to destroy the insurgent movement of the progressives. For that he has the support of the whole A.F. of L. bureaucracy.
Despite the heavy task and all of the obstacles involved, the progressives can come out of this battle victorious. If they succeed in arousing the still untouched thousands of automobile workers in the industry, whose interests they represent, if they push their progressive program and win ever wider support; If in addition, they rely upon the progressive groups of all the other unions, especially in rubber and steel, they will have created a movement which will prove itself invincible in battle against any and every foe.
 



TOLEDO, Ohio, Aug. 19. – Dillon and. Co. are girding their loins for the convention of the automobile workers to be held in Detroit, Aug. 26–31. The usually quiet office of Dillon at the Hoffman Building is bustling with activity. Dillon himself is reported to be “somewhere in the middle west.” We are informed he will visit Cincinnati, various points in Wisconsin and also St. Louis.
The pleasant news is also released that in the last few weeks the American Federation of Labor has granted charters to two “large” locals in Detroit, while a third “large” local has applied for a charter and will receive one in time to participate in the convention. This spirited campaign of organization has not been confined to Detroit alone. Several cities in Wisconsin, in South Bend, Richmond, Ind., Waukegan, Ill., Cleveland, Ohio, Grand Rapids, Mich., Birmingham, Ala., etc. etc. have had new locals formed recently.
Toledo, because of the successful battles waged at Auto-Lite and the Chevrolet plants, has developed a comparatively strong and large progressive group, out to challenge the rotten “leadership” of Dillon. Toledo has therefore become in a certain sense the beacon light for the automobile workers throughout the country. Therefore the Toledo progressives had to be kept out of Detroit at all costs. Therefore even the discredited former business agent of the Toledo federal local 18394 was used by the executive board to put through a motion to have convention delegates hand-picked by the executive board. The president of the union refuses to allow any democratic discussion on the floor; all motions are ruled out of order; the convention call is not even read and twenty cops are stationed at the entrance of the union hall to terrorize the membership and to prevent any distribution of the progressive program.
The Flint Buick local, it will be recalled, wanted to strike in solidarity with Toledo, during the Chevrolet strike. Dillon had a pretty hard time keeping them out of the fight. It was rumored that some progressives were gaining influence in the Flint local. Therefore one of the militants, Killinger, is brought up on charges by Dillon. The executive committee drops the charges; Dillon proceeds to read him out of the union. No troublemakers from Flint must be permitted to disturb the convention at Detroit.
 
Labor Skates “Not Interested”
The progressives are demanding an International union with full jurisdiction over all who work in or around automobile or automobile parts plants. This program is popular with the membership. It corresponds to their interests. The petrified officialdom at Atlantic City, however, have more important matters to worry about than the demands and needs of the automobile workers. These “labor leaders” have their own vested interests to look after. That is why Dillon is so busy “somewhere in the middle West.” That is why the American Federation of Labor is granting charters so hastily to newly organized “large” locals.
Most of the federal unions of the United Automobile Workers are, as is well known, in bad shape. Every attempt at organization has been deliberately sabotaged by the Dillon office. It is becoming increasingly clear why the convention was called at this time, and why a convention of the rubber unions will be called next month. The executive council felt that today they are still strong enough to place their heavy hands around the throat of an automobile International; if they waited, things would perhaps get out of hand.
Obviously they are not leaving things to chance. The Dillon machine is working full steam ahead. The credentials committee will probably be able to report quite a few “large” locals formed “somewhere in the middle west” and receiving charters just in time to participate at the Detroit convention.
The progressives are making preparations to fight any steamrolling tactics of a corrupt bureaucracy. Their forces are probably still too weak to dominate the convention, but they have been effectively innoculated’ against the “virus” of quitting mass unions, because their leaders betray them. They are planning to enlarge their numbers, and strengthen their ranks for the inevitable battles of the future.
 



DETROIT, Mich. – The unofficial date for the convocation of a constitutional convention of delegates from the present federal unions to set up an International in the automobile and auto parts industry, is supposed to have been set for August 26. This unofficial notice has already engendered a tremendous enthusiasm among automobile workers throughout the country. The response has proved again that the time is doubly ripe for the establishment of an International and will undoubtedly become a major factor in the organization of the workers of this key industry.
President Wm. Green, the executive council of the American Federation of Labor, and Francis Dillon, lead of the National Council of the United Automobile Workers Union, however, have not yet broken their silence with regard to the proposed convention. Nobody in the Dillon office at Detroit, knows what arrangements have been made for this convention, where it will be held or anything else about it. None of the locals have yet received instructions with regards to the convention, on what basis delegates will be elected, what the powers of the convention will be, or for that matter, even received an announcement of the fact that on August 26 a constitutional convention will be held.
 
Officials Dodge Question
In view of the fact that only about four weeks intervene between now and Aug. 26th, and that some of the federal automobile locals meet only once every two weeks, the conduct of the A.F. of L. officials can only be characterized as light-minded and that they are not seriously concerned about the setting up of an International in the automobile and auto-parts industry.
If the activities of the leadership of the A.F. of L. is characterized by delay and sabotage, the growing rank and file movement in many of the federal automobile locals, especially in Toledo, characterized itself by its militancy, class conscious leadership, and a growing confidence in its ability to organize the automobile industry and conduct the affairs of the union. The voice of this progressive movement is making itself heard in many of the federal locals more and more clearly, demanding that a constitutional convention be convoked in
Detroit on Aug. 26th, as announced; that only bonafide delegates elected by the men of the locals be permitted to vote; that an International be set up including all workers, skilled and unskilled, engaged in he manufacture of automobiles and auto parts.
 
An Industrial Union Aim
In other words the demand is unmistakably for an industrial union to be completely democratic in form, electing out of the convention all of its officers and that the membership have the right to recall any officer who does not carry out his duties in the organization; that the new International include tool and die makers, maintenance men, etc. etc., and that all workers of this industry be eligible for membership in the union with no discrimination because of race, color, creed or political affiliation.
The automobile workers have become steeled in two years of battle with government mediators, boards, automobile corporations and treacherous officials in their own midst They are now in no mood for “playing around” with the idea of an International union. Regardless of what the intentions of the officials in Washington may be, the progressive workers in the automobile unions are determined that a constitutional convention be called on Aug. 26, for the purpose of setting up an International on the above mentioned basis, and are-determined that nothing shall stand in their path for the realization of their goal.
 



The sixth annual convention of the CIO auto workers’ union, concluded August 16 in Buffalo, served to highlight and dramatize all the underlying contradictions which characterize the CIO movement as a whole in this critical war period. In no previous convention has the dilemma of the labor movement, faced with the governmental preparations for totalitarian war, been so clearly revealed.
In many respects this convention was the most militant and most progressive in the whole fighting history of the UAW. But, at the same time, the delegates at Buffalo put on the books of the UAW constitution the most reactionary provision it has ever contained – the amendment barring members from elective or appointive posts because of their political beliefs.
On the one hand the debates on political issues of the day were the sharpest and clearest in the union’s history, the speeches of the delegates showing the great strides forward in the political consciousness of the membership; on the other hand the International Executive Board was left unchanged by the election – the few board members who were defeated being replaced with essentially the same type as before.
 
Riddle of the Convention
What is the riddle of this powerful and vital union which has made great advances both in organization and in political understanding, and yet has returned Thomas and Addes and all the other leaders, with a few exceptions, to office? This leadership is certainly the democratic choice of the delegates, since democracy reigns in the UAW as in no other international union.
Does this mean that the auto workers are content with their leadership? That cannot be so, since the delegates placed plenty of restrictions on leadership, and more than once voted down the unanimous recommendations of the International officers whet the interests of the rank and flit were endangered. R.J. Thomas. who was elected by acclamation himself complained several times during the convention that every proposal he made was turned down. The behind-the-scenes maneuvers of the top leaders were attacked by many delegates; ever the capitalist press was forced to comment that in the UAW, unlike in so many other unions, the leadership sits on an uneasy throne. The answer to the contradictions lies in two main underlying facts:

First, while there is a great opposition to the Roosevelt war party and to the whole administrative apparatus of the war ma chine, the OPM, the Mediation Board, etc., this opposition has not been thought out to the end. While a great body of UAW militants oppose the OPM and the Hillman type of unionism, they are nevertheless wholly in favor of the national defense program The obvious contradiction between these two positions has not yet occurred to the union membership.
 
Secondly, while the membership as represented by the delegates at the convention, have no great faith in the present UAW leadership, they have not yet formed a new leadership in whom they have faith and confidence and whom they will follow along the path of struggle in defense of. the union.
 

Background of Conflicts
Ever since the St. Louis convention last year, there has been a fierce clique fight in the UAW International Executive Board. Addes and his group have fought bitterly with Reuther and Thomas Frankensteen and their clique. What was this fight about? It began purely as a struggle for posts and prestige, nothing more:
But in the course of a year, the UAW, profiled by its own organizational progress, collided head-on with the war machine, and the militant membership set up a howl against the strike-breaking, union-busting government apparatus which had been hurled at their heads.
The struggle in the CIO between Sidney Hillman and John L. Lewis, over the important and basic union-issues relating to the attitude of labor toward Roosevelt and to the war apparatus of the administration dominated by the dollar-a-year men, had already come out into the open and revealed as a basic issue the question of’ the independence of the labor movement.
The Lewis group was far more progressive and reflected more correctly the needs and desires of the masses of workers. Hillman and his tendency represented the cynical and unabashed labor lieutenants of the war machine who were willing to tie labor to the tailcoats of the Wall Street politicians who dominate the war production agencies.
The clique struggle within the UAW tops was caught up in this great swirl around Hillman and Lewis, and the board members became partisans inside the UAW of the two groups in the CIO.
This did not occur because the top UAW leaders became convinced by themselves of the correctness of the respective arguments; on the contrary, they would have preferred to limit their fight to power politics. But through the great lessons of the North American strike, the Allis Chalmers strike, the GM strike, and other big battles which brought the union into a clash with the administration agencies, the basic issues being fought out by the Lewis and Hillman groups seeped down to the thinking sections of the membership of the UAW, and wide sections of the membership had taken sides and paired off by the time the Buffalo convention convened. The leadership only reflected this division.
The Reuther group, led by and large by such renegade Socialist Party members as the Reuther brothers, George Nordstrom, Joe Ditzel, and Emil Mazey, constituted a hard and conscious group who, because of previous political training, propagated their policy clearly and formed a tight and well-organized caucus propagating the full-rounded Hillman program on all issues. They used their training in the Socialist Party to fight for the most reactionary tendency in the labor movement.
The Addes group cannot be said in that sense to have existed as a caucus at all. This group was and remains a top clique of job politicians, whose policy it was never to let the membership in on the secret of why they were fighting Reuther.
 
Addes Group Folds Up
In the whole past year the leaders of the Addes group took a stand only on questions of job power and prestige. On all the basic issues they went along with Reuther. They upheld Frankensteen in his strikebreaking role at North American, they voted to bully the GM workers back into the plants without an agreement in their recent strike, and have in general been no more and no less conservative on the important issues than the Reuther group.
At the convection, therefore, the Addes group was immersed in the problem of their own jobs. They thought without a doubt that they could win supremacy in the UAW by exposing Reuther as a factionalist and by posing as the great defenders of unity. Not only did they give leadership, but. they had to be practicably blackjacked by leading militants from Flint, who understood the need for a basic light, into calling a caucus meeting to discuss the problems. They called a caucus only after terrific pressure.
The militant element at the convention, who came prepared in a general way to fight the Hillmanism which threatened to sap the union’s independence, constituted a majority of the convention delegates. This militant element, led by the well-knit and able delegation from Flint, were attracted on several issues to the Addes group when it showed merely a half-hearted pretense at fighting Reuther.
These militants fresh from the picket lines, came to the convention with a great desire to get a crack at the Hillman program. The first few Addes caucus meetings for that reason were big enthusiastic gatherings which discussed in strong terms the basic questions of the independence of the union from administration domination, and pilloried the Hillman tendency for belly-crawling to the government, stooging for Wall Street, and the like. Addes and his top clique did not lead this group, they were pushed around by it in spite of themselves.
The Communist Party people during the whole period since the St. Louis convention of the UAW were the extreme supporters of Addes, paralleling in the auto union their support of John L. Lewis in the CIO as a whole.
However, any discussion of the Stalinists in auto in terms of two or three years ago is totally unrealistic. Precisely because the auto union has been such a militant union, and because the Stalinists have played such a big role, they exposed themselves more thoroughly in auto than in any other section of the labor movement.
At Milwaukee, in 1937, the CP members were the organizers .and. leaders of the Unity group which commanded the major portion of the union, and throughout this period they were considered as the great progressive[s] and militants in auto.
 
Stalinists Lose Ground
At the Cleveland convention in 1938, while they suffered from a split with Walter Reuther, and had already compromised somewhat by their unprincipled factionalism and disruption, the Stalinists still were a controlling force at the convention and had the largest single unified bloc.
In St. Louis last year, at the height of the Stalin-Hitler pact, they arrived at the convention having lost heavily in Detroit, having paid a heavy price as a result of their flip-flop off the Roosevelt bandwagon. They voted at the convention against the prevailing pro-Roosevelt mood and were a minority also on the Red issue.
Only the fortitude circumstance that John L. Lewis’s policy was similar to theirs in opposition to Roosevelt, enabled the Stalinists to balance themselves. In addition, their new line enabled them to attract the great anti-war elements among the militant membership, and made it possible for them boldly to take a hand in the organization of aircraft and establish new bases for themselves as a result.
No such happy accident and no such opportunity accompanied their recent new turn. On the contrary, the Stalinists in auto stand now completely exposed before the whole conscious membership and at the convention their nakedness was displayed before all the informed delegates.
In the first phase they arrived at Buffalo with a line opposed to Lewis. Secondly, their new flip-flop lost them all standing as a union group and cost them popular support among the auto workers who now saw them as tricksters who were puppets of the Stalin regime in Russia. Third, their numerical strength had catastrophically decreased. While the Stalinists still control a few large locals, they are unable to use them any longer as a base for bigger endeavors, and this was shown at Buffalo.
All of this resulted in great demoralization of their own people and in boundless confusion. The idea that the Stalinists today act as a highly disciplined force in auto is untrue; that is only a memory of the past.
One must remember that in the UAW the Stalinists have not been able to sail ahead as they have in the National Maritime Union, the Transport Workers etc. In these unions the Communist Party had a monopoly of leadership and faced only the out-and-out reactionary opposition, by and large.
In the auto union they had to face competition with every tendency in the labor movement, in the presence of a highly militant and aroused working class engaged constantly in class struggles. Here, faced with real tests, the Stalinists starting with their largest, most conscious and most experienced organized group, have squandered their capital month by month and year by year until, at Buffalo, they hardly dared to open their mouths.
The Stalinists’ strategy, carefully worked out in advance, completely missed flire in actual performance at the Buffalo convention.
Previously the supporters of Lewis and Addes, and bitter opponents of Hillman and Reuther and Thomas, they were forced to try to efface the memory of this on the eve of the convention, to switch completely around, forget the North American strike, and try, in order to save themselves, to get harmony and unity between the warring groups. They had the end in view of gradually drawing Addes and his friends to the support of their pro-war program. and uniting with Reuther and Thomas. This done, they would have been able to speed the union along the rails of Roosevelt’s war machine. But alas ... their power did not correspond to their big plans!
No sooner did the convention open than Thomas rudely hurled back the CP support offered him. Reuther pressed his campaign against the Stalinists with renewed intensity, bent on unseating their delegates and on crucifying them on the West Coast. In sheer desperation, the Stalinists had to trudge along shamefully with the Addes group, the only group that would tolerate them.
At the present juncture, in order to keep their dwindling base, the Stalinists cannot drop Addes and his people, without first coming to an understanding with Reuther and Hillman. Will such an understanding be forthcoming? All indications are negative. The Roosevelt administration, and Hillman as part of it, will not tolerate the Communist Party people precisely because they are weak and discredited. To hang on, they must continue in a way to oppose Reuther and Hillman, although that is contrary to their whole program. In any case, as a major force the Stalinists are through in auto. Discredited as they are, they cannot mobilize the militant elements with their present line. The great body of union fighters who are moving forward towards a progressive program cannot be won by the CP.
 
The Coming Clash
While Reuther had a tight caucus functioning all through, and Addes tried weakly to form one, the chief aspect of the convention was the fluidity of the delegates. Caucus lines were crossed and re-crossed on different questions, and on many issues almost the whole convention opposed the unanimous leadership at the top. Some of the most militant and well-thought out speeches on the OPM, on government control of labor, were delivered by rank-and-file delegates at this convention.
This militant element, clearer on basic issues than ever before, represented a great positive weight at the convention. With unequalled boldness this positive weight put to the forefront the big organization problem – the organization of aircraft. The insistence upon this organization exceeded the demand at St. Louis for the organization of Ford. An assessment will be voted to pay for the aircraft drive, and the whole convention centered to a large degree around this problem.
The Roosevelt and Hillman program for aircraft is to adopt a scheme similar to the shipyard agreements which freeze wages. Inevitably, the aircraft organizational drive will clash with the Roosevelt administration, and will bring out all the militancy and fight of the auto union. That is the positive road the union is really going to take in spite of the top leadership. Couple this fact with the fact that this is also the road of the whole CIO in its fight for complete domination of the American labor movement, and you can say for sure that this fight started at Buffalo, which began as a clique fight, will deepen and clarify, and in the course of clashes with the apparatus of the war machine will become the major aspect of the labor movement and its advancement in the yea? ahead.
The leadership is forced to propel the union into the aircraft drive not only because of the insistence of the rank and file, but in the interests of their own preservation. The AFL threatens to capture aircraft and that cannot be tolerated by the UAW; moreover, priority curtailment of raw materials for auto threatens to drastically cut down employment in auto and face the UAW with a vastly reduced working membership. The aircraft drive will be pushed and pushed hard.
 
Temper of Membership
In spite of the desire of the UAW Board members to patch things up and build a unified top machine to their mutual benefit, the aircraft drive will sharply pose all the basic issues confronting the auto union today; this, plus the accumulating bitterness of the Lewis-Hillman fight is bound to split the UAW board more widely than ever in the past year. Reuther has the majority of the board today. But in the ensuing struggles, the problem of who controls the majority of the board will be decided by the temper of the membership and only by that factor.
Addes can still be expected to work closely with Lewis. What direction will he get from him? The Lewis machine in the CIO is made up of the old line wheel-horses of the Miners union. In the Buffalo convention, Lewis did not attend and throw his personal weight behind the Addes group; he did not do this because Lewis is a prestige politician, and would not risk his prestige and standing where he was not sure of victory. He sent instead his man Alan Haywood, whose contribution, with or without Lewis’s aid, was the unprincipled horse-trade by which Frankensteen was assured a board job in exchange for his support to Addes, dumping Reuther, and making some deals as to appointments in the aircraft set-up. The North American fight was hushed up as a result of this deal.
Such a deal cooked up by the boys in the back room might have smoothly gone over in an AFL convention, or even in the Mine Workers or Steel Workers, but when it reached the red hot floor of the UAW convention its rottenness was exposed and derided and bitterly resented by the militant delegation. This type of tactic is typical of the Lewis machine.
But events are unquestionably going to propel Lewis toward more progressive positions as the struggle for the building of the CIO progresses, because he is staking his future not on Roosevelt and his war adventure, but upon the future and strengthening of the CIO. This may tend to force Addes in his turn also to take a more progressive stand.
Reuther on the other hand, to meet the new militancy of the aircraft drive, will use his new majority if possible to kick out the radical and militant elements under the constitutional amendment passed at the convention. This is his only defense against the new onrush and the auto union may witness, while it is surging forward organizationally, an attempt by the top group to behead the militants and isolate them.
 
Know What They Want
But the militants from Cleveland, Flint and elsewhere, at this convention showed the greatest solidarity of ideas in the history of the union, and demonstrated that they know what they want. There is no question that many of this fighting group will break in the coming period decisively with the war machine, and this fighting core of men who pushed Addes as it did at the Buffalo
convention, will push further in the coming months, for a program to build the union in the face of any and all opposition. To understand the auto union, it is necessary to understand the courageous fighting men who make up its heart and sinews. They are determined to build. Those who go along with them they will accept. Those who stand in their way they will brush aside; the veterans of the sit-downs and scores of labor battles, are determined that the UAW shall march forward, organize aircraft, solidify their gains, and protect and defend the most powerful labor union in the history of the country. In the course of this struggle, these union men who have learnt so much in the past years, who have developed so far, will grow in stature and will insure a fighting leadership for American labor.







John L. Lewis will address the Buffalo convention of the United Auto Workers-CIO, it was announced Tuesday.
Coupled with the 10–9 vote of the International Executive Board of the UAW, refusing Sidney Hillman an invitation to speak, John L. Lewis’ appearance may lead to a dramatic clash of the pro-Lewis forces with the Hillmanites at the convention.




DETROIT – Every convention of the Auto Workers Union constitutes a landmark in American labor history. The constitutional convention of the UAW, scheduled to open in Buffalo on August 4th will be no exception to this rule.
The great battle looming in the CIO between the Hillman and the Lewis forces will find its initial test of strength at this convention.
Relations between the Lewis-Addes and Thomas-Reuther groups have become increasingly embittered. The International Executive Board is divided into two hostile camps. Things have reached such a sharp turn that the board rejected by a vote of 10 to 9 the proposal made at its last meet ing to invite Sidney Hillman to address the UAW convention.
The sad fact must be recorded, however, that the Lewis-Addes forces have not yet indicated clearly what they stand for.
 
Hillmanite Line Is Clear
Everybody knows where the Reuther-Thomas group stands. Comprising about half the union leadership and controlling such key sections as the General Motors, Chrysler and the Aircraft divisions, this group follows the Hillman program. It has sold itself lock, stock and barrel to the Roosevelt war machine. It supports the OPM and the National Mediation Board and, in general is working overtime to place labor in the army straight jacket.
Of course the Hillmanite program, when boldly put, is not very popular with the auto workers or any other group of workers. The workers interests are in a diametrically opposite direction. The workers must fight for constant wage increases, if they are even to hold their own in this period of upward-spiralling prices.
In order to chloroform the auto workers so that against their better judgment and against their real desires they would line up behind the war machine, the Reuther-Thomas group has initiated a virulent red-baiting campaign reminiscent of Homer Martin at his worst. Reuther and Frankensteen announced months ago that they would seek an amendment to the UAW constitution to bar all members, sympathizers, etc. of so-called “subversive groups.” That is where the Reuther-Thomas group stands and this is the program it will fight for at the Buffalo convention.
The other half of the top union leadership, the so-called Addes group, has generally supported John L. Lewis and his policies. What is the policy of John L. Lewis’ followers in the UAW? Nobody knows for sure. The Addes people caucus against the Thomas-Reuther group, they compete for positions with them, but they have not yet clearly revealed what their union program is and what the union will look like if the membership grants them the leadership.
John L. Lewis has unquestionably taken a more progressive stand on many recent union issues than Hillman and his supporters. This much cannot be said, however, for Addes and his group.
Literally on every important union question that has arisen inside the UAW in the past year, the Addes group all voted solidly with hhe Hillman men on the UAW International Executive Board. The Board voted unanimously not to call the GM strike, and endorsed acceptance of the GM contract without the shop steward system against the express instructions of teh GM delegated conference. The Board voted unanimously to call off the Ford strike before the union secured a signed contract with the company.
The Board likewise voted unanimously to approve the strike-breaking actions of Frankensteen in the North American situation. This means the Board approved the dictatorial Homer Martin policy of removing without trial a local union leadership and appointing administrators over the membership. This means the Board approved F’rankensteen’s public denunciation of a wholly justified strike. This means the Board approved Frankensteen’s infamous statements welcoming the strikebreaking actions of the army and the Roosevelt administration.
 
Role of the Stalinists
Tagging along behind th Addes group until very recently was the Communist Party bloc. Throughout the period of the Stalin-Hitler pact, the Stalinists pretended to be the sterling militants of the union. They opposed the Reuther-Thomas reactionary red-baiting campaign. They opposed the policy of subservience to the National Mediation Board and the war machine. They were active in the organisation of the aircraft workers on the West Coast. They denounced Frankensteen for his strikebreaking activity. They appealed to every local union to denounce Frankensteen and his policy and to uphold the North American aircraft workers.
But now, with the new switch of their party line, the Stalinists have abandoned the North American aircraft workers cold. They will not fight out the decisive issues of this battle at the coming convention; they have already reversed their two-year-old campaign and are proceeding to grovel and crawl before the Thomas-Reuther group, having openly come out for Thomas’ re-election. In short, the Stalinists today are back to the Days of the People’s Front in full support of the Roosevelt war machine.
 
Union’s Great Gains
The Buffalo convention meets in a period of storm. Great events are in the offing in both the UAW and the CIO. What a contrast with the period of the St. Louis convention of a year ago! At that time the UAW was marking time. The UAW had conducted that year two major strikes: the tool and die strike at General Motors and the 55-day strike at Chrysler. Both strikes had achieved no real gains for the workers. The union membership appeared to be demoralized. Shortly after the convention, the UAW had renewed some of its major contracts, the Chrysler, Hudson and a number of other corporations. The contracts provided for miserable two-cent increases in be face of sharply rising living costs. The membership, seemingly pathetic and tired, accepted the entrants without protest. The UAW was temporarily in a blind alley.
The Weisenheimers of the capitalist press began to wag their heads and observed sagely that the “punch” had gone out of the auto workers and that the union was at last on the road towards “stabilization.”
But the auto workers finally caught up with the war drive. The first explosion came from the lowest paid and most exploited section of the union membership, the aircraft work-era. The Vultee strike came like a flash, and the militancy it engendered swept through the entire union membership like a prairie fire.
The fight was on and before the smoke of battle cleared, the greatest fortress of the open shop, Ford, was conquered. The aircraft drive, involving some half a million young workers began churning. General Motors, Chrysler, and almost every major automobile and parts manufacturer, were forced to grant sizeable wage increases.
 
UAW Faces War Drive
Since the Wall Street-Roosevelt war drive must be financed at the expense of workers, it was inevitable that the economic struggles of the auto workers should collide head-on with the forces of the Administration. The militancy of the workers smashed all obstacles in the union’s path in the preliminary phase of the strike struggles.
But the Roosevelt administration, quickly realizing that it could not wholly rely on the top union leadership to curb the rank and file, revised its strategy and met the union forces head-on at the North American aircraft strike. Within the velvet glove of the National Defense Mediation Board was the iron fist of the capitalist army. The strike was crushed and temporarily the great strike wave was stopped.
Since the North American strike, it has become extremely difficult to wage a major strike; the National Mediation Board has taken on the powers of a semi-compulsory body.
The labor movement has been maneuvered into this predicament not because it was defeated in battle by a superior power, or because it has been confronted with a force larger and stronger than its own. Labor’s dilemma flows chiefly from the fact that at least half of its top leadership, like Hillman, Thomas, Reuther and Frankensteen, have sold out to the Wall Street war machine.
 
Militant Leadership Needed
The present position of the auto union, coupled with the existing mood of the auto workers, cries out for a new leadership which will lead the union out of the existing impasse. A recognized leadership possessing authority and prestige such as the Addes group possesses, could easily win the auto membership to its banner if it announced its clear militant program, courageously fought for it and showed the auto workers in practical terms how an Addes leadership would operate in contrast to the Reuther-Thomas group.
So far, however, most of the effort and energies of the Addes group has gone into the game of horsetrading votes, competing for union posts, etc.
The class-conscious militants in the auto union today, the best men who have come out of the strike struggles of the past five years, are now bending their efforts to rally support for a realistic program which corresponds to the real needs of the auto workers today, the only program that will allow the union to move forward.
They ask that the union break completely from the Roosevelt administration, cut loose from the whole apparatus of the war machine, the NDMB and the OPM, and proceed to set up the independent political voice of labor, a National Labor Party, which will fight against the warmakers and the attempt to fasten the cost of the war on the backs of the workers.
They ask that the CIO fight for a policy of militant action to preserve the complete independence of the trade-union movement, so that the auto workers, in common with the rest of organized labor can move forward in spite of Roosevelt’s war machine.







Protesting the continued police hounding of persons selling literature for the Socialist Workers Party, Edward R. Frank, Local New York organizer of the S.W.P., on July 13, demanded that Police Commissioner Valentine investigate these actions and put a stop to them. Comrade Frank’s letter reads:



Commissioner Valentine
Police Department
New York, N.Y.
Dear Sir:
On May 25th I communicated with Mayor LaGuardia, requesting that the Police Department refrain from arresting people who were selling literature for the Socialist Workers Party, while at the same time allowing followers of Father Coughlin to sell his magazine without the slightest interference from your Department.
I was assured, by representatives of your department, that no discrimination would be made against people selling literature for the Socialist Workers Party, and that the civil rights of our people would be respected. Nevertheless, last Monday, July 10, 1939, two persons who were selling pamphlets for the Socialist Workers Party in front of Macy’s Department Store and who were standing side by side with three other people selling Social Justice, Father Coughlin’s magazine, were arrested and booked on charges of “disorderly conduct” and “violating the anti-noise ordinance.” Not a finger was laid on the vendors of Social Justice. On Tuesday, July 11, 1939, another arrest was made under the same circumstances and at the same place.
 
Deliberate Policy
Obviously, these arrests are the result of a deliberate policy of discrimination against the Socialist Workers Party and in favor of the followers of Father Coughlin. I do not know how true might be the assertion of Father Coughlin that 5,000 of his followers are members of various police departments, but in view of the open discrimination against the Socialist Workers Party in favor of Father Coughlin’s followers in these arrests, and the violation of the civil rights of our people, our attorney has asked a postponement of the case involving Tuesday’s arrest until August, pending an investigation into the policy governing these arrests.
This letter merely confirms my conversation with Patrolman Boles concerning this matter and my request that an investigation be initiated.
For your further information, these cases were booked at the Magistrates Court of the Second District, 6th Avenue and 103rd Street; Judge Thomas A. Aurelio presiding.
Trusting that you will make an immediate and complete investigation into this matter, and awaiting your early reply, I am,



 


Yours truly,
Edward R. Frank,
Organizer,
Socialist Workers Party,
Local New York



 



May 25, 1939
Mayor Fiorello H. LaGuardia,
New York,
New York.
Honorable Sir:
Last Saturday evening, May 20, at approximately 8:30 P.M., four individuals were arrested on Times Square while selling an issue of the Socialist Appeal which carried an exposé of Father Coughlin as a mouthpiece of Fascism in America.
The technical charge placed against them, as is the police custom when they wish to infringe upon civil rights, was “disorderly conduct.” It is a matter of witness that the defendants were selling their newspaper and in no conception of the term conducting themselves in a disorderly fashion.
At exactly the same time and in the same location, Times Square, numerous followers of Father Coughlin were selling their magazine, Social Justice, which is loaded with venomous attacks against the Jews, Negroes, and other racial minorities, and which carries a program identical with that of Hitler and Mussolini just before they seized power.
These followers of Father Coughlin were left entirely unmolested by the police.
Yesterday, on May 24, an exactly similar occurrence took place, when the police arrested eleven individuals who were peacefully selling the Socialist Appeal in the Bronx at Tremont and Marmion Avenues, and booked them on the same technical charge of “disorderly conduct.”
This is not the first time that your police have shown tender solicitude and partiality for the fascists, protecting them while bringing police clubs down on the heads of the anti-fascists. On February 20 at Madison Square Garden your police protected a huge mass meeting of the Nazi German-American Bund. The greatest police force in the history of New York was assembled to make sure that those vultures enjoyed a successful meeting. Those who protested this insulting provocation to American labor were brutally attacked by your police.
The arrests on May 20 and May 24 are only the latest indication of the partiality of the police in attacking the anti-fascists and protecting the fascists. You, as Mayor, are directly responsible for their actions, and we hold you accountable lor these police violations of the elementary rights of free speech and free press.
Why is your police so interested in protecting free speech for the fascist forces in America? Why are they so interested in denying free speech to the anti-fascist forces in America? And above all, where do you yourself stand?
On Wednesday, May 31, at 10:00 A.M., the case of the eleven Bronx defendants is scheduled to be heard in the Magistrate’s Court at 161st Street and 3rd Avenue. On Thursday, June 1, at 10:00 A.M., the case of the four Times Square defendants is scheduled to be heard in the Magistrate’s Court at 54th Street and 8th Avenue,
If you are genuinely interested in safeguarding civil liberties and democratic rights, as you maintain in your public utterances, then you will show it by conducting a personal investigation of these cases where civil liberties and democratic rights were so flagrantly violated.
We demand, moreover, that you instruct your police Commissioner, Mr. Valentine, and his Department of your City Administration, to desist from provoking, attacking, and arresting anti-fascists who are courageously attempting to expose the insidious and great danger of fascism to the American people, particularly at this time, the danger of Father Coughlin.
It is high time you brought your opposition to Fascism down from the nebulous clouds of oratory to the sidewalks of New York where fascism right now is fanning race-hatred and foisting its poisoned literature on the people of New York City.



 


SOCIALIST WORKERS’ PARTY
Edward Frank
Organizer



 







The Independent Labor League (Lovestonites), through its New York District Organizer, D. Benjamin, recently communicated with the New York District of the Socialist Workers Party suggesting joint street meetings held on selected corners, against the growing Coughlin menace. Below we publish the reply of E.R. Frank, secretary of the New York District S.W.P.:



* * *
July 25, 1939
D. Benjamin,
New York District Organizer,
Independent Labor League of America,
131 West 33rd Street,
New York, N.Y.
Dear Comrade:
We regret the delay in replying to your letter of June 26. The press of work connected with our Anti-War Convention interfered with a prompt reply to your communication.
We fully agree that the Coughlin movement, like the rising fascist movements in general, constitutes an acute and immediate menace to all labor organizations. Wherever any Coughlinite hoodlums have been disturbing or threatening meetings of any labor organizations, our Party is ready, for its part, to cooperate to the fullest extent in protecting such meetings.
 
An Effective Means
However, it is our conviction that the Coughlinite and, in general, the fascist movement, can be effectively counteracted only by the militant, organized action of the unions themselves.
The fascists have demonstrated to the hilt that they mean business, and Labor can meet the menace they represent only if it means business. By that we understand the mobilizing of the most devoted and militant elements in the trade unions into Union Defense Guards. Several union organizations in Ohio, Minnesota and elsewhere have already initiated the establishment of such Guards and with excellent effect from every standpoint.
As you are aware, the proposal to form such Union Defense Guards is now being widely discussed in the more advanced sections of the labor movement in New York, particularly among members of the International Ladies Garment Workers’ Union. Were one or more Locals of this powerful Union to endorse and organize a genuine Union Defense Guard, it would constitute a great step forward in the struggle against Fascism.
Zimmerman Support Asked
We consider highly desirable cooperation among all elements looking toward such a goal. It would be especially desirable, in our opinion, if so prominent a leader of the I.L.G.W.U. as Vice-President Zimmerman, a member of your organization, were to give his support to the proposal in question.
We are interested in hearing from you on the matters raised in this letter.



 


Fraternally,
E.R. Frank,
Organizer,
New York District,
Socialist Workers Party



 







The following letter calling for united labor action against the Coughlin provocation was sent on August 11 by Edward Frank, organizer of Local New York, S.W.P., to the following organizations: Avukah, American Jewish Congress, Jewish Labor Council, Poale Zion, Socialist Party, Social Democratic Federation, Young Circle League, Workmen’s Circle, Workers Sick and Death Benefit Society, Independent Labor League, International Ladies Garment Workers Union, Jewish National Workers Alliance, etc.





Dear Friends:
After weeks of unprecedented anti-Semitic and anti-labor propaganda, the storm-troop followers of Father Coughlin, America’s Number One Fascist, are organizing a “mass demonstration and parade” to form at Columbus Circle on Saturday, August 19th, at 6 P.M. and March into Union Square.
The Fascists, in their circular, call their provocation a “manifestation of Christianity.” That is not true. The Fascist parade is simply a mobilization of strike-breakers, thugs, Jew-haters and union-busters.
This provocation was forecast by Coughlin two weeks ago in a nation-wide broadcast entitled “The Call To Action,” in which he attacked the “Bolshevik” leaders of the American Trade Union Movement, the “non-religious Jews,” and stated that he would resort to the use of “force.” “I will meet you in Franco’s way!” he declared. Father Coughlin is organizing a Fascist movement in America, with the same methods and the same aims as Mussolini and Hitler.
The Fascist demonstration of August 19th is an open challenge to the whole Labor Movement, as well as to the whole anti-Fascist movement of this city.
We cannot afford to wait until Coughlin converts the United States into one huge concentration camp.
Time is pressing! Let us join hands now against this terrible menace to our liberties, our rights, our very lives!
Let us all join hands to stop Fascism in America!
We call upon you to join with us and rally in Union Square on Saturday, August 19th, at 4:30 P.M. to protest against this Fascist provocation.



 


Fraternally,
E.R. Frank,
Organizer,
Local New York



 

