

“Your demand is for Universal Suffrage ... a right
of which no human power can justly deprive you ...
and which you must regain at any risk – peaceably,
if you may, forcibly if you must.”
From the first manifesto of the Chartist Convention,
published in the Charter, February 17, 1839.
On February 4, 1839, fifty-three delegates to the General Convention of the Industrious Classes met at the British Coffee House, Cockspur Street, Charing Cross. Thirteen were from the middle class – magistrates, editors, clergymen, doctors – and the remainder were described by their first secretary as “shop-keepers, tradesmen and journeymen.” The working class element was not very conspicuous in this gathering, yet it began the organisation of Chartism as a national movement and Chartism has rightly the called the first independent political movement of the working class in history.
The first Chartist Convention, as the body came to be called, was dominated by London and Birmingham, both centres of small handicraft, not factory production. The two cities were also the standards of those days, prosperous. The artisans and petty producers who made up such a strong element in Chartism, especially in its early months, were discontented men. The reform Act of 1832 had enfranchised the shopkeepers and business men, given the mass of the people nothing. The Poor Law Reform of 1824 with its brutal workhouse test outraged the conscience of every decent person in the country. The economic crisis, which struck Britain in the Spring of 1837 and lasted for over two years, increased the demand for reform among the huge unrepresented majority of the people.
But the London and Birmingham artisans were not the revolutionaries. The London Working-Men’s Association, founded in June, 1836, aimed at attracting the “intelligent and influential portion of the working classes.” It sought to promote the cause of progress through education, discussion and “moral force.” Its leader was William Lovett, a joiner whose social ideas derived from Robert Owen while his politics were strongly influenced by Francis Place. The Birmingham Political Union, under the rich banker, Thomas Attwood, saw salvation through currency reform based on enfranchisement of an enlightened working class.
 
Mass Movement
But the first Chartist Convention contained other elements as well. Delegates had been elected at mass meetings of 300,000 in Manchester, 150,000 in Glasgow and 70,000 in Newcastle. Here the handloom weavers, ruined and starving through competition from the power looms, miners and factory workers, predominated. Their spokesman was Fergus O’Connor, an Irishman, revolutionary and anti-Socialist. He was alive to the evils of industrial capitalism and the factory system. But he saw the solution in terms of a land reform which would cover the country with prosperous smallholdings. He advocated insurrection in principle while opposing it in practice.
Also represented at the Convention was a small but vigorous socialist wing led by Bronterre O’Brien, with George Julian Harney as a promising young recruit. It was private property, said Bronterre, particularly in, land, banks and utilities, which lay at the root of poverty and exploitation. The power of the bourgeoisie had been established, in England and France, through social revolution. A new revolution would establish the power of the workers and put an end to oppression and inequality. In his theories of exploitation, class struggle and historical development, Bronterre anticipated some of Marx’s most important conclusions. But he failed to develop a comprehensive analysis of capitalism or of the emergence of a proletariat. In the decline of Chartism, after 1848, he took to repeating himself and led his small sect into the political wilderness.
 
Weakness in Chartism
Socially heterogeneous, theoretically immature and politically vacillating, Chartism was nevertheless a remarkable achievement. In no other country was there an independent working class movement, and on the Continent of Europe, while socialist thinkers penned penetrating criticism of capitalist society, mass movements of the people remained tied to the left wing of bourgeois radicalism. The Chartists, by contrast, led a movement of workers not only separate from the bourgeois radicals but in opposition to them.
On the day the first Chartist Convention met the Anti Corn Law League began its first national conference. The Chartists had to define their attitude to this vehicle of Manchester liberalism and they did so. On February 12 the Convention unanimously [adopted] a resolution, moved by Bronterre O’Brien, which declared that “the people’s undivided attention” must be given to the campaign for the People’s Charter, “being also convinced that the present agitation for a repeal of the Corn Laws was intended and does actually tend to divert the working classes from that permanent object; and being further of opinion that such an unconditional repeal as would alone be likely to receive the sanction of the Anti Corn Law agitators, would be rather injurious than otherwise to the interests of the poorer classes.” While political power remained the hands of their enemies, in fact, neither free trade nor protection would bring any lasting benefit to the workers, and though, on occasions, local groups of Chartists were inveigled into supporting Corn Law Repeal as a palliative, the movement as a whole retained its independence of and hostility to the radical, Benthamite, free trading middle class.
 
National Petition
The main efforts of the Chartists went into collecting signatures for the National Petition, which demanded universal male suffrage and related democratic reforms. Within the Convention, Harney asked for a decision as to what action would be taken if Parliament rejected the Petition. The majority, consisting largely of “moral force” Chartists, refused to allow the question to be considered. But among Chartist supporters in the country there was intense discussion and divided views. Some argued for a run on the banks, but they had no money. Others called for a general strike, but there were few trade unionists. Yet others advocated armed uprising, but though there was a scattering of pikes here and muskets there, few believed seriously in its chances of success.
 
Provocations
In May the Convention moved to Birmingham. Faced with increasing government provocation it issued a manifesto stressing the constitutional and legal aims of the movement.
“Aware of our position,” it went on, “your oppressors are moving heaven and earth to bring us into collision with the enemy. They are pouring spies and traitors into your ranks, in order to seduce the unwary into illegal practices ... Our advice is that YOU RIGIDLY OBEY THE LAW; but at the same time be prepared to make your oppressors likeways obey it. Be upon your guard against spies or madmen, who would urge you to illegal practices, but at the same time bear in mind that you have the same right to arm that your enemies have ... Parade not your arms at public meetings but keep them bright and ready at home.”
 
Persecution and Arrest
In July there was a wave of arrests. Meetings were prohibited. A body of police was brought down from London to break up a meeting in the Birmingham Bull Ring. The workers drove the police out of the Ring and it took troops to restore the government’s authority. On July 5 Lovett, for all his moderation and “moral force” was arrested. A week later the Petition, with over one and a quarter million signatures, was rejected by 235 votes to 46. Now the Convention had to act or dissolve. There was no hope, it was soon decided, of redress from the existing House of Commons. But the workers were powerless to elect another. The Convention therefore decided “that the people should work no longer after the 12th of August next, unless the power of voting for Members of Parliament to enable them to protect their labour and their rights is previously given and guaranteed to them.”
 
New Stage and Development
Propaganda went out for a “Sacred Month “ which was to inaugurate the rule of the people. But it soon became obvious that there would be no adequate response. The workers were not strongly organised and the Chartists had neglected to build up their strength in such unions as there were. On August 5 the Convention, from which the right wing had mainly withdrawn, abandoned the “Sacred Month “ and called, instead, for a token strike of “one, two or three days.” They appealed, belatedly, to the “united trades” for help. But even a token strike was beyond their powers and on September 6 the Convention, confessing defeat, decided to dissolve.
 
Labour History
This ended the first phase of Chartism. It did not destroy the movement, which came back, stronger than ever, during the “Plug Riots” of 1842. Finally, the Chartist movement was defeated in 1848, and though it took another ten years to die it was never again a serious force. But the working class movement regrouped, assumed new forms and came back again into the struggle.
 



A virtuous man will teach himself to recollect the principle
of universal benevolence as often as pious men repeat their prayers.
William Godwin
If men practised benevolence towards each other society would be sound, happiness widespread and intellectual and moral progress infinite. This could be the text for a vapid sermon. In Godwin’s hands it became one of the formative ideas of British and world socialism.
Godwin was born in 1756. His youth coincided with the birth of industrial England. During the 1760s John Wilkes roused the people in defence of parliament and civil liberties against the autocratic tendencies of George III. In the 1770s Thomas Spence demanded the public ownership of land as the only foundation for a just society, freed from oppression and exploitation. At the end of the following decade feudal Europe was shaken to the point of collapse by the great French Revolution. And in 1793 Godwin published the first edition of Political Justice. It was to play its part in moulding the ideas of two generations of socialist pioneers.
Godwin’s ideas stemmed from philosophy rather than directly politics or social conditions. His philosophical roots were in Locke, Rousseau and the revolutionary school of French Encyclopaedists. With Locke, Godwin saw the mind of man as a complex receiving mechanism. Sensations, arriving from the external world were transmuted by reason into ideas, both intellectual and moral. With Rousseau, Godwin perceived the inherent equality of man and the sharp, bitter contrast between this innate equality and the availing inequality deriving from social conditions. From the Encyclopaedists and, most particularly, from Helvetius, he learned that man’s character was formed for him by his social environment, if this environment could be made rational and free, man, in turn, would become rational and free.
Innately, the human mind was neither good nor evil, neither wise nor foolish. It was what society had made of it – in too many cases a ghastly mess. Most men worked too long and too hard in conditions of crippling poverty. The privileged few, emancipated from the need to work, were also emancipated from the discipline, common sense and common humanity that went with work. If the poor were vicious from ignorance and greedy because of want, the rich were vicious from idleness and greedy because of greed.
More than a century and a quarter later, men would write of the “Acquisitive Society,” but Godwin, in the first decades of industrial capitalism, described its consequences with eloquence and power. His main weaknesses were those he shared with the French revolutionary materialists from whom he derived. As Plekhanov was later to demonstrate, in his essay on French Materialism of the Eighteenth Century, Helvetius and his school regarded men’s characters and opinions as the effects of their environment. But when it came to explaining how the environment itself was to be changed, they looked to a change in men’s opinions, to the enlightening effect of revolutionary ideas. No thinker of the eighteenth century was able to escape from this contradiction. And in Godwin’s case the dilemma was to drive him, more than once, over the edge into absurdity.
Though he called his book an Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, it was with social justice that Godwin was, in fact, concerned. Government, like property, originated in violence. But as violence was the cause of injustice it could not be the means of its eradication. Property gave man economic power over man, while Government gave him the means of physical coercion. If private Property led to gross inequality and, hence, to poverty for the great majority, political coercion warped men’s character and judgement, political coercion, therefore, could not be a means of emancipation and all organisation carried with it the seeds of coercion. Reason was the only cure for irrational society. With the spread of reason men would learn the futility of superfluous wealth and the joy of moderate, creative labour. As the new ideas caught hold, a new pattern of living would develop. Freed alike from property and government, men would become fully human.
“The vices which are inseparably joined to the present system of property,” wrote Godwin, “would inevitably expire in a state of society where all shared alike the bounties of nature. The narrow principle of selfishness would vanish. No man being obliged to guard his little store, or provide, with anxiety and pain, for his restless wants, each would lose his individual existence thought of general good. No man would be an enemy to his neighbour, for they would have no subject of contention, and in consequence philanthropy would resume the empire which reason assigns her.”
Godwin’s ideal communities were to be small and individualistic. Co-operation would be ad hoc, voluntary, not institutionalised. The standard of living would be frugal, not luxurious, but poverty would disappear. Intellectually and morally, if not materially, man would reach for the stars.
Politics, by its nature, implied coercion and the subordination of individuality. They were therefore rejected. In 1795 Godwin went so far as to publish an anonymous pamphlet (signed, significantly, “Lover of Order”) supporting the Government’s repressive measures against democratic agitation. Two years earlier, Pitt had refused to ban Political Justice. The masses, he believed, were unlikely to be subverted by an abstract philosophical treatise costing three guineas.
Yet Godwin became the centre of an intellectual movement with profound repercussions. The poets Wordsworth, Southey and Coleridge were, for a time, under his spell, during the period in which they welcomed the French Revolution as the dawn of a age of human freedom. Godwin’s wife, Mary Wollstonecraft, became the first advocate of women’s emancipation. His daughter Mary, married Shelley, who translated the philosophy of Political Justice into undying poetry. Robert Owen learned from Godwin that private property must be abolished to create an environment worthy of human beings. Francis Place, brought up in an atmosphere of Godwinian libertarianism, applied some of his political practice. In his essay on Avarice and Profusion, which appeared in 1797, Godwin denied that manufacturing progress under capitalism would benefit the poor. On the contrary, it perpetuate poverty and lengthen the working day, an idea which was to provide a central theme for Marx’s Capital. The rich would benefit the poor, Godwin showed, not by employing them in factories but by getting off their backs. And in his most famous novel, Caleb Williams, which had far wider circulation than any of his political writings, Godwin exposed the cruelties of the system of transportation and helped to initiate the movement for penal reform.
One celebrated figure, who became a parson, was worried by Godwin’s conclusions. Thomas Robert Malthus, in 1798, wrote his Essay on the Principle of Population to prove that social progress was impossible and perpetual poverty inevitable unless the poor had fewer children through voluntary, moral self restraint.
 



“The tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to time with
the blood of patriots and tyrants. It is its natural manure.”
(Thomas Jefferson)
On July 4, 1776, the American Congress adopted the Declaration of Independence which Jefferson had just drafted. Fifty years after, to the day, the author of the Declaration died, having bequeathed to History one of the outstanding revolutionary documents of all time.
“We hold these truths to be self-evident,” it began, “that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed, that whenever any Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the Right of the People to alter or abolish it and to institute new Government.”
Like other great revolutionary manifestos, the Declaration of Independence arose out of a clash of powerful social forces whose interests could no longer be reconciled by diplomacy or politics. The Seven Years’ War had ended in 1763, leaving England with vast colonial gains and a vast National Debt. The Government felt that the burden of the wars, past and future, should be shared with the North American colonists who, it claimed, benefited from the security of the British Navy. The ungrateful beneficiaries thought otherwise, and after ten years of political resistance instituted a boycott of British goods. The British landed a cargo of tea port of Boston and the colonists dumped it in the harbour. As a reprisal, the port was closed. After that, it was only a matter of time before, in 1775, the fighting began at Bunkers Hill which culminated in the independence of the United States.
 
Conflicting interests
Such momentous developments could not have arisen solely from Bostonian high spirits or Jeffersonian eloquence. The American Revolution resulted directly from the growth of American Capitalism. Britain, by means of the Navigation Acts, tried to tie the colonists’ external trade exclusive to the mother country. But for the North Americans it was more profitable to sell the rice tobacco from the plantations and the timber from the New England forests to the Spanish and French colonies elsewhere on the American Continent. Smuggling became a major national pastime and the catching of smugglers the chief preoccupation of the Royal Navy. To the Americans, the demand that they pay additional taxes for the upkeep of that Navy seemed adding insult to injury. Moreover, since the Seven Years’ War had freed Canada from the French, the protection of Britain now seemed a dispensable luxury.
It was in this situation that the slogan “No Taxation Without Representation” began to make sense to Americans, increasingly conscious that their interests conflicted with those of the British sovereign.
Like all wars of national liberation which are led by a revolutionary class, the American War of Independence was complicated by the presence of a Fifth Column, the Loyalists, who supports King George on principle, hated democracy and valued their connection with the old country. Much more important was the fact that in England there was a substantial body of opinion supporting the claims of the colonists. The Earl of Chatham was an imperialist who saw that the blindly reactionary policies of the King and Lord North were disrupting the Empire.
John Wilkes, who had been leading the struggle for “Wilkes and Liberty” since 1763, at the head of the London working class, identified the cause of the American rebels with the cause of democracy at home. So did a host of others who began to develop, under pressure of events, the idea of international solidarity.
 
Democratic gospel
Dr. Richard Price, a Unitarian and one of the leading economists of his day, wrote the Discourse on Civil Liberty in defence of the American Revolution. Joseph Priestley, Unitarian and chemist, went even further in his espousal of democratic ideas. Major Cartwright, who spoiled a promising career in the Navy by refusing to serve against the Americans, published a famous pamphlet in 1776 – Take Your Choice – with unmistakable echoes of Jefferson’s Declaration.
“The all-wise Creator,” said Cartwright, “hath made men equal, as well as free; they are all of one flesh, and cast in one mould ... There are, therefore, no distinctions to be made among men, as just causes for the elevation of some above the rest, prior to mutual agreement. How much soever any individual be qualified for, or deserve any elevation, he hath no right to it till it be conferred on him by his fellows.”
Cartwright’s programme was almost identical with that later adopted by the Chartists: universal suffrage, annual parliaments, vote by ballot, payment of members and equal electoral districts. Through the Society for Constitutional Information, which he helped to establish in 1780 and, later, through the Hampden Clubs and other organisations, Cartwright preached the democratic gospel in and out of season until his death in 1824.
Most remarkable of all, however, was the work of the former staymaker and exciseman, Tom Paine, who had emigrated to America in 1774. As Anglo-American relations were moving towards their crisis Paine issued, six months before the Declaration of Independence, a short pamphlet, Common Sense, which sold 100,000 copies in four months. If men were naturally equal, enjoying equal natural rights, Paine argued, then only representative government could be legitimate. “All delegated power is trust: all assumed power is usurpation.”
 
From chaos to triumph
But how could Americans enjoy their natural rights under the rule of a British king and a Parliament elected by a narrow oligarchy? Independence was a prerequisite of freedom, and for the first time in history the causes of national and political liberation were shown to be inseparably connected.
“Ye that oppose independence now,” he wrote, “ ye know not what ye do; ye are opening a door to eternal tyranny, by keeping vacant the seat of government ... Freedom hath been hunted round the globe. Asia, and Africa, have long expelled her. Europe regards her like a stranger, and England hath given her warning to depart. O! receive the fugitive, and prepare in time an asylum for mankind ... We have it in our power to begin the world over again ... The birthday of a new world is at hand.”
Like other revolutionary wars, the American War of Independence began in chaos and ended in triumph. Out of the untrained irregulars of thirteen disunited states, Washington created an effective fighting force. The first decisive American victory was over General Burgoyne, who surrendered at Saratoga with 5,000 men. (The battle, and the monumental incompetence of the British Government which it exposed, were used by Bernard Shaw as the background to his Devil’s Disciple.) International rivalries were exploited to the full to embarrass the British. Feudal France, Spain and, later, bourgeois Holland, joined the revolutionary colonists and paralysed the naval might of England. Supplies were interrupted, garrisons besieged and, against a nation in arms, Cornwallis surrendered at Yorktown in 1781. After that the result was only a matter of time.
 
Aristocrats unshaken
Discredited by defeat, the Government of George III was forced to make some concessions to the Whig opposition. The number of sinecures and pensions at the disposal of the King was sharply reduced and his control over the House of Commons correspondingly weakened. That proved to be, however, the limit of reform for the next fifty years. The landed aristocracy was still too strong to be severely shaken. The next steps could not be taken until technical developments had given rise to an industrial bourgeoisie and an industrial proletariat.
 



On November 3, 1815, John Mitchel, one of the greatest Irish nationalists of the nineteenth century, was born. Ireland was England’s first colony and all the main features which we have come to associate with colonial exploitation appeared there in a peculiarly repulsive and brutal form.
In 1798, during the war which followed the French Revolution, the United Irishmen had led a desperate and forlorn revolt in the hope of being reinforced by French troops. Napoleon, already beginning to succumb to delusions of grandeur, was more interested in the conquest of Egypt and when French help eventually reached Ireland it was too little and too late. The rising was crushed with unusual savagery and three years later the Act of Union abolished the Irish Parliament, linking the two countries under a single rule.
Rent to the landlords, tithes to the priests and taxes to the government almost crushed body and soul out of the Irish peasants. An underground resistance movement, largely spontaneous but sporadically organised, sprang up, under the leadership of the Whiteboys and the Ribbonmen. As Mitchel was born the war with France was ending but the English found themselves with a peasant war in Ireland on their hands. Tithes were collected at gun point.
The leaders of Irish Catholicism were in a dilemma. They could hardly approve the English establishment and its alien, heretical Church. But neither could they view, without misgiving, the spread of a land war which might end in the destruction of private property, in the critical decade following the end of the war, Daniel O’Connell found the answer.
O’Connell is one of Ireland’s national heroes. His statue stands at the head of the main street in Dublin, which is named after him. Yet John Mitchel said of him that “next to the British Government he was the greatest enemy Ireland ever had.” And unfortunately, Mitchel was right.
O’Connell organised the peasant movement and then re-directed it. The agrarian revolt was damped down and the Catholic Association, which O’Connell set up in 1823, concentrated its efforts on securing Catholic emancipation. The priests were happy and the “Catholic Rent” to the Association was collected at chapel doors. In 1829 the English Tory Government thought it expedient to yield and an Act was passed permitting Catholics to sit in Parliament, hold commissions in the forces and be called to the Bar.
 
Failure of Potato Crop
Catholic Emancipation proved a mixed blessing. It split English Tories, paving the way for a Whig Government in 1830 and the Reform Act of 1832. For Ireland it was practically unredeemed disaster. The Act emancipating the Catholics was accompanied by another, disfranchising the Irish smallholders. Now there was to be no political barrier to eviction, and eviction, on a stupendous scale, was what followed.
The Act of Union of 1801 had subjected Ireland’s native manufacturing industry to the full blast of English competition. It was almost totally destroyed and with a rapidly growing population pressing on a limited supply of land, rents were raised and evictions were frequent. By the middle of the eighteen forties Ireland was ready for the “famine.”
It was “famine” of a very special kind. The potato crop failed through blight. Nothing happened to the corn or cattle. But the Irish were too poor to buy either. There was no reduction in rents, and the food which the peasants could afford was sent out at the ports under military escort. Deaths followed from hunger, typhus and cholera on a scale that has never been accurately assessed. Not for the first or last time in their tragic history the Irish grew desperate.
 
After emancipation
In this supreme crisis of their nation, the national hero collapsed. After achieving Emancipation, O’Connell had turned his attention to campaigning for the repeal of the Act of Union. But he always insisted that the movement should restrict itself to constitutional channels The English Whigs, in his view, were Ireland’s natural allies. Independent mass action by the Irish peasants was to be deplored. In 1847 he died in Genoa, sick, senile and despondent, on his way to receive a Papal benediction. His place was taken by others of a different mould.
In October 1842, three years before the onset of the “famine”, a weekly journal, the Nation, had been established to serve as political and cultural inspiration of renascent Irish nationalism. On the analogy of Mazzini’s “Young Italy” movement, the group around the Nation soon came to be known, collectively, as “Young Ireland.”
John Mitchel, son of a Unitarian Minister who had been active in support of the United Irishmen, became one of the Nation’s leading contributors. For him, as for his colleague, James Fintan Lalor, the path to freedom lay through the forcible seizure of the land by the peasants and the mass refusal to pay rent and tithes. For them, the natural allies of Ireland were not the English Whigs but the English Chartists. And, indeed, the Chartists, since the inception of their movement, had shown generous appreciation of Irish needs.
“An immense portion of the agricultural wealth of Ireland,” wrote Bronterre O’Brien, the great Chartist leader in 1838, “is annually drained into this country to enrich bands of absentee landlords, fund lords, and usurers of every description who give the agriculturists of Ireland not one shilling’s worth of value in return. Again, an immense portion of the manufactured wealth of England and Scotland is, in like manner, annually drained into Ireland to enrich the squirearchy, shopocracy, law, church, Government agents, military and constabulary officers, and, above all the hordes of corn factors, butter merchants, cattle dealers, jobbers, and contractors of all sorts that overspread that country, and who yield to operatives of England and Ireland not one shilling’s worth of value in return for the manufactured produce absorbed by them.”
In view of all this, it seemed to him that the natural outcome must be “a grand alliance between the oppressed or unrepresented classes of Ireland, with the oppressed or unrepresented classes of Great Britain.”
By 1847 starvation was rampant in Ireland, while food to the value of £17,000,000 was being exported. Irish resistance grew and the Whig Government in London introduced a coercion Act. Charles Gaven Duffy, proprietor of the Nation, saw the way forward through parliamentary action. By the end of the year Mitchel had broken with the Nation. He had come to the conclusion, he explained,
“that the whole system ought to be met with resistance at every point, and the means for this would be extremely simple: namely a combination among the people to obstruct and render impossible the transport and shipment of Irish provisions; to refuse all aid in its removal; to destroy the highways; to prevent everyone by intimidation from daring to bid for grain or cattle if brought to action under distress; in short, to offer a passive resistance universally, but occasionally when opportunity served, to try the steel.”
1848 was the year of European revolution. Its outbreak in France, in February, sparked off a revival of Chartism in England, while the Irish, led by Mitchel and Lalor, planned an armed uprising. The Government prepared to strike back. On April 10 the Chartist demonstration at Kennington Common was overawed by a colossal concentration of troops and special constables. On May 25, Mitchel was sentenced, on a charge of “treason-felony,” to transportation for fourteen years. There followed the arrest of Lalor and the leadership of the rising passed into the hands of the landlord, Smith O’Brien. His support for insurrection, was half-hearted and he wanted no infringement of property rights. The rising went off at half cock and was easily quelled.
Mitchel spent his last years in the United States, during the stirring period of Civil War and slave emancipation But his great days were over. Like a number of other misguided radicals he sided with the slave-owners, on the grounds that, like the Irish, they were fighting for the right of secession against grasping traders and capitalists. The struggle for Irish freedom was to go through many strange phases in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In an important sense it is still going on.
 



On August 1, 1920, the Communist Party of Great Britain was founded at a congress held in the Cannon Street Hotel, London. Its formation marked a new stage in the development of revolutionary ideas among the British working class. This stage in the story had started six years earlier when, on the outbreak of the First World War in August, 1914, the Second International collapsed ignominiously. Internationally famous revolutionaries such as Vaillant in France, Kautsky in Germany, Victor Adler in Austria and Plekhanov from Russia supported or even joined their respective governments in the cause of national defence.
Just over a year later an international Socialist Conference assembled at Zimmerwald, in neutral Switzerland. In a manifesto to the European working class, the Conference announced its intention “to re-tie the torn threads of international relations and to call upon the working class to recover itself and to fight for peace.” There were no British representatives at Zimmerwald, but the Independent Labour Party and the British Socialist Party both declared themselves in agreement with its aims. Zinoviev and Lenin, on behalf of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party signed the Conference manifesto but considered that it did not go far enough. It not only failed to condemn the treachery of the main leaders of international Socialism but it studiously refrained from calling on the workers to finish the War by revolutionary action. In a draft solution, rejected by the majority, the left wing delegates at Zimmerwald called for “the organisation of street demonstrations against the governments, propaganda of international solidarity in the trenches, the encouragement of economic strikes, the effort to transform them into political strikes under favourable conditions. Civil war, not civil peace – that is the slogan!” The draft was signed by Zinoviev and Lenin for the Russians, Radek for the Social Democrats of Poland and by representatives from Latvia, Sweden, Norway, Switzerland and Germany.
 
Revolutionary Response
By 1916, when the International Socialist Commission which had been elected at Zimmerwald, called a second Conference, at Kienthal, disillusion with the War was spreading among the workers. The Left was correspondingly stronger and the Kienthal resolutions more radical. The agreed resolutions at Zimmerwald had called for a just peace, leaving open the question how this could be obtained. Kienthal declared bluntly that there could be no real solution short of “the conquest of political power and the ownership of capital by the peoples themselves,” insisting, at the same time, that “the real durable peace will be the fruit of Socialism triumphant.”
The Third, or Communist International for which Zimmerwald and Kienthal had prepared the way, and for which Lenin had been calling since 1914 [See esp. the article Position and Tasks of the Socialist International, in Sotsial-Demokrat, Nov. 1, 1914, V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, XVIII, p. 89.], could only be set up after the War had been ended by proletarian revolution. In January 1919, an appeal went out from revolutionary Moscow addressed to 39 parties and groups which were invited to participate in establishing the new International. Two parties in Britain – the British Socialist Party and the Socialist Labour Party – together with “the revolutionary elements of the Shop Stewards’ movement” were included in the invitation. Though none of these bodies was able to send an official representative to Moscow in time for the foundation Congress in March (J. Fineberg was there without a formal mandate), there was an appreciable response to the appeal from the most advanced sections of the British Left.
 
Hyndman the Jingo
The years preceding the outbreak of the War in Britain had seen the rise of an exceptionally militant trade union movement. Miners, dockers, seamen, railway workers and, during the War itself, engineers had been swept by rising prices combined with the feebleness of the Parliamentary Labour Party into a strike wave without precedent in British industrial history. Under the impact of these pressures the Social Democratic Federation had been reformed, in 1908, as the Social Democratic Party and, in 1911, as the British Socialist Party. However, the old leadership, headed by H.M. Hyndman, retained its control over the Party machine and over its weekly organ, Justice. When War came, the BSP, like most Socialist parties in the belligerent countries, jettisoned its internationalism in the cause of “national defence.” There was a good deal of opposition to Hyndman’s jingoism, however, and in 1915 the Party had decided to send a delegate to Zimmerwald, though it was not possible to put the resolution into effect. At the Salford Conference, in 1916, the Hyndman leadership was overthrown, and withdrew from the Party. After that, the revolutionary internationalists were, in full command. The BSP gave an unqualified welcome to the October Revolution and Maxim Litvinov, the Bolshevik representative in Britain, brought fraternal greetings from the Soviet Government to the Easter Conference in 1918.
 
Industrial Unionism
The Socialist Labour Party was rather a different kettle of fish. Founded in 1903 under the inspiration of Daniel de Leon, it started life as a breakaway from the SDF Standing for strict industrial unionism, the SLP refused to allow members, on pain of expulsion, to occupy any official position in an existing union. Towards the leadership of the SDF, as of the Labour Party, the SLP adopted an attitude of intransigent hostility and complete non-cooperation. It never had more than a few hundred members, concentrated mainly in Glasgow, but they were highly disciplined and active. It made its attitude to the War clear from the outset, publishing pamphlets by Liebknecht, Radek and Clara Zetkin. It was probably the first British organisation to publish a work by Lenin – his famous Collapse of the Second International. Its first organiser was James Connolly, Irish Marxist and revolutionary nationalist, who died in the Easter Rising in 1916.
 
Lenin and the Labour Party
In April 1919, a month after the formation of the Third International, representatives of the BSP and SLP met with members of two smaller bodies – the Workers’ Socialist Federation and the South Wales Socialist Society – at the Eustace Miles Restaurant in Chandos Street, London, to discuss the formation of a Communist Party. At this and subsequent gatherings there were heated arguments about the relationship of the Communists to the Labour Party and about their attitude to Parliament. On one wing, the Workers’ Socialist Federation and the South Wales Socialist Society opposed all participation in parliamentary elections and any attempt to affiliate to the Labour Party. On the other wing, the BSP favoured both courses, while the SLP, supporting parliamentary action, opposed affiliating to the Labour Party. Lenin found time to participate in the discussion, writing from Moscow on July 8, 1920, on the eve of the second Congress of the Communist International, “I personally am in favour of participation in parliament, and adhesion to the Labour Party on condition of free and independent Communist activity.”
 
Chequered Career
At the Comintern’s second Congress Lenin argued persistently with both Willy Gallacher and Jack Tanner, who, as representatives of the Workers’ Committee Movement, opposed all parliamentary activity as a diversion from the class struggle and a source of bourgeois-democratic illusions. Lenin elaborated his position in his classic “Left-Wing” Communism, an Infantile Disorder, which appeared in May 1920. The Communist Party of Great Britain was established at the beginning of August, and Lenin’s advice proved the deciding factor in the controversy.
The Party, which began with 10,000 members, experienced a chequered career in the 1920’s. During that decade it made little progress in its struggle to win substantial industrial influence, perhaps its most remarkable success being among the unemployed.
The CP’s application for affiliation came up for final decision at the Labour Party’s Conference in 1924. It was rejected by 3,185,000 votes to 193,000, though the resolution barring Communists from individual membership of the Labour Party was carried by the much narrower vote of 1,804,000 to 1,540,000. Writing of the Communist Party prospects, in 1928, Max Beer, the leading historian of British Socialism, said: “Maybe that their day will arrive when a Labour Government, backed by a majority of its own, disappoints the hopes of the working class.” The disappointment arrived in 1951, but the day did not. The reason will long be a source of profitable investigation by British Marxists.
 



Was it all to end in a counting-house on the top of a cider heap,
with Podsnaps drawing-room in the office, and a Whig committee
dealing out champagne to the rich and margarine to the poor?
On October 3, 1896, William Morris died at the age of 62. Artist, craftsman and poet of considerable talent, he was first drawn into politics in 1876 by the threat of war against Russia in defence of the Turkish Empire. “I cannot help noting,” he wrote in a letter which appeared in the Liberal Daily News on October 24, “that a rumour is about in the air that England is going to war: and from the depths of my astonishment I ask, On behalf of whom? Against whom? And for what end?” In May of the following year, as Treasurer of the Eastern Question Association, he felt able to answer his own rhetorical questions. In a manifesto addressed To the Working-men of England he wrote that the threat of war came mainly from a class of men who, “if they had the power (may England perish rather) would thwart your just aspirations, would silence you, would deliver you bound hand and foot for ever to irresponsible capital – and these men, I say it deliberately, are the heart and soul of the party that is driving us to an unjust war.’’ [See E.P. Thompson: William Morris: Romantic to Revolutionary, 1955, pp. 230–1.]
By 1883 Morris had broken with radicalism and joined the Democratic Federation, precursor of the Social Democratic Federation, Britain’s first Marxist party. Although his main inspiration was aesthetic he soon came to realise that a society based on exploitation was ugly in its essence and could only cheapen life and debase art, life’s highest product. In an article in Justice two years before his death Morris explained that “the desire to produce beautiful things” had been the leading passion of his life and that this had inevitably given rise to a “hatred of modern civilisation.”
“What shall I say,” he wrote, “concerning its mastery of and its waste of mechanical power, its commonwealth so poor, its enemies of the commonwealth so rich, its stupendous organisation – for the misery of life! … So there I was in for a fine pessimistic end of life, if it had not somehow dawned on me that amidst all this filth of civilisation the seeds of a great change, which we others call Social-Revolution, were beginning to germinate.” [How I Became a Socialist, Justice, June 16, 1894, republished as a pamphlet, 1896]
 
The Socialist League
Quarrels within the S.D.F., arising out of Hyndman’s personal autocracy and political intrigues, resulted in a split at the end of 1884. Morris, together with Eleanor Marx, Edward Aveling and Ernest Belfort Bax, seceded and set up the Socialist League, its monthly journal was The Commonweal which Morris edited and, in large part, financed. During the four years of his editorship Morris contributed a large number of articles, many of them showing a remarkable creative insight into the nature of society and the future development of Socialism. The new society, Morris insisted, must not be merely a capitalism reorganised, with its frictions ironed out and its values retained. On his right he found Socialists, principally Fabians, so immersed in institutional reform that they lacked all vision of the quality of life as it might be under Socialism. “Surely they must allow,” he argued, “ that such a stupendous change in the machinery of life as the abolition of capital and wages must bring about a corresponding change in ethics and habits of life.” This change must include the equality of social life, sex and family relations, education and leisure. As things were, the model Victorian family man was “an affectionate and moral tiger to whom all is prey a few yards from the sanctity of his domestic hearth,” his wife’s physical charms “but an appendage to her property” and the education of his children “a system of cram begun on us when we are four years old, and left off sharply when we are eighteen.”
From Marx, and, more directly, from Engels, with whom he had some personal contact, Morris learned to see Socialism as the product of a historical process and as the result of forces engendered by Capitalism’s contradictions. Economics he never claimed to understand. “I put some conscience,” he told the readers of Justice [Ibid.] “into trying to learn the economic side of Socialism, and even tackled Marx, though I must confess that, whereas I thoroughly enjoyed the historical part of Capital, I suffered agonies of confusion of the brain over reading the pure economics of that great work.” Perhaps it was as well that he remained ignorant of economics, since his Marxist contemporaries who prided them on their understanding of Capital predicted the absolute impoverishment of the workers as an inevitable outcome of Capitalism’s economic laws. Understanding nothing of this, Morris foresaw another kind of obstacle to the achievement of Socialism.
“I want to know and to ask you to consider,” he wrote in a Fabian Tract in 1893, “how far the betterment of the working people might go and yet stop at last without having made any progress on the direct road to Communism. Whether in short the tremendous organisation of civilised and commercial society is not playing the cat and mouse game with us socialists. Whether the Society of Inequality might not accept the quasi-socialist machinery ... and work it for the purpose of upholding that society in a somewhat shorn condition, maybe, but a safe one.”
As it happened, Morris’s remarkable insight led him into some serious errors in tactics. If reform was to be regarded as the enemy of revolution then, it seemed to Morris, the task of “making socialists” must absorb not their main but their total energies. Work in existing trade unions was irrelevant and the attempt to get socialists returned to Parliament positively harmful. Defending his policy of abstention from parliamentary activity, Morris emphasised “the necessity of making the class struggle clear to the workers, of pointing out to them that while monopoly exists they can only exist as its slaves: so that the Parliament and all other institutions at present existing are maintained for the purpose of upholding this slavery.”
Abstention from parliamentary politics and from trade union work kept the Socialist League, for the most part, a propagandist sect remote from mass movements and from the vast, unorganised majority of the working class. Isolation bred despair and a tendency to look for short cuts. In this atmosphere the Anarchists secured control of the Socialist League and succeeded, in 1889, in deposing Morris from his editorship of Commonweal. After that he withdrew from the League and from active politics, founding, in 1890, the Hammersmith Socialist Society, a small body which concentrated on discussion, education and local propaganda. At about the same time he began the publication, in Commonweal, of News from Nowhere, perhaps the noblest and most inspiring Socialist Utopia ever conceived.
 
Art and Society
Despite declining health, Morris, together with Bax, revised and republished in 1893 an earlier joint work with the new title, Socialism, Its Growth and Outcome, one of the most comprehensive statements of Marxist political philosophy to appear in English in the nineteenth century. And on November 10, 1893, the Daily Chronicle published a letter from William Morris which gave perhaps the clearest expression to his views on art and its relation to the working class movement. He strongly disbelieved “in the possibility of keeping art vigorously alive by the action, however energetic, of a few groups of specially gifted men and their small circle of admirers amidst a general public incapable of understanding and enjoying their work.” To live, art must break through to the people and, in an age in which the working class was rising to rising to power, art must be democratised. So confident was Morris in the wholesomeness of this development that he was even “prepared to accept as a consequence of the process of that gain, the seeming disappearance of what art is now left us; because I am sure that that will be but a temporary loss, to be followed by a genuine new birth of art, which be the spontaneous expression of the pleasure of life innate in the whole people.”
Visions of the future did not blind Morris to the realities of the present. As he wrote, the great and terrible miners’ lock-out, which lasted for fifteen weeks, was drawing to a partially successful close.
“The first step,” he told the editor of the Daily Chronicle, “towards the new birth of art must be a definite rise in the condition of the workers; their livelihood must (to say the least of it) be less niggardly and less precarious, and their hours of labour shorter; and this improvement must be a general one, and confirmed against the chances of the market by legislation. But again this change for the better can only be realised by the efforts of the workers themselves. ‘By us and not for us’ must be their motto!”
The enemy of bureaucratic, Fabian, reform-from-above, Morris had come to see the value of reforms extorted by working class struggle from the capitalists and their state machine.
 



The greatest figure in working class journalism, on whom Marx modelled his style and whose writing left wing journalists of today could study with advantage, began his political life as a Tory, a supporter of tradition and authority. Cobbett’s army background, his love of the English countryside and of the sturdy, independent yeomen with which his imagination peopled it, predisposed him to support the establishment and to look with suspicion and hostility on French Jacobins and English Radicals. In 1802 he founded the Weekly Political Register and, as a conscientious political journalist he learned, though slowly, where the responsibility for rural evictions and slum housing really lay.
In 1806 William Pitt, the drunken and misanthropic symbol of reaction died, and high hopes were laid on the “Ministry of All the Talents” which succeeded to the government. Though there was a perceptible easing of repression it soon became clear that no reform would come out of shifting parliamentary combinations and William Cobbett, Francis Place, Sir Francis Burdett and Lord Cochrane began a campaign to mobilize public pressure for the return of radicals to Parliament. Burdett and Cochrane became MPs for Westminster – one of the few boroughs with any kind of popular franchise – in 1807, and with the support of Cobbett’s paper, political radicalism re-emerged from underground.
 
Action at home and abroad
The programme of the new radicalism was at first extremely limited. War-time conditions created a profiteer’s paradise and the House of Commons was corrupt beyond belief – bribery of electors by candidates and of MPs by the Government being accepted features of the Constitution. While the war lasted, Corbett and the radicals campaigned chiefly against corruption and for cheap government, with the aim of reducing taxes. The programme appealed to those sections of the middle class which were being crushed by taxation without sharing in war contracts, and also to a growing number of workers, slowly coming to realize that their misery was increased by high taxes on the necessities of life.
Cobbett was well aware, however, of the connection between a reactionary economic policy at home and reactionary objectives abroad. The war against France, ostensibly for the defence of Britain against Napoleon, had among its objects the restoration of monarchies in Europe. “The war, which began in 1793, is now over,” wrote Cobbett on September 25, 1815:
“The troops are not all come home, the ships are not all paid off, the account is not wound up, but the war is over. Social Order is restored; the French are again in the power of the Bourbons; the Revolution is at an end; no change has been effected in England; our Boroughs, and our Church, and Nobility and all have been preserved; our government tells us, that we have covered ourselves with glory …”
 
He turns to the workers
If parliament was to be reformed, however, so that the crushing weight of taxes might be relieved, the people – at least those of those of them who paid direct taxes – must be enfranchised. But the cause of reform could not be won without mobilizing behind it the strength of the urban working class and Cobbett instinctively turned to that class as it began, from the end of the war and for the first time in history, to emerge as an independent force in politics. His Weekly Political Register cost a shilling and a half-penny and was beyond the reach of working class pockets, though country workers had formed the habit of having extracts from the Register read to them in pubs.
 
The “Twopenny Trash”
In November 1816, he wrote the first of his Addresses to the Journeymen and Labourers which he published simultaneously in his ordinary edition and in a special twopenny edition, which, since it did not contain news but only articles, was exempt from the stamp duty on newspapers. The venture was a huge success, and “Cobbett’s Twopenny Trash,” as it was called by its critics and, before long by its supporters as well, became a regular feature of the political scene. Cobbett was no longer a middle class radical and champion of the rural workers. He had become the authentic spokesman and leader of the working class – the first leader of a workers’ mass movement in history.
In that eloquent first Addresses to the Journeymen and Labourers, Cobbett wrote:
“Whatever the Pride of rank, of riches or of scholarship may have induced some men to believe, or to affect to believe, the real strength and all the resources of a country, ever have sprung and ever must spring, from the labour of its people ... Elegant dresses, superb furniture, stately buildings, fine roads and canals, fleet horses and carriages, numerous and stout ships, warehouses teeming with goods; all these, and many other objects that fall under our view, are so many marks of national wealth and resources. But all these spring from labour. Without the Journeymen and the labourers ... the country would be a wilderness, hardly worth the notice of an invader.”
Cobbett went on to demand the vote for everyone who paid direct taxes. Soon he realised the inadequacy of this in a country which the workers were impoverished by indirect taxes, and he began to work for universal adult male suffrage, which was to become the central demand of the Chartist movement twenty years later.
 
The lack of organisation
Under conditions of post-war crisis in which falling prices and demobilization combined to cause mass unemployment, Cobbett’s influence among the workers was immense and working class journals, like Jonathan Wooler’s Black Dwarf, mass meetings addressed by Corbett’s friend, “Orator” Hunt, and Hampden Clubs, organized by Major Cartwright were followed by renewed repression. The new labour movement was harassed by provocateurs and police spies. Cobbett warned the workers against falling into police traps, advising his readers, on February 15, 1817,
“to have nothing to do with any Political Clubs, any secret Cabals, any Correspondencies but to trust to individual exertions and open meetings.”
Essentially an individualist, Cobbett did not appreciate the strength inherent in working class organization. An agitation carried out through public meetings and journalism was as far as his ideas carried him, and when, in 1817, the Government suspended Habeas Corpus, so that any of its opponents could be arrested without charge, he left for the United States.
After his return, in 1819, repression was intensified, and the Six Acts gave greater powers to the magistrates to suppress meetings and disperse gatherings. The fourth Act, especially directed against the cheap edition of Cobbett’s Register and other working class journals, levied a fourpenny stamp tax on papers costing less than sixpence and appearing more often than once a month.
“It is quite sufficient to know that every printer, every bookseller, every publisher, every writer for the Press, is now liable to be banished, if he dare write, print, or publish anything which shall be regarded ... as tending to bring into hatred or contempt, the Government and Constitution ... as by law established ... are we still to be told that we are free men? Good God Almighty!”
wrote Cobbett on January 6, 1820. Yet his advice remained the same:
“I am for making use of all the elbow-room, which we have yet left us by the Acts ...”
Though he did not advocate organization, either legal or [other]wise, under prevailing conditions, Cobbett gave every support to Arthur Thistlewood, who had planned to kill the entire Cabinet at dinner when, after being first instigated and then bet by a police agent, he and the other “Cato Street Conspirators” were tried and executed. Cobbett published both Thistlewood speech at his trial and a moving account of the dignified and resolute behaviour of the condemned men at their execution, in 1820.
Cobbett died in June, 1835. His greatness and his limitations were evident to his dying day. Both were displayed in his articles, denouncing the new Poor Law, of the previous year the callous behaviour of the Poor Law Commissioners in enforcing the workhouse test. He called for nation-wide resistance to the enforcement of the Act, but after his own fashion. “Half-a-dozen counties “ he wrote
“are in a state of partial commotion; the jails are opening the doors to receive those who are called the rebels against the Poor-law Bill ... here is the country disturbed; here are the jails filling; here are wives and children screaming after their fathers; here are these undeniable facts; and what is the cause? Not a desire to overturn the Government ... not a desire to disobey the settled laws of the country; not any revolutionary desire; not any desire to touch any one of the institutions of the country. What is it then? Why a desire ... to maintain the laws of their country, as they were settled at the time when the present church of the country was established ... the very fundamental principles of the Government; and which are of two hundred and forty years’ standing.”
 

