

An old-timer explained Capitalism and Socialism to me at lunch the other day. This is what he said.
Now the Capitalists own all the factories, the mines, the railroads and everything we work at. We just own our debts, our appetites and our muscles. We have to give the Capitalists our muscles so we can pay our debts and feed our appetites now and then.
Here’s the way it works. Say this jackknife here is all the plants, machinery, tools – everything we work with that the Capitalists own. Suppose this chunk of bread is the earth itself. Pretend for now that you are the whole working class of the world. I’m the Capitalist class because I own the jackknife.
I let you work with this jackknife. Here, take it, and cut that bread. There, you made ten slices. Well, I put those ten slices away in my cupboard and give you five cents. You take the five cents, go out and buy five slices of bread. Here’s the five slices. You and your family eat it up tonight. Then tomorrow you come to work and slice some more bread for me.
After this goes on for a while, I get a hell of a lot of bread stored up in that cupboard. And it isn’t any use to cut up any more, because it’ll only get moldy. So I tell you to go home, and wait for me to call you back to work. I let the jackknife get rusty while I sell that extra bread.
 
How Capitalism Operates
Well, you’re out of work, and you can’t buy any bread, so I have to lower the price. I can’t make much money that way, so I dump a lot of it in the ocean so the price will go up. Maybe you’re so hungry by this time that you pick it up and eat it when it drifts to shore, salt water and all. But if I’m smart, I figure on that and put poison in the bread.
Things get tougher and your muscles are getting weaker. That looks bad for me because I’ll need you later on. So I am big-hearted. I give you a half a slice of bread a day for nothing – no money at all. Of course I say you’re a lazy bum because you won’t work, and it’s your fault that I don’t give you any work. But that generosity makes me a pretty good guy.
Finally I get things started again. I get you to sharpen up the jackknife once more. You cut out twenty slices a day instead of ten. To show you how big-hearted I am, I give you six cents a day. And it isn’t my fault if the price of bread goes up. I’ve got a little war on so I can sell more bread in the rest of the world. I have to give your brother some of the bread you cut so he can go out and kill your cousin and get killed himself.
In the meantime my cupboard is getting bigger than ever. When my war is over I’ll lay you off again, fold up the jackknife again and eat my bread while you starve.
What can you do about it? IN JUST THIS COUNTRY ALONE YOU ARE 130 MILLION PEOPLE, AND I’M JUST 60 FAMILIES. WHY DON’T YOU TAKE THAT JACKKNIFE AWAY FROM ME?
 



People are getting laid off from the war plants. The whole aircraft industry is beginning to shut down. Fellows are returning from the army. And they’re all forming a new army. The Army of the Unemployed. It’s going to be bigger than all of Eisenhower’s forces – much bigger.
You don’t have to look very far to see it coming. The aircraft plants on the other side of town are half closed down already. It hasn’t hit the steel industry yet. So far, we’re all still in the shop and still working six days a week.
But it’s like when you were a kid hoeing beans on the farm. A storm would come blowing at you right in the middle of a dry day. And you could see the rain coming down at the other end of the field, drenching the other kids. But a minute later, you were soaking wet yourself.
 
It Sucks Everyone In
That’s the way this thing hits, too. You see the unemployed and the reliefers a long way off. And suddenly you’re right in the middle of them.
Some people think that unemployment doesn’t hit everybody. But that’s where they’re wrong. Remember how it used to be when there were fifty guys outside the gate waiting to take your job? You took a lot of the company’s crap then. You swallowed a lot that you don’t swallow now.
The bosses used those fifty men for all they were worth, as a whip over your head. They felt the power those unemployed gave them. They made you work ten and twelve hours a day for straight time. Divide the work up with the unemployed at a living wage for everyone? The hell they did! With those fifty guys at the gate, you’d take your thirty cents an hour and be thankful for the ten-hour day.
Unemployment hits you whether you’re working or not. It demoralizes the employed and the unemployed both. It’s a weapon in the hands of the big capitalist bosses. It’s up to us to take this weapon out of their hands and put everyone to work.
 
Workers’ Control the Only Cure
This can only be done by operating industry under our own workers control. If the capitalists could operate these factories to make murder machines, certainly WE can operate them to make the things that people need to live like human beings. The capitalists have made their millions and billions out of the plants, and now the plants are being left to rust and decay, while people starve.
This rust and decay and starvation are part and parcel of the capitalist system in its stage of decay. War has only interrupted the process and substituted explosion for decay, sudden death for starvation. Now we are going back to the old pre-war dog-eat-dog way of living, only fiercer and more bitter than before.
But when we working people take over the factories, mines and mills, there won’t be one bunch of us working 12 hours a day for starvation wages and another bunch on relief with a starvation dole. When the working class takes over, that kind of stuff will be done with forever.
 



Maybe you think it’s going to be a long, long time before the working people take power and create abundance for all in a warless world. You explain the ideas of the Militant to your neighbor and he often doesn’t seem to get the idea. You see people keep right on with the same old prejudices that are against their own interests. And you wonder how and when all these workers will overthrow their rulers.
“How are you ever going to get the working people together?” It isn’t only Scissorbill Sam that asks that question. It’s a natural question for millions of us to ask, because we see the workers divided by religion, race, nationality, sex and “classes of work.” And the worst of it is that you don’t see any big changes taking place from day to day.
People still go on talking the capitalists’ crap. The colored and white don’t seem any closer together. The ignorant don’t seem to be any smarter.
But do you remember how it was before the big strikes? Remember how Harry Johnson and Louie the stump jumper were taken off welding and given day-work jobs because they were getting too old to keep up with the new guys? Remember how Johnny Dylek used to listen to Stebbs yell at him, and never say a word? Remember how they fired a new fellow for coming in late a few times? That was before the big strike.
A lot of things happened before the big strike that went into our minds and stayed there without us realizing it. The foreman would pick on us and we wouldn’t say anything – or not very much. Of course Stebbs was hit so bad he went to the hospital once. But poor Tony got a week off and we all considered him lucky not to get fired. But mainly we took it. We took all their crap. Everybody’s – from Hawkshaw in the front office right down to Pile-it-high Patterson, the stooge.
And we had plenty of prejudice, too. The Poles couldn’t get along with the Italians, and vice-versa. And it happened there was a couple of families of Swedes related to the boss. So we figured they were no good, too. Three or four colored fellows had the worst jobs of all – and somehow we figured that was what they deserved.
 
Labor Unity Seemed Impossible
How could you ever get a bunch of people like us into a union? You could talk to us day after day – but it wasn’t any use. No sir! We were too superior in our ignorance and prejudice. No union was going to make trouble with us. We had enough troubles as it was!
Only Slim and Shorty and old Pop Philiber would join. They were the only members for the longest time. And everybody thought they were crazy. Especially Slim, because he did so much talking he was taking his job in his hands. Times were tough. And that was like taking your life in your hands.
Well, Slim kept on talking. The bosses kept on being tough. We kept on taking it. And it seemed like it was going on like that forever. Then one day Slim got fired.
BANG! The whole shop went out the gate. Everybody. Italians, Swedes, Poles, Negroes. Louie the stump jumper – and even Scissor- bill Sam. And all the shops at the other end came out too. They had the same experiences we had. And they felt the same way. Thousands and thousands of us poured out on the highway. We felt our power. The union had come to stay.
It was so sudden and complete, it seemed like magic. But it wasn’t. It was the final sum of all we learned and all we went through. We had never begun to add it up when it was happening. But it was all there waiting for us to add it up. And it added up to one thing – STRIKE.
The whole working class is like the fellows in our plant. All that they have gone through, and have got to go through, is adding up. They may not know it, any more than we did, before the strike, but it’s there. It’s growing. And it’s going to add up to one thing. THE SOCIALIST REVOLUTION.
 



How are the workers of the world ever going to get together?
Sometimes you ask yourself that question when you see the workers split up because of race, religion, nationality and many other things. You see it even within the same country. And how much tougher, you think, it will be to unite the workers of all countries. In every nation the people are taught from childhood that the country they live in is the best in the world, and that they are superior beings. How are all the peoples going to unite under conditions like that?
Well, it isn’t going to be easy to organize the whole world behind the Fourth International. We’ve a big job ahead of us. But the main job of uniting the working people is being done by our enemy, the capitalist class. Yes, even though they encourage race provocations and attack the unions, they are uniting us.
They are uniting us by subjecting us to the same conditions. They are uniting us by making us work together on the same material and with the same machinery. They are uniting us by giving us all the same lousy wages and squeezing us into a common mold.
 
Unity Forged in Strike Action
Into the shop have come farmers from nearby, Negroes from way down south, former mine workers from Pennsylvania (one from West Virginia). A dozen or so of the welders were shipyard workers just last year. Some of the girls used to be waitresses; others, housewives. And now a scattering of laid-off aircraft workers have been hired, too.
Some of the people had militant traditions and some didn’t. Nearly all of them would talk about their former occupations and think of themselves as they used to be. They knew in the backs of their minds that they all got the same lousy Bethelehem Steel wages and took the same Bethlehem Steel crap. It was like all being in the same prison.
Then we had the strike. And they all, every single one, realized they were all STEELWORKERS. And their common enemy was the STEEL BOSSES. The company’s own capitalist organization and methods united the workers' against it.
And that’s not just here in our own shop. It’s all over. Take Hitler – the worst anti-labor dictator and Jew-baiter in history. In spite of himself, he united Jew and Gentile, Pole and German. And do you know how? BY THROWING THEM INTO THE SAME PRISONS AND CONCENTRATION CAMPS!
In Buchenwald, one of the worst of the prison camps, workers of all nations and races lived, suffered and died. (Among them many German revolutionary heroes.) Before they left that prison they all sang the world song of the socialist working class, The Internationale. And language was no bar to their harmony.
 
The Prison of Capitalist Slavery
And not only in the stone prisons where the chains were made of metal. For the German steel plants are like the American steel plants. And the German capitalist system is like the American capitalist system: a huge prison that Hitler made even more of a prison. But in making a prison of Germany and all of Europe, Hitler subjected the working people to the same misery, the same hunger and the same death. Thus he began to UNITE them against himself.
Now the Allied capitalist leaders are doing the exact same thing, step by step. The people all over the world are suffering the same united misery under their capitalist masters, regardless of what capitalist flag these masters fly.
Capitalist war is uniting the working peoples in its prison, too. And not just those of the “Allied” nations. Capitalist war has brought the worker youth of all nations into compact masses. It has transported them to all parts of the earth. And though it spews out its poison, it opens the eyes of the youth even while it turns their stomachs.
Japanese maidens, American girls, German frauleins are united in a common anxiety for their sweethearts. Many – too many – will be united by a common grief. The soldiers of all nations are becoming united by a common hatred of the war. And millions of their youthful corpses have been united in the same graves.
The whole capitalist world is a prison for the working class. And we working people are. beginning to see it. The jailer keeps making it tougher for us all, and we can’t help but see it. As we see it more and more, unity in the straggle will be forged. For we are shackled with a common chain. And the same key fits all the locks.
 



“Who’s going to do the dirty work under Socialism?” That’s one question that doesn’t come from the heart of the working man at all. He’s just thoughtlessly echoing the middle and boss class people who never have soiled their hands. Because if he stopped to think a second he’d say “Who does the dirty work under CAPITALISM?” And the answer would be THE WHOLE WORKING CLASS.
Somehow or other some people have got the idea that it’s just the garbage men who do the dirty work under capitalism. If that were true and that were the only dirty work we had to eliminate under Socialism, it would be a real snap. Why, for the cost of a couple of pocket battleships you could install private incinerators all over the country and let all the garbage men work in a perfume factory.
But it isn’t true. There are jobs far, far dirtier than garbage men’s. What about the furnace workers in the steel plants, straining their guts with all-day shoveling and slag picking in sweltering heat and getting pneumonia when the winds freeze the sweat on their bodies ? That’s a dirty job.
 
Plenty of Dirty Jobs
What about the foundry workers, pouring the metal into sand molds while the black smoke fills the shut-in buildings so much that the glaring red and white hot iron only dimly lights the place like a red sunset? Yes what about them – working along till they collapse with tuberculosis, silicosis and other lung diseases. All the horse pills in the drinking fountain dispensers don’t stop them from getting this coughing, blood-spitting business. And that’s a dirty job.
What about the miners, working their lives out on their knees and bellies in the bowels of the earth? They get lung diseases, too – and more besides. The cave-ins, the blow-ups, the asphyxiations – and the slow starvation in the death traps. And as for dirt, they come home every night covered with coal dust from head to toe. They still have the taste of it in their mouths. Do you call that a clean job?
Capitalist war isn’t exactly a clean affair either. Millions upon millions of youngsters are thrown into battle to murder and be murdered for the sake of Dupont and Mitsui. Most of those kids would have been squeamish about tossing around scraps and rotten vegetables. Now they have to plunge their stickers into MEN and turn them into rotting corpses. And afterward they have to endure the stink of the battlefield and try not to go crazy.
 
Cleaning Up the Capitalists
And mind you the capitalists, who are the cause of all these things, have the gall to ask us “Who’s going to do the dirty work under Socialism?”
The only dirty work will be the job of cleansing all the filth the capitalists have left behind – like clearing up the debris from their terrible war.
Our workers’ society will have no need of war. It will have every need for strong, healthy, happy human beings and every reason to help them to be so. Our workers’ society will spare no expense to make all jobs safe and clean. UNDER SOCIALISM, NO ONE’S GOING TO DO THE DIRTY WORK.
 



“Why you have socialism right now, and what good does it
do?” said Scissorbill Sam (the bosses’ man).
Everybody looked surprised.
“Look at this here War Production Board and War Manpower
Commission. The WPB tells the corporations how much to produce. The
OPA tells ’em how much to charge for it. And the War Manpower
Commission tells everybody where to work.”
“So what?”
“So what? That’s regulation, ain’t it? That’s
planned production, ain’t it? It’s Socialism, that’s
what!”
“You know, Scissorbill,” said Slim, weighing his
words, “Sometimes I think you missed your calling.”
“Yeah?,” muttered Sam distrustfully.
“You should be writing editorials for the big newspapers.”
“Well, I don’t write them,” Scissorbill replied
with a pleased and hopeful note in his voice, “but I read them
carefully every day.”
“Same difference,” said Slim.
While Scissorbill was chewing on that, Shorty asked, “How
about that, Slim? I know we want to throw the War Manpower Commission
out because they’re part of the labor freezing outfit. But
other boards help keep prices down and plan production. Wouldn’t
we keep them in if we had a labor government?”
“We might have a word like ‘Production,’ or
even ‘Price Administration’ at the beginning. But that’s
all that might be the same – just the name. Everything else
would be different. The main difference would be that our boards will
work.
“You don’t think this capitalist board works, do you?
Look at the way they had all those lay-offs in aircraft and
small-arms factories a little while ago.”
“Sure. And now they want a labor draft.”
“And look how they take some of the people back to work. At
less wages than ever.”
“Yes. But that isn’t all,” said Slim. “Naturally
these companies are all trying to chisel on our wages and cut us down
to the bone. But that’s just one reason why you see crowds of
working people going out of one factory – working in another
one for three or four weeks – or wandering around the streets –
then back in the first one – then out on their ear again. Don’t
forget, the War Production Board itself is telling the companies to
do this.”
“You mean the companies do it against their will?”
“Not by a long shot, Breezy. The War Production Board is
made up of a lot of agents of different big companies. My point is
that they can’t plan production. Their own system prevents
them.”
“Just a minute,” said Scissorbill, disapprovingly,
“You’re trying to give the impression the WPB is run by
Big Business.”
“Oh, no,” said Slim sarcastically. “I
wouldn’t want to give you the wrong idea. Maybe us working
stiffs are running it. But anyway it comes out like this: a few
months ago WPB gives Big Business, and only Big Business, the green
light to change over to peace-time production.”
“Yeah, that’s what started the big lay-offs, too.”
“And smaller outfits couldn’t get any materials for
peace-time work for another year.”
“Some of them can’t even get materials for war work
right now’. Why I know a guy ––”
“The people thrown out of work,” continued Slim, “just
signed up for unemployment. insurance because the WPB. couldn’t
put ’em back to work. Then the war got under way all over
again, and most people got back to work.”
“With a few pay-cuts, of course.”
“Of course. And it just goes to show that the only thing
that’s making this screwy system work nowadays is war. And they
can’t even plan production right for their own war. What the
hell are they going to do in peace-time?
“The War Production Board,” Slim went on “is a
planning board, all right. What does it plan ? – It plans how
Big Business can make the most money possible and give the working
people the business. It plans how to choke off smaller companies and
drive them to the wall in the changeover.”
“Now Scissorbill Sam says that is a socialistic set-up. Well
that’s the way the big manufacturers feel too. They didn’t
even want to hear a little squawk out of the War Production Board, or
any other board, if they decide to make a few extra bucks on ships
that break in two in cold water.
“They agree to have the board – like you agree to let
a dentist pull your tooth – because you have to. But they kick
like hell about the few restrictions they have to accept once in a
while. And they call that Socialistic. They’re only raking in
twice the shekels they did in the last war – but they figure
it’s a big enough war to rate four times as much profit.”
“You know –” said Shorty, “if we were
running things ourselves I should think it would be pretty simple to
make a production board work. The fellows in each plant would want
the other plant to produce a lot. And what damn fool would want to
make things so fast that they broke in two? Why our production board
could make things go right without half trying.”
“If I was running a real socialistic shebang,” boasted
Breezy suddenly, “and they tried to make stuff that killed our
own boys, I’d cut their hearts out.”
“That’s the right idea,” said Shorty.
“Yeah,” Slim said, “except that Breezy
wouldn’t be running it. We all would. And nobody’d get a
chance to pull stuff like that even if they wanted to. Anyway, we’ll
do a lot worse than cut their hearts out. We’ll make ’em
go to work.”
 



“I don't care what you say,” Scissorbill Sam (the
bosses’ man) was very positive. “You can’t take all
the factories away from the owners. The factories BELONG to the
owners. It wouldn’t be RIGHT for us to take them.”
“Sure they belong to the owners,” Slim commented, as
he reached into his locker for his gloves. “So do you. But
that’s no reason you ALWAYS have to be a slave.”
“If I’m a slave you’re a slave, too. You do the
same work I do, and you get the same pay.”
To this indisputable logic Slim replied, “Yep. We’re
all slaves. Wage slaves. Only difference between you and the rest of
us is that you LIKE it.” 

“Whaddaya mean – we’re slaves?” Breezy,
said, as he looked up from a list of teams for the big hockey pool.
“I ain’t no slave.”
“Anyway we’re not slaves until they pass that slave
labor law,” Shorty said, with his mouth full of a baloney
sandwich.
“What I was getting at,” Slim began again, “is
that this plant and all the machinery in it don’t do the
capitalists a bit of good unless they have us to work it for them. We
have to be their slaves when you stop to think of it. And the only
way we can stop being their slaves, and work for ourselves, is to
kick them out.”
“Listen!” Scissorbill Sam said belligerently, “Don’t
you know that widows and orphans own stock in this company? What do
you want to do? Kick them out in the streets?”
“Now, wait a minute, Slim,” Pop Philliber set his
thermos jug down real quick. “Don’t you fly off the
handle at Sam. Anyway that’s a real good argument he’s
got there.”
The fellows looked at Scissorbill Sam. He was pleased. But he
looked a little bit self-conscious, because everybody could see that
Pop was getting wound up with an argument, too.
“Slim here says that if you take the factories away from
the rich, you take their slaves away at the same time. But as
Scissorbill points out, you also take the slave away from some poor
widow that never done you any harm –,” Pop lit his pipe
while he let the moral sink in.
“Now just look at that widow. All her money is wrapped up in
that slave. Maybe just ten or fifteen thousand dollars in stock. It’s
all she has in the world. Now just pretend that all the rest of us
here are slaves belonging to Eugene Grace, or some other rich and
fancy stockbroker. But poor Scissorbill there, he’s a slave of
this nice old widow woman.”
Scissorbill tried to make out he wasn’t paying much
attention. But we could all see he was.
 
Scissorbill and His Lady Slaveowner
“You see,” continued Pop as he squinted into his
thermos bottle at nothing in particular, “this here is what you
call a problem in ethics. It might be all right for all the rest of
us to kick our owners out, on account of their being mean and
no-account crooks that get real fat off’n us. But you take the
sweet old lady slaveowner that lives off Scissorbill. Why he just
keeps her in crinkly dresses, a nice little cottage with a board walk
and roses, maybe a buck in the collection plate at church now and
then –”
“Maybe she’s got a couple of pet cats and dogs, too,”
Shorty added.
“Mebbe.”
“I ain’t supportin’ no pet cats and dogs!”
Scissorbill shouted. He was getting a little mad.
“Well if you’re gonna be a slave for a nice old
widow you got to work for her pets, too,” Pop said, with an air
of finality, “I guess you just got to take the bad with the
good, that’s all.”
“Anyhow,” the old boy went on, “if the majority
of the boys figure this poor woman hadn’t ought to lose her
slave, just on account of a little Socialism or something, well you
can let Scissorbill go right on being her slave. That’s fair
enough, ain’t it, Sam?”
But the bosses’ man walked out in a huff, while everybody
laughed.
“Now that I think of it,” Shorty said, “My old
lady was a widow. She never had time for rose gardens and stuff like
that, though. She worked ten and twelve hours a day at the laundry to
keep us kids in school.”
“Of course if you was to get technical, now,” Pop said
with a little sigh, “you might say there’s quite a few
poor widows in this country that don’t have any ten or fifteen
thousand dollars worth of stock in this company.”
Slim clenched his teeth. And without opening them very much he
said, “For every widow who gets a cut on the profits, they mail
the lousy five hundred dollar insurance to twenty new widows right in
this town. And they’re making thousands and thousands of widows
in this war that they’ll kick out on the streets when it’s
all over. It’s THEM that’s robbing widows and orphans.
And it’s US that’s going to put a stop to it.”
 



“Just as long as people want to have power, you’re
going to have wars and trouble,” somebody said the other day.
Some crazy guy with a lust for power and a yen to play soldier
crops up every generation or so and gets millions of poor guys killed
off who never wanted to play soldier at all ... That’s the
way the capitalist books and newspapers explain things. And naturally
most people believe it’s really so.
But it stands to reason that very few tyrants are as strong as,
say, two men together. And you never heard of ONE that could stand up
to ten men at once. Yet it takes a hell of a lot more than ten strong
men to overthrow a weakest tyrant.
Take the old superintendent of the Open Hearth – the one
they had three or four years ago. He was hell on wheels. Took away
the benches, took down the canopy the fellows had fixed up on the
other side of the furnace floor to keep the rain and snow off them.
He’d have a man sent back home for coming out on the floor five
minutes late for his turn. There was a tyrant for you.
The whole union kept up a running fight for months to break that
guy. They complained to every big shot they could. They had
“take-it-easy” weeks, and regular slowdowns, too. Finally
when the second and third helpers just refused to work on the floor
at all, and stayed in the labor gang, the company “looked into
it.”
The result was that a different superintendent was put in and the
other slave-driver was transferred. Naturally he got better pay in
the new place where he pulled the same business, while the new super
was a young guy – just promoted. Probably got lower pay than
the old one.
But whom was the whole union fighting? Was it just an ornery,
cantankerous old man who wanted to have his own way? Or was it the
COMPANY – the association of millionaires who PROFITED by his
use of power?
You can be power-drunk all your life. But if you don’t tie
up with the bunch that want you in power to protect their interests,
about all you can do is twiddle your thumbs, or read the comic books
and intoxicate yourself with the deeds of “Superman” and
his pals.
In their movie Lost in a Harem, Abbott and Costello run up
against a dirty king who’s a tyrant for fair. And do you know
how he does it? He hypnotizes everybody in the kingdom (including
Tommy Dorsey and his band) with some kind of magic ring. That sounds
pretty silly.
And yet, when you come to think of it, some explanations of
Hitler’s powers might have come out of the same wacky scenario
writer’s hand. According to the stuff you read and hear, this
Hitler is some kind of nine-day wonder in reverse. He reportedly
wields hypnotic power over people: Roosevelt and Churchill may be
superheroes. But Hitler’s a super-villain. And instead of
having a ring to put people to sleep, they have something better.
They are supposed to have people all willing to be hypnotized anyway
because they’re such dopes!
But what does Hitler DO when he uses all this super-power of his?
Does he put extra benches on furnace floors? Does he command the
capitalists to raise workers’ wages? Does he command them to
pay time-and-a-half, and double time? Not on your life. He doesn’t,
because he CAN’T.
No, the magic of the fascist tyrant’s power works only in
one direction. Against the working people. Hitler has a lust for
power, all right. But he and his gang are working for the association
of German millionaires who PROFIT from this power. The minute there’s
no more profit, out he’ll go, while they try to use some other
handy tyrants (like Allied generals) to keep the German workers down.
No single individual really rules either Germany or America. A
CLASS rules. The capitalist class. If they can get some super
boy-scout to front for them, so much the better – for them.
They can put forward these tyrants because, like all previous class
rule, capitalist rule is the rule of a tiny minority, based on the
foundations of scarcity economy. The only way a minority has or
can or ever did rule over the majority is by supplementing brute
force with deception, lies and legends – especially centered
round tyrants, “democratic” and fascist alike. That
is why real democracy is out for capitalism just as it was excluded
for feudalism and slavery.
When we take over the industries, our class, THE WORKING CLASS,
will rule. Then we’ll have real democracy, workers’
democracy. We working people will be running things in our own
interests. So naturally we will train as many as possible for genuine
leadership. There will be no lifetime presidents or dictators under
our system, for the simple reason that we’ll be constantly
getting better leaders to take care of the interests of those who
will then PROFIT from the power – the WORKING PEOPLE
themselves.
 



“But look,” young Mike was saying, “a
man’s entitled to what he earns, isn’t he?”
“Sure, but you don’t think Eugene Grace
earned all his millions, do you kid?” asked Shorty from behind
the orange he was peeling.
“Oh no,” Mike said, and he turned a
little red, because he was just a kid. Only eighteen. Just out of
High School and waiting around for the draft to catch him. But he was
twice as big as Shorty and stuck to his point. “But somebody
earned it. His father and grandfather maybe. And they passed it on to
him and he built it up.”
“So what?” Shorty threw a peeling at Pop,
but missed.
“Well, that’s why you can’t take it
away from him. It wouldn’t be fair,” Mike insisted.
“Somebody earned it all right,” said
Slim. “But it wasn’t him.”
“Well, it wasn’t me,” Mike said
with a generous wave of his hand.
“It was your old man, then,” Slim kept
on. “It wasn’t Grace’s old man, or his partner’s,
or any other big shots.”
Mike thought this was silly. And he said so.
“No ’tain’t,’’ said
Slim. “Your old man and mine – and Shorty’s here,
and Pop’s and all the working people earned it. Only they
didn’t pass it on to us. They had to turn it over to Grace and
his pals. When we take things over, we’ll just be taking what’s
rightly ours.”
“Oh, I see what you mean,” Mike said,
although he didn’t exactly. “But that’s their
capital you’d be taking. The workers got paid wages for their
labor. The investor had to take millions of dollars and put it into
industry to give people those wages.” Mike took economics in
High School. And he sounded pretty sharp.
“Just what is this capital you’re talking
about?” asked Slim.
“It’s money used as an instrument of
production – didn’t you know?” Mike quoted the best
school book. And then Slim turned a little red because he hadn’t
ever got to High School and hadn’t read all that stuff.
“There’s your instrument of production,”
Breezy piped up, as he showed his arm and flexed his muscle. Mike
waved him down derisively. Here was one subject, he thought, where
these old timers didn’t know a tenth as much as he.
“The way I figure it,” reasoned Slim “is
this. A million dollars might be money that someone has in the bank.
But if you were to add up all the millions in banks and stocks and
bonds it would be more money than there is anywhere. Could you change
all that into money at once, Mike?”
“Of course not,” chirruped Mike.
“Then all this capital must be nothing else but
factories and mines and the things we work at. Right, Mike?’’
Mike didn’t say anything. And now Slim really
got going.
“Let’s say Eugene Grace is worth a
hundred million dollars. That’s just the same as saying he owns
a lot of blast furnaces, open hearths, coke ovens, rolling mills and
such, that anybody’d be willing to pay a hundred million for –
if they had it.
“Now you were saying,” Slim went on
“that you own what you work for and you’re entitled to
it, didn’t you? OK. Who worked to build all those things?
Eugene Grace or your old man and mine?”
“Well, of course, they did in a way,”
said Mike, a little confused by this strange departure from High
School Economics. Then he remembered. “But they got paid for
it, didn’t they?”
“You might call it pay. I ball it upkeep,”
Slim replied. “They got enough to keep them going, and to come
back the next day to work again, and to bring up kids like you and me
to work for Grace later on.”
“And what have the workers got,” he
continued, “after all that work is over? They got their old age
or a grave. Eugene Grace inherits what THEY made. And we inherit the
same working conditions they had.”
“Looks like the old boys should have got a
better lawyer,” gagged Breezy.
“Say!” Shorty exclaimed. “Look
at that strip mill across the way. They just built that ten years
ago. Now the company’s making big dough out of it. And where
are the guys that built it? Half of them are in the army. Fifty lousy
bucks a month” – he threw the orange peelings at the
trash box in disgust.
“Yeah,” Slim said after he thought a
minute, “all their sweat and part of their lifetime is locked
up in that building. And more than that. Remember how a couple of the
riggers got killed? Think the insurance paid their widows and orphans
what they would have made the rest of their lives? Like hell it did.”
He stopped because he was beginning to burn.
Then, he said, “That strip mill belongs to
us working people. I don’t care what the present laws say. The
working people paid for it with their labor and their lives. And all
that was ever paid to them was just enough to keep them going so they
could build more mills and run them so Eugene Grace could suck the
blood out of more of us than ever.”
 



Sometimes you hear somebody say, “These accidents are the fellows’ own fault.” And it’s not only Scissorbill Sam (the bosses’ man) who says it, either. Shorty said it once, and Breezy makes cracks like that too.
At the last safety meeting the foreman said, “There’s no such thing as an accident.” Everything is carelessness, he argued. And he mentioned how a girl and a fellow had both hurt their hands in just the same way on the same machine. They both wiped the shavings off a drill-press table with one hand while they were bringing the drill down with the other.
There’s no excuse for that, the foreman said. They had a stick to clean off the shavings with. They didn’t need to use their hands and get hurt. Of course the, company never got around to installing an air line to blow the table clean. But it’s no trouble to pick up a stick, as the foreman says. You only have to do it once every three and a half seconds.
Well, maybe there isn’t any excuse. Maybe these people did it on purpose. Maybe they wanted to see what it felt like to tear a hole in their hand. Maybe they were so dumb they thought it would be a big enough accident so they could get compensation and retire. – And maybe not.
It’s a funny thing. But fellows and girls have been running that drill-press ever since it was put in the shop two and a half years ago, and nothing happened to them. But all of a sudden there are two accidents in a row. How come?
 
Does the Law of Averages Explain It?
Well, maybe it was the law of averages. Mathematicians figure it out by the law of chances, or something. They figure that a drill-press has one accident a year in its system. So if two years go by without an accident, there are two accidents coming up, you know. The same way they figure if you flip a coin a thousand times it will come down heads 500 times. But maybe not exactly 500 times in a row – as every bettor knows.
You never can tell. The law of averages might explain it all. But it’s too bad the law got enforced just when they started to make money on the job.
Oh yes, I forgot to mention that angle, didn’t I? The first two years and five months the drill-press was only used for shop repair work and other day-work jobs. But for the last couple of weeks the operators have been on steady PIECE-WORK on the drill.
NOW they can make nine-fifty a day! Maybe ten bucks if. they get good stock and quick crane service. Of course they work four or five times FASTER than day-work to get the dough. But hell, that’s piece-work, isn’t it? .
Take a girl who got 78 cents an hour yesterday on a clean-up job. She may have run the drill a couple of times before for 81 cents an hour. Now there’s a piece-work job. The boss gives her a break, and puts her on the drill. She has the chance of making a dollar and a quarter an hour. All she has to do is work four or five times harder and faster.
And maybe that’s why she decided to drill a hole in her hand, and push a broom for the rest of the month.
 



“I’ll be glad,” said Scissorbill Sam (the bosses’ man), “when all these here women are out of the shop. They belong in the kitchen, anyhow.”
Well, I don’t know,” said Pop after a well-aimed spit of coffee juice at the trash box. “Now I don’t know. ’Course babies is better off with women takin’ care of ’em. But whether women is better off that way is a moot question. I’ve heard tell there’s an awful lot of women folk go crazy every year just from listenin’ to babies cry all day long.”
“As a matter of fact ” said old George, the machinist, “I bet babies would be just as well off with men to take care of them as women. That is,” he added hastily, as the fellows started to laugh, “if you’re gonna feed them with a bottle. Only reason a man’s not handy at that stuff is that he works such long hours away from home that ...”
“Hey!” hollered Breezy. “Wait a second! I don’t care if I’m laid off for the whole year. You won’t see Breezy changing diapers and pouring powder down the kid’s back. That’ll be the day!”
“I ain’t trying to say who’s the best dydee pinner – man or woman. Guess I’d bet on the woman, myself.” Pop paused a moment, sort of to apologize for admitting a point of superiority in women. “But it don’t seem reasonable for women to have to do a job that some of them go crazy at. And most of them go down hill somethin’ awful after raising three or four babies.” Pop waited for somebody to contradict him. But how could anybody?
“It ain’t only the squallin’, either. It’s the awful mischief they get into. That’s what runs a body down trailing after them when they’re anywheres from one to three or four years old. A woman looks pretty old in a few years.”
 
What Can You Do About It?
“Yeah, that’s the way it is. But what are you going to do?” said Tony glumly.
The way he said it he didn’t expect any answer. But Pop was wound up pretty well that day.
“Tell you what I’d do if it was me,” Pop said. “I’d use a little sense and let women handle little tykes that were good at it. Women that liked it. Maybe have ten or fifteen youngsters in a real nice day nursery like the rich people have. Only do it all over the country. Then a woman would have a little time to bring up her youngsters the way she wanted to. Read them bed-time stories and things like that instead of boxing their ears all the time.”
“Aah, put away the pipe,” Breezy razzed the old man. “Nobody can afford that ritzy line of stuff not if they work for Bethlehem Steel!”
“Not today they can’t. But if it’s not too good for the rich,” said Pop stubbornly, “it’s not too good for the poor.”
 



Pile-It-High Patterson was talking to Hallory, the foreman, today (sort of one bull-shooter to another). He said, “I see the aircraft plants have been laying off gradually for several months.”
And Hallory said, “Yes. That’s a good thing, too. If they laid everybody off at once when the war with Japan ends, it would be a terrible calamity. It’s a great boon to have it this way.”
You see Hallory must have read the editorial in yesterday’s paper. Same with Pile-It-High Patterson. That editorial said it was a boon too. When those two birds haven’t got any stuff of their own to shovel and pile, they get somebody else’s out of the newspapers.
Maybe they have a point at that, though. When you stop to think of it, maybe it is a great boon to be laid off “gradually” instead of suddenly. You see, if you get laid off on the same day as five or ten thousand other people, why that’s kind of sudden. In fact, it’s a calamity.
But if you get laid off all by yourself, or with only a couple hundred other lucky people, it’s a “boon.” (A boon, they tell me, is something a big shot gives you for nothing.)
 
Sounds Pretty Good, Doesn’t It?
It’s much better, after all, to get laid off now, isn’t it? You wouldn’t want to get slapped in the face with a lay-off right in the middle of that big victory celebration the bosses will be having, would you?
By getting laid-off now, you get more time to get used to the idea and adjust yourself to post-war conditions. Not only that. Maybe you’ve been making a dollar and a quarter an hour over at aircraft. And if you get laid off soon enough you might get in a couple of months over to our shop, or on the furnaces. You get 78 cents an hour and up – up to about 88 cents ... You’ll get used to lower wages quicker that way, too.
That’s a break, isn’t it? And you might have three or four weeks between jobs, too – just enough not to collect on unemployment insurance. That ought to help a guy get back into the old harness.
So Pile-It-High Patterson sighs – you know, just as though all. the problems of gouging Bethlehem’s 38 million dollars average profits out of the workers, were on his shoulders alone. He sighs and says, “I suppose we’ll have some of those aircraft workers over here. That means an awful lot more paper work for me.”
And Hallory says, “They’ll be hard to handle, too. One thing, at least, the union can’t say anything for 30 days. Maybe they’ll be out by then.”
Sounds pretty good, doesn’t it?
 



Sometimes a fellow thinks he’s not getting much brighter as time goes on. And sometimes he wonders how he’s ever going to get smart enough to understand the theory of socialism. Karl Marx, Lenin and Trotsky seem like geniuses out of this world. And you can’t even understand their words without a dictionary. At least that’s the way it looks at first.
And you find yourself thinking, “Well, this socialism stuff is all right for college people and geniuses. But look at me. I only work for a living. I even fall asleep over a newspaper when I’ve had a hard day. How am I going to understand the books when I don’t even read all the articles in The Militant?”
Well that reminds me of the first helper’s job on the open hearth. You know, it wasn’t so many years ago – just before we got the union, in fact – that a first helper made out that his job was like one of the mysteries of the Knights of Columbus. And nobody but him could understand it. That was in the days when the superintendent would put his boy friends in your job at the drop of a hat.
If the second helper was a little brash and bold he might ask he aristocratic first helper, to explain something about the job. But the answer was always “It can’t be explained, my boy. It’s too complicated. You’ll understand after you’re a first helper.”
That was pretty good! How could you ever get to be a first helper if no one could tell you the first thing about running the furnace? You would look into that furnace every day of your life and see the iron soup bubbling and blowing like the devil’s own brew. But you never knew just what temperature to run the oil at to make the iron boil. That was one of the mysteries.
You’d shovel manganese into a flaming ladle in the pit when the “heat” was being tapped out. You’d hold your head down to keep your face from being burned – or try to. But no one ever told you what the manganese was for or why there was more one day and less another. Same with the silicon on the other side of the spout that you used to throw in when you were a third helper.
Read about it? That’s a joke. You flop down on the davenport the minute you get home, and the one time you feel good at the end of the week, three shots go straight to your head, and you’re done for on your day off, too.
 
How You Will Learn – and Teach Others
You’d see the first helper shovel “spar” into the furnace every so often. It brought the slag to the top, somehow. But how much or how little to use was one of the slick tricks of the trade. And he hugged all his instruments like a lioness watches her cubs. You’d watch him make notations on a scratch pad that looked like a cross between shorthand and Chinese arithmetic. You began to think you were just, a dummy.
Well, after the union came in and seniority prevailed, after the first helper didn’t have to worry that he was going to be kicked cut for somebody’s brother-in-law, some of the first helpers began to open up a little and teach the fellows a few things. Well that isn’t the point, exactly. The point is that the second helpers began to see that it wasn’t such a mystery after all. And the theory was only something that corresponded to their own experience. It sort of lit up ard clarified what they had already been thinking about.
That’s the way it is with life, too. The class struggle bubbles and boils. And at first that seems to be quite a mystery to understand too. You see it every day of your life and take part in it yourself. Wars, depressions, wage-cuts – strikes, picket lines, revolution.
There’s one big difference, though. First helpers like Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky are waiting eagerly in their books to explain the process. There are others in The Militant doing the same explaining the day-to-day fight as well as the coming struggle. The first helpers of the socialist revolution are anxious for you to be a first helper too. And you’re going to find, as you make tht first steps forward, that it’s not such an impossible thing as you thought.
You’ve already seen it a little when you’ve explained The Militant’s position to a fellow worker. And later when the class struggle reaches the boiling point, you’re going to step up front and tell dozens – maybe hundreds or thousands – of other working people how to turn the shapeless, boiling mass of revolutionary iron into the high quality steel of a workers’ government. And in the process you’ll find out you weren’t so dumb as you thought.
 



“Pop, you goose-greased son of a sea serpent,” said Breezy, who had come in a little high. “Don’t you recognize your old friends any more?”
“The last time I recognized you on a Saturday afternoon I had to buy you two drinks,” Pop growled.
“So you admit it! What do you fellows think about that? Here’s a man I thought was a friend of mine. That’s life for you,” he said tragically, slapping his side like Schnozzle Durante. “But I’m big-hearted. When I see you in this condition, Pop, I’ll come right over to your side of the road and buy you three more drinks. How do you like that?”
“You don’t have to buy me no drinks, Breezy. You save your money for you old age. You can’t work when you’re old,” Pop said.
“Play young and work old. That’s the only way,” Breezy insisted. “How’m I gonna play when I’m old and dried up like you? – Anyway I’m gonna live on the interest when I’m sixty-five.”
“What interest?” asked one of the first-shift boys who was washing up.
“Why my old-age benefit fund. What do you think? I been paying in on it for nine years now. Look at Pop there. He’s a two income man. Forty bucks a week from the company, and a pension from the government to boot.”
“I got eight years to go, sweeping and hooking for guys like you before I get that royal pension, Mister Breezy.” Pop was sort of huffy.
“Eight years! Don’t you try to tell this gang you’re only fifty-seven years old, Pop! You’re seventy-seven if you’re a day.” Breezy reconsidered – “I bet you’re eighty-seven. Say, fellows, Pop’s the guy to see if you want to borrow money. Pop’s got all that pension dough salted away somewhere.”
For a minute some of the fellows looked at Pop as if they almost believed it. Then Breezy asked everybody in general, “Say, how much is that pension anyhow – anybody know?”
Nobody knew. But we were all thinking – just like Breezy would have been thinking if he hadn’t been under the weather, “Gee, is Pop only fifty-seven? With all his wrinkles and rheumatism he really could pass for seventy-seven.” And each one of us thought, “Will I be as old as that when I’m fifty-seven? Why hell – I might never live to be old enough to collect that pension.”
 
The Kind of “Security” Capitalism Gives
“I guess most of you guys are too young to be interested,” Pop said, pretending he wasn’t very much interested himself, “But the highest amount anybody can possibly get is eighty-five dollars a month. The average is about thirty-six dollars. I’ll beat the present average, though, on account of the eight more years I’ll be paying in – if I live to be sixty-five.”
Boy, isn’t that beautiful? Pop will get about ten bucks a week in his old age. A hell of a lot of “playing” he’s going to do.
“Yes sir, you fellows will be sweating your heads off eight years from now,” Pop went on, as he opened his laundry and tied up his dirty overalls into a small bundle. “And I’ll be sitting back drawing down that 10 smackers a week.” And being a thoughtful sort of cuss, he couldn’t help but add after a second or so – “mebbe.”
“Play young and work old” Breezy said. But how can you work when you’re old. The plant doesn’t want you. They’ll throw Pop on the scrap heap one of these days. And you don’t have the money to play when you’re young, unless you neglect those you really want to take care of.
That’s the capitalist system for you. That’s capitalism and the kind of security it gives you – with money you yourself fork over.
So what’s Breezy going to do? Or anybody else for that matter? Butt his head up against the wall and wind up on the skids before his time?
There’s only one thing we can do. Organize our forces to overthrow the whole rotten system. We don’t want their starvation bread when we’re old. We want a decent workingman’s society, where a man fifty to sixty years old can make his own choice to keep on working, or take it easy, AT THE SAME GOOD PAY EITHER WAY. That’s the way we’ll fix things under socialism.
 



I see by the papers that soldier Mickey Rooney arrived in Paris on March 23, after performing for 3 months in the Roer River sector. And now all the soldiers are happy.
“I performed in barns and bomb-ruined houses,” Mickey told a reporter. “But what does it matter as long as the GIs are happy?”
The way I get it is that America’s “bad boy” usually has an easy chair near the cameras, and a plush-lined dressing room on roller skates to relax in. So he had a pretty tough time pepping up the boys’ morale under such adverse conditions.
But what the hell! He’s a good scout, isn’t he? He’ll make the best of a bomb-ruined house! Maybe the people who used to live in it could learn a lesson by his spartan example. Maybe they’ll learn to get along without running water and a roof, too.
Maybe. But they won’t be able to go to Paris and relax after a few weeks of it, though.
Maybe he’s right about the soldiers being happy, too. But it looks to me like the happiness of the steelworkers on a Saturday night. They’re so glad to be out of the mess and sweat for a few hours, and so worried about going back to it again – they try to forget with a drink and a good laugh.
 



It was Monday morning. The older fellows already had their work clothes on. They were sitting on the benches smoking. Shorty hardly got his) locker opened when he said, “Any of you guys read that blank blank Drew Pearson’s column yesterday? ”
“No. What’d he say?” a couple of fellows asked.
“Don’t talk to me about it,” Breezy said. “My wife read it to me in bed on Sunday morning and wanted to know where I spend all my pay check. Next thing I know she’ll be coming down to the gate to meet me on pay day.”
This made the other fellows more serious. “What’s the matter? What did Pearson say, anyhow?” they pressed Shorty.
“Why he said the steel workers are making an average of a dollar seventeen an hour.”
“But that ain’t all,” Shorty went on belligerently, “he says we went up to that from an average of 76 cents an hour in 1939 – all because Murray was polite to the War Labor Board.”
“What?" Slim turned around from his locker.
“Sure. Here’s the article,” Shorty persisted. “I’ve got it right here if I can just find it. Here it is!” He read it out loud.
“Average hourly rate for steel workers in September 1939, while Lewis was still CIO president, was 76 cents. The average wage in the mines was higher – 89 cents.
“Through the war period, Lewis has ranted and raved against the War Labor Board ... and was the first important labor leader to repudiate the no-strike pledge. Phil Murray, meanwhile, has fought his battles through the WLB rather than by strikes.
“By last November however, Phil Murray had quietly boosted the average hourly earnings in steel until they were above the miners. Bituminous miners got $1.16, anthracite $1.15 and steel workers $1.17.”
“What do you think of that?” said Pop Philiber. “So we’re getting a dollar seventeen an hour. And we got that over 76 cents an hour in 1939. Forty-one cents an hour increase from the War Labor Board. That’s pretty good.”
“Now wait a minute. Don’t joke about it,” Shorty protested.
“Are any of you guys getting $1.17 an hour?”
Nobody was.
“I know a fellow down in the open hearth that does,” Tony said after a minute. “But that’s the tonnage rate he’s making it on – not his regular pay.”
“Forty one cents an hour increase from the War Labor Board since 1939,” said old George, slightly dazed. “But the War Labor Board didn’t start, till 1942, did it?”
“That’s right,” Slim commented.
“Well, I only remember one raise they gave us. June 1942 it was. Four and a half cents an hour. I can’t remember any other raise the WLB ordered. Can you fellows?”
Nobody could.
“Of course,” Slim pointed out, “we did get a ten cent raise in April 1941. But that was after the biggest series of steel strikes since 1919. Phil Murray might have been ‘quiet’ then. But us fellows weren’t so quiet. Breezy over there was one of the boys that got dragged off the picket line and landed in the hoosegow.”
“But what I want to know,” complained Shorty, “is where the hell that so-and-so gets that $1.17 an hour stuff.”
“Well look at all the sixteens they’re working down at the other end,” Tony put in. “That’s a lot of time-and-a-half. A young cousin of mine worked five sixteens in one week ... Took the next week off sick,” he added.
“Yeah,” Breezy threw his old overalls into the trash can. “All the time-and-a-half brings the average up, don’t forget.”
“We didn’t get time-and-a-half by Phil Murray keeping ‘quiet’ either,” Slim said. “An awful lot of working men got measured early for coffins because they fought for the eight hour day. They were getting knocked off by big business long before Phil Murray discovered how kind-hearted the War Labor Board was.”
“I tell you what I think,” Shorty concluded, finally calming down enough to put away the clipping and get his work clothes on. “This Drew Pearson is just trying to show where the no-strike pledge is a wonderful thing for labor. And he doesn’t care how he proves it.”
At that moment Scissorbill Sam (the bosses’ man) came in at the last minute, with Sunday’s editorial section under his arm.
“Did any of you guys read Drew Pearson’s column yesterday? Some of the radical screwballs around here might learn something if they did.”
“Why Sam,” replied Slim, “I thought Westbrook Pegler was your favorite columnist!”
“He is,” said the bosses’ man, “But Pearson’s good sometimes too.”
 



“You’re never gonna get people to stick together enough to fight for Socialism – much less to keep if after you get it,” Scissorbill Sam (the bosses’ man) opened up.
At first nobody disagreed. Because nobody knew exactly how to prove he was wrong.
Slim opened up his sandwiches to see if it was baloney again, and he said, “I don’t know about that. Any of you fellows remember when Republic came around town in the thirties looking for men to run a new plant they said they were puttin’ up?”
“Gee, I remember that,” laughed Tony. “They offered a free bus trip to their new plant in Ohio. Everybody in town was out of work. So what did we have to lose!”
“Were you in that gang too?” Breezy booted. “What a beautiful job that was.”
“Yes, it was a beautiful job, all right,” Slim continued. “They took about seven bus loads out of this town. None of us had a cent in our pockets. The company supplied the meals. We had all been desperate for a job. And we had just packed into those buses. But after we’d been riding most of the day we had been talking and talking – wondering how come they went so far from this Ohio town to get workers,
“Then we all started saying it was damn funny that they didn’t have any people out of work in this town we were going to. And an idea started to trouble us. But no one dared to speak it out loud.”
“I was in the first bus that stopped by the gas station,” Breezy put in, “I remember exactly the way that guy came out from behind the building. ‘Where do you fellows think you’re going?’ he says. ‘Why, over to work at the Republic plant’, we tell him. ‘Like hell you are’ he says. And he was up against the whole bus load.”
 
We Had Sense Enough to Stay United
“Well, he could easily see we weren’t a hunch of scabs,” argued Tony. “Besides, don’t you remember that other gang of strikers nearby in the woods?”
“Not when I was there,” Breezy insisted.
“Anyhow,” Slim went on, “I remember all the fellows in the first bus load got out on the road and stopped all the rest of the buses themselves. First we were going to drive the buses right back home ourselves. Then some faint-hearted guys let the drivers call up the company agent, and he hot-footed it over with a couple of lawyers. They argued for an hour about the contracts we signed. Bit it didn’t do ’em any good.
“Finally they persuaded us to stay overnight in a hotel at their expense. We knew damn well they wanted to work on us again the next day. But we were all tired. The only thing I was afraid of was that we’d all have to hitch-hike back. But we took care of that by making the bus drivers bunk in with us. And every last man of us went back in the morning.”
“Remember how we made the drivers pick up all the hitch-hikers on the road back?” gloated Breezy.
“The point is ...” Slim closed up his lunch basket, “that hardly any of that gang had even been in a union at that time. They hadn’t even started to organize Bethlehem into the CIO then. But we had sense enough to stick together with those guys we never even saw, no matter how green or hard up we might have been.”
 



Pop was putting his crane cables away. The welders were winding up their lines. Tony put his chisels where the next shift wouldn’t find them, and stacked the chipping gun and the air line neatly in the corner. A couple of big presses at the other end were still thumping away. But you could almost hear them getting ready to stop. It was just before quitting time when some of the fellows are telling stories, and some just horsing around with each other.
Somebody started talking about the war in Germany. Somebody else tried to get up a pool on when it would be over. And they were talking about the latest newspaper stories and wondering whether you could believe them all or not. Slim said don’t forget, the stories are always worse when a bond drive is due.
Then Breezy piped up, “Hey, Dutchie, you’re from over there. What are those Germans like anyhow?”
(Dutchie is really Fred Schultz. He’s been working in the shop about thirteen years. He’s a good workman and a sort of jack of all trades – good at them all, too.)
“Well,” said Dutchie, not knowing whether to get mad or not. And not being a fast talker like Breezy he said it again after a minute – “Well – I’m a German, ain’t I? What am I like?”
That floored Breezy. Everybody likes Dutchie and figures he’s a pretty good guy. And Breezy being Breezy he changed his argument.
“What the hell do they still want to fight for? Our boys are going through there like grease through a tin horn.” (This was a couple of weeks ago when the Yanks were going through Thuringer.)
“Maybe they don’t,” observed Dutchie, as though he was pretty sure they didnt. “And maybe the leaders are afraid to surrender before the Americans get to Berlin.”
Slim was curious. “What do you mean by that?” he asked.
“Just you wait. It will be like the last war. You will see.”
“Say, you must have been there after the last war, Dutchie?” Shorty was interested now too. And a little knot of six or seven fellows gathered around Dutchie, sensing an “inside” story.
 
The German Workers in 1917 and 1918
Dutchie was embarrassed. He doesn’t talk very much. “I was, just a farm boy in Thuringer,” he said. “But I had an uncle in Berlin. I went to visit him in April 1916. I was there for May Day. You should have seen the people pouring out on the streets protesting against the war.”
His voice dropped very low – mainly from shyness from telling a long story. But everybody listened quietly. And Slim helped out by asking, “Did you get in the parade too?”
“Yes. My uncle was a socialist. I didn’t know anything about that – politics and that. But I knew my people back home hated the war. He gave me – my uncle gave me a little red flag to carry in the parade.” Dutchie’s eyes were shining with the remembrance of it.
“There was a man there who made a wonderful speech. He spoke about the working people all over the world. He spoke against the war.”
“I bet they gave him the business,” said Breezy.
“Yes, the Kaiser put him in jail. His name was Liebknecht.”
“Well, there you are,” Breezy exclaimed, as though this proved that the German workers were hopeless. And the fellows almost started to drift to the locker room.
“But wait!” Dutchie was excited himself now. And he was determined to tell his story. “Two years later there was a big revolu­tion. It started just before the Armistice. It was all over. Every­where. Even in Thuringer where I lived. The soldiers came back home and told us about it. Even some of the farmers became reds.”
“And the big shots don’t want that to happen again, eh?” said Slim.
“I know they don’t want it to. I think Hitler wants the Allies to take Berlin before the workers take it. – I guess the Allies will, too. – But,” he added, with another burst of enthusiasm, “You should know those German workers.”
The fellows drifted apart. And Breezy said to Slim on the way to the washroom, “Say, can you imagine that? Dutchie comes from Thuringer. Gee, our boys were bombing hell out of Thuringer yesterday.”
 



Some Bethlehem steelworkers, not well versed in political economy, have wondered from time to time, “How come Eugene Grace is entitled to a take of $523,000 per annum?” The answer is just simple arithmetic.
Say you get 2,500 dollars a year for working – when you work. Then if you worked twice as hard, or twice as long – 16 hours a day – you’d get twice the money, or 5,000 dollars. A little more, counting the time-and-a-half. If you are twice as skilled, on the other hand, after spending five or six years in an Engineering college, you might make the $5,000 a year on the basis of just an eight hour day, like the engineers do. That’s fair enough.
But Eugene Grace gets a salary of 523,000 dollars a year. It could be that he works 209 times as hard as you, because that’s how many times $2,500 goes into $523,000.
Of course, you might object that you eat Wheaties in the morning, too, and you can’t understand how anyone could have 209 times the energy you do.
Well it’s possible, then, that he works 209 times as long. That’s 1,672 hours a day. And you can make the same amount of money yourself if you’re not too lazy to put in the time.
But that doesn’t quite make sense. So if he doesn’t work 209 times as hard, and he doesn’t work 209 times as long, maybe he works 209 times as skilled. He must be 209 times as educated. Where an engineer went to school twice as long as you, Grace must have gone 209 times as long, or about 1,672 years.
However, he couldn’t have started attending college in the third century A.D. because they didn’t have any colleges then.
 
Eugene Grace Must Be a Genius
How is it then, that he knows 209 times as much? Is his brain 209 times as big? No. There’s really only one answer. It’s genius. He must have been born with it. He must be inspired with some knowledge far beyond our power to understand. He never learned it the ordinary way.
But that’s the way genius works, you see. A poet, for instance, just sits down with a rose in front of him, or maybe a glass of whiskey – and before you can stand a quarter up on its edge, he dashes off a whole poem, beautiful as anything.
Eugene Grace is like that poet. You can’t compare a man like Mr. Grace with ordinary men. (You can’t compare $523,000 with an ordinary income either).
Of course some ordinary people can’t understand what it is that a genius like Mr. Grace actually does – what his work really is. But that doesn't mean anything. People never do understand genius anyway.
I bet you thought this shop ran pretty much by itself what with a couple of hundred of us working men and women, a couple of maintenance men, machinists and a foreman we see as little as possible. But if you’d read the company bulletin board as carefully as you should, you’d see a letter from Mr. Grace himself every year or so telling you how hard we all worked (including him).
You might have thought that what with us people to make the coke, make the iron, make the steel and steel products, what with salesmen to sell it, what with the government to buy it and whole armies begging for it so they could blow it to pieces right away, you might have thought Mr. Grace wouldn’t have much to do. That’s where you’d be wrong.
No, he doesn’t fool around with the production end of steelmaking. He doesn’t waste his valuable time with the business end of it either. But every month, rain or shine, come hell or high water, he has to preside over a board of director’s meeting, where he tells them how to divide up the thirty-eight million dollars in profits that they skim off every year.
And if you don’t think THAT’S 209 times as much as you could do if you were in his place, then you must be a Trotskyist or something.
 



“When you stop to think of it,” said Shorty out of the blue, How much organizing and managing do the big shots do themselves?”
“They manage well enough to give you a job,” Scissorbill Sam (the bosses’ man) shot back in swift and brilliant repartee.
“A few years back in peacetime, I was carrying the bucket two and three days a week. Looks like this war is giving me the job – not the big shots. Course you could always say they gave me the war, too – so it all evens up.”
“Don’t change the subject,” said Scissorbill, “First you guys think you can get along without a foreman. Next you’ll be saying that the whole of Bethlehem Steel could run by itself. If you had your way, there’d be no one responsible at all. What would you do without leaders? One plant would make too many beams and not enough plates. Another wouldn’t make enough bars. One shipyard would be clogged up and the next one empty. Why, the railroad trains would be piling up on the tracks if you didn’t have a BRAIN to direct them,” he said with a final burst of eloquence.
“Yeah,” Slim said, “Scissorbill’s got something there.” The bosses’ man looked surprised. “You’ve got to have organization all right. You’ve got to have Brains to direct things.”
“There’s a high price on brains too,” Pop broke in. “About 38 million a year for the owners during the war ... They only made 18 million before the war.”
“Well, they’re usin’ their brains twice as much now on account of the war,” said Shorty.
“Must be. Can’t be the cost of living, because that’s only gone up 15 percent.”
“You got to remember the cost of living for brains may go up faster than for stomachs.”
 
A Fancy Price for Brains
“I don’t know why you fellows should kick about payin’ for a little brainwork,” Slim said. “Although I admit that 38 million bucks ought to buy you some pretty fancy brains. It does seem like a pretty high price to pay just for them tellin’ you how many plates and I-beams to roll, too. But I can’t see where they are telling you that, anyway. They’ve got the government orders now and the pushers are all pushing like hell. As soon as an order is finished they put a bunch of guys back in the labor gang, or lay some off. Then the government or some admiral reorders, and the bosses yell at the War Manpower Commission because they can’t get enough workers. That’s 38 million dollar brainwork for you.”
“You’ve been doin’ okay, anyhow, Slim. You haven’t missed a day out of six for a year and a half. So what if we do all kick in a little bit to give them that 38 million. We’re livin’, aren’t we?”
“Sure, for today, we’re living. But what about tomorrow? And the next year? I have to live ’til I’m sixty or seventy years old – if the flue dust and coke gas don’t get me first. How do I get through all those years yet? Live on the interest?”
“We’re living today because we’re rolling the steel,” he went on. “Can all their brains tell you how long it’ll keep rolling? Do their brains know how to sell steel when the war’s over and Liberty ships are being sold at a dime a dozen for scrap metal? It might not be so bad if they knew what they were doing – these brains. If they could keep the mills percolating as well as the furnaces, make the stuff and roll it out all the time, you wouldn’t kick at the 38 million bucks.”
“Not much, anyway,” said Shorty.
“But the trouble is, they don’t do it.”
“I don’t see anything so brainy about that,” mused Shorty. “If they want to keep making that 38 million a year, why don’t they have enough brains to keep things rolling?”
“Because they can’t,” said Slim. “They can’t do it and make a profit.”
“Now that’s pretty good,” Pop said. “We pay them 38 million dollars worth of profits one year.. And we’re out on our ear the next. Brains is brains. But they don’t look good to me.”
“Oh, brains aren’t so bad,” Slim explained. “It even helps to have a few extra brains around. It depends a good deal on how they’re used – and who they’re used FOR.”
 
Produce for Use – and Not for Profit
But Shorty was warmed up to the subject now, and he said, “Nope. It wouldn’t do a bit of good. The best brain work in the world don’t stack up next to that 38 million bucks. No bloodsucker is gonna listen to your brains if it interferes with his profits.”
“That’s right, Shorty. So what’s the answer?”
“What do you mean,” said Shorty, “Have Socialism, or something?”
“That’s the general idea,” Slim replied. “If that 38 million dollars is the big obstacle between us and steady work with decent pay, I say let’s eliminate it.”
“Well, if you split up the 38 million among the boys, it would still be profits, wouldn’t it? You’d still have a depression from overproduction and all that, wouldn’t you?”
“Not at all,” said Slim. “The whole idea is we wouldn’t be producing for profit – for sale on the market. That’s the main thing. The 38 million is just an item.”
The fellows whistled. “Sure, we could manage the whole industry ourselves – or pay a few brainy bookkeepers a couple of bucks to do it for us. We’d co-operate with other industries doing the same thing. We’d give them our steel. They’d give us their products. Automobiles, wash-machines, foods and all that – all the stuff we can’t get now because they’re not making any, and probably won’t get after the war either because the boss will lay us off on account of that 38 million dollars not coming in on tick.
“As a matter of fact,” he went on, “we wouldn’t need any superbrains either. We could use the same office force, the same accountants and bookkeepers they have now and double their wages. They get less than we do on the average, anyhow. We could put them to work calculating the amount of our products we can reasonably get out in a year – what we need from the other industries and all. That should be fairly simple. Of course it would mean a sharp fall in the price of BRAINS,” he added. “But you can’t please everybody.”
“Our Steel! Our products!” Scissorbill Sam (the bosses’ man) was aghast. “I’ve heard about enough,” he said indignantly. “Don’t you know this corporation belongs to the stockholders? There’s laws in this country. You can’t do anything like that. It wouldn’t be right. That 38 million dollars belongs to them, not to you – even if you did make the steel.”
“Oh is that so?”, said Slim, all interest. “Well, in that case, just make out like I never said anything.”
But all the same, the fellows thought it might be a good idea, at that.
 



“Say, who’s running this shop anyway, you or me?” the foreman said.
And Slim said, “I don’t see where you’re doing so much to run it.” The foreman got mad at that. But he didn’t say anything. Mainly because there wasn’t anything to say.
But later on in the washroom Scissorbill Sam sneered out to nobody in particular, “Some people think they’re pretty good around here. They know how to run the shop with their eyes shut.”
“If some people don’t slow down a little on running that punch press they’ll lose a couple of fingers – with their eyes wide open, too,” said Shorty.
“They might get their eyes closed at that,” said Slim.
There was some more sarcasm back and forth, until Scissorbill Sam came back to the point. “If you guys think you can get along without Hallory (the foreman), you’re wrong. You’ve always got to have a boss on a job. ... Of course if you’re one of these here Socialists” ... he started to sneer again.
“I don’t know about the Socialist part of it,” Slim said.
“But remember the landing-barge job?” Everybody remembered because we made good money on that job. “And the whistle system? Two whistles for the crane, three for the inspector and four for the foreman. Any of you guys ever hear the whistle blow four times?” Nobody peeped. “I don’t think the foreman ever came around except when the navy inspector called him.”
“Sure, but you guys were all on piece-work for that job. Hallory knew you’d work hard anyhow.”
“Why Scissorbill, you don’t mean to say Hallory is just a nasty old pusher, do you ? You don’t mean to say he only comes around to make us work harder?”
Scissorbill Sam (the bosses’ man) looked embarrassed, though he didn’t know why he should be. “Well, what do you want a foreman to do? That’s what he gets paid for, ain’t it?”
 
What Is a Foreman For, Any Way?
Slim went on without paying Scissorbill any attention. “A foreman is supposed to know something, I was always told. Remember the time some welder came over from the shipyard to work on the landing barges? Hallory got hold of a hood and stood over the guy to watch him weld. So the guy turned around and asked Hallory to show him how he wanted the welding done. Well you know how much Hallory knows about welding. The only man that knows less around here is Hawkshaw himself. And I’ll bet even he read a book about it. After that Hallory didn’t show up at that end of the shop for a week.”
“You can’t expect a foreman to know every job in the shop” said Scissorbill.
“What can you expect him to know, then?”
“A foreman is an organizer. He lays out the work and makes sure that you don’t do more left parts than right parts. And stuff like that.”
“The stock boy or the dispatcher always let me know if that’s happening. No,” said Slim, “I never saw a foreman yet that was the best man, best skilled, best organizer or anything else.”
“What about Billy Jones?”, asked Shorty.
“I’m not talking about maintenance work. That’s the exception —
“Who does the company choose for a production foreman. The man they figure knows the most, or the man they figure will push the most?”
“All right, all right!” said Scissorbill, getting hot. “What’s all this got to do about it? What if the foreman is a pusher? He has to get the work out, don’t he? He’s supposed to be a boss, ain’t he? I take notice, when you guys are on day-work you keep out of his way, too. That proves there’d never be any work done in this place if it weren’t for him.”
“We made landing barges without his help – and without his pushing. And we made them better, and faster, for the size crew we had than anywhere else in the country.”
“That was piece-work. Piecework, I tell you!” Scissorbill shouted at the top of his lungs. “You had an incentive.”
 
Putting Pork Chops on the Table
“Piece-work without a foreman – or day-work with a foreman – the incentive is the same. To put the pork chops on the table. Only it works backward in the second case. If you don’t do what the foreman tells you, you’re liable to lose your job, and the pork chops come off the table.”
In that case,” said Shorty, “you have to have the foreman to organize the job, or else be on piece-work to organize it yourself.”
“I’m not so sure about that,” said Slim. “We all know piecework is no good. But the main thing is this: that we had about 25 fellows on each shift for the landing barges ... burners, fitters, chippers and welders. We laid out our own work. We systematized it. And we produced way more than Hallory or anybody else ever thought we could. That’s the main thing. Us fellows did it – And without benefit of foreman.”
“What do you want to do, Slim. Abolish foremen altogether?” somebody spoke up.
“Not exactly. Like Scissorbill says, you need an organizer. We used to spend 15 minutes or more in a huddle every morning to decide how we were going to work. That’s 25 times 15 minutes If some one person had done that and laid out the work it would have saved time and maybe been done better.”
“But Hallory —”
“I know that’s what Hallory tried to do once. But in the first place he didn’t know how to do it. And in the second place he’s a company man.”
“If you’re not going to listen to the company’s man,” yelled Scissorbill, "who in hell are you gonna listen to?”
“We’re going to listen to ourselves. When we get the chance we’ll organize the work ourselves. And someday we’ll change things around and get time to train somebody how to be a WORKERS’ foreman instead of a company foreman.”
 



“I don’t care what you say,” Scissorbill Sam (the bosses’ man) was protesting, “You’ve got to have executives.”
“Why of course you have,” said Pop soothingly, “of course you have.”
“Well that screwball Slim says things can run by themselves.”
“Nope, ’taint so,” Pop replied, not making it clear whether he meant it wasn’t so that things could run by themselves, or it wasn’t so that Slim had said they could run by themselves.
Anyway, feeling thus encouraged, Scissorbill Sam got under way. “And even if you had your own executives – Slim was talking about a bunch of two bit bookkeepers – huh! – even so, they’d have to have someone over them, wouldn’t they? Even Eugene Grace has someone over him, hasn’t he?”
“Who?” said Shorty.
“The stockholders!” was the triumphant reply.
“Oh, the thirty-eight million dollar a year boys. Grace is in on that gang as well as being president of the corporation. So he must take orders from himself.”
“That’s only accidental.”
“Pretty happy accident,” Pop chuckled.
“I mean incidental,” snapped Scissorbill.
“Now don’t get excited. What’s your point?”
“The point is that these engineers or bookkeepers or whatever they are, won’t have anyone to make them toe the line. Who’s going to call them to order, who’s going to fire them?”
 
Who’ll Do All the Firing?
“Well for that matter, who’s going to fire us underthat kind of a set-up? Things’d come to a pretty pass,”said Pop “if there was nobody to fire us.”
“Yes, for that matter, when you come right down to it,”said Scissorbill, looking all around with a challenging look, “whois going to?”
Then he calmed down and was very patient with the fellows. “Whatyou guys don’t understand is that even these big executives,even Eugene Grace himself, has to make out reports for thestockholders. And if they don’t manage the business to show aprofit, the stockholders give them the air.”
“That doesn’t sound too bad,” said Shorty. “Atleast it’s systematic, if it really works that way. But whatI’d like to know is this – if it really is the executivesthat make the business show a profit, and if the stockholders reallydo fire them if they fail, how come the stockholders get thirty eightmillion dollars a year just for firing people? Why CrabappleJennings, over to the main gate, does all the hiring and firing forthis whole plant, and he makes hardly any more than I do.”
“It’s their plant, don’t you understand?”shouted Scissorbill. “They own it – that’swhy they get so much ... You’d get it too,” he saidgrudgingly, “if you owned it.”
“Yeah, I’ll buy you a drink when I own it. But thatisn’t the point. You were tryin’ to tell us why you haveto have the owners. Sure they are the owners right now. But supposeall of us here, including Scissorbill and all the other workingpeople, was to be the owners. – Suppose we were just asextravagant as the present incumbents and paid our stooges a half amillion or so a year just like they’re doin’ now –we’d still save the thirty eight million profits, which isn’tpeanuts. But according to Scissorbill, we wouldn’t have senseenough to fire these half a million dollar babies if they acted up.”
“I didn’t say that. But who would you have over themto do the firing? A couple thousand jerks like you couldn’tjust walk up in a body and do it.”
“If a couple thousand jerks like me walked up to EugeneGrace in a body, it’d be lots of fun” mused Shorty. “Herecomes Slim. Hey, Slim, if you get this here Socialism, who’sgoing to make these organizers of industry, the bookkeepers and allthat, toe the line ? Scissorbill was tellin’ us they wouldn’thave anybody to prod them.”
“You mean there wouldn’t be anyone over them with awhip, like the foreman over us?”
 
How We’ll Manage Socialized Industry
“Yeah, I was just coming to that. I was figuring we couldsave a lot of money just to give some guy three or four thousandbucks a year and give him a bull whip. And the only thing he’dever have to do would be crack somebody with it when they got out ofline. That would save us thirty seven million, nine hundred ninetysix thousand dollars. Right?”
“Right,” said Slim solemnly. “But I’mafraid we’d have to spend a little more of our thirty eightmillion than that. In the first place there’d be hell of a lotmore than thirty eight million anyway, but say there was only thatmuch more produced than the wages we’re getting right now, wecouldn’t add all of that onto our wages. We’d have tospend a little making this place a little more decent to work in.We’d get the new wheel on that number two crane right away, forinstance, instead of waiting for the insurance company to make us doit, after somebody got killed.
“As for the guy with the whip. Well, that’s gettingby pretty cheap for us. But it’s too much like capitalism formy taste. We want to produce more than we do today. We’ve gotto have a more efficient system that won’t break down indepressions and bust out into wars. You can’t bring that aboutwith a whip.”
“You mean the capitalists will let us walk in like cowsgoing to clover?” queried Shorty.
“Oh that’s something else again. I’m talkingabout how we’re going to work things – how we’regoing to make production go.”
“We could elect an industrial commission, sort of inspectorson a nationwide scale. Only instead of holding a rule or a pair ofmikes on the margin of a piece of sheet metal, they would have tomeasure up the total production of the whole country. If the steelplants weren’t up to specifications with the auto plants, theguys who were organizing the output of steel would be told about it.”
“There you are,” said Scissorbill. “Thesesuper-inspectors of yours would eat up your thirty eight million.You’d have to give them a damned high wage.”
“I don’t know about that – ” Slim startedto reply.
“Now don’t tell me they’d work for the kind ofmoney you do.”
“Well, the capitalists get their Congressmen to work for ten thousand a year. Thirty eight million dollars would buy thirty eight hundred Congressmen for a year. It ought to buy the services of three or four production experts for the steel industry. If it doesn’t, we’ll train our own experts – send them to a college for expert planners on the understanding that they’d have to work for a measly ten thousand a year when they come out.”
 



Scissorbill Sam (the bosses’ man) keeps telling us how unfair it would be to take away the factories from all the bosses and run them ourselves. A lot of fellows agree with him, too. They don’t say it so loud as he does. But down inside, some of them think it would be kind of a dirty trick.
Why, us working people are in the great majority. And it wouldn’t be very sporting for us to take advantage of our great size and strength – to kick out this tiny group of tyrants, would it? After all, there THEY are, smooth, cultured generous – born to command – just like the actor who plays the female movie star’s millionaire father in the pictures. And here WE are, the huge mass of people that only look at the movies, and work in the shops. The fifty or sixty million dumb cluck’s that have to work for a living. Born to be commanded. Why only an “agitator” would want to change a beautiful set-up like that!
No. It really doesn’t seem fair to take things away from people who are weaker, fewer, and more useless than ourselves. But figure it this way. We’re really not taking anything away from them that they didn’t take away from us in the first place.
When they sell a billion dollars worth of steel to the government, where did the steel come from? Why, you’ll say, from the strip mill, the bar mill, the rail mill, etc. And where did the plates, bars and beams come from? From the ingots, you say. And the ingots from the open hearth. And the “live iron” from the mixer and the blast furnace, and so on, back to the iron ore that was dug out of the Mesabi Range by workers just like ourselves. And in every one of these processes it was working PEOPLE who changed the product from one thing into another, until finally it became steel.
But what about the machinery the diggers used, and the expensive equipment every steel plant has ? Fine – fine – That’s just the point. That cost something, they tell you. Yes. But what it really cost was LABOR, The machinery took labor to make, the labor of the engineer, draughtsman, tool and die maker, etc. It is made of steel that the millworker, billet man, furnace man, dock- workers, railroad worker, ship worker and miner made, too – and so are the buildings and tracks and engines – and everything else made by whole generations of working people.
 
They Sell the Product of Our Labor
What they sell, when they sell a billion dollars worth of steel is the product of our labor. And that’s where they get the money to hire more laborers to build more plants. That’s where they get the money to live, to live in palaces and swim in champagne. And all they return to the laborer is enough for him and his family to scrape along on, a jump ahead of the Finance Company.
We’re not going to be unjust to the capitalist. We’re going to give him a far better break than he ever gave us. When he works under a WORKERS’ government he’ll get the full product of his labor – which is a damn sight more than he gives us.
He won’t surrender a part of his product every day of his life for the enrichment of a few, like us working people have to do now. He won’t be building up more factories to enslave his own children. He’ll be helping to build better factories to make the work easier and life better for all.
Maybe he’s a smart fellow and will be of more aid in drafting and planning work than in actual construction. Good! We’ll use him. But maybe he’s too old, and can’t work at anything at all. Never mind! We’ll give him a pension (and no lousy thirty dollars a month, either!).
Then again, maybe he’s not too old, or too weak, or too dumb, but just won’t work. Well, in a case like that, the boys in the locker room ought to dope out a pretty good way to deal with him.
 



Pile-it-high Patterson, that unappreciated genius of production, was over by the spot welder talking to Marjorie, and as usual, piling it high.
“I’m taking off a little early today, Marge” said he. From the tone of his voice you’d have thought the whole shop would go down if Pile-it-high didn’t give it every moment of his attention.
“Really?” Marjorie asked, trying to be polite. She hadn’t been, around too long. But she knew enough to duck when Patterson started slinging the bull. Still, it gave her a little excuse to dog the job a few minutes, letting him talk to her.
“Yes, I have a golf engagement this afternoon. I suppose you noticed my golf clubs in the time office.”
Of course she noticed. Everybody in the shop had noticed. Pile-it-high had put them right where you couldn’t help but notice them when you rang in on a job. And we were all making wisecracks about them. “First sign of spring” and all that. But Marge wanted to string him along some – so she let on she didn’t happen to see them.
Any ordinary guy wouldn’t have kept trying to impress a girl when she didn’t want to be impressed. But Pile-it-high was not ordinary. He was made of different stuff.
“I bet you can’t guess who I have the golf engagement with Marge.”
“With Rita Hayworth and Donald Duck, huh?”
“Ha, ha, ha,” he laughed a little weakly. “As a matter of fact –” he cleared his throat, and rustled his sheaf of important papers – “I’m going out with the Superintendent to the Park Crest Club.”
Marjorie didn’t fall into a faint at this exciting news. So Pile-it-high added his biggest bombshell. “I’m going to give his daughter a little golf lesson.”
“No kidding?” said Marge without enthusiasm.
“Oh yes, you see I’ve been at it quite a while. Had a chance to be a professional at the Happy Valley when the war came. But I-ah-felt my career was here.”
“Say, how old is this daughter of old sourpuss?” Marge asked suddenly.
Patterson’s face got red and he tried to be a little nonchalant when he said, “Oh I don’t know. About twenty.”
 
Making a Play for the Boss’s Daughter
“Teaching her golf, huh? Giving all the girls around here the brush-off while you make a play for one boss’s daughter.” (Pile-it-high figures he’s quite a ladies’ man, and Marge was rubbing it in.) “You’re not going to go and marry the girl are you?”
Patterson laughed his smooth, self-conscious laugh, and pulled in his pot belly a little. “Oh, no. Of course it’s nothing like that,” he said with a sort of pooh-pooh in his voice. After all, he was only trying to give the girls in the shop an insight into his true charm. He didn’t want to give them the impression he was going to be taken out of circulation for good.
“Seriously, though, Marge, it isn’t a laughing matter. You know Taylor C. Wilkins himself got to be vice-president that way. He married the president’s daughter. You’d be surprised at the number of the big executives who got their start that way. And even if they don’t get a big position, it’s a lifetime job, you know.” There was real awe in his voice.
“Is that so!” Marge exclaimed. “Well say I better finish spotting these brackets.” And she said to herself, “Can you imagine that? That little four-flushing pipsqueak thinks he’s going to marry Miss Millionbucks and be a big time four-flusher for the rest of his life. Well, it takes all kinds of people to make a world, I guess.”
But Pile-it-high is a pathetic sort of four-flusher, though. Running around shining the shoes of the higher-ups like he does, always keeping his eye on the main chance.
He doesn’t realize he lacks sophistication, poise, polish, “education” to marry Miss Millionbucks. He hasn’t guzzled enough cocktails or seen enough dog-races to make this grade, poor fellow.
It is done sometimes, you know. Richer girls do occasionally marry up-and-coming young executives like Pile-it-high. Yes, if you’re a smooth, smart young fellow, who’s been to the “right” college and knows the “right” people, maybe you can marry a boss’s daughter and be set for life as a big-time “Yes-Man.” Quite a future before you under the capitalist system.
But what a future ... for a MAN!
 



“I was talking to my corner grocer,” said Shorty. “He says Socialism is all right, but it doesn’t respect the rights of the individual.”
The fellows swapped arguments back and forth a while on this theme. And then it came out that Shorty’s grocery store was an A and P Tea store. That’s a big chain, in case you don’t know it. And the manager is only a forty dollar a week errand boy for the district manager, who’s an errand boy for somebody else.
So I don’t know just what individual rights this storekeeper thought he had that us working people might take away under socialism. Maybe he thought he knew what he was talking about. And maybe he was just a big-mouth and a show-off, repeating the lessons the bosses’ stooges taught him in school. You never can tell.
Anyhow, the way for a workingman or woman to look at it is this. What rights have we got right now under this free and democratic system we’re supposed to live in? And what rights would we like to have? And will we have them under a working people’s government?
You don’t have the right to freely change your job. You don’t have the right to take a day off. You don’t have the right to bring a steak sandwich every day in your lunch. You don’t have the right to criticize the boss. You don’t have the right to stand on your own two legs like a real individual human being should.
“Why everybody has those rights! This is a free country!”
No. That’s not so. Only a handful of people at the top have those rights. The working people don’t, because they can’t afford to have them. It would mean losing money, or what’s worse – losing their job. Then they would only have the right to starve.
Look at the way everybody in the shop is tied to his or her machine just as though an individual chain was welded to the machine and riveted around their wrists. And the chains of wage- slavery are worse than real chains in a way. Your hands work faster and pile up wealth faster for the boss when iron chains are not in the way.
Only NEED chains us all. Only cringing poverty before mighty wealth of ONE individual. But it’s a wonderful chain – for the BIG BOSS. We don’t all wear the exact same uniform of the chain-gang prisoner in the South. But it doesn’t take long for dust and hard labor to do its work and make us all look alike – inside and out.
So where is your individual? Where is he under this so- called system of the individual, this capitalist system? Why, his individuality is buried in the mines, and it’s crushed out of him and pushed and pulled out of him in the factory.
Only a slobbery fool at the top sitting uselessly on the sands of Miami, while his managers run the business, is “free.” Only a parasite, living drunkenly and aimlessly off the backs of a million slaves, has any “rights.” Only this rum-pot has the nerve to call himself an “individual” under this system.
 
Crown of Capitalist Individualism
There’s your individual. There’s the crowning glory of individualism. A bored and jaded imitation of the rest of his society. His main activity is to find newer thrills and taste rarer foods. His main accomplishment is a final softening of the brain, And this is the mark we are told to aim at to become an individual!
When we working people take over production, we’ll have some real rights for the first time in history. The main thing we’ll do is make enough and more than enough goods for all. Then a man or woman won’t have to look the other way when the foreman passes – or keep his mouth shut when he wants to open it. The fear of starvation and poverty which makes us about as “individual” as an animal will be gone.
People will then have a different idea of what makes you outstanding, excellent, or “better” than somebody else. They won’t figure that the biggest thief or his heirs are so hot. Not the person who steals the most, but the one who creates the most, and the best, will stand at the “top” of OUR society.
And we’re going to see to it that a person who wants to be a pattern-maker, or engineer or whatever else gets a crack at it. And I don’t mean just a three-day trial like in the present contract seniority clause, either. We’ll filter the ore dust, coal dust, polishing powder, welding smoke, grinding dust, paint-spray fumes – draw them right out of the air. So people will keep their clothes clean and different, and LOOK LIKE individuals.
We’ll make the work easier by using the many inventions that capitalists buy up and bury. And we’ll encourage far more inventions from people who can hold up their heads for the first time and look their machine and the whole factory over from top to bottom. Instead of us all being one tired-out bunch of workers, drab, grey, and regimented by the power of Capital, we’ll BE individuals.
 



“I just can’t see your point of view, Slim;” young Mike was talking. We had all been arguing about whether a man got paid; for what he produced, and joking about how the electrician would starve if he only got what he earned, and all that.
“If you get paid for the hour, or by the piece, you still get paid for what you do. If you work harder you get more. Am I right?” Mike takes the floor in the locker room more than you’d expect from a new fellow in the shop. But he was brought up nearby – and knows half the fellows pretty well anyhow.
“No,” Slim insisted, “you produce way more than you get paid for. And if you didn’t –.” But then the whistle blew and, everybody went back to work.
Young Mike was working on old 29 press with Ed and Breezy. It was a piece-work job – punching big holes in a sheet about 10 feet by 30 inches. The sheet was fed into the press from one side and taken out from the other. The press had to make several hits while the sheet was sliding along. The job was priced so you could make between nine and ten dollars if you worked like hell and kept the press going automatically all the time.
Old 29 made 450 hits an hour – that is, not allowing for breakdowns, etc. It was the best job Mike had been put on yet. There were plenty of other fellows ahead of him in seniority. But this was sort of a rotating job and nobody wanted to bump him for the lousy buck.
Well, naturally the kid was working like a dog, pulling those sheets out of the press and helping to stack them up. All of a sudden there was another breakdown, and 29 was really finished for the day.
Press 31 had already been rigged with the same set-up, though. And after a few minutes day-work to move the stock, etc., Ed, Breezy and young Mike started again over there. Well 31 got 600 hits an hour – thirty three percent more than the old press. And the fellows had to really shake their shoes to make every hit.
Especially Mike. He was soaking with sweat. But he didn’t feel so bad, on account of figuring on an extra thirty-three percent an hour that he’d be getting. It came to at least 40 cents more per hour, according to his mental arithmetic.
At the end of the shift when they were all changing clothes in the locker room, Breezy said, “Hey Mike! How much did we make?”
“Eleven dollars and seventeen cents,” Mike replied.
 
Mike Learns About Piece-Work Rates
Everybody in the locker room turned around, or stopped washing.
“Whaddaya mean, eleven dollars and seventeen cents? Nobody makes that much money on that job.”
Mike was nobody’s slouch at arithmetic, and he said, “You want me to draw you a diagram?” And he figured it up with a piece of chalk on the side of a locker. And it came to exactly eleven dollars and seventeen cents.
Then an arm reached over his shoulder and erased a couple of figures and made it come out to nine dollars and a quarter.
It was Slim. “You see they have a cheaper rate on 31 than on 29 because it goes faster.”
“But I went faster too,” protested Mike, a little dazed.
“Sure you did, and you produced faster. But like I started to say at lunch time, you don’t get paid for what, you produce.”
“But this is different. This is a dirty swindle!” Mike was coming out of his daze. “Why don’t we put in a grievance?”
“We did,” Slim replied.
“And do you mean to say you lost it? What the hell could the company say, anyway?”
Breezy laughed. “I remember one thing they said! – If you got the same price rate on 31 it wouldn’t be FAIR to the guys on 29.”
“They just pay you for a day’s work,” Slim replied. “They figure eleven dollar’s is a little too much for a working man. You made thirty-three percent better production, but it still don’t take you any more money to eat. Why should they pay you any more?
“I remember,” Slim went on, “when all the presses were slower, and you did a lot of stuff by hand that you do now by machinery. We didn’t get half the production out that we get now. But we’re not living in better houses, or driving better cars, or eating better than we did then.”
“Well, it’s a screwy system,” young Mike said. “I’m certainly surprised you guys stand for it!”
“What kind of a system would be better, Mike?” Slim asked innocently.
 



Scissorbill Sam (the bosses’ man) has the bright idea that Socialism won’t work because the workingman and woman will have too much money. They won’t come to work half the time, he says.
Well, in the first place, I don’t see why that will be the acid test for the success of Socialism anyhow. If a fellow can look out the window some fine spring day, see the sun come up real bright for the first time in months, and decide to go fishing instead of going to work – why I think that’s swell!
Especially if he can afford it, and under Socialism he CAN afford it.
But Scissorbill Sam and every other company man the world over hold up their hands in horror when you say a thing like that. “What would become of production?” they say. “Suppose everybody did that? It would be a fine state of affairs, wouldn’t it?” – and so on. You know, just like the foreman talks when he sees you eating a sandwich at your machine.
They think production will go to hell under Socialism. They think everybody will take it so easy nothing will get done. They think we’ll all wind up combing the beach or sitting on a park bench starving until we keel over and come back to our senses.
Naturally, the capitalist, the foreman, and their scissorbill stooges believe that people won’t work if they are FREE. All the bosses can see is a society where everyone – except themselves – is a slave. Take the chains off a slave, they figure, and he’ll run away.
They understand so well how hateful it is to work under their system that they see it takes heavy chains indeed to keep their wage-slaves humble. Why, if the worker had a little independence, they reason – a little extra dough, and reasonable freedom from worry about future unemployment, he’d take off every day in the week!
So keep him poor! Keep him down! And you’ll squeeze the work out of him. And they’re partly right, too, because a slave isn’t the same as a free man. A slave works because he has to – because the master has the upper hand.
But they are only partly right. The funny part of it is that even under this wage-slave system, people don’t always behave according to slave etiquette. (There is more than one way to act when you get whipped.)
For instance the people who take off the most are the sweepers. Their work is the lowest paid and the most miserable. A couple of the old boys go off on a toot for two days after payday, regular as clock work. They work the other four days counting the hours until they get their twenty odd dollars, and spend half of it for forgetfulness.
The people that are by far the steadiest are the tool-room workers. Their work is the highest paid and the most interesting. For one thing they’d hate to lose twelve dollars – rather eighteen with time and a half – by taking off. And not only that. You can see when they fold up the blueprint for the day that some of them are still thinking of the thing they are making. In that sense, they even work overtime for nothing.
Even when the work is not so interesting, men are much more cheerful doing it if they are decently paid. Bricklayers, for instance, riveters and iron workers, put in a tough day, but they don’t look at it as a grind nearly as much as they would at lower pay.
 
How It Will Be Under Socialism
Under Socialism EVERY job will be decently paid. And jobs will be interesting, evev aside from the pay. Hours will be shorter. Instead of taking you at least 48 hours a week to make a living, you’ll do it in 30, 24 and less. You’ll plan things, turn wheels, and push buttons instead of getting ruptured. And you’ll look forward after your regular three or four days off, to your turn at the wheel – just like you look forward to a day’s fishing now.
There won’t be any question about production falling down because of people not working. That only happens in Capitalist depressions when millions are begging for work, and can’t get it. Today when there is supposed to be so much “absenteeism” the workers have outstripped all production records. The system of the Capitalists works pretty well – between depressions. The Capitalists “give” everybody work for a little while making guns to kill everybody else.
But these same Capitalists lock and bolt the factory door when wars are over. And long, long lines of working people form every day trying their best to get in the dirty place and do the work they hate. That’s the kind of work that’s done under Capitalism. That’s the kind of production. But that’s the CAPITALIST SYSTEM.
Under OUR system, things are going to be different. We’re going to be working for ourselves then, not for Park Avenue poodles. We’ll want to work, and like to work. Not as sweated slaves for a few lousy bucks, but as people working for other working people instead of for profits. Making the things our wives and children want – and making them in far greater amounts than the fattest capitalists ever dreamed of.
The capitalists, and the capitalist-minded scissorbills, may think we’ll get dopey and lazy with so much prosperity. They may think that when we can eat as much as we want, we’ll just keep on eating like pigs. And that without any owners over us, we’ll bust – that we’ll lose all sense of responsibility and forget about making the food that we so hoggishly eat. In other words, they judge US by THEMSELVES.
I don’t know how it is with other workers. But I think I’ll take my chances of possibly busting under Socialism against sure starvation under Capitalism.
 



Suppose I have a million dollars and I want it to “make money” for me, as they say money does. Will it grow bigger if I put it in a hole in the ground and cover it up with dirt? No, I must invest it. If I don’t want the trouble of deciding what to “invest” it in, I can put it in a savings bank – let them invest it tor me, and the law will guarantee me an income on which I can live beautifully without touching the million.
What magic does this million have, to act like that? What does it do to yield up this new fortune every year? It is more than human, apparently. For it creates new life without ever dying itself.
Let us follow this million dollars around in its “investment”: A large building is bought for 50 thousand dollars. Forty machines at an average cost of 15 thousand dollars are bought for 600 thousand – lathes, planers, shapers, boring-mills, etc. Throughout the year 250 thousand dollars’ worth of steel bars, shafts, castings, etc., are bought from other capitalists to serve as the raw material for these machines.
There is 900 thousand of the million accounted for. Will it “make money”? By all the laws of logic, it should make nine-tenths as much as a million. But will it? Suppose I let those things all stand there for a year. At the end of the year how much would I make?
Well, the building would probably still sell for 50 thousand dollars. My 40 machines, if they had been soaked in oil, might still sell for 600 thousand, but most likely I would take a loss on them. The same applies to my 250 thousand worth of raw materials.
So here is 900 thousand of my million that is very stubborn and singularly inept about this business of creating new values out of itself. The machines stand next to the raw materials like so many male and female mules. They have a lot of latent power but they cannot generate anything new. No matter how long these things associate with each other, nothing new is created. And no new value appears.
But if 40 workers are hired to put the raw material in the machines, operate and guide the work, at the end of the year. Instead of rough castings there will be fine machined products, smooth close-tolerance shafts, etc. These will be a new creation. And they will represent a greater value than before. They are new things and new values.
 
New Value Has Been Added
They have the old value of 250 thousand that was given them by the previous labor worked up in them in the steel plants and foundries. Now they have a new value added to the old – the labor worked up in them by the machinists. Now they are sold for 450 thousand instead of 250 thousand dollars. That is a new value of 200 thousand dollars added by the machinists during the year.
Now if each of these machinists has been paid 50 dollars a week it will cost me just about 100 thousand dollars for the year. This, you will remember, was the tenth part of my million. If there is any magic about my million it is that tenth that is paid for labor. Because the labor added 200 thousand in value to the product, and I only paid the laborers 100 thousand. So my million has at last given birth to a little image of itself. It has apparently presented me with a 100 thousand dollar profit.
Here is the real problem, and also the real clue to the source of profits; the labor of other people that is worked up in the capitalist’s product – and the wages paid for that labor.
Products are bought and sold all the time by the capitalists among themselves. They are sold according to how much labor is incorporated in them. But after a capitalist has bought products that represent a certain amount of labor, he must add some more labor to them in order to sell them for more than he bought them for.
To make a profit he must always be sure to pay the worker less values than the worker produces – or adds to the product. But how does the capitalist get away with this?
(Next week: Labor and Labor Power)
 




“Well, it’s a dirty deal,” you might say, “and a tough situation when your labor produces so much and your labor power gets paid so little. But after all, why does your labor produce so much? You couldn’t do it without the capitalists’ machinery and factories. You couldn’t do it without the inventions of Edison and other smart men. You’re just a laborer after all – even if a little bit skilled. If you sell your labor power for its full value and get a decent living wage – that’s really all you’re entitled to.”
Without modern factories and techniques we are helpless, all of us. That is true. But who made the factories? Did the capitalist, with his millions? Did even Edison, with his brains?
Ages ago the factories did not exist. And more ages before that there was no difference between labor and labor power that could be separated and exploited like it is today. And strangely enough, there were no millionaires.
At the dawn of humanity, the cave-man, or even eons later, the primitive Indian living in groups or tribes could barely produce enough from the unwilling earth even to keep alive. His labor power could not be bought and sold even if there had been someone around to buy it from him. There would have been no profit in it. For if part of the product of his labor were given to someone else, he would soon die of starvation.
But today human labor can produce thousands of times what the caveman could. For many, many centuries people have been improving their working tools, and thus increasing the productivity of labor.
No one knows who invented the wedge, the lever, the pulley, the wheel or axle. Long before writing existed, these existed. Ages before patent offices were invented, these were invented.
Yet they were tremendous advances for mankind. They made man’s labor more fruitful. Labor could produce more with these elementary tools and mechanical devices. And in the last few hundred years these tools and devices have become transformed into extremely complex machines. Inventors long dead and forgotten made axes, nails and chisels from the wedge, and wagons, waterwheels and mills from the wheel. In the last century they learned to harness steam and electricity to the machines.
The physical and mental labor of our fathers and grandfathers has produced the factories, railroads and other riches that lie around us. But generations upon generations of our remoter ancestors produced the things that made our fathers’ labor more productive too.
The tools and technique we have today, the accumulated capital of the past and the rightful heritage of all humanity, these are the things that make our labor so productive. Our brains, too – finer and more subtle instruments than our ancestors had, enable us to work more efficiently, to produce better things.
 
Our Heritage Turned Against Us
But still, we as laborers have only ourselves to sell – only our labor power. All that we produce – all that we labor to make – belongs to the buyers of our labor power.
Our ancestors built up such a tremendous storehouse of tools and knowledge, such a magnificent productive system, that it is impossible for each worker to own the tools that make his labor so productive.
We cannot work alone. We must work in common with hundreds of others, in order to make the kind of things and amount of things that are made today. We must work in huge factories.
Our heritage is turned against us. The capitalist, who owns the means of production – the instruments of our labor, finds us disinherited in the market place, with nothing to sell but our labor power. While our labor creates our work places and his pleasure palaces – our labor-power is rewarded with slave’s bread, masquerading under the name of a “Living Wage.”
Next Week: Surplus Value
 




“In order to be able to extract value from the consumption of a commodity, our friend Moneybags, must be so lucky as to find in the market, a commodity, whose use-value possesses the peculiar property of being a source of value, whose actual consumption, therefore, is itself an embodiment of labor, and consequently a creation of value. The possessor of money does find on the market such a special commodity in ... labor power.”
KARL MARX
* * *
As we have shown, commodities exchange in accordance with their value. The capitalist buys and sells everything at its value. How is it then that he pays less for the new values created by the labor he employs?
Just what does the capitalist buy when he pays the worker his wages? He would probably say that he buys “labor.” That he pays the market value for it too, by God! His millions of dollars in profit – that is, his steel products, autos, soap, or frigidaires over and above his investment, he regards not as the product of labor, but as the product of his brain. Or if he hired someone else’s brain, he looks upon the new product as the legitimate offspring of his own capital. At any rate the law says the profit is his, and that is enough for him!
As a matter of fact the capitalist does not buy your labor at all. He buys LABOR POWER. And that is what he pays the market value for. Labor itself has no value at all. It is the measure of all values. But like breathing, it is only an activity of man (rather harder than breathing, to be sure.) Labor doesn’t have value any more than running has size.
Long before exchange or exchange value ever existed there was labor. Labor was “an eternal nature – imposed necessity” on man in order to live. It was his relationship to the earth – a purposeful activity. He couldn’t exchange this activity either then or now. Today he may perform this activity for another. But exchange is the trading of two things both of which are products of this activity, labor.
Walking, for example, is such an activity. Walking itself hasn’t any exchange value. But a number of hours walking behind a plow adds so much value to the potatoes which will be harvested in the fall. Later a faster, riding plow is invented. Walking behind plows becomes less and less socially necessary labor. But both before and after the invention of the riding plow, walking itself has no value.
“But I sell my labor for so much an hour, don’t I? It must be worth something” the worker says. No, you give your labor to the earth, as men have always done. You incorporate your labor in your product. What you sell the capitalist is not walking – but your ability to walk. If he can make you run instead of walk, so much the better for him, and worse for you.
 
You Sell Yourself
What you sell is your nerves, muscles, flesh, blood, bone and brain for so much an hour. Add up all the hours you sell, it for throughout your life, and you will see that what you sell is yourself. You sell yourself piece-meal to the capitalist, little by little, hour by hour throughout your life. The capitalist does not buy you all at once like a chattel slave. He does not want to feed you and your children during depressions when you don’t work for him.
The self that you sell piece by piece can well be called your labor power. It is this labor power that is bought and sold under capitalism. It is the worker’s strength, his intelligence, the skill of his hand, the sharpness of his eye, that passes under the auction block like tobacco and slaves.
Labor and labor power do not at first sound like such very different things. But you have to remember that “labor power” is the worker himself. Labor is the worker’s action. Or putting it another way: labor power is a commodity whose use is labor.
The capitalist buys so much labor power and pays so many dollars for so many hours of its use. How he uses it is his business. The more usefulness he can extract from it, the richer he gets.
You could buy an apple for a nickle, for instance. The seller would get the exchange value for it. You would get its use value by eating it.
If you are a laborer and sell your apple (your labor power) to the boss, you get your nickel. And the boss eats the apple, which in this case happens to be you – because you and your commodity (labor power) happen to be one and the same. At any rate the method the boss has of realizing your use value is by putting you to work. Your commodity, labor power, has the wonderful aspect for the capitalist, that in using it, he can obtain values beyond what he paid for it. And lo and behold, when the day is finished you are eaten up, the capitalist is fatter, while your wages – the price of your labor power – barely replenishes you and your family.
Next Week: The Value of Labor Power.
 



Labor power is the capacity to work. It is, in the long run, the worker himself. But labor is the living action of the worker. It is value-creating action.
It was the genius of Karl Marx that first discovered and clearly described this difference between labor and labor-power. At first glance, the difference seems slight. It might be some kind of hair-splitting. But the difference is really of great importance. And it is because of this difference that capitalism can exist at all.
It is the second great distinction that the young student of Marxist economics has to master. The first was the distinction between use-value and value. These seemed a little bit alike, but we saw how these two qualities were very different.
It may be difficult to grasp the difference between labor and labor-power at first. But once we do grasp it we can understand what capitalist exploitation is.
It is because the laborer is able to produce more than enough for his own and his family’s upkeep, that profits can exist. If the product of his labor was exactly equal to the products that he and his family consumed in daily life, there would be no capital, and no capitalism.
Labor power can remain almost unchanged from one year to the next. A man’s muscle and brain don’t change much in a year. And his food, clothing and family requirements are about the same. But his labor and what it produces can change drastically in that same year.
In ship building, for example, it used to be a year- round proposition to build an ocean going ship – especially naval craft. But before the war was over, these vessels were turned out in a matter of days. Labor was applied in different ways, under new circumstances – welding huge pre-fabricated sections together with assembly line technique. The labor, however, was still powered with the same spinach and beef as when the iron worker, fitter, burner and welder used to put each ship-plate in place in the ancient days of 1940.
 
Labor Power Must Be Sustained
A man working piece-work may turn out a thousand articles a day, and a maintenance man may read comic books for hours at a time. The labor they perform is very different. But their labor power is about the same. They eat about the same quantity of groceries – they wear out the same amount of clothing, and they both have a wife and family to provide for.
During the war a man labored six days for the boss to get the money to keep his labor power replenished for seven days. But now he only labors five days. And he still must live for seven. That is why he demanded a higher price for his labor power and struck for the 18½ cent raise.
Finally, a man who is laid off altogether, is doing no labor whatsoever for the boss. But his labor power, like a millstone around his neck, is an unsold commodity that still requires spinach and beef, even in idleness. In an agony of hunger and worry for his family, he is willing to sell it cheaper and cut out the beef. But once having sold it at a cut rate, he is still compelled to produce for his boss at a faster rate of labor than ever.
The capitalists are always trying to push down the price of labor power. They are trying to make the laborer get along on less. They are trying to reduce his standard of living. That is why the working people are organized in unions – in order to resist this pressure – and raise the price of their labor power.
And while the capitalists try to reduce the value of labor power, they move heaven and earth to increase the values that its labor produces – in other words, they whip more labor out of the labor-power they have bought.
Having grasped the difference between labor and labor power, we have accomplished two big things. We have stripped bare the secret of capitalist exploitation. And we have discovered the economic roots of the class struggle.
(Next week: The Value of Labor Power)
 



Your labor power is your SELF. It is your muscle, bone, and mind. Under capitalism it is a commodity. It is the only commodity you own. Your clothing, your car, your groceries, were once some capitalist’s commodities. Now they are your useful possessions. And being second-hand now you could not sell them for very much – even if you wanted to. They are no longer commodities.
Your labor power is the only thing you have to sell. The products of your labor are not your own. They belong to the capitalist who employs you in the factory.
You sell your labor power for so much a week and so much an hour. This selling price is called “wages.” Wages are always paid in money. This helps to conceal the difference between what you produce and what you get. It’s harder to see that you are giving the company so much unpaid labor every day.
How is the selling price of labor power determined? “Why, the union bargains for my wages,” you might say. But in many shops no union exists. Moreover there was a certain wage level before the union was organized. And even today the union’s bargaining centers around a definite amount called a “living wage.”
People’s idea of a good selling price for labor power is their idea of a good “living wage.” That is to say what they can live on. The wages which will buy them and their families enough food, clothing and shelter to get by decently.
And what is this food, clothing and shelter for the laborer? It is the cost of production of his labor power. His labor power cannot be useful and available for work without these necessities of life. And the value of these necessities is the value of his labor power.
How do we determine the value of the food, clothing etc.? By the amount of labor it takes to produce them. And so we find that the VALUE OF LABOR POWER IS DETERMINED BY THE AVERAGE AMOUNT OF LABOR NECESSARY TO PRODUCE THIS LABOR POWER. Like all other commodities, labor power obeys the same law of value.
But the commodity – LABOR POWER (the laborer) – does not drop from heaven with a rivet gun in hand. This commodity must be produced from the cradle to the factory gate as well. So the capitalist pays the laborer enough to bring up a family. Not because the capitalist loves his workers’ children, but because these children must be reasonably strong and healthy when they bring their labor power to market.
As Karl Marx says, “The value of labor-power is determined, as in the case of every other commodity, by the labor time necessary for its production, and consequently also, the reproduction, of this special article.”
If it takes 20 hours labor to produce the food, clothing, shelter, etc., for a working-class family to live then the values that you produce in 20 hours will be the value of your labor power, and approximately the same as your wages.
In other words, if you had the opportunity of exchanging what you produced in the factory with all the other factory workers in the world, you’d find that you’d produced your own wages in 20 hours.
However, you are working for the capitalist and not for yourself. Thanks to the labor of your fathers, he has huge machinery and factories with which he employs you in making values – in 40 hours, or 50 hours, not 20. And he keeps the change.
According to the law of the land you and he are – equals. You sell your labor power. He buys it. You sell it according to how much labor it takes to produce it. You sell it for enough to keep it alive. He buys it, and like all buyers, consumes what he has bought.
“To the purchaser of a commodity belongs its use. From the instant the worker steps into the workshop, the use value of his labor power, and therefore also its use – which is labor – belongs to the capitalists.” – Marx.
Value for value is given in the market. Equals exchange for equals. All is perfectly legal in this exchange. But the market-place is only the most temporary stopover for the laborer and his precious product, which is HIMSELF. His free and equal bargain with the employment manager is quickly sealed, his product sold, and he has to keep delivering for a long time after.
There is a change from equality to inequality. It takes place after the bargain is sealed. Marx describes the change thus:
“He who before was the money owner, now strides in front as capitalist; the possessor of labor power follows as his laborer. The one with an air of importance, smirking – intent on business; the other timid, and holding back, like one who is bringing his own hide to market and has nothing to expect but – a hiding.”
Next Week: Labor Power and Productive Labor
 



What does this statement mean: “Use Value Cannot Be Measured?” It means there is no yardstick that can mark off the different degrees of usefulness different things have.
A smart engineer might tell you that usefulness can be measured. He puts steel beams in a certain part of a building he is working on, because they will outlast wooden ones. They will not only outlast wood. They will stand a much greater strain at any given time than wooden beams. Experience and mechanical theory enables him to compute exactly how much longer they will last, and how much more they will stand.
A glass of milk and a cup of coffee have about the same exchange value. But their usefulness to the human body is very different. This difference can be measured pretty closely by a good doctor. He could show you that the number of calories and other health-giving elements in milk are just exactly so many times greater than in coffee.
This can be repeated a thousand times with all kinds of items in all kinds of ways. But if you stop to reflect a moment you can see that it’s only one particular side of usefulness that can be so measured. You can measure calories, pounds, hardness and other qualities. But you cannot measure calories against pounds, color against hardness, or one usefulness against another.
The usefulness of things lies in their filling the needs of mankind, making people happy, contented or comfortable. In that sense they cannot be measured.
Even where certain aspects of usefulness can be measured, as for example, durability, strength, etc., these measurements do not at all enter into the determination of value. Thus tool steel is not merely several times as hard as mild steel. It is infinitely harder in its service to man. If mild steel were used for a cutting tool on a lathe it would just burn up without doing any work at all. But a steel that is just a little harder can cut a turning shaft on a lathe as though it were wood. Without hard steel we couldn’t have lathes or machine shops at all. But tool steel is not infinitely more expensive than mild steel.
If you’ve ever had to change a tire in the middle of nowhere and tried to get the wheel off a car without a lug wrench, you know what a wonderfully useful thing that wrench can be. You know how many hours of fruitless tapping of the lugs with a hammer you save by using a wrench.
 
Use-Value and Exchange-Value
And yet for all its usefulness the wrench costs very little. It costs perhaps 75 cents or so. It may be a blessing to the user, but it has little actual exchange value.
If you work in a shop you may have had trouble with the old time crescent wrenches, occasionally breaking a handle. But the new crestaloys and other alloy wrenches will stand five to ten times as much pulling. You can put a six-foot pipe over the handle and still they won’t break – yet the crestaloy costs only about a quarter more than an ordinary wrench.
Some people might say the crestaloy was ten times as valuable when they really mean that it is much superior to ordinary metal. Usefulness and value are two entirely different aspects of things (Marx sometimes used the phrase use-value and exchange-value, sometimes use-value and value).
Usefulness – use values – were constantly increased under capitalism. Factory production made things available to everyone that formerly even kings could not get. Automobiles, for example, and electric light bulbs. Since commodities have to be useful, the capitalist was forced to look for more and more useful things to produce – and encourage inventors to invent still more of them.
But that day is past. Now the monopoly capitalist discourages inventions and new use-values and he tries to keep up the exchange value (the price) of the old ones.
Next Week – Can Exchange Value Be Measured?
 



Exchange value, unlike usefulness, can be measured quite exactly. The fact that things are always exchanged in definite proportions is a proof of this. Prices prove this in a special way. Commodities are exchanged for fifty cents in money – fifty-one cents – fifty-five, etc. If one commodity sells for fifty cents, and another for a dollar, we say that the second is twice the value of the first and will exchange for two of the first.
But some people think that all the grocers and storekeepers get together and cook up their price-lists every so often and foist them on an unwary public. No doubt, the storekeeper tries his best to get a high price out of us. But what is a “high” price? – higher than what? – “Why higher than the real value,” you will say.
There we are again – back to value itself. How can we measure this real value? If we tried to exchange a bicycle across the table for an automobile, we’d find the bicycle not remotely able to balance the automobile in the scales of value. But a little diamond only an ounce or so in weight would exchange very readily for the car.
But what is the measuring meter on this scale of value? It isn’t pounds or ounces. It isn’t yards or inches. Is it dollars and cents? – But a dollar is only a certain amount of gold – today 35 to the ounce. If a diamond and a car are both worth 560 dollars, then they both have the value of a pound of gold.
”Well, gold has value because it is rare,” people will say. “It’s hard to get.” But how rare is it and how hard to get is it? What determines that? Automobiles aren’t so rare. How come they exchange with diamonds, gold, boats, tractors and so on? There must be something in them all that is common to each.
 
What Gives Commodities Their Value?
Perhaps it would be easier to discover this common thing which determines value if we looked at the simple exchange of commodity for commodity before gold and money were in universal use. Take a couple of farmers of an earlier century who were craftsmen on the side. One made plowshares and the other made axes. When the first one wanted an ax, he would offer the second a plowshare and expect, say, two axes in return. Suppose the second would give him only one ax?
Right then and there number one would balk. And why? Because only a few years before he had been making axes himself, and he knew that two could be made in the same time he made one plowshare. He would go back to making his own axes again. Or if a third farmer made axes he would take his business there.
Even if number one had never made axes before, he could soon find out that it took less labor to make axes than plowshares, and he wouldn’t dream of exchanging the product of two days’ labor for the product of one day’s labor. If he should do this, then the more days he labored and exchanged the poorer he would get.
Without seeing gold, dollars, dimes or cents from one year’s end to the next, he would know quite well when he was getting gypped. He would have an excellent scale on which to weigh the value of the article he traded. He would measure the value by the amount of labor-time took to make it – and the other trader would do the same.
It takes a great deal of labor, on the average throughout the world, to find, mine and refine gold. It takes as much labor for an ounce of gold as for a half ton of cast iron. And whether you call the ounce of gold 20 dollars or 35 dollars, that’s what the half ton of iron will exchange for – one ounce of gold. It’s the amount of labor in a thing that determines its value.
The rarity of a thing is only incidental. Commodities are not rare moths or butterflies that you catch only once in thirty years or so. They are made in mass production. Automobiles are much more plentiful on the streets than rare butterflies. But they are also more expensive. The number of autos could even be doubled under certain conditions, and the value of each car would still be the same.
It isn’t how pretty or ugly, how big or how little, how rare or how plentiful a thing is that determines its value. It’s how much labor under average conditions is necessary to produce it. A commodity, as Marx said, is nothing but crystallised labor so far as its value is concerned.
Next Week – How Value Is Created
 




“The total labor-power of society, which is embodied in the sum total of the values of all commodities produced by that society, counts here as one homogeneous mass of human labor-power, composed though it be of innumerable units.”
Marx’s Capital
* * *
Even though the worker in the shop is far removed from the bowels of the earth where the iron he works upon comes from – the final product that he makes represents nothing but a piece of the earth transformed by the labor of thousands of people.
If we look up and down the whole world-wide list of commodities, we see that every single one of them answers this description. They are all products of labor as far as man is concerned – and nothing but parts of the earth as far as nature is concerned.
Take a piece of metal, shaped into an auto fender, for instance. Trace its history back, and you will see that everything in its making is labor and nothing but labor.
The fenders are stamped out from sheet steel by operators of huge presses. The man and the press made them from the sheet steel. The press itself was made by many machinists, founders, tool-and-die makers, etc. The sheet metal that was stamped out came in turn from the rolling mill or strip mill, where men pressed it out with massive machinery that was also the product of labor – the ingot steel came from the bloomingmill, and the open hearth furnaces – and before that from the cast iron made by the blast furnace workers. (Needless to say, these furnaces are all the products of labor, too). And before the blast furnace, the iron ore, the limestone and the coal that go into it are all dug out of the ground by man. Man – human labor – works upon the earth.
A commodity has a tangible, touchable material – the elements it is made of. And it also has another substance: all the labor that has gone into making it.
The labor that goes into making the commodity has two sides to it, just as the commodity has. There is the particular kind of labor, like shovelling, picking, press-operating. And there is just plain human labor – the energy of human muscles, nerves and mind.
Some kinds of labor may be far more useful than others – just like the products of that labor. One man makes dog biscuits, another makes bread for human beings.
One works at a forge, another extracts iron ore. But two men can’t dig and forge at the same time. Both things have to be done to make a hammer. And although a hammer and iron ore are two very different KINDS of things, they are just two different ways of using human brain and muscle.
When you consider all the thousands of different kinds of useful labor and all the people working together to make the complete product, it’s as though one universal giant with millions of pairs of hands made the hammer and the fender.
It doesn’t make any difference so far as the quantity of labor in a given product in concerned, whether one pair of hands painted, polished or hammered. It makes no difference whether they moved up and down, back and forth, or around in circles. Just so long as the labor was necessary labor. It’s the total AMOUNT of labor – human labor, that creates the product.
 
The Sum Total
Take the finished auto fender. There it is, gleaming in all its painted glory. The sweat and dirt of the workers has been washed off. The blood from industrial accidents has been mopped from the floor. The umbilical cord is cut between it and the producer. It stands there as though it had dropped from heaven – the sacred property of the capitalist.
But the labor of the workers – the motion, the activity, of which the sweat and dirt are the by-products – has not really disappeared. Just as the mighty motion of Niagara is transformed into charged power lines, so the laboring motion of the working people is transformed into the apparent stillness of their product.
The painter’s activity has been concretized in color, the polisher’s in brightness and smoothness, the steelmaker’s in flexibility and durability, etc. – that is, the useful side of their activity. But they all work in common to produce a single commodity, and the sum total of their different labors equals one massive general labor – value-creating labor.
All the different useful labors flow into the final product just as many rivers flow into the sea. The great Mississippi loses its identity in the ocean just like the little Rappahannock. So the big and little labors lose their individuality in the product. And this product becomes a part of the sum total of generalized human labor; labor-power concealed in material mold.
Next Week – The Profitless Poker Game
 



The capitalists do not grow richer by cheating each other. Nor do they merely gain from the others’ losses. It would be as if there were 10 men in a poker game, each with a million dollar stake. If they played with a one dollar limit, the chances are they would all play for years and still each have their million at the end. Each would gain from the other only to lose to the other.
Yet if each put his money into a business – shares of ownership stock in U.S. Steel, for example, he would have about a million and 50 thousand at the end of one year.
Even suppose the general law of chances didn’t work out in the poker game and one capitalist won millions of small pots constantly, cleaned the others out and made 10 million. The fact remains that there was only 10 million to start with, and there was only 10 million, at the finish – even though differently divided. But if the whole 10 million had been put into U.S. Steel, it would have increased to 10 million, 500 thousand at the end of the year. Even if it were put into savings banks it would have Increased 200 thousand or so.
If you look over the income returns, you will see that the capitalists as a whole get richer and richer every year. Where do all their riches come from? If they don’t cheat other capitalists out of it, maybe they cheat the poor people out of it when they sell to them?
That can’t be true either. Take the steel producer. He sells only to capitalists. He can’t cheat them, as we have proved (yet he makes 5 percent profit). The steel producer would look at the automobile producer who sells directly to the working man. He’d say, “To hell with selling steel to a man I can’t cheat. I’ll get in the auto business, where I can sell to the working man and cheat him to death. Thus I will make more profit.” But he doesn’t do this. For both heavy steel and light cars are sold at their value, and there is a profit in both of them.
Then, too, the rich are 7 billion dollars richer than they were last year. But the poor, though poorer, are not 7 billion dollars poorer. The seven billion didn’t come by the capitalists gypping each other out of it, and it didn’t come by their evercharging the consumers for their products.
The 7 billion is 7 billion dollars worth of new wealth. It is something that did not exist before. It is new factories, new limousines, and warehouses full of products. It is the product of the labor of the working people.
The working people did not give their employers warehouses full of goods and newly built factories by passing them over the counter in a sleepy trade. No. It was not a gesture of trade but a labor – a constant labor of millions and billions of hours on their part, that created this wealth.
The working peoples’ labor made all their own food and prepared it – it built their homes, made their clothes in the factories, and all their other necessaries, as we have seen. In addition it made 7 billion dollars worth of other things they didn’t get.
The capitalists get their wealth directly out of the labor of the people who work for them. When the capitalist owner of the factory takes the products you have made and gives you wages in return, he has already made his profit. The products turn into money as they go out the door of the factory into the trucks of the merchant who pays for them.
Naturally, the capitalists and their stooges do not agree with this. And when you show them that new wealth cannot be created by trading everything back and forth (buying and selling), they pull their ace-in-the-hole. “Why capital makes its own profit! All you do is invest it. Money itself breeds money!”
(Next Week: The Parent Without a Child)
 



When you look at the old factories and mills of the industrial cities on the shores of the Great Lakes, it’s hard to believe that they stand on Indian trails where the hunter’s call and the beat of wild goose wings were the only breaks in the primeval stillness. The lake nearby was an emerald green, untouched by the red ore-mud and slag. Only the paddle of the birchbark canoe broke its surface in fair weather.
How long ago was this? A thousand years? No. Your great-great grandfather, if he were there, could have parted the foliage with his hunting knife and gazed or just such a scene. The factories grew up at a tremendous rate of speed and replaced the wilderness.
These factories didn’t come out of the sky. They didn’t spring up out of the ground either, like Indian corn. They were imported from England. And over in England, too, where they first started up, they are not so very much older than here. Two hundred years ago, the English mining towns still had “green valleys” and a great many people still made cotton and wool garments by hand.
Handicraft workers had been going along year after year, generation after generation, using their own little cottages for their private factories. These were not like your cellar workshop where you putter around for fun. They made their living and their family’s living at their handicraft, even though they had no machinery one-tenth as efficient as a Sears-Roebuck lathe.
When it was discovered that the looms of the weavers and the wheels of the spinners could be enlarged, the work simplified and done by several people together – then more material could be produced by each worker than before. And the well-off grocer, merchant, or craftsman, who had the money to buy a new-fangled machine and owned a shed to put it in, began to make money out of other people’s labor in this baby factory.
Once these little shops got going, production increased greatly. More money was made by the owners. They enlarged the shops, encouraged inventions to improve the crude machinery, and hired many more workers. Just before 1800 the “Industrial Revolution” began in England. The great discoveries of science began to be harnessed to production. (Most of the early scientists couldn’t collect any cash out of this, or were dead before this “revolution” began.) Steam power replaced water power. More and more improvements were applied to the machines that the steam propelled.
 

Capitalism Only a Few Centuries Old
This factory system of England was the main feature of capitalism, and we call England the classic country of capitalism. Capitalism dldn’t get much of a hold over here in North America when the first settlers came. The settlers who had money and materials and owned choice land were very much richer than the others, of course, but they couldn’t begin to make factories right away. Instead they carved out great plantations from the virgin land and forced white and black slaves to produce wealth for them. Other rich Americans in the early days used the capital they brought from England to build ships and pay sailors to produce wealth in the form of the profits of trade.
The United States was mainly a farming country for several centuries after its discovery. But along in the early 1800’s the little capitalists here began to steal the English capitalists’ machinery blue-prints and patents. They lured the British master-workmen over here to help them plan these factories which were such gold mines to the owners. Then American inventors began to come forward with inventions thick and fast. Not many of these made the inventors very rich, but like today they increased production, and enormously enriched the capitalist. Most of all they hastened the building of big factories.
The big steel plants were built after the Civil War. Then mines had to be dug deeper and spread farther. Railroads opened up the country in earnest. But the largest single factories in the world – far larger than any of England’s – have been started in our own lifetime. River Rouge – GM – Willow Run – Boeing – the population figures of these plants read like the census of large cities.
All this phenomenal growth within the United States from the wilderness to the factory has taken place in a few short lifetimes. Moreover, before that, neither factory owner, factory nor factory worker existed anywhere. The capitalist is a very young master for us workers compared to the 5,000-year-old chattel slave master whose system died such a short time ago. But nevertheless, the capitalist system – swifter than all others to grow – is even more swift to decline and die.
Next week: How The Factory Worker Was Born
 



Was your father a worker in the shop like you? Maybe. Was your grandfather? Not very likely. How about your great-great-grandfather? Why, no. Definitely no. He was a farmer, or a farm laborer, or maybe a skilled craftsman on his own. Hardly anybody’s great-great grandfather was a factory worker.
If you question typical American steelworkers you will see that they come from Poland, Ireland, Hungary, Serbia (Yugoslavia), southern U.S. – and if they didn’t that’s where their fathers came from. If you question the auto workers you will find that many came from the mid-west, from Kentucky and Tennessee. And their fathers and grandfathers from Ireland, Italy, Germany, England, Poland, etc. All of them farmers or farm hands before they came in the shop.
Everybody says we live in a changing world. Well that’s part of the changing of it. People changed from farmers and craftsmen into factory workers – from working for themselves to working for a boss whom they never even see. This has happened on a tremendous scale. The number of American workers has jumped from a few hundred thousand in 1846 to forty million today.
A person can’t help thinking. Where did the forty rnillion come from? Suppose they did come from the farms and tiny shops of Europe and America? There were farms for thousands of years, weren’t there? What did the forty million do then, when no charitable Henry Ford gave them jobs to sweat in the nerve-racking din of the production line?
It used to take a lot of people to run a little farm. When they cut wheat and oats with a hand scythe, it took more than the hired man to do the work. The farmers used to run to big families. Their sons and daughters found it a full-time job to do the chores and keep the beans hoed, to plant and harvest the grain and weed the corn. When McCormick invented the reaper in the 1840’s he gave Henry Ford many thousands of his labor force. Only Ford did not get them at that time.
Instead of throwing people off the farms, this invention led to more farms being started up – and the great mid-west being opened up to wheat production. The country was still expanding. The farmers’ surplus sons started new farms.
But when all the land had been taken up, and the reaper had been surpassed by the harvester and combine, more and more farm boys had to go to the cities to “seek their fortunes.” And now with the tractor methods and still more advanced farming equipment, whole communities of farms and buildings are wiped off the earth (as in Oklahoma and Arkansas) to make way for the big capitalist farms. And thus new recruits join the industrial army.
The farmers of Europe starve (and want to leave there) for a different reason. America’s wheat is produced so cheaply that it can undersell the rest of the world. The ox-drawn plow and the man with the hoe or scythe cannot stay in business and prosper. American capitalism makes the European children come and work for it, or wait for work at the plant gate.
When capitalism first started in England, it got its labor force even more brutally. Besides running the handworkers out of business, and hiring their children at literally starvation wages, the capitalists passed special laws forcing people off the land. They made begging a crime and paupers were put in a workhouse so horrible that they were glad to work in the mills for a few pennies a day.
The modern wage worker was whipped, driven and forced into his present servitude. The factory system, which produces so much and has the power to emancipate the worker from his chains, is now his master. To get his freedom the worker must master the factory system. And to accomplish this, he must understand the secret of capitalist exploitation. He must understand the product he makes, and how the boss makes his profit out of the worker’s labor on it.
Next Week: The Things We Produce
 



Workers puzzle over the question:
“When we can produce so much in the shop, how is it that we ourselves get so little? Certainly, we produce hundreds of times more wealth with the factories than our great-grandfathers did without them. But the things we produce do not belong to us. Somehow we can never buy back what we ourselves make. Sometimes we produce things that then rust in warehouses or rot on the ground. Sometimes all we produce goes up in battlesmoke. Sometimes we are idle and the factories remain idle too! Why?”
These questions can be answered in two sentences: The world’s great productive system is owned by a little handful of people who run it for their own profit and not for people’s use. And it can run at full steam and keep running only when society as a whole owns and operates it.
Yes, that is the answer. But how do we know it is the answer? We know the present system is rotten and useless by our own experience with depressions and wars. But we did not arrive at the above socialist answer through hopelessness and despair. The answer is the product of a reasoning process. It is a reasoning that conscious fighters for socialism should follow. It is a rather long chain of reasoning that Marx begins by analyzing the things we make in the factory.
Look around you in the house, and you will see- the products made by us in the factories. Chairs, tables, sewing machine, ice box, oil stove, cook stove, sink, toilet and bathtub – all factory products. Now look out the window. The lamp post, the cars and trucks on the street, the street itself – asphalt, car tracks, concrete or bricks, are factory products too.
Even the food you eat was canned and preserved in the factory. And before that it was planted, cultivated and harvested by factory-made machinery. Workers, just like ourselves, make all these things – food, clothing, shelter and all. They make them in tremendous quantities In great factories.
So if we are to follow Marx’s reasoning let us begin by looking at these factory products. The things we make – and the ways under which we make them – turn us into what we are.
The first thing we learn about these things is that just looking at them does not tell us very much. Many of them look just like they did ages before the factories made them. Factories, as we have seen, are something new under the sun. And the factory worker is too. But many of the things we make in our new way were made by different methods thousands of years ago. Bread, for instance, used to be baked by slaves before the Bible was written or the pyramids were built.
Nevertheless, bread and other things we make today are very different from the same things made before the factory was born. Why? Precisely because we make them so differently. That is where the difference arises. A given thing could have been made by ancient slaves, by a shepherd girl in the medieval hills, by a semi-craftsman in a cotter’s hut, or in a billion dollar factory with a hundred thousand pairs of hands whisking it along to the salesroom or warehouse. This difference in the method of production does actually stamp its difference on the product. But we discover this only if we probe beneath the surface.
Just by looking at it you might not think bread has changed very much in the last ten thousand years. But it has just the same. Capitalist bread contains something that primitive bread was quite innocent of. Capitalist bread has market value. For example, a loaf of bread contains 12 cents “worth” of value.
 

What the Difference Is
What’s the difference? you might ask. Slaves’ bread filled the slave’s stomach so he could work for his master, capitalists’ bread fills the worker’s stomach so he can work for his boss. Both loaves are things to eat. Why get so technical? The bread must have been worth 12 cents ten thousand years ago – if there had been 12 cents lying around somewhere.
But the 12 cents is something you exchange the bread for. If you could only make one loaf a day, and nobody else could do any better, you’d be a fool to exchange it for 12 cents or even $12 because you wouldn’t have any bread left to eat. You wouldn’t produce it to sell in the first place. The idea of selling it or trading it would never enter your primitive head.
Besides, what would you do with the 12 cents anyway? Suppose you needed a couple of razor blades. Well, if they were made at that time it would have taken longer to make one than to use one up – so who would have one to sell you? Your 12 cents would be no good, even if it were “lying around.”
The bread, too, would be “no good” from the point of view of the 12 cents. Or take it in its wider aspect: exchange could not exist. We thus see value expressed in exchange. And until there are enough goods exchanged – and made to be exchanged – there can’t be any idea of money or exchange value.
Under primitive conditions the loaf of bread is life itself. It’s produced to feed the producer. It’s as much a part of him as his big toe. And he would no more think of selling it.
Under capitalism, the loaf of bread, unlike a big toe, is quite detachable. It can be sold. In fact all the bread is produced for just that purpose: to be sold. Instead of the baker being thought crazy if he sold his bread, he would be thought crazy if he did not. Under capitalism the goods must be sold – or the producers starve.
These goods – all the billions of units of factory products, all produced for a market – are called commodities. Karl Marx begins his famous book on Capital with the analysis of a commodity.
Next Week: What Is a Commodity?
 



A commodity is something produced to be exchanged. Nearly everything made nowadays comes under that heading. Things are very different today from the pioneer era when people made their own shoes, clothing, and molded the bullets for their long rifles.
There couldn’t be much exchange then, because people had to work from sunrise to sunset just to make the things they needed for themselves. Their log cabin was their factory. But it was the most inefficient factory you can imagine. In spite of Herculean labor, they often couldn’t produce enough goods for one family (that is, for themselves) to exist.
Today great factories employing thousands of people are busy making just one of the items the pioneers made – socks, for instance, or stockings. Hundreds of thousands of pairs of stockings are made – far more than the owners, or even the workers in that particular factory, can use. The stockings have to be exchanged for other things.
The capitalist who owns the factories and employs the workers who produce the socks, is interested in only one thing about socks. How much he can get for them. How useful they are to people is entirely secondary with him. If it so happens that he profits five cents a pair on cotton socks and only four cents a pair on wool, he will turn his whole factory over to the production of cotton socks. Children’s underwear, for several reasons, has yielded a lower profit than coats and dresses in recent years – so children have had to go without underwear. This is because we are living in a commodity system. Goods are produced to be sold – and at a profit. It is the number of purses that counts and not the number of users. If the working people as a whole ran the factories, they would, of course, make underwear for their children and themselves. But then they would no longer be producing commodities, production would then no longer be hamstrung by capitalism.
The capitalist, as we have said, doesn’t care whether the commodity is good or bad, so long as he can sell it. But all the same, the commodity has to be of some use, otherwise the people are not going to buy it. Dishes have to be smooth and cleanable, coal has to be hard and burnable, auto tires have to be soft and rideable, bread has to be fresh and eatable.
 

Two-fold Nature of Value
A commodity is a useful thing and it is at the same time a saleable thing. It has value in use (use-value) and value in exchange (exchange-value). The loaf of bread we described last week is a commodity precisely for these two reasons. It is useful to man. And it is produced to sell or exchange.
Naturally not every useful thing is necessarily a commodity. The air we breathe is quite useful, we would die without it. But it is not produced or monopolized by man. So it is free. On the other hand, oxygen, the purest air for breathing, is distilled out of the air by the labor of man, and therefore it becomes a commodity. It is sold to hospitals for oxygen tents, etc. It is sold to factories for welding and burning purposes. The acetylene flame breathes the oxygen – but not for free.
If we look up and down the world-wide list of commodities – from toothbrushes to tractors – we find every single thing that is sold on the market (except unimproved land – see Marx’ Capital, Vol. III) is a product of human labor. Now this seems such a commonplace, such a humdrum sort of discovery, you might say “so what?”
You might say everything contains labor and materials – just like a repair job on your car. That’s right. And the “materials” are commodities, too. The wrist pins, the rings, the pistons, etc., are also the product of labor – labor and materials again. But the raw steel they came from originally wasn’t worth a dime a pound. And that steel, too, was the product of the labor of thousands of workers, the sum total of tiny bits of their labor concentrated in that little bit of steel.
If a commodity so far as its exchange value is concerned is nothing but an amount of labor, you might say that the labor that produced it should own it. That would be fair and just. But a commodity is produced to be sold. The capitalist hires you to make caviar or Packards – not so you can use them, but so he can sell them.
We shall see why that alters everything when we continue our analysis of the commodity, and its two fold nature of being of value in usefulness and in exchange.
Next Week: Can Use Value Be Measured?
 



The economics of Karl Marx is a science. Marxian economics is in fact the only scientific study of capitalism. It is the only complete and correct explanation of how the bosses make their profits.
But no working man or woman should think just because it is a science that he can’t hope to learn it. The worker can learn the most important elements of this science a thousand times easier than his educated boss.
This is so first because Marxism is an honest study of the system we live by. Second because it is a revolutionary study, and third, because it is a study of the everyday things that working people know more about than anybody else: the factory, where they spend all their working hours; the machinery, which they become almost a part of; and the products which they, and only they, produce.
Marx proves that capitalism is doomed – sentenced by its own laws. He shows how capitalism is different from other systems in the past. And the working poor today are entirely different from, even though they are the descendants of the ancient slaves. They have the possibility of running the world to benefit the majority. The ancient slaves, for all their rebellions, never had that chance.
Many people remark, and most people believe, that “We’ve always had capitalism.” But this is not so. Capitalism had a beginning and it’s going to have an ending. Again these same people say, “Well, even before capitalism, there were always rich and poor. Doesn’t the Bible say, ‘The poor ye have always with you’?”
No. The “poor” did not always exist. There is no record of class society beyond 6,000 years ago. In other words we workers have a background of oppression only about 300 generations long. A good bit longer than the snooty family trees of the capitalist aristocrats, to be sure, but very short indeed compared to the age of man.
Our remoter ancestors lived hundreds of thousands of years without being divided into rich and poor. We might call them all “poor,” because they didn’t have good clothing or regular meals – not to mention limousines and servants. But they were also all equally “rich” because none called another “boss.”
Our ancestors in Europe, Asia and Africa lived at one time or another very much like the American Indian lived a few generations ago. Many African tribes still preserve the remains of this kind of life, where the European and American capitalists have not battered it away.
 

Equality Under Primitive Communism
In this form of society there was an equality and spirit of fellow feeling that disappeared as humanity progressed to the stage of producing more goods, and it became possible for one man to get a little more at the expense of many others.
For the primitive communism (you could call it that) of early man was based on scarcity. People were compelled to help each other to live. When they advanced to a higher stage, they paid for the advance with social inequality.
Now after 6,000 years of accumulation and newer systems of production, we have built enough factories and developed enough technique for everybody to have everything he needs and more. But again we will be compelled to work together, not only in operating the factories, and building them, as we do now – but in running them ourselves, if we want to enjoy the full benefits of factory production.
Capitalism was the highest stage of man up to a couple of generations ago. With its factory system of production it accomplished miracles that put the seven wonders of the world to shame. Under its sway people were educated and the working slaves got a little elbow room to look around in.
In a very short period, there has been more material progress than in all the other stages of history. Railroads, automobiles, airplanes, telegraph, wireless, radio. Capitalism has developed much faster than any previous system.
But it has also worn itself out faster. It is running down like an old machine. Bigger and bigger wars, deeper and deeper depressions, are its chief product in this period of running down.
The next stage in history is socialism. This is a system which eliminates depressions and wars because it operates the factories in a different way than capitalism. It operates them directly for the benefit of the people. It produces for use and not for profit.
To be real socialists we should understand why capitalism is dying, and why socialism will inevitably be born. And to begin at the beginning, let us see where capitalism came from. Let us see how we got where we are.
Next week: How The Factories Were Born
 

