

The policy of craft unionism into which the Stalinists are slowly pushing the Furniture Workers Industrial Union – as exemplified by the Newport strike (see Militant of April 15th, 1933) – has received the official approval of the Trade Union Unity Council in its decision finally rendered in burocratic fashion three weeks after the strike was over – almost two months after the Left wing appeal was raised in the union.
In presenting their conservative viewpoint in the form of a decision against the appeal of Sol Lankin, secretary of the union, it was necessary lor them to resort to childish distortions and falsifications on the Left wing proposals in order to vindicate themselves.
When the Newport framemakers, struck in April we immediately proposed “that no man in the shops which we control be allowed to upholster a frame which comes from the Newport Furniture Company and is made by scabs.” We don’t know exactly whether it was simply because we proposed it, or whether they are inherently against a Left wing policy, but at any rate, they quickly defeated our motion and carried a proposal for a mere “propaganda campaign” against Newport frames, leaving it up to the individual worker whether or not to work on these frames. Now every rebel worker knows that solidarity between the crafts of an industry is the ABC of industrial unionism. Unless this solidarity is manifested in action, the Industrial union forfeits its right to the name and starts back on the road that leads to the swamp of craft unionism.
 
Call Proposal “General Strike”
It is because they felt the correctness of our viewpoint and the effect that our appeal for solidarity had upon the workers that the TUUC was obliged to distort our proposal into a utopian call for a “general strike of the industry,” and then proceeded with the fierceness of a Jeremiah to flay this alleged position of the Left wing.
“A general strike in an industry where our union has not yet control over the workers,” runs the postmortem strike decision of the TUUC, “can only be an empty phrase and secondly, cannot be carried out in a burocratic fashion due to wishes.” We are happy to see the apparatus men acknowledge that a general strike cannot be carried out by burocratic wishes. It marks a step forward. This does not prevent them, however, by burocratic wish, from striking out of the union records the proposals of the Left wing. The practice of striking out all defeated motions (minority proposals) from the records of the union is unprecedented even in the A.F. of L. and has no place in our ranks. Only by fighting against such non-democratic methods in the Left wing unions will the class conscious workers be drawn into the movement.
 
Militant Attacked
With naive indignation against the publicity appearing in the Militant on the question of the strike, the Trade Union Unity Council “further condemns the articles signed by Lankin in the Militant in which he accuses the union of craft union practices and which actually in its contents condemns the union leadership for refusing solidarity action and also for publishing this slanderous attack before even appealing to the TUUC.”
These charges are manufactured out of the whole cloth and once more indicate the need to cover up a false policy. It was not until after the appeal made in April was ignored and left unanswered during a strike in which every hour counted, that Lankin finally stated the Left wing point of view in the columns of the Militant (April 15th). This article sounded the clarion call of unity and solidarity of all furniture workers during a strike of one craft. The TUUC, on the other hand, did not see fit to act on the strike policy until three weeks after the strike was over.
The right to publish views on the strike and the movement generally in the working class press, and especially in the revolutionary press, cannot be abrogated simply because the facts in the articles do not complement the leadership. The logical outcome of that position would be to insist on the mechanical acceptance of Stalinism as a prerequisite for membership in the industrial union. Discrimination or persecution of workers who do not hold the same views as the leadership will not build the union. It
is a direct violation of the industrial union program, and would cut off all possibilities for the movement to broaden out. More than that, it would reduce it to even a thinner shadow of the official Communist party and its sympathizers. It is the aim of the Left wing group to prevent this and to help build a militant movement in the furniture industry.



 


For the Left wing group,
              Sol Lankin
              Carl Cowl



(Next week’s issue of the Militant will contain a report of the upholsterers unity negotiations.)
 



“The correctly understood task of the Communist party does not consist solely of gaining influence over the trade unions, such as they are, but in winning, through the trade unions, an influence over the majority of the working class. This is possible only if the methods employed by the party in the trade unions correspond to the nature and the tasks of the latter ... If the party buys its influence in the trade unions only at the price of a narrowing down and a factionalizing on the latter, converting them into auxiliaries of the party for momentary aims and preventing them from becoming genuine mass organizations, the relation between the party and the class is wrong ... Out of this springs the policy of combinations behind the scenes of hushing up, of adaptation to the ideas and slogans of others, and finally the complete passage to the positions of opportunism.” – Leon Trotsky.
American industry is beginning to stir into open class struggle. Uppermost in the mind of the working class is the burning question: How can these miserable depression wages meet the rising cost of living. Spontaneous, elemental strikes and protests break out with increasing frequency from unexpected quarters and in a surprising manner. What distresses the bosses and annoys the trade union burocrats is that this upsurge does not wait for the unions to act, nor does it wait for the “busy season”, or for the “better moment”, or for the thousand and one excuses of the conservative labor “strategists” for delay. It bursts out for wage increases; it bangs its fist, even in anticipation of the “season”; it gives the bosses a foretaste of what is to follow in the “season”.
The furniture industry is no exception to the trend of the day. On the contrary it strikingly illustrates how determined, militant action, in most cases without union leadership, can wrest conditions and wage increases from the bosses by sporadic strikes and stoppages.
Of the three to four thousand upholsterers in greater New York, barely three hundred are organized into both unions: The Furniture Workers Industrial Union and Local 76 of the Upholsterers International, of which the latter though smaller in actual number, has signed agreements with three or four shops. Local 70, in the manner of all A.F. of L. unions, is based on the “job trust”, that is, the control of certain shops through agreement with the employer which allows the latter to use the union label on his goods and limits the membership to little more than those working in these shops. This gentlemen’s agreement between the union and the boss, while it maintains wages and conditions in the union shops above the general level of the unorganized industry, and offers protection in the form of a strike fund and other considerations ; nevertheless, it quite effectively creates a barrier between the unorganized mass, to whom the “union cannot give jobs”. This condition stimulates the development of reactionary policy, machine control ignoring of the unorganized and the stilling of the rank and file in the union.
 
The Left Wing in the Trade
The Furniture Workers Industrial Union was born out of the old Left wing of Local 70 under the leadership of the T.U.U.L. Under the hysterical lash of the Stalinist “third period” policy, it was not difficult to break off (or have expelled) a substantial group of the union who together with a number of rank and filers who had lost their confidence in the reactionary A.F. of L. union formed the Left wing union. In the period of its existence it has advocated the principle of one union for the entire industry and has stressed the shop as the basic unit of the union. It has championed the democratic rights of the rank and file and the idea of an international revolutionary movement of labor. On the other hand, it has succumbed to the adventurist practice of the united front from below and the theory of “social Fascism”, which has produced within the union the atmosphere, and without, the policy, of the revolutionary sect.
The discontent and unrest among the furniture workers of New York has had a marked effect on both unions. Suddenly Local 76 announces an organization drive. The Industrial union intensifies its efforts. Local 76 makes some headway; the F.W.I.U. leads some small strikes and stoppages. But each, naturally, must undermine the basis of the other union in order to proceed. And they are both met with stony indifference and cynicism on the part of the furniture workers who say: Two houses divided against each other cannot stand. A plague on both your houses.
Realizing the burning need for the unification of the industry, the Left wing elements in both unions have come forward with the demand for trade union unity on the basis of a fighting policy against the boss upholsterers in the coming season. In the Industrial Union, we have fought for close to six months to put the question of the unity of the unions on the agenda of the union. Our proposals were ridiculed and rejected. “No united front with the social Fascist leaders”, was the demagogic cry, “only with the rank and file!” And so the Stalinist leadership in the Industrial staved off the responsibility of approaching the A.F. of L. organization.
But so vital is the issue among the rank and file of the union that it could not be postponed for long. On May 8, after ordering the Left wing proposals stricken from the minutes and without much confidence in the outcome of the negotiations, the Stalinist leaders of the union sent a unity proposal to Local 76. Why was it necessary to conceal our policy from the membership by expunging it from the record and then resurrect it as though it were their own? Unquestionably because it was “Trotskyist contraband”. And second, because it didn’t jibe with the party line ...
In our next article, we will conclude the account of the fight for unity of the furniture workers together with the Left wing program for its achievement.
 



New York, N.Y. – Four thousand upholsterers were called out last Thursday, July 27th on a general strike of the industry. The call was issued at the Manhattan Lyceum by the Executive Committee of Local 76 of the American Federation of Labor at a strike meeting of over 800 sitting under banners of 42 of the largest shops of greater New York. Demonstrations of enthusiasm and spirit swept the hall at the proposal of the chairman, Brother Alpert, for a general strike in the morning for the basic demands of the 30 hour week and the minimum scale of $1.40 per hour. Irving Plaza, headquarters of the strike, was packed this morning with the first day’s response to the call. Committees were organized to cover every shop in the city down to and including the one and two man shops. Preparations are under way for a kitchen to feed the strikers. All indications point towards a militant and determined fight to unionize the trade.
 
Left Wing Joins Strike
Caught completely unprepared by the general strike call, the party fraction of the Furniture Workers’ Industrial Union met hastily last night, and without consulting the membership of the union, also called a “general strike” of the four or five shops over which it has “control”. In contrast to the A. F. of L., their demands are for the 40 hour week and for the $1 per hour basic wage. This is the culmination of the weak and confused “united front from below” policy against which the Left wing group has struggled over a period of months.
Two days ago, at a meeting of five shops called by the Industrial Union, the mask of unity behind which the Party bureaucrats had been hiding, was torn from their faces when they answered the demand for merging the rival unions with a “decision” from above that the Industrial Union will be maintained at all costs. For months the rank and file of the trade, led by the Left wing, demanded the reintegration of the Left wing union into the American Federation of Labor and for a united general strike under one banner. We believe that the militancy resulting from a victorious strike would inevitably lead to the growth of Left wing strength in the merged union, towards the re-establishment of the Left wing in the leading positions of influence and control which they held prior to 1929.
 
C.P. Versus the Union
The upholsterers are going back to Local 76 (A.F. of L.). They are not going; they are running. They are not running; they are already there.” This is the private opinion of the majority of the Party fraction in the Furniture Workers Industrial Union. The overwhelming response of the workers to the A.F. of L. strike call sustains that opinion. One party member after another, in a meeting with the representatives of the Trade Union Unity Council, Overgaard and Wortis, thus declared that unless unity was achieved with the A.F. of L. in the coming general strike, we would find ourselves six months from now without a rank and file.
Notwithstanding this overwhelming sentiment in the Party fraction, the TUUC representatives put their foot down heavily against any further unity negotiations with the A.F. of L. “betrayers of labor” and ordered that the Industrial Union be maintained at all costs.
The false face of unity behind which the TUUC masqueraded was finally ripped aside at a meeting of five shops held Tuesday July 25th to discuss the question of unity between the two unions. The Stalinists refused to give the floor to the representatives of the Left wing group, this time on the pretext that they were not members of those particular shops called to attend that meeting.
Why was this meeting called? Was it because the Stalinists wanted to hear the opinion of the upholsterers as to whether we should unite with Local 76 or not? No. It was because the workers, tired of being fed on empty and worn-out phrases, began to say that, if the Industrial Union does not join 76 as a body, they themselves, as individuals, would join Local 76.
When the organizer of the Industrial Union, it appears, came to the shops to collect a three dollar strike tax, the workers, who naively thought that they were in the midst of unity negotiations, turned on him suspiciously, and said: “Let us wait until the unity negotiations are over. Perhaps we will have one union, perhaps other arrangements will be made, etc.” Frightened by the fact that the Industrial Union was losing the little influence it had up till now, the organizer asked them to come to a special shop meeting that night to discuss the question.
The sentiment of the workers at the beginning of the meeting was to go into 76 as a body. The Stalinists were frantic. Demagogic speeches rolled off their tongues that would have shamed Tammany politicians and tabloid sob-sisters. Remarks such as: “Are you going to desert us now?”, “I was in jail 26 days for you!”, “I shed blood for you!”, “I was always on the picket line”, etc., etc. filled the air.
 
Left Wing “Defeated”
The terrified “leaders” again “defeated” the Left wing by denying them the floor, thus preventing an open comparison of policies which they knew could swing the bulk of the membership in favor of unity. By tiring the rank and file with speeches and appeals, in which only the Stalinist point of view was expressed, they finally put through a vote to “strike under the banner of the Industrial Union” in the coming strike.
Do the party leaders think this is an endorsement of their policy of obstructing unity? It was nothing but a vote of sympathy and confidence in those individuals who made the appeals, but in no sense can it be construed as approval for the split policy of the party in the furniture industry. Let them not deceive themselves about their following. The workers in the shops want unity today, in the heat of the strike, even more than before the strike was called. It must be stated here that the Stalinists, with the calling of the general strike, have already lost the golden opportunity to unite the two streams in the movement, the Left and the Right. They will stand convicted, in the eyes of the entire movement, of complicity if not collusion with the reactionary burocrats of the A.F. of L. in preventing the achievement of what lies nearest and dearest in the heart of every furniture worker in the industry: one strong union.
 
All Out on the Picket Line!
Every shop in the trade, large or small, join the strike.
The Left wing calls upon you to support the general strike and the following demands:

The 30 hour – 5 day week in place of the 44 hour week now prevailing.
 
Minimum scale of $1.40 per hour in place of the 60c average now prevailing.
 
Abolition of the Piece Work System.
 
Provisions in contract for higher wages when cost of living rises – the union to determine when and how much.
 
Protect allied trades by AMALGAMATING them into one strong industrial union.
 
No collaboration with the bosses under the National Recovery Act.
 
A militant general strike, and a class-struggle union, for better conditions in the trade.




 


For the Left wing group,
Carl Cowl
Sol Lankin



 



Tens of thousands of American boys are being herded into regular army camps, presumably for forestry training. A quarter of a million will be regimented by May 15, according to Robert Fechner, national head of the “Civilian Conservation Corps”. The government is pushing for the full quota of 250,000 by the middle of May, when the reforestation program is to begin in earnest.
The 1,800 supposedly homeless youths from New York who boarded the buses for Fort Slocum are the first victims of a novel brand of efficiency known as the “New Deal”. According to the government plan, each of the nine military corps areas from New England to the Pacific Coast, will be a recruiting or “conditioning” center for the forestry workers of that area. They will be given army work clothes, army grub and live n army barracks. They will all get military training in the form of infantry drill under the strict discipline of superior officers. “Education” and “recreation” will be completed supervised by government authorities.
“We intend to make self-supporting men of them,” says Adjutant Furey of Fort Slocum. Let’s see what he means by that. Do the men actually receive the $30 per month that they are promised? Not at all. The “investigators” of the New York Home Relief Bureau of the Department of Public Welfare are instructed to supply 7,500 unmarried young men between the ages of 18 and 23 from off the relief list. They are neither homeless nor wandering. $25 of every $30 earned by the worker is to be deducted and turned over to the Home Relief Bureau which promptly deducts that amount from the family budget, plus $1.50 per week (or over $6 per month) from the food budget. Others are removed entirely from the Welfare list. Anyone who knows the narrow margin upon which “relief” families live, knows what hardships these deductions are.
Now the Home Relief Bureau of the Department of Public Welfare has on its lists 180,000 families, or almost a million individuals. It spends ten million dollars a month caring for them. Of these there are about 60,000 on what is called “work relief” under the City Commission Work Bureau. Each man works five days every other week, or a maximum of ten days a month: For this he gets $45 a month, but he is cut loose and must support his family on this sum. Those on Home Relief, however, average $55 to $65 per month. The budgets are pared down to an almost unbelievable minimum and paid in credit tickets. There are today hundreds of large families close to starvation on this budget. The reforestation camps are being recruited from among those now receiving relief.
 
Homeless Still Homeless
What becomes, then, of the homeless and the wandering? There was a great agitation before the elections about them. The Scripps-Howard syndicate, for example, estimated that 500,000 of them roam the country. The January census of the Committee on Care of the Transient and Homeless showed 1,225,000 homeless and transient people in the Untied States, of whom 200,000 are youths. Boys and girls, unable to go to school, unable to get a job, a burden to their poverty-stricken family, join the ranks of migrant youth in a futile search for work in other cities. A restless tide is moving across the United States, hitch-hiking, walking, riding the freights, begging, stealing, living as they can. They are treated as traditional hoboes – a night in jail, a meal of beans and coffee and twenty-four hours to get out of town. They are clubbed by railway detectives and hobnob with petty criminals in jail. The good citizens demand government action to relieve the municipalities. Something had to be done for the American “beg prizorni”. So, the Democrats fervidly promised, if elected, to take care of them also. At the same time, liberal and progressive groups clamor for the reforestation of land denuded by the lumber and paper interests in the heyday of rugged individualism. An ideal chance to kill two birds with one stone, and do it cheap! Conservation and Unemployment Relief. However, they are in this dilemma: Either they use conservation funds for municipal relief, in which case they do not reach the wanderer; or, if they recruit the latter, then conservation funds cannot be allocated to city relief. America’s homeless youth is lost in the shuffle of the “New Deal”.
What about the dignity and honor of honest toil, ask the army men? The men get $5.00 a month for doing the work of regular foresters. It is exploitation in the crudest sense, it is humiliating to the person and degrading to the class. Out West they call this racket, “gyp labor.” And it is well named. Investigators of the Public Welfare use economic pressure on families to get their “quota” of boys into camp. One realizes the bitter irony of this situation: Workers “volunteer” for their six months’ enlistment.
With the brazen self-interest of the business men they have converted a twenty million dollar reforestation fund into a new scheme for pauperizing workers and creating the basis for national conscript labor. “Citizens Conservation Corps” means human cannon fodder trained, with funds intended for unemployment relief. The Democratic party in power, like its Republican predecessor, to rise out of the crisis by still further exploiting and degrading the working class. Against this the American worker can and will organize a struggle.




Full time wages for forestry workers!
 
No victimization of those who refuse conservation enlistment!
 
Abolish the relief “deductions” system!
 
Organize within the camps for better conditions!
 
Payment of City Relief in cash!
 
Unemployment Insurance.




 



The militant strike of over 1,500 upholsterers is nearing settlement. The Furniture Manufacturers Association has been brought to terms by one of the greatest strikes in the history of the trade. They have been forced, at the moment when victory is in the grasp of the strikers, to call in the NRA to “conciliate the dispute”.
And the NRA has acted. On August 17th, the Washington conciliator, Colonel Leopold Philipp, chairman of the Bureau of Compliance, came to an agreement with the Furniture Manufacturers Association at the Pennsylvania Hotel, (the headquarters of the NRA). The agreement, which was to serve as the “code” for the furniture industry, calls for a “sliding” wage, scale beginning with a 60c an hour minimum, in place of the $1.40 per hour, demanded by the union; a 40 hour week in place of the 30 hour week demanded by the union; the open shop; an arbitration board, to be presided over by the NRA representative, which would decide grievances from time to time.
Without consulting the union or the men in any way, this spurious “agreement” was circulated broadcast among the striking pickets for the sole purpose of breaking the resistance of the men who might still have respect for the authority and “impartiality” of the NRA. Needless to say, the union immediately exposed this trick by a leaflet warning the men against the fake “agreement”, Rudolph Thiez, business agent of the A.F. of L. Upholsterers Union then upbraided the Colonel in a letter which demanded an explanation for his complicity in the matter.
To pacify the union leaders and the strikers they represent, the Colonel sent the following letter to the boss association:
I am terribly annoyed to find that your association has distributed today a pamphlet of the agreement entered into between yourself and myself.
After all, the agreement was simply a tentative proposition and was not binding on either party and to have circularized that and the use of this organization in an effort to gain your own ends is highly unethical and unwarranted. If those are the tactics that the dealers intend to use, I am sorry to confess that many of the accusations made against you, which I have endeavored to listen to with an open mind and not to take sides, seem to be well founded.
I insist that this statement be refuted by you immediately, as the only purpose of this agreement was to affect a compromise between yourselves with the union, and that during the period of time that these negotiations were on, no statement was to be made publicly or especially thru the issuance of the most dangerous material, such as a broadside.



 


Very truly yours,
Col. Leopold Phillip
Chairman, Bureau of Compliance



He added the following postscript without the knowledge of the union officials:
“This letter was sent to help pacify the labor leaders”.
The whole fraud of the NRA as the impartial arbitrator in strike disputes is here shown up in all its nakedness. After secretly conspiring with the bosses association to put across starvation wages in the industry, the NRA sends a hypocritical “reprimand” to the very elements with whom he made the conspiracy.
* * *
Now, when we have the bosses licked is the time for solid ranks in the strike. Let there be no talk of going back to work. NO FAKE SETTLEMENTS. Without the recognition of the union you are helpless to enforce whatever conditions you have achieved by the strike. Don’t let the boss pull any promises to groups of men in the shop. It’s too late for that. If he wants to settle, make him settle with the union. The time is past for herding upholsterers under the slave conditions of the past 3 years.
 



A spirit of militancy pervades the upholsterers who are in their second week of strike. Over fifty shops, large and small, have already responded to the call issued a week ago, Thursday by local 76 of the American Federation of Labor. The demands are for the 30 hour week and the basic minimum wage of $1.40 per hour. The manufacturers association have failed to bring the strikers back into the shops with promises to live up to the code, especially after the proposed conditions of the code were made public (44 hour week and 34¢ per hour). A roar of laughter went up from the men when this was read off by Brother Moskowitz, chairman of the strike committee. Code or no code, the men are in no mood to be tricked into any condition’s below those demanded by the strike. Every day new shops are pulled. The notoriously scabby Trade shop on Long Island, the backbone of the open shoppers, came down 100%. With the determination the men are now showing the strike is bound to win.
In the midst of the solid spirit of the men, however, is to be found that apathy which is characteristic of men who are coming into the union and into the strike for the first time. It is easier to rely upon leaders than to take active responsibility yourself. Too much work and responsibility is being shoved upon a few individual at the top. As a result, the struck shops do not meet to consider the particular plans of their shop. The daily general strike meeting is not sufficient. The particular problems of the individual shops cannot be taken up there. For example – the “farming out” of work by Lewittes shop to a two by four dump, which threatens to demoralize the men of that shop, could have been avoided if handled by the shop committee. Also a closer tab should be kept by the shop committees on the location and activity of the men, so that at any time the union could put its finger on any sore spot.
We consider it our duty to express our opinion on the question of pulling signed shops during a general strike. The general strike takes precedence over all such agreements. Strikers do not understand why those union men who called them on strike, themselves go back to work on the basis of the old agreement, and not on the basis of the strike demands. The bosses always break agreements when it is to their advantage to do so. Maison Art, for example, introduced piece work into their shop in direct violation of the agreement signed last September with the union. Greenpoint and others all violated the agreement by paying single time instead of time and a half for overtime. A general strike of the trade in all cases takes precedence over extent contracts. No work should, be produced in these shops.
 
What About the Industrial Union?
The Industrial Union, with the calling of the general strike, has adopted an entirely new set of tactics. Knowing that the overwhelming sentiment of the men is for going into the A.F. of L., they have adopted the policy of “helping” the strike, under the slogan of “unity with the rank and file”. In view of the cool reception that their strike demands got from the strikers, they changed them from $1 an hour and the 40 hour week to $1.15 an hour and the 35 hour week. In this respect they are still lagging behind the A.F.L. The excuse of not knowing what
the general strike demands would be, no longer avails them. Their is no reason, except Stalinist disregard tor the interests of the strike, to explain why they did not immediately adopt the strike demands of the majority. Workers are indignant and enraged at what appears to them to be an open bid to the bosses on the part of the Industrial union for settlement on the basis of scab conditions.
And in this connection, we must note the ominous significance of the complete boycott of this strike in the Communist party press. Can this mean that the Party and the TUUL intends to ignore a mass strike simply because it is not under their control? Possibly, since this is not the first strike that has been ignored by the Daily Worker, and major ones at that. But more probably the reason can be found in that they have not yet recovered from the confusion into which they were thrown by the striking upholsterers who voted with their feet to support the A.F. of L.
Now, the members of the Industrial union, who in some respects represent the cream of the industry, have it as their duty to be among the masses of the trade, who are now moving into the ranks of local 76. Just as before the split in 1930, the Left wing can now carry on a much more effective fight for their point of view within the mass union, where they should constitute themselves as the Left wing, the nourishing leaven to the entire movement, leading it in the direction of class struggle and militancy. Especially now, after the mass of strikers have spoken, it is your duty to come back en masse – reintegrate yourselves into the main body of the upholsterers, local 76, in New York and similarly in other cities. Demand of your leaders to do likewise.
 
Win the Strike, Beat the Bosses!
We call on you men in the strike to close your ranks and fight for the realization of the full demands of the strike. You have every opportunity now, if you put your hearts into it, to deal the bosses’ association a crushing blow, and to raise your conditions with one mighty sweep from the miserable status it is now into one of decency, with more leisure to develop yourselves towards a greater measure of control over the conditions of your lives. Fight in solidarity and you will win!



 


For the Left wing group,
Carl Cowl
Sol Lankin



 



Russia: Market or Menace?
By Thomas D. Campbell
Longmanns, Green and Co., New York, Toronto and London 1932. 148 pages.
The appearance of this book urging American business men to develop trade with the Soviet Union by the extension of long-term credits, and eventual legal recognition, makes it instructive to draw a balance of the present state of this question in the ranks of the working class and its vanguard Mr. Campbell is a large scale agricultural capitalist, owner of a 95,000 acre giant farm at Hardin, Montana, a Mechanical and Agricultural Engineer, special expert and adviser to the Soviet Government in 1929–1930 in the development of large scale Soviet farm organization.
He marshals arguments convincing if only from the purely business point of view; for extension of credits:

“It has, during the past fourteen years paid all its obligations promptly and in full”;
 
“For many years to come Russia will be the world’s greatest consumers’ market for all kinds of manufactured goods”;
 
Will relieve American depression;
 
“American banking and financial institutions ... have sold to the American public since the war, two and a half billion dollars of German securities, a portion of which have been used by the Germans to extend credit to Russia.”
 
“Germany has received a flood of orders from Russia including $75,000,000 worth of industrial equipment since April 15, 1931.”
 
Stable Government. “It is my opinion that Russia would not now be the important nation she is, if Joseph Stalin and his supporters had not succeeded in displacing the more violent revolutionists of the Trotsky type ... Stalin is a strategist of another sort, a man who can advance or retreat, thrust or parry, denounce or defend, and still advancing towards his ultimate goal.”The American bourgeoisie will agree with him.

These arguments and others are advance by Campbell to assure timid business men that trade with Russia is a good business proposition, repeating again and again that he is firmly opposed to Communism in any form.
That Campbell represents a live view among certain strata of American manufacturers is attested to by the recent resolutions of the Toledo and Cleveland Chambers of Commerce, basing themselves on a three million dollar loss of orders from the Soviet Union due to the “short-sighted diplomatic policy” of the government, they want an immediate cessation of playing with this question, and demand recognition of the Soviet Union as a basis for revival of certain American industries.
The cry has been taken up by the Democrats in their anti-administration propaganda and proposals have come before congress. It may become a substantial secondary campaign issue in the coming elections.
The slogan of long-term credits and trade with the Soviet Union has a powerful political appeal to workers suffering unemployment in the present crisis. There is no question of the response that the Communist party and its auxiliaries got, after they reluctantly adopted this “counter-revolutionary” slogan because of their hesitant, “tongue-in-the-cheek” policy, however, there has been no real effort to build on this key slogan. Abstract and pacifist slogans of “Defend the Soviet Union” type have been substituted.
In spite of the obvious effectiveness of this slogan in connecting up the fight against capitalist misery directly with the cause of the Workers Republic, little progress has been made in the ranks of the American workers. It still remains for certain business men’s groups to take the lead in this question, motivated by real loss of orders, shut-down of their plants, and panic at the extent of the crisis. How silly the bureaucratic “arguments” about this slogan lending aid to the capitalists in stabilizing their industry. As if credits for the Five Year Plan program would eliminate the gigantic contradictions of chaos and glut in the capitalist market.
A most astounding revelation in this book is the lengths to which Stalin has gone in his false “strategy” of “deceiving the bourgeoisie.” While secret negotiations take place with capitalist magnates and diplomats for recognition and extension of credits as, for example, behind the scenes at Geneva, Sokolnikov in London and Bogdanov of the Amtorg in New York, in these manipulations behind the backs of the workers, the principles of the movement are bartered for a possible recognition or a possible extension of credits. That explains Litvinov’s defection in signing the Kellogg Pact. Not the bourgeoisie but the workers are thus deceived as to the aims of the Workers Republic in the international class war.
But aside from disastrous consequences of the false theory of national socialism in world politics, you have the petty “deception” of the world bourgeoisie thru the medium of Stalin’s interviews – the famous “twofold” policy, talking with one face to the workers and another to the bosses, and occasionally getting the faces mixed.
Campbell reports:
“He (Stalin) unhesitatingly admitted, with disarming frankness, that under Trotsky there had been an attempt to spread Communism throughout the world. He said that was the primary cause of the break between himself and Trotsky. That Trotsky believed in universal Communism while he wanted to confine his efforts to his own country. He explained that they had neither the time nor the money to try to communize the world, even should they wish to do so, and that his own chief interest was to improve the conditions of the people in Russia, without any interference whatsoever from the government of other countries.”
That this is an authentic statement can be shown by the following fact: “Upon leaving, he told me that the interpreter would prepare a typewritten copy of our conversation, which I received two weeks later in London, signed “J. Stalin”, and with this note – “Keep this record, it may be a very historical document some day.” (What arrogant conceit!)
Are the bourgeoisie really fooled by these utterances? Note the wave of editorial irony in the capitalist newspapers about Stalin’s back to capitalism (sic) movement in the questions of the new decree on individual sale of cattle and grain and the piece work system in the factories. They place a correct evaluation on Stalin’s interviews and “twofold” propaganda.
And finally, let us examine the views of the author himself, who so earnestly extolls the virtues of Stalinist leadership.
“Communism” he says, “Thrives only in dark places, the cesspools of the world ... (despite the depression) the producers of America’s manufactured goods were loth to deal with Russia. They held aloof during those first years after the revolution WHEN RUSSIA WAS DOMINATED BY RADICALS OF THE MOST PERNICIOUS BREED, who threatened to overthrow our government and those of the other great nations. Years before the financial crash of 1929, the militant advocates of world revolution have been banished from Russia and expelled from the Communist party which rules Russia’s 160 million people”
“Oh! What a tangled web we weave,
When first we practice to deceive!”
 



MINNEAPOLIS, MINN. Two state conventions of rival reformist parties were held last week in the Twin Cities – the Socialist Party on April 28th at Labor Headquarters, Minneapolis, and the Farmer Labor Party on April 29th and 30th in the St. Paul Auditorium.
To give a brief political characterization of these assemblies, it can be said that aside from the difference in size and excitement, both have adopted on almost identical program of practical reforms with vague references to a new society.
The Farmer-Labor Party of Minnesota is unique in American politics in being the only third party to elect a governor (Floyd B. Olsen), state and congressional officials and a U.S. Senator (Shipstead). It is not surprising, therefore, that the St. Paul auditorium hall was jammed to the doors (about 1,200) with a motley delegation of farmers, bankers, lawyers, labor officials and a sprinkling of rank and file members.
The Socialist Party state gathering of about 50 met in Labor Headquarters, Minneapolis. I say gathering advisedly, since it was not a delegated body, there being no functioning units in the state. All those who “consider themselves as socialists” were invited to attend the state “convention”.
While the F.L.P. declared for a “new social system”, the S.P. called for “the abolition of capitalism”. The S.P. demand for “Unemployment Insurance, full cost to the boss”, is countered by the F.L.P. “federal and state unemployment insurance ... the industries, corporations ... must bear the burden of this protection.” The socialist proposals for a graduated income tax with emphasis on the rich takes the form in the F.L.P. platform of a “graduated, progressive income tax, the proceeds to be used to reduce the present tax burden of the farmer and small home owner.” They both declare for the old-age pension and the shorter work day.
The only point of real difference in the two parties is the purely parliamentary one of national candidates. The Socialists endorsed Norman Thomas and Mayor Hoan of Milwaukee for the head of their national ticket. The F.L.P. leaders apparently plan an election deal with the democrats behind Roosevelt in return for state support of the latter for the F.L.P. candidates. Therefore, when Slonin, late committeeman of the S.P. and delegate to the F.L.P. convention in an impassioned speech, threatened to withdraw from the body if the “fusion” measure passed, a storm of raillery opened up from the floor. The motion to leave the matter in the hands of the state executive committee finally passed. So the clique in control of this going concern is free to make any deal they care to.
In spite of all the ballyhoo of the liberals there is little indication of a national third party ticket. Julius J. Reiter of Rochester reported a conference of the “National Farmer Labor Party” held at Omaha in February. His heated argument for the endorsement of a third party presidential candidate, or at least, the nomination of F.L.P. presidential electors, fell on deaf ears. The prevailing sentiment, as expressed by numerous speakers, was that the capital of the Party was not to the detriment of the offices already achieved in Minnesota.
Although the S.P. convention elected a state executive, state secretary and state organizer, and some half-hearted speeches were made to stage an S.P. “comeback”, there is nothing to indicate that it will not go back to sleep after the elections for another four years ... at least in Minnesota. The putting up of a socialist ticket in the event of the F.L.P. endorsement of Roosevelt might give it a spurt of life – for the period of the campaign – but little more. I say this in view of the fact that in Minnesota the F.L.P. has completely usurped the functions of the S.P. – in fact, the latter is merely a loose faction of the former.
So much for the news. In next week’s Militant the writer will attempt to present a political analysis and draw conclusions with regard to the role of the Communists and the Left Opposition.
 



DULUTH, MINN. In spite of definite threats of a “broken head if he speaks Friday on Trotsky”, comrade Sam Bloomberg, well-known party member and a figure in the Winnipeg General Strikes of 1919, addressed a mass meeting of over 150 attentive workers Friday night in Moose Temple on the Truth About Trotsky, thus breaking through a ring of slander and intrigue maintained by the Stalinists against the Left Opposition for over two years since the occasion when comrade Shachtman last spoke here. The meeting marks a forward step for the Opposition in a city having a militant class-struggle tradition like Duluth.
It was originally scheduled to be held at Camel Hall. But since that hall is also rented on a monthly basis by the Stalinites, the management was pressed into refusing to allow the hall for a Trotsky meeting. As is to be expected, this bureaucratic attempt to suppress the meeting aroused determination on the part of the workers to hear the point of view of the Left Opposition, and, in spite of a blizzard, made our meeting successful. A few party members and a number of T.U.U.L., F.S.U., I.W.O. and ex-Party members were present, in spite of the party decision to boycott the meeting.
Comrade O’Rourke, the chairman, who is an old Duluth militant, a R.R. engineer, opened the meeting and introduced comrade Bloomberg. In an hour and a quarter speech, marked, by brilliant analysis and conviction, Bloomberg told the story of Trotsky and the Left Opposition, the alleged “differences” with Lenin from 1903 on, the theory of socialism in one country, the role of the Left Opposition in bringing the Communist movement back on the base of Marxism-Leninism. “For years I was prejudiced and poisoned against the Left Opposition by the Stalinite press. It took me two years of study and practical observation to convince me that Trotsky is right and that the hope of the international Communist movement rests in the success of the Left Opposition.” Bloomberg’s declaration was well received.
O’Rourke then, introduced comrade Carl Cowl, the secretary of the Minneapolis branch of the Communist League, who spoke on Why the Centrist Bureaucracy Defeated the Left Opposition. Citing the defeats of the proletariat in Bulgaria (1923), Germany (1923), Esthonia (1924), Great Britain (1926), China (1927) and the stabilization of capitalism connected with these catastrophes, together with the weariness engendered in the Russian proletariat after the heroic straining of forces in the years of the revolution and civil war, Cowl explained the new confidence placed in the petty bourgeois strata of the city and village and in the bourgeois elements of the state bureaucracy who gained considerable strength on the basis of the N.E.P. The centrist apparatus, supporting itself on these elements and exploiting the passivity of the proletariat, crushed the Left, revolutionary wing of the Party and revised the principles of Marxism-Leninism. He depicted the lying and disloyal campaign used to poison the minds of the party members. It is necessary to combat their lies with the truth, their disloyalty by comradely methods, their irresponsibility before the working class by serious work. He called on every member of the audience to hear the other side of the question by reading and subscribing to The Militant and Unser Kamf and Young Spartacus and the pamphlets on specific problems before the world working class. Further, those workers who are in agreement with the principles and aims of the Left Opposition, should not hesitate, but should join our ranks and help our cause.
Comrade Carl Skoglund, member of the National Committee of the Communist League, then took the floor on the German elections and gave an analysis of the dangerous and compromising position the Stalinists were leading the German party into. He explained precisely what Fascism is and the stupidity of the slogan: After Fascism – the Workers Dictatorship, which betrays and disarms the German working class in the primary struggle against Fascism. He revealed the figures in the recent elections and exposed the false analysis of “victory” for the Communists who gained a few hundred thousand votes as compared to six million of the Fascists. The German question will not be solved in the elections or in parliament, he said, but in the class struggle, and finally by the united forces of the proletariat against the reaction.
The speakers were harassed with questions and discussion, a few Stalinites adding to the interest of the meeting by raising the old chestnuts about writing in the capitalist press, aiding Bruening and others, some of which actually brought laughter from the audience. There were some serious statements of support together with a recount of a number of incidents in Duluth illustrating wrong party tactics, leading to lack of confidence and disrespect and finally isolation from the workers.
$10.50 worth of literature was sold, and there was a substantial collection. Three subs were gotten and two new members joined the League. Workers, after the meeting, expressed amazement that they could have been so deceived by the Party press and asked for more such meetings. With the present program of adventurism of the party continuing in force, there is every possibility of building a good branch in Duluth which will be able to help restore the confidence and support of the working class in Communism.
 



Recently a worker approached the League and applied for membership. He is sullen, shy, keenly observant, but not very talkative. He said he had just completed a 90 day sentence at the workhouse for participation in the February 25 Hunger Demonstration last year. He had been picked up by the police after the event as a “suspect”, in reality as a hostage pending the arrest of the T.U.U.L. and party organizers of the affair. The breaking into the Gateway Meat Market on that date, the product of the party’s “third period” adventure in Minneapolis, found the party bureaucrats unwilling to go through with the move for which they alone were responsible. When the three rank and file workers were arrested, Karl Reeve, Powers and Grecht, the erstwhile working class heroes on the party payroll, sneaked out of town. The party officially announced they had nothing to do with the affair and refused to participate in the defense of the workers fearing this would implicate it, and be used as prima facie evidence of the party’s responsibility. All idea of working class solidarity was thrown to the winds. The workers of Minneapolis got a lot of secret satisfaction out of the daring act of the demonstrators literally refusing to starve and going into the store and “taking it”. But chagrin was felt at the manner in which the party shamefully deserted the workers arrested, tried and railroaded to the work house.
The flight of Reeve and Powers threw the party into a panic. For months no challenge was made to the edict of the Republican Mayor Kunze against all Communist assembly. The T.U.U.L. headquarters on Hennepin was left open by the police perhaps for the purpose of trapping Powers. The Communist League headquarters, however, were raided twice and meetings broken up. Our headquarters were finally closed. To all appearances, the police department considered the Trotskyists as the more dangerous menace in the given situation.
In the workhouse, the I.L.D. machinery was again gummed up. Or was it deliberate sabotage and cowardice again? The I.L.D. lost a unique opportunity to exploit this local issue along with its national campaign. After all, nothing rallies local workers so much as a case they personally know about. Never for years has there been as good a case. Innocent, framed workers. The I.L.D. officially did nothing for the victims. A few friends brought fruit and cigarettes and very little of that. The boys felt the bureaucrats had betrayed them; and that their own comrades had deserted them. It rankled. They resolved never to be made scapegoats again.
After serving their sentence, one comrade dropped out altogether, one came back into the I.L.D., much “wiser” for the experience, and the third, after several months of thought and study of the situation, joined the Communist Opposition. In his own words he says, “I’m going to do what I can to help put the Communist party back on the right track.”
 



After the successful banquet held last Saturday with comrade Swabeck for the joint benefit of the Militant and the new Jewish organ of the Left Opposition, two public lectures were held: one on the Plight of the MacDonald government in England with lessons for the Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party, which was held right in the 11th Ward F.L.P. headquarters, and the other on the Role of the Left Opposition in the Present Crisis, held at the Labor Lyceum. Though the audience in both cases was not extraordinarily large, it was very attentive and interested in the message of the Opposition spokesman. The meetings were marked by serious questions and discussion from the floor, as well as by certain provocative heckling and speeches by the Stalinists, all of which gave comrade Swabeck an opportunity to deal concretely with the questions raised. One party member reiterated the argument that the Trotskyists were “individualists who would not abide by Communist discipline; and that furthermore, in the face of the mass work the party was doing, the Opposition did nothing but criticize the party.” It was obvious to all after Swabeck’s answer that the very participation of party members in our meetings were a recognition of the revolutionary work the Opposition is carrying on, and that our constructive criticism and conduct in the W.I.R. and the Mooney conference, etc., was rallying increasing numbers of workers to our standard.
In addition, comrade Swabeck addressed the Labor Lyceum Open Forum on the Manchurian Crisis and the Workers Open Forum on the Future of American Trade Unionism, the latter conducted every Sunday Afternoon, 3 p.m. at 1530 East Franklin Ave.
Nearly seventy dollars was raised from these meetings and a number of subscriptions to Opposition papers, especially to Unser Kamf, the new Jewish organ. We hope soon again to get a speaker from the National Center.
 



The results of the successful mass meetings and anti-war demonstration in Duluth are excellent for further organization work for the Communist League. After the meeting previously reported in the Militant, the Party held an anti-war meeting at Court House Square recently in which we publicly advertised that we would participate. For this reason, all the speakers turned their guns on the Left Opposition, the meeting turned into an anti-Trotsky revival. We refused to be provoked, expect when one emboldened bureaucrat said, “I challenge comrade Bloomberg to come up here and deny this!” Bloomberg immediately accepted the challenge and moved to the platform. “No, no”, shouted the speaker in regret, “we don’t want to hear what you got to say!” “Why did you invite me?” asked Bloomberg simply and the crowd roared.
We issued a challenge to the Party, the following day to a debate on the question of their base slander that Trotsky is an enemy of the working class. 1,200 workers came down to the square. This was one of the biggest mass meetings held on the streets of Duluth in recent times. This turnout decisively proves that the workers and especially the Left wing do want to know the truth about the struggle of Trotsky and the Left Opposition. What they want to know especially is how this relates with the day to day struggle of the working class. And this we were prepared to tell them.
The party bureaucrats had organized a squad of hecklers and even hoped to be able to capture the platform. But we hit every attempt squarely on the nose by exposing their tactics before the workers present. The workers understood the reactionary role the Party plays in organizing to break up meetings, and create disturbances and in mass threatened the individual party hoodlums to be quiet or go home. When a vote was put whether to go on with the meeting or not, a forest of hands voted yes, and a solitary hand voted no. The hoodlums feared to vote lest it would be construed as “participation” in our meeting. From that time on the din lessened. “What is your program?” shouted a YCLer. “That is exactly what we are here to explain,” we answered, and proceeded to over program of unity of the working class as a whole on the basis of the united front, and of the Communist party on the basis of Marxism-Leninism.
The party was decisively defeated in their attempt at disruption, but we were not able on this night to complete our speaking program. We therefore announced our third and concluding mass meeting for the following night, where about 800 workers assembled and listened attentively to our message. Comrade Avrin spoke on the Washington massacre. Comrade Bloomberg related the history and problems of the Left Opposition. Comrade Cowl gave the united front policy of the League in the organization of the Unemployed. The Party members this time listened without making a peep. Only once Gardner shouted: “Look what a jackass Bloomberg is making of himself.” The speaker snapped right back: “After your performance last night, there is no doubt in anybody’s mind who is the jackass!” The crowd laughed their appreciation. A number of new party members and sympathizers asked serious questions after the program and discussed before the crowd until after eleven which is a late hour in this town.
The methods we used in handling the Party members were completely vindicated by the results we obtained. What remains to be done however is some intensive organization work in Duluth with the view of organizing a branch, a youth group and possibly an auxiliary. The Minneapolis comrades who have been organizing the work in Duluth will endeavor to follow up in an effort to establish a firm foundation for the Left Opposition in Duluth.
 



Every industrial city in the United States today has its “Hooverville”. Patriotic citizens consider them blights and attempt to disperse them or to cover them up. In each city, provided you look, you will find them ... under bridges, on vacant dumps, near garbage plants ...
In St. Louis, for example, there are several under the great Mississippi span. In Chicago, they are scattered, usually on condemned city property; Akron and Cleveland have theirs on the outskirts; Minneapolis on the river “cliffs”. And so on.
They are standing condemnations of the capitalist system, and it is not surprising that social workers and lackeys of big business studiously avoid this aspect of human degradation. For that reason serious students of American conditions should analyse this phenomenon from the standpoint of a decreased eruption on the surface of capitalist economy.
On first observation, they appear to be glorified “jungles”, spots – every town in the country has them – where migratory workers hide improvised cooking equipment. Closer inspection reveals a totally different purpose and mood. The jungle spirit is carefree, transient, on the go; here, however, you find the haggard, despairing psychology of men driven to the last extreme, their spirits at the breaking point.
 
What Capitalism Has In Store for Us
If the readers of The Militant would really like to see a typical American “Hooverville”, if they are not already in one – let them go down to Youngstown, in the heart of America’s steel industry. There, on the 5 or 6 acres behind the municipal incinerator plant, they will see in brutal outline, the squalor and destitution resulting from the capitalist mode of production. Here is a picture of what capitalism has in store for us when we are no longer necessary for profit making.
Upward of 1,000 shacks, huts or shelters hastily constructed from radio containers, boxes, crates, etc., some just large enough for a man to crawl into out of the weather, some buried in holes in the ground, on property that has for years been the dumping ground of filth, are the homes of several hundred men, who, having spent the best years of their lives in the steel mills and coal mines of Ohio and Pennsylvania, are now literally thrown on the garbage heap to starve, or – to claw over the miserable refuse collected each morning by the City Sanitary Department. You will not believe it till you see it. Restaurant cast-offs make the choicest morsels. The alternative is the notorious “soup line.” The men prefer to mull over garbage than to expose themselves to the miserable soup. It is almost impossible to beg food in Youngstown because of the large numbers of the hungry.
The writer personally interviewed a number of these men. It was easy to see that they are not of the hobo type. Their calloused hands and powerful frames are not characteristic of the lumpenproletariat. They are men who have spent 10, 20 and 30 years of their lives in the steel mills, in the coal mines, in the rubber mills of Akron and on the Great Lakes traffic. They are men who have learned the industry from the bottom. They know steel, how it is made, how coal is mined, all about rubber, railroads, shipping. Step by step the ruthless Plutocracy of Steel has crushed them with the brutal club of starvation and exposure. Recently they built a sign over the huts with this legend: HOOVER CITY. The local bourgeoisie considered this a dangerous affront to their rule. And rightly so. They swooped down on them with a threat that they would be driven off even this property, and they demonstratively destroyed the sign.
 
II
The Steel industry is shot to hell. Never operating at more than 85% of capacity at the peak of prosperity, it now functions at 10%. or less. In Youngstown, the Brier Hills Mills, subdivision of the Youngstown Sheet and Tube, consisting of two blast and 12 open hearth furnaces, closed down completely in April. Carnegie steel has been working two to four days a week since 1929 and closed down June 24th for good. Only the Republic Steel seems to be able to eke out one or two days a week, and that only in some departments. Others are closed down completely.
Less than 15% of the workers in the entire steel industry are now employed. Those still working part time have been cut 10% in October 1931 and again 15% on May 15 of this year As if that were not enough, the vicious “deductions’’’ system assails every pay envelope. These are taken out of the workers’ wages without his consent. First, Life Insurance (only for period of employment, on the “group” basis); then, Community Chest (”make the workers pay their own damn relief!”); then, Unemployment Relief (which means nothing to those permanently laid off). It is therefore not uncommon to see pay envelopes of 50c and 75c for the week. This will serve to indicate how near to “Hoover City” even the employed workers are.
It would seem as though there is absolutely no way of housing these unemployed workers except in crates and filth. It would seem as though the housing problem is insoluble. Still there are more empty houses and buildings in Youngstown today than there have ever been in its entire history. Those that are occupied hardly yield rent. Large sections of the population have simply ceased paying rent. Landlords encourage the better class of tenants to remain or to move in on the prospect of future rent – or at least to protect the property from vandalism done to plumbing and fixtures. Most of the buildings have fallen into the hands of the bankers, who can’t take care of their property themselves. Only under capitalism is the housing problem insoluble.
In the poorer sections, evictions go on apace. Gas and electricity are promptly shut off. City water was cut off to 4,000 families in the middle of June. Of the 50,000 workers in the city of Youngstown, approximately 42,000 are on the relief list and these have been officially warned by the city fathers that there will be no more relief after July. Will these workers be cast into “Hoover City”? Can’t the bankers, bloated with wealth, see the handwriting on the wall, the spectre of Communism embracing these destitute workers? Will they not understand that this misery marks the decay of capitalism an the end of their system?
 
The Creed of Capitalism
I think not. As a class they are too selfish, too stupid. Engels has magnificently described their attitude in his Conditions of the Working Class in England in 1844. He says:
“I have never seen a class so deeply demoralized, so incurably debased by selfishness, so corroded within, so incapable of progress, as the English bourgeoisie ... For it nothing exists in the world, except for the sake of money, itself not excluded. It knows no bliss save that of rapid gain, no pain save that of losing gold. In the presence of this avarice and lust of gain it is not possible for a single human sentiment or opinion to remain untainted ... It is utterly indifferent to the bourgeois whether his workingmen starve or not, if only he makes money. All the conditions of life are measured by money, mid what brings no money is nonsense, impractical, idealistic bosh. Hence, political Economy, the Science of Wealth, is the favorite study of these bartering Jews. The relation of the manufacturer to his operatives has nothing human in it ... He could reach his highest perfection in a wholly ungoverned anarchic society where each might exploit the other to his heart’s content. Since, however, the bourgeoisie cannot dispense with government, but must have it to hold the equally indispensable proletariat in check, it turns the power of government against the proletariat and keeps out of its way as far as possible.”
The class interests of the bourgeoisie are identical the world over, and this description is particularly applicable to the American ruling class. One can find no better characterization of the capitalist attitude towards relief and charity than the following remarks of Engels in the same book:
“Philanthropic institutions, forsooth: As though you rendered the proletarians a service, first sucking out their very life blood and then practising your self-complacent, Pharisaic philanthropy upon them, placing yourselves before the world as mighty benefactors of humanity when you give back to the plundered victims the hundredth part of what belongs to them!”
 



DULUTH, MINN.
A rousing open air meeting was held Sunday night by the Communist League on the Court House Square. Listening attentively to an excellent speaking program, 600 workers applauded vigorously the fight of the Left Opposition for the unity of the Communist movement on the basis of Leninism. For the first time on the streets of Duluth the truth about the Chinese revolution and the crisis in Germany was told. Comrades Dunne and Skoglund, respectively, clarified these questions and demonstrated the international basis for the struggle of the Opposition, especially the menace of Fascism in Germany, which now constitutes the main danger to the Soviet Union.
Comrade Bloomberg’s analytical report of the four national conventions of the political parties held in Chicago was frequently interrupted by stormy applause. In a speech filled with fighting exposure of the Republican and Democratic platforms, and satire and scorn for the Socialist party platform, he called on the workers to rally behind the Communist party candidates in the coming elections.
It was not until the collection that the party bureaucrats became concerned. Some minor functionary called out to the audience that the money collected was not going to the Communist party. We can sympathize with the anxiety of one who makes a living from such collections on the street, but, as comrade Bloomberg immediately pointed out, the chairman, Miles Dunne, had openly announced the meeting under the auspices of the Communist League. All funds are to be listed for our publication and organization work. The audience responded splendidly.
Comrade Cowl then made an appeal for the unity of the Communists in the name of the Communist League. He urged all class-conscious workers to demand of the party bureaucrats a cessation of their splitting tactics concealed under pseudo-revolutionary slogans of social Fascism and their slander against the Left Opposition. He challenged the hecklers to debate the disputed questions then and there or any other time or place they might designate. Workers who accept our program for reform of the party should not hesitate to support our press and join our ranks.
Instead of rushing to the defense of the position of the party as self-respecting Communists should, the Stalinists proceeded to start another meeting in the center of the crowd, amidst boos and angry shouts of the workers, who saw that the issue at stake in this instance was clearly the attempt of the party to break up the meeting, after they had been invited to participate.
One Stalinist bureaucrat, with the bureaucrat’s contempt for the wishes of the working class, sneeringly launched a tirade of mud-slinging and personal slander against the character of Trotsky and the record of Bloomberg and Cowl. All of which, as is to be expected, left the audience cold. So that it was not difficult, in the midst of comrade Sara Avrin’s speech on the “Washington Massacre” to bring the entire audience, with the exception of the few faithful, to the other side of the monument which served as our platform. Here our meeting continued with greatly increased interest and closed with a number of questions and discussion. We called on all the workers present to participate in the anti-war demonstration the following night.
As these lines are written for the current issue of the Militant, a public challenge to the Communist party to debate the proposition: That Trotsky Is an Enemy of the Working Class has been issued in the capitalist press by the Communist League for Tuesday night on Court House Square. The results of this meeting and other organization work in Duluth will be reported in the next issue of the Militant.



 


C.C.



 



The strike wave launched by the general strike of the hotel and restaurant workers in New York has spread to the taxicab industry. 30,000 cab drivers went on strike today. The last straw which let loose the accumulation of bitter grievances was the disposition of the 5 cent tax on all rides. The cab companies want the money collected so far, estimated at between half a million and two million, to go to them as part of their gross income. But the men demand it on the ground that their pay, which averaged from seven to ten dollars for a ten-hour day, six-day week, was not enough to keep them alive, and that the tax was really coming out of their tips.
The strike is spreading like wildfire. Even the capitalist newspapers have been forced to admit this. The New York Evening Journal admitted on February 2 that, “they crippled service at the Grand Central Terminal, for example, that scarcely one cab was available there – generally there are five hundred.” “The scene at the Pennsylvania Station was worse, if anything”. This condition prevails at all railroad and steamship terminals in the city. The boss press estimates the number of men on strike at only ten thousands. That this is an obvious and deliberate understatement, will be a clear to all workers who have seen how they lied about the strength of the hotel strike.
All the big companies are tied up. The Parmelee System, Yellow Taxicab Corporation, Keystone, Five Boro, Radio, Terminal, General and Checker have been forced to admit that they are crippled.
Old-timers who have been through other strikes say this is one of the greatest demonstrations of solidarity in the history of the industry. By a unanimous vote of the strike meeting of the United Taxi Drivers Union of Greater New York, every cab was ordered off the street. At the time of the strike vote there were six thousand men in the union, headquarters and the strike halls. Thousands are pouring into union to sign up.





The following are the demands of the striking drivers:

The entire “tax” to the drivers.
The 8 hour 6 day week (48 hours).
No firing for low bookings.
Elimination of political and insurance racketeers.
Eliminate police persecution.
Against the vicious blacklist system.
No double shifts.
Recognition of the Union.




 



MINNEAPOLIS – Twelve thousand people jammed the Minneapolis Municipal Auditorium and five thousand more were turned away from the monster unemployment protest meeting called April 23rd by the Organization and Education Committee of the Central Labor Union.
 
Unemployment Severe
This turnout proves positively the deep-growing inroads unemployment has made into the lives of Minneapolis workers and demonstrates how they will respond to a [call] to aid themselves during the present crisis in industry. The railroads are putting into effect a 15% reduction in payroll. The building trades see no great pickup in spring building. Layoff, speedup, and wage-cuts are the order of the day. Only the Ford plant seems to be running full blast with 3,300 men, but they also are planning a short season. All conditions were excellent for a packed meeting. The Auditorium was donated by the City Council. Floyd B. Olson, the Farmer-Labor Candidate for governor was the big drawing card. Walter Frank, R.D. Cramer and other labor officials scheduled to speak, Eddie Dunsteder, the theatre organist; and the Kiddie Review, to amuse the crowd.
The stage was set. Amplifiers broadcasted the speeches to every corner of the building. Thousands roamed the corridors trying to sneak in against the Fire Marshall’s orders. Yet with all these favorable circumstances the meeting lacked spirit. The speakers quibbled and hedged with the main problems ... the chain store hokum was stressed ... buy union label card goods and solve unemployment ... vote tor Floyd B. Olson for governor: Labor’s friend. Walter Frank’s attempt at a real analysis was weak and lacked any concrete proposals for the solution of unemployment, which the workers could profit from.
It is not surprising that over one half the audience dribbled out before the main speaker got the floor. The reason was obvious: No program was laid down to combat and abolish unemployment. Workers know and no spellbinders can convince them otherwise, that the union label hocus-pocus is no solution for unemployment) or any other big problem of the labor movement. Frank’s vague reference to an “industrial and political democracy” which he somehow picked up in his brief stay in the Communist movement is a cheap “socialist” fig-leaf concealing his seat on the Olson bandwagon.
 
Cramer Has Ross Pinched
And behind the scenes what do we find? We find a connivance with the police to prevent a real message getting to the workers. The only piece of literature on unemployment distributed at that meeting was put out by the Communist League. R.E. Cramer, editor of the Labor Review, who apparently has influence at police headquarters ordered the literature banned. The cops led us a merry chase and finally arrested Joe Ross who is a member of Cramer’s own local, and well known for his activity in the Brooks Parlor Furniture strike. Cramer claims that these leaflets were likely to disrupt the meeting. This proves Cramer’s lack of faith and hypocritical disbelief in his own program—or lack of it. Eight thousand of the leaflets were distributed.
It should be noted that the Communist Party in line with its latest tactics “boycotted” this mass meeting of workers as “social-fascist” and went off to talk to itself on Bridge Square about the Communist duty to go to the masses.
The success and fine spirit of the May Day meeting held by the Communist League proved the correctness of our program of working among the masses of workers.
The May Day parade, what it lacked in numbers, made up in spirit and the “Trotskyites” contributed most of the spirit. We introduced the singing of revolutionary songs on the line of march.
The terms “counter-revolutionary” and “renegade which so sneeringly rolls off the tongues of Party bureaucrats these days ring rather hollow and stir resentment in the hearts of non-Party workers, who on revolutionary holidays like May 1st want to see unity of Communist forces before the masters.
 



Minneapolis, Minn.
Dear Comrades:
No doubt, by the time this appears in the Militant, the Freiheit will have reported another victory for the Party in the Minneapolis Independent Workmen’s Circle, Branch 89, It seems that the more decisively the Party defeats itself in the mass organizations with its “barricade” policies the more triumphantly it proclaims victories.
The scene this time, was the election of a delegate to the special convention of the order to be held in Boston, January 12, 1930. After weeks of campaigning in the Freiheit, and caucusing with every element willing to negotiate, Moses was finally able to gather together a motley support for himself at the meeting.
In the front rank of the supporters of the Communist party policy and its candidate stood such gentry as H. Supak, well-known needle trades boss, S. Segal, proprietor of a men’s garment shop, Shulberg novelty perfume manufacturer, and others of this ilk. This alliance is an excellent illustration of how extreme “Leftism” in theory goes hand in hand with open opportunism in practice. Moses is the same one we have many times exposed for the same practices while in the Party. This is the same Moses who shrieked for our expulsion as “renegades” and “counter-revolutionaries”.
Now although the open support of the bosses contributed somewhat to the defeat of the Party, the outstanding honors in all Justice, must be given to comrade Saltzman himself. Moses, it seems, was doing a fairly good job organizing his group in preparation for the elections, when the aforementioned strode upon the scene. First on learning that I. Berg, secretary of the local branch, was nominated in opposition to Moses, he launched a campaign of attack against him and all those who might support him as “Trotskyists,” “renegades” and “counter-revolutionaries”, although Friend Berg is quite innocent of the charge.
In reality, Berg is a typical Left wing I.W.C. worker of whom there are hundreds in the organization, loyal, painstaking and unalterably opposed to the policy of the party in the Independent, and to Moses, whom the party has entrusted with the execution of that policy. No factor contributed more towards crystallizing opposition to the party than the charge that all those who supported Berg as a delegate to the convention were “Trotskyites”, “renegades” and counter-revolutionaries. Every self-respecting Left winger, not befoozled by the new phraseology (and many who were) rebelled against this schoolmaster threat and voted overwhelmingly for Berg, though normally their vote might have gone to the party.
It is regrettable that our own comrades did not clearly take the lead for the position of the Communist Opposition. No clear voice was raised in defence of Communism and the Communist party as against the distortions and hysteria of the present party misleadership. It is true that the provocations of the Party bring out passionate rebellion from honest proletarians, but a Leninist direction must be given to this healthy movement, or it will be lost in the swamp of reaction and may become anti-Communist in character. It is above all essential at present for the comrades of the Opposition to clearly define before the membership its policy on all questions pertaining to the future of the order. A means must be given the Left wing (now repulsed by the Party) of rallying around Left traditions and preserve them against the black hand of reaction now reaching out for control of the order.
And this raises the question of the immediate development of a definite Left wing group in the Independent, one which will openly, militantly and clearly speak and act for Communist principles, criticising the maneuvers and phrasemongering of the Party and resolutely fighting for the presentation of proletarian policies within the order.



 


C.C.



 



Since Lenin Died
by Max Eastman
Labour Publishing Company, London, 1925, 158 pages.
The fact that this book earned the concentrated scorn of the latter-day Comintern leadership, should immediately interest all Communists suffering under the deluge of “anti-Trotskyist” verbiage distributed in recent years under the guise of Leninism. Aspirants to leadership, in all English-speaking countries, from Rothstein to Browder, finding the thorny path of fight against capitalism not so promising, have turned with enthusiasm to slinging mud at the Russian Opposition and its leader, comrade Trotsky. But the authority of these slanderers of the revolution is shortlived. This book is one of the nails in their political coffin.
Coming fresh from the Thirteenth Party Congress of the Russian Party (May 1924) and the hysterical campaign leading up to Trotsky’s resignation as president of the Revolutionary Military Soviet in January 1925, Max Eastman was the first to publish the authentic documents of the controversy in English. He was in Russia during the whole development of the fight, witnessed the consolidation of the shady opponents of Leninism under the crafty leadership of the “Triumvirate”. The book is valuable to us now because in it are published the original documents, theses, letters and press articles of the period. These documents have already been supplemented, amplified and a thousand times verified in the writings of comrade Trotsky and other leaders of the Russian Opposition. Also by the shamefaced confessions of Zinoviev, Kamenev, etc. when they were no longer of use to Stalin.
Eastman will be remembered for unswerving courage and determination in the face of the solid mass of howling bureaucrats, to speak the truth and prove it. He has the honor of being one of the first to be expelled from the American Party for supporting the Russian Opposition. He certainly was the first to bring the documents and platform of the Russian Opposition out of the “illegality” imposed by Stalin and into the light of day.
Price: Cloth, $1; paper, 50 cents. Order through the Militant
 



The needle trades strike in Minneapolis, embracing about 300 workers in the men’s clothing industry is the largest manifestation of revolt against the miserable open shop conditions existing in this city for a number of years. The strike, called by Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America, found fertile ground. Since the first shop struck 10 weeks ago, 4 other shops have followed suit. Four large shops must yet be called out. Workers in every industry of this city, long famed as a lush field for exploitation, are watching the outcome of the strike. The spreading and winning of the strike will give tremendous impetus and inspiration to the organization of the unorganized workers of Minneapolis.
A review of the handling of the strike to date will give us some conception of the forces in operation, and the direction in which the strike is going. If we are at all to understand the situation and give guidance to the workers, we must look at the facts as they are. The calling of the strike 10 weeks ago, in spite of the lack of preparation, resulted in the walkout of four of the smaller overcoat and leather shops. The workers, ready and willing to put up a militant fight for better conditions were held together by the promise of a general strike of the entire industry in Minneapolis. It seems that the words and deeds of the leadership of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America are at variance and sharply so. In the weeks that have elapsed since the calling of the strike, a marked reluctance to spread the strike on the part of the A.C.W. heads, Kaminsky, Genis, and Rosenbloom is apparent. They avoid the organization of the ladies’ garment workers, furriers, etc., employed in the struck shops with the excuse that “We invite no jurisdictional disputes with the I.L.G.W.U., Furriers, Cloak-makers: we cannot go into their fields”, and then they make no effort to get these other unions to act.
The agreement with the Excell shop signed three weeks ago above the heads of the workers, has created, along with the reactionary policy of the leadership, a very serious situation among the strikers. The agreement, undated, grants tentatively the more harmless demands of the union; the 44 hour week, pay for seven legal holidays, time and a half for overtime, recognition of the union. The vital question, that of piecework rates, is left unsettled – the agreement specifies that the workers continue at the old rate till the other shops settle, with the union. With the shortening of the work week, this results in a cut in wages.
What does this mean in actuality? What effect has this great “victory” on the morale of the strikers? The workers feel that the Excell Manufacturing Co. boss and not the workers is deriving the benefit of this agreement. They are putting out his work. He is obtaining new and large orders lost by the struck shops. Now he is using the agreement as a club over their heads when they demand a raise in the piece-rates. The strikers in the other shops feel that if the strike nets them a cut in wages, why fight for the union? On the other hand, in the eyes of Kaminsky, Genis, and Rosenbloom, the Excell Manufacturing Co., is a shining example to the bosses of Minneapolis that the Amalgamated Clothing Workers Union is no danger to business, but rather, a benefit. Furthermore the Amalgamated Bank, in taking over Excell’s notes foreclosed through the influence of the Citizens’ Alliance, at the same time compels the union to supply “passive” workers without “labor trouble”, or else risk losing the notes.
The puny-minded Stalinites, “stalwart leaders of the workers in fierce class battles” have found in the new “revolutionary” trade union line of the party a new excuse for deserting the workers in this strike. Under the false and non-Leninist slogan that all existing unions cannot serve the interests of the working class, they are capitalizing this situation to demonstrate that the old unions are fake unions, that the strike is a fake strike, that the only recourse for the workers is to abandon the old union, and join the new “mass” needle trades union (locally consisting of five members). The strikers are a thousand times more loyal to the strike than the Stalinites believe, and are bitter against the Party’s leaflets denouncing the strike. They do not seek to abandon, but to win the strike. And finally, it is significant to note, the Daily Worker “fearless organ of the revolutionary masses”, has not been able to find space to mention this strike – even in ridicule. With its present policy the Party is a nonentity in this strike situation.
The crying need at present is the organization and development of a militant Left wing group to fight the fight of the workers, broadening and deepening the strike into every field in the industry. Thru the initiative of the Communist League such a group has been formed. Pressure must be exerted in the strike for the demands of the workers for organization and better conditions. That pressure, to become effective, must be a result of the concerted and organized demand of the strikers themselves. The tasks which the Left wing must set itself and take responsibility for are heavy. Each militant step towards winning the strike will come from this group, determined to push forward the interests of the garment workers, in spite of a reactionary leadership and a cynically “disillusioned” Party, to victory. Our slogan is:
FOR A HUNDRED PERCENT ORGANIZED NEEDLE TRADES INDUSTRY!
MAKE THE STRIKE GENERAL!
INITIATE A GENERAL ORGANIZATION CAMPAIGN IN MINNEAPOLIS!
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (7. Imperialism)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Lesson Seven
Imperialism

A. Development of Corporations, Cartels and Trusts
Large scale production needs a great deal of capital. By selling shares of ownership in the form of stocks, the corporation acquires the use of great quantities of capital. These shares entitle their owners to a part of the profits made by the corporation, which thus utilizes the savings of small capitalists. Furthermore, corporation law absolves the individual capitalist from the corporation debts if it fails, contrary to a partnership in which each partner is liable in full.
Corporations sharpen competition between capitalists. There are now fewer capitalists but each is a more powerful competitor. To prevent the suicide of long, exhaustive price-cutting wars, corporations strive to eliminate competition by combining into trusts and syndicates, hoping to dominate the market, keep prices up and centralize control of capital. We live today in an era of monopoly production by trusts.
 
B. Finance Capital
Because huge industrial enterprises require vast amounts of capital for success, the banks become an all-important factor. Only through banks can the industrial capitalists secure the quantities of capital required to float modern enterprises. By making loans to factories, railroads, mines, etc., bank capital becomes industrial capital. In turn, industrial capital increases the growth of bank capital. Thus finance capital binds together all branches of industry.
Now, banks lend money not to one firm, but to many. They are interested to see all these firms make a profit. This means the banks must try to eliminate competition among the firms to which they lend money. The tendency of banking or finance capital, therefore, is to unite whole industries and even groups of industries under its direction. The penetration of bank capital into industry finally results in two or three financial groups assuming control of all the resources and industry of the country. In the United States for example, J.P. Morgan heads not only an all-important banking system, but also U.S. Steel Corporation, General Motors etc. Andrew Mellon’s banking house controls, among other enterprises, the Aluminum Trust. In each great capitalist country today, a financial oligarchy holds sway over the economic and financial (and, consequently, the political and military) forces of that country.
Definitions:
Syndicate is a trade agreement between competing firms as to prices and territory (you sell in once district; we in another; at set prices). A trust is a complete merging of competitors. The entire control and management of the individual companies is vested in the hands of the new Board. A combine is a union of trusts in several industries. (Example: General Electric, U.S. Steel. They control the mining, transportation, smelting and finishing industries connected with the process of production.) Finance Capital is banking capital which has penetrated industry and controls it. A capitalist country today, economically speaking, is an immense combine headed by the banks. The government is its executive committee.
 
C. Policy of Colonial Expansion
In the previous lesson we learned that the capitalist tries to overcome the falling rate of profit by a more ruthless exploitation of the working class – speed-up, lowering conditions, decreased wages, increased hours – to extract more and more surplus values. Later he learned that by exporting capital to backward countries, he realizes a higher rate of profit (more variable, less constant capital).
The export of capital is a relatively recent phenomenon. In the early 19th century, the era of free competition and free trade, export was mostly in finished goods such as textiles, shoes, pots, etc. In this period, England was the dominant capitalist country of the world and “the predominant bourgeois policy of England was against colonial policy and considered the liberation of the colonies, their complete severance from England, an inevitable and useful step.” Colonies were considered milestones to progress.
By the latter half of the 19th century, England began to feel the competition of the growing industry of Germany, France and the United State. It became more profitable to exploit the cheap labor and natural resources of the backward region, to transfer production to colonial and semi-colonial countries, than to export goods to these regions. Export of capital expanded more rapidly than export of goods. But the export of capital results in the creation of competitive industry in the colonial country which tends to drive out products of the mother country. Furthermore, it creates a colonial proletariat and aggravates unemployment at home.
 
D. Policy Of War
Because profit from export of capital is greater than that from export of goods, the struggle over investment of capital sharpens. In this struggle the capitalists of the advanced countries strive to get political as well as economic control of the backward region. They bring pressure on it through manipulating loans to get favorable treaties, restriction or excluding imperialist rivals. Furthermore, capital investments have to be protected from harm. In order to do so the capitalists have to actually own or control the backward countries they invested in.
There arises a terrific competition for the acquisition of colonies and spheres of influence. Finance capital tends to eliminate competition within the nation, but aggravates it between nations. Capitalist competition takes on a world form in which entire nations are mobilized in a contents for survival. The process of partitioning the world among the great powers cannot be a peaceful one.
“The economic wars of capitalists expansion, of tariff and exchange and armament and competitive exploitation reach a point where the attempt is made to find a political solution of the economic and social contradictions through war, open and undisguised: imperialist-inspired wars between subject nations; wars of subjugation by imperialist powers against subject peoples, and the converse of these, peoples against their imperialist oppressors; the world-wide war of the imperialist nations among themselves ... Modern war is the very essence of imperialists-capitalism, as much a part of capitalism as wage-labor. To speak of capitalism without war is like speaking of human being without lungs. The fate of one is inextricably bound to the fate of the other.” (Imperialism – Lenin)
By 1871 the division of the entire earth among the great powers was complete. Between 1898 and 1905 the first redivision of the earth had taken place. In the world war of 1914–17 occurred the second great redivision. The crisis beginning in 1929 marked the beginning of the third great redivision of the earth. Nations coming late into the imperialist arena demand a “more justifiable” redivision of world markets. Prior to 1914, Germany, having developed the most powerful industrial apparatus in Europe, aggressively faced Great Britain and France who had already taken the best portions of the world. The United States had not yet saturated its own tremendous internal market. It was still a debtor nation. The struggle for world markets was therefore chiefly between Great Britain and Germany. In order to get an outlet to Asia and Africa. Germany sought to establish a trunk line from Berlin to Bagdad. First she had to have control over Central Europe – Austria-Hungary, Serbia, Bulgaria and Turkey. Of these she had all but Serbia. The Balkan War of 1912 was fought to annex Serbia. She failed.
In 1914 Germany utilized the assasination of the Archduke of Austria as an excuse to annex Serbia. Gt. Britain and France opposed this. The War was on. American capitalism wished for the defeat of Great Britain since it was her leading rival in the Western Hemisphere. This was clearly expressed in the policy of “neutrality” of Wilson, candidate of the Rockefeller group of financiers, whose oil policy called for defeat of its most powerful oil rival, Great Britain. Since Germany was winning, neutrality aided the winner. But Germany could not reach the U.S. and the Allies could. American capitalists could not resist the juicy investments and loans at high interest afforded by the Allies. Only when these loans were threatened did it become the interest of American capitalism to side with the Allies. Although Germany was defeated in the World War, Great Britain has now a more powerful rival in the United States, which has become the world’s greatest exporter of capital. The American dollar has displaced the pound everywhere in the Western Hemisphere with the exception of Brazil and the Argentine. Even here American investments have gained at the expense of G.B. since 1914. In an attempt to win Argentina away from G.B. the U.S. organized the Pan-American conference and Roosevelt’s “Good Will” tour. She failed in the attempt.
EUROPE: Although American capital has supplanted British in Europe, she has been unable to equal the sale of goods, due to the stronger political influence of Britain. Another factor is Europe’s retaliation to the high American tariff barriers.
ASIA: British investments in Asia, Africa and Australia outweigh the American, in China, for example, five to one; but, due to U.S. industrial superiority, it sells 13 times as much for every dollar invested as does Britain. Asia will most likely be the prize over which the next world war will be fought.
JAPAN: Britain has tried to form an alliance with Japan against U.S. But they are both leading textile exporters. This weakens the alliance. When Japan invaded Manchuria in 1931–32 England was indifferent because American interests in the main, were undermined. In the present invasion, Britain is the loser. U.S. has refused to protest the bombing of Shanghai since ¾ of British investments in China are there, but caused a stir over the attack on Nanking which is an Amrican sphere of influence.
NEUTRALITY: The U.S. was for “neutrality” in the Ethiopian and Spanish wars because that helped undermine Britain. In the Sino-Japanese war, U.S. has the opposite policy, because here the danger of Japanese victory means closing the door of China to American trade. To wage war against Japan, U.S. must have an Asiatic ally, either China or the Soviet Union.
SOVIET UNION: When the Wall Street base in Manchuria was undermined in 1931–1932, American capitalism almost immediately signed the Roosevelt-Litvinoff agreement. The weakness of this type of agreement is that it means a pressure on Stalin to form an alliance with Germany. Conversely, an alliance of England and Russia is hampered by the danger of a German-Japanese bloc. A British-German bloc would break France away from England and toward Italy, bursting the Rome-Berlin axis.
 
E. Militarism
The above illustrates the complexity of the preparations for the coming world war. To be prepared for war constitutes the major policy of the imperialists. They build huge armies; larger and technically superior navies and air fleets. They systematically poison the minds of the working class with nationalistic propaganda and prejudices. Disarmament conferences, League of Nations, Collective Security – all these are smokescreens behind which the real jockeying for position and alliances of one group of nations against another take place. Big armies and navies are designed not only for suppression of colonials and to defeat rival powers, but also to maintain “law and order” at home – for the suppression of strikes, demonstrations, insurrections and other “domestic disturbances.”
 
F. Fascism
It has been pointed out how capitalism in its imperialist and decaying stage exploits the working class with increasing ruthlessness. This arouses the workers to resistance. To meet this resistance the capitalists turn to Fascism as a means of heading off the revolutionary will of the masses. Fascism arises when finance capital can no longer afford to hide its dictatorship behind democratic forms of government.
Fascism is not a different economic system from capitalism. It modifies certain aspects of capitalism, just as in war-time other aspects are modified. Fascism is the last resort of finance capital in defence of the system.
“Through the Fascist agency, capitalism sets in motion the masses of the crazed petty bourgeoisie, and bands of the declassed and demoralized lumpenproletariat; all the countless human beings whom finance capital itself has brought to desperation and frenzy ... The Fascist agency, by utilizing the petty bourgeoisie as a battering ram, by overwhelming all obstacles in its path, does a thorough job. After Fascism is victorious finance capital gathers into its hands, as in a vice of steel, directly and immediately, all the organs and institutions of sovereignty, the executive, administrative and educational powers of the state: the entire state apparatus together with the army, the municipalities, the universities, the schools, the press, the trade unions and the cooperatives ... it means, for the most part, that the workers organizations have been annihilated that the proletariat is disorganized; and that a system of administration is created which penetrates deeply into the masses and designed to frustrate the independent crystallization of the proletariat.”
 
G. Summary
Following the merchant and industrial stages of capitalism arose the third, imperialist stage, characterized by: industry dominated by monopoly, economy by finance capital; capital is exported; the world divided among great capitalist powers; economy is dependent on colonial and semi-colonial bases for raw material. Imperialism aggravates all the contradictions of capitalism. The ever-growing necessity of the production forces to expand confronts a continuously narrowing market and comes into the most violent conflict with the national state boundaries. The result is a general, permanent and insoluble crisis of capitalism, the permanent disemployment of more and more proletarians, the lowering of real wages and the pauperization of the masses. Imperialism is the epoch of war and revolutions: of the great powers for the redivision of the earth; of the colonial masses for national liberation; and revolutions for the overthrow of capitalism. Imperialism signifies that capitalism has exhausted its progressive possibilities and now constitutes a brake on the development of the productive forces and the advance of humanity to higher material and cultural levels. Capitalism is ripe for transformation to socialism. The world revolution stands on the order of the day.
* * *
Required Reading
Imperialism – Lenin
Foundations of Imperialist Policy – M. Pavlovitch
The Decline of American Capitalism – Corey; Ch. 8, 17, 19, 20, 21
Rulers of America – A. Rochester; Ch. 1–8
Capital – Marx; I – Ch. 16 and III – Ch. 15, 23, 24, 25
Suggested reading
The American Empire – Scott Nearing, Ch. 3
Modern Corporation and Private Property – Berle and Means
Imperialism and World Politics – Moon
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (5. Surplus Value and Capitalist Production)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Lesson Five
Surplus Value and Capitalist Production

The application of the materialist conception of history to the problems of the class struggle under capitalism demands a knowledge of scientific economics. While Marxist political theories are based on the concept of the state, scientific economics is based on the labor theory of value. First we will analyse the relations between labor, wage-labor, labor-power, value and the transformation of living labor into crystalized labor.
 
A. The Historic Development of Labor
Under chattel slavery, the slave’s labor appeared to be unpaid labor. Under capitalism, the worker’s labor appears to be paid labor. Both these appearances are false. The slave got the minimum necessities of life as “pay”, while the wage-slave under capitalism gives the boss the greater portion of his product as unpaid labor. Historically this difference represents a change in the form of slavery. With the development of feudalism slavery was transformed into serfdom. This form in turn was changed into wage-labor with the spread of the capitalist mode of production. The slave himself was a commodity bought and sold by slave-owners. The wage-worker is not a commodity but his labor-power is. Deprived of the ownership of the means of production the worker is forced to auction off hours of his life in order to survive. Apologists for capitalism deny labor-power is a commodity though they concede that the slave was a commodity.
 
B. The Commodity
Simply defined, a commodity is a useful thing produced for sale on the market. It is the basic unit of all capitalist production. Labor power appeared as a commodity with the advent of the capitalist mode of production. The wage-worker sells his labor-power for a definite period of time: by the hour, day or week; not for all time. That is why the wage-worker is called a free man. He is “free” to sell his labor power on the market as a commodity, or starve. He has no other commodity to sell.
 
C. The Motive Force Of Capitalist Production
When we examine the method of capitalist production, one thing strikes us immediately: goods are produced not for use but for sale. To be saleable all good must have use-value, must supply some human want. But not all use-values are commodities, do not embody labor. The manufacturer or farmer does not produce goods because they are useful alone, but because he can sell them. In capitalist society food is not grown to eat, nor is clothing made to be worn, nor are houses made to be lived in. No matter how great the need for it, the good will not be produced by a capitalist unless it can be sold. Capitalist production is commodity production – for the market.
 
D. Labor and Labor Power
Labor closely resembles and is often confused with labor power. Labor power is owned by the worker and is his until it is sold and used in the production process. It is potential labor. It is the commodity sold by the laborer. The capitalist buys labor power as a commodity, takes it to his factory and puts it to productive use. Here potential labor is converted into dynamic or realized labor. Dynamic labor and the commodities it produces become the private property of the capitalist by virtue of his monopoly of the means of production. As soon as labor power enters the productive process it is consumed in the form of labor and ceases to be a commodity. Labor is as different from labor power as the machine is from the work it performs.
 
E. The Value of Commodities
Commodities exchange for one another on the market by virtue of some common quality or character than can be measured. As use-values, commodities, being different, cannot enter into quantity relations. As exchange values, however, commodities, being the same, can enter into quantity relationships. If we ignore their natural qualities (use-values) there remains only one common quality or likeness: they are all products of (abstract) human labor, a social, not a natural quality. How is the exchange value of a commodity measured? By the number of hours of labor socially necessary to reproduce it. Value must not be confused with price. The latter fluctuates according to supply and demand. But the level around which it ebbs and flows can be determined only by the amount of labor embodied in them. It would seem that:
“the lazier or clumsier the man, the more valuable is his commodity. This, however, would be a sad mistake. You will recall I used the word ‘social’ labor, and many points are involved in this qualification ... we mean the quantity of labor necessary for its production in a given social average intensity, and average skill of labor employed.” (Marx – Value, Price and Profit, p. 61)
Labor power, however, is also a commodity, since the worker sells it on the labor market. The value of labor power “is determined by the value of the necessaries required to produce, develop, maintain and perpetuate the laboring class.” (Same, p. 75) In other words, the amount of labor it takes to produce the labor power. Wages are the price of labor power. Behind wages is concealed a relationship of exploitation.
 
F. Surplus Value
Marx discovered that labor power is different from all other commodities in one fundamental respect. He found that a worker, in consuming commodities which takes, let us say, four hours of socially necessary labor to produce, stores up enough energy to work much more than four hours. In other words, labor has the ability to produce surplus value. By means of his monopoly of the means of production, and because the worker must sell him his labor power, the capitalist takes advantage of the ability of the worker to produce surplus value. He takes from the worker 8 or 10 hours and in return gives the worker the four hours pay which the worker needs to restore his energies.
Surplus value is the unpaid portion of the value of the commodity produced by the worker. It is the source of profit. The degree of exploitation is the ratio between paid and unpaid labor. It is not dependent on the amount of wages. Colonial workers whose wages are low are not exploited to the degree that the highly developed industrial workers are, although the latter receive a far higher wage. The worker receives in wages the full value of his labor power. The capitalist realizes surplus value by selling commodities at their value.
“Let us now consider society as a whole. We are not interested in any individual capitalist or any individual worker. We are concerned with how the whole gigantic machine called the capitalist system is arranged. The capitalist system employs a vast number of workers. Capital pays them wages, the value of their labor power. This money enables them to renew their labor power, to be again expended in the service of capitalism. The working class not only pays for itself by its own labor, but creates also the income of the upper class – surplus value. Through innumerable channels this surplus value flows into the coffers of the ruling classes: the capitalist himself receives his share – profit; a part goes to the landlord – rent; a part goes to the capitalist state in the form of taxes; a part to the merchants, shopkeepers, clergymen, etc. On this surplus value live all the parasites who are created by the capitalist system.”
The exploitation of labor is the source of the irreconcilable conflict between the classes. It is the driving force behind the working class for the abolition of capitalism and the wage system.
 
G. The Twofold Character of Labor
Marx first demonstrated that labor power, like all other commodities, has use value and exchange value; that is, it has the quality of being concrete and abstract. “This is the pivotal point on which a clear comprehension of political economy turns.” The two-fold nature of labor does not signify two different kinds of labor, but two qualities of one and the same labor.

Labor creates use-values. Use-values invariably take a special, particular (concrete) form such as tailoring, shoemaking or an operation in machine production.
Labor has the second quality of creating exchange value. As such it takes a general or ABSTRACT form. Abstract labor is homogeneous, undifferentiated social labor. It can be measured in time units. [1]

Craft or skill generates a distinction between simple and complex labor. In computing the value of a commodity complex labor must be reduced to simple labor of which it is composed. It is now clear that value originates not in nature but in society. It is not a relation between things but between men.
 
H. Money
Money is the standard of price and the measure of value. In this sense it serves as a medium of circulation. Gold and silver by nature are not money. They are used for money because the physical properties of these metals enable them to function best as money. This is possible because gold and silver coins are themselves commodities embodying crystalized labor. Money does not express value directly, but indirectly, as price. “Price is the money name of value realized in a commodity.” It is a monetary expression of value. Paper money facilitates circulation and functions as part of capitalist bookkeeping. It can replace gold as medium of circulation but cannot be a standard of value. Gold and not paper is the equivalent of socially necessary labor time embodied in commodities.
 
I. Capital
All commodities are reducible to crystalized labor time. Capital is a special form of commodity which multiplies itself by causing labor to create surplus values. It exists in various forms: as money; as machines, buildings, land, etc.; and as accumulations of goods, raw materials, etc. It is a social relationship, by which the capitalist uses labor for the creation of new surplus values.
“It is the lordship of past stored-up, realized labor over actual, living labor that transforms the stored-up labor into capital.” (Marx – Wage-Labor and Capital, p. 31)
“Capital does not consist in the fact that stored-up labor is used by living labor as a means for further production. It consists in the fact that living labor serves as the means whereby stored-up labor may maintain and multiply its own exchange-value.” (Same)
The mere development of commodities and money does not suffice for the advent of capital. Capital was born only when the development has proceeded to the point where the owner of commodities and money meets in the market and purchases the “free” laborer’s labor power. The appearance of capital in history marks a new economic epoch.
 
J. The Accumulation of Capital
Not all the surplus value that the capitalist expropriates is used up by the capitalist for his immediate needs. Most of it is used over again in further production. He adds it to his capital. He extends his undertakings. He installs more productive machines thereby displacing workers and creating an “industrial reserve army.” He builds greater plants. This new industrial machinery, this increased capital, set in motion by labor, receives still greater quantities of surplus value. Thus capital rolls on like a snowball, with every turn gathering larger masses of surplus values.
 
K. The Anarchy of the Capitalist System
As is now apparent, capitalism is not a well-ordered society. Resting on exploitation, it is split into classes. No real organized production and distribution of the necessities of life is possible. Plans like those of the Technocrats, Sinclair’s Epic Plan, or the social schemes of the New Dealers, designed to organize production and distribution under capitalism, are utopian. As long as goods are produced for profit and not for use, anarchy in production must prevail. As long as the working class is exploited, real social planning that would benefit society as a whole is impossible.
* * *
Footnote
1. Two “technology” engineers, L.P. Alfred and J.E. Hannum, advocate measurement of production by “kilo-man-hours” or kmh’s as a basis for capitalist planning. In the final analysis this is the recognition by ominent capitalist engineers of the labor theory of value.
* * *
Required Reading
Value, Price and Profit – Marx
Wage-Labor and Capital – Marx
Socialism, Utopian and Scientific – Engels; Part III
Capital – Marx; Vol. 1, pp. 1–32
Suggested reading
The People’s Marx – J. Borchardt
The Marxian Economic Handbook – Emmet
A Short Course in Economic Science – Bogdonoff
Critique of Political Economy – Marx
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (9. The Struggle for Power and the Revolutionary Marxist Party)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Lesson Nine
The Struggle for Power and
the Revolutionary Marxist Party

A. Revolutionary Strategy and Tactics
The theory and program of Marxism analyse human society and describe the goal of the working class movement. They do not include the means by which the program is realized. These means are summed up in the laws of strategy, tactics and organization. Strategy consists of the general principles underlying the whole system of day-to-day actions, by which these partial struggles are developed into a broad revolutionary struggle against the capitalist system. Tactics. “By party tactics we mean the political behavior of the party, or the character, tendency and methods of its political work.” – Lenin. Correct tactics are the actions, maneuvers and methods by which strategic aims and, finally, the program are attained. False tactics hamper the movement. In critical situations tactics are decisive for the life and death of the movement. Setting the date for the insurrection in October 1917 led to the seizure of power. Setting it too early or too late would have meant a smashing defeat.
 
Day-To-Day Tactics:
The United Front, as developed by the Bolsheviks under Lenin, is a tactic for uniting the masses in action against the capitalist class through temporary agreements with working class organizations for immediate demands. Since the opportunists split the working class politically, unity can be achieved only when the Marxist party succeeds in separating the workers from their opportunists leaders and winning them for communism.
Union and Unemployed Work: The Marxist party takes as its basis for trade union and unemployed work the fight against class collaboration and for class struggle policies. To be successful in union strategy the workers should fight every struggle on two fronts: against the capitalists and against their labor agents in the unions. The following are some of the main lines of revolutionary strategy in the unions:

organization of the unorganized into industrial unions and plant committees;
 
amalgamation of craft into industrial unions;
 
work within the existing unions (AFofL, CIO, RR Brotherhoods) for trade union unity;
 
establishment of the plant meetings as the basic unit of the unions;
 
creation of a national left wing in the unions;
 
unity of the employed and unemployed by joint action of unions and unemployed organizations for demands to alleviate the conditions of the unemployed.

Revolutionary Parliamentarism: The elections system today, unlike the preceding epoch, can no longer be used to improve the lot of the working class.
“It is the immediate historic task of the working class to tear this apparatus out of the hands of the ruling class, to break it and destroy it, and to create in its place a new proletarian apparatus.” – Theses of the II Congress of the C.I.
Election Campaigns are carried on to secure the maximum mobilization of the masses around slogans of proletarian revolution. The campaigns, wherever possible, are conducted in closest contact with strikes, demonstrations and movements among soldiers and sailors.
Negro Question: American capitalism freed the Negro from chattel slavery and integrated him into the economic structure, but it did so on the basis of race subjugation and double exploitation. The industrialization of the South is transforming him from a share-cropper into a propertyless and unemployed worker. In the North he is an essential part of the proletariat in the basic industries.
Imperialism dominates the Negro populations of Latin America: Haiti, Santo Domingo, Brazil, etc.
The Negro question can be solved only by proletarian revolution. The class conscious worker of the Negro race in the United States has the historic task of sharing the leadership of the workers’ struggle both in the United States and in the suppressed Latin American countries and throughout the world. The white worker has the greater responsibility in cementing the unity of the black and white workers. The main slogans for this fight are: Full economic, political and social equality! Whites and Negro workers – smash Jim Crowism! Armed defense against lynch law!
The Youth Question: Conditions of working class youth in all capitalist countries are miserable. Working longer hours for lower wages, underfed, underdeveloped, deprived of the leisure and means for higher education, deprived of political rights, the first victims of capitalist war and militarism, the working class youth is faced with special conditions giving him a unique place in the class struggle. It is the primary task of the party to defend their rights to social and cultural opportunities from the greed of capitalism for cheap labor. In the course of this struggle special tactics, demands and forms of organization are created.
Work in the Army and Navy: Persistent and systematic propaganda and agitation is necessary in the armed forces where communist groups should be formed. Wherever such work is suppressed it must be done illegally. Refusal to carry on such work is equal to treason to the revolutionary cause.
Illegal work: Communists can have no confidence in bourgeois laws. As the class struggle enters the phase of civil war, or in time of reactionary attacks on the proletariat, or in time of war, the bourgeoisie will make arrests, indictments, raids on union and party halls for the purpose of gagging it. Illegal forms of agitation and organization must be prepared beforehand to function alongside of the legal apparatus so that the communists will be able to carry on their work when it is proscribed.
 
B. The Revolutionary Situation
A revolutionary situation occurs when:

production breaks down;
 
the proletariat determines to put an end to the old way of living and seeks a new life;
 
the middle class becomes desperate and is ready to support either the capitalist class or the working class in a decisive struggle;
 
the ruling class loses confidence in itself.

Dual Power:
“What constitutes dual power? The fact that, by the side of the government of the bourgeoisie there developes another, as yet weak, embryonic, but undoubtedly real and growing government – Councils of Workers and Soldiers Representatives ... The fundamental characteristics of this type of power are: (1) it originates not in law previously considered and passed by parliament but in the direct initiative of the masses from below, in outight ‘seizure’, to use a popular expression; (2) instead of the police and the army (institutions separated from and opposed to the people) there is the direct arming of the whole people’s orderly government is thus insured by the armed workers and farmers themselves, by the armed people itself; (3) officials, bureaucrats are either displaced by the direct rule of the people, or at any rate, placed under special control; officers are not only elected by the people but are also subject to recall at the initiative of the people; they are reduced to the position of plain representatives; from a privileged social stratum, occupying snug, highly remunerative ‘berths’ they are changed in workers, skilled in handling certain ‘tools’, receiving salaries not exceeding those of average skilled workers …” – Lenin
The Insurrection: The very possibility of proletarian insurrection implies an extremely advanced disintegration of the capitalist state. Civil war in general and the armed insurrection in particular must be studied.
“To be successful the uprising must be based not on a conspiracy, not on a party, but on the advanced class. That is the first point. The uprising must be based on the revolutionary upsurge of the people. This is the second point. The uprising must be based on the crucial point in the history of the maturing revolution, when the activity of the vanguard of the people is at its height, when the vacillations in the ranks of the enemies, and in the ranks of the weak, half-hearted undecided friends of the revolutions are at their highest point. This is the third point.” – Lenin
The Insurrection and the General Strike: The working class cannot achieve victory over the bourgeoisie by means of the general strike alone, by the policy of folded arms. In conjunction with the armed uprising, however, the general strike becomes a powerful weapon in the hands of the proletariat to paralyse capitalist state power.
 
C. Problems of the Proletarian Revolution
The Agrarian Question: Under the leadership of the city industrial and agricultural proletariat the small, tenant and share-cropping farmers who constitute the majority of the agrarian population, can save themselves from the ruin of capitalist landlordism and imperialist wars only through the overthrow of capitalism. They are economically, socially and morally benefited by the victory of the proletariat. After the workers have taken power and the owners of large estates and the capitalists have been done away with, after they are able to see in practice that the working class is their organized leader and helper, powerful and firm in its guidance, the farmers will constitute an important support of the proletarian dictatorship. But not the landed farmers, rural bankers and plantation owners. They are capitalists in agriculture. The small, tenant and share-cropping farmer, under the leadership of the working class, will deal a crushing blow to this reactionary class. Their estates will be confiscated without compensation.
The Revolution in the Colonies and Semi-Colonies: The spread of imperialism, the investment of capital in the backward colonial countries such as China, India, Cuba, has given birth to a native bourgeoisie which, in its desire to expand, comes into conflict with the capitalists of the great powers. A vital working class has arisen in these countries which, together with the peasantry, is doubly oppressed: by imperialism and by its own bourgeoisie. These conditions continue to create revolutionary situations which threaten to destroy the foundations of capitalism. Movements for redistribution of land and national liberation have given rise to numerous uprisings which have been suppressed, as in China, India, Cuba, Puerto Rico, etc. The first stages of the colonial revolution are agrarian, anti-imperialist, national liberationist and are fought in cooperation with the native bourgeoisie. Under the leadership of the Marxists the masses pass through the struggle for petty-bourgeois reforms such as the redivision of the land to the organization of peasants and workers councils and the establishment of the workers state.
In such struggles the colonial bourgeoisie finds itself in a peculiar position. To fight the imperialists it needs the workers and peasants. But for fear the workers and peasants will get out of hand and destroy it, it cannot bring the struggle for national liberation and democratic rights to completion. As the masses begin to show independent strength, the bourgeoisie, to save its neck, makes alliances with the imperialists powers against the workers and peasants. Therefor the colonial problem cannot be solved by the bourgeoisie. The aims of the colonial nationalists movements everywhere are to win freedom for the native bourgeoisie to dominate the country. But it is for liberation from capitalism as a whole that the workers and peasants struggle.
The colonial Marxist party strives to develope class consciousness in the working class, to overthrow capitalism and establish a workers republic. Proletarian revolutions in the colonies undermine world capitalism. It is the historic task of the working class and the Marxist parties in the imperialist countries, therefore, to collaborate with the colonial Marxist parties for the general advancement of the revolutionary movement.
The National Question: The imperialist war of 1914–18, the twenty one years of “peace” and the events of the last few years clearly demonstrate the hypocrisy of the bourgeoisie with regard to the freedom of small nations and national self-determination. The League of Nations was an insurance policy by which the victors of 1918 guaranteed their gains by tearing some states asunder and artificially creating others. The vanquished nations began to work for the “re-union of alienated territories” to gather forces for new wars. While the proletariat is interested in re-uniting nationalities artificially torn asunder, this can be accomplished only by the revolutionary overthrow of the bourgeoisie. Equality of nations is impossible under capitalism. For the establishment of national equality a free federation of workers’ republics is necessary.
Tasks of the Proletarian Dictatorship: The first task of the proletarian dictatorship is to defeat the exploiters completely, to crush their resistance, to render impossible any attempts on their part to reimpose the yoke of capitalism. The second task is to inspire, enlighten, or organize, instruct, and discipline the entire mass of workers and those exploited by capital, to wrench this enormous majority of the population in all capitalist countries out of their state of dependence on the bourgeoisie, to instil confidence in them through practical experience, in the leading role of the proletariat, and its revolutionary vanguard. The third is to neutralize or render harmless the inevitable fluctuations between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, between bourgeois democracy and the workers power, on the part of the small owners and proprietors in agriculture, industry, commerce and the layers of intellectuals, employees, etc. The fourth task is to extend the revolution to other countries, as summarized in the theses of the Second Congress of the Comintern:
“Proletarian internationalism ... demands (1) the subordination of the interests of that struggle on an international scale. (2) the capability and readiness on the part of any one nation which has gained a victory over the bourgeoisie of making the greatest national sacrifices for the overthrow of international capitalism.”
“The emancipation of labor is neither a local nor a national, but a social problem, embracing all countries in which modern society exists.” – Preamble and Rules of the International Workingmen’s Association (First International)
These tasks make possible the great historic objective of the complete reorganization of economy, the transformation of industry and agriculture into a production plant based on social need and the scrapping of the entire profit system, the creation of a new social discipline and a free union of free workers.
 
D. Proletarian Strategy in War
The strategy of the bourgeoisie in imperialist war is summed up by Lenin as follows:
“To seize lands and to conquer foreign nations, to ruin competing nations, to pillage their wealth, to divert the attention of the laboring masses from domestic political crisis ..., to disunite the workers and fool them with nationalism, to annihilate their vanguards in order to weaken the revolutionary movement of the proletariat, such is the real essence, the significance and meaning of the present war.” – War and the Second International
Imperialist wars shake the foundations of capitalist society and heap unbearable burdens on the working class.
Revolutionary Defeatism: The workers have no interest in the defense of the “fatherland”. Under no conditions, directly or indirectly, can the support of a war conducted by an imperialist government be justified. On the contrary, the class and its party must fight such a war.
“Turning the ... imperialist war into civil war is the only correct proletarian slogan ... however difficult such a transformation may appear at one time or another, socialists will never relinquish systematic, resistant, unflinching preparatory work in this direction once the war has become a fact.”
“Revolution in war time is civil war; and the TRANSFORMATION of war between governments into civil war is, on the one hand, facilitated by military reverses (‘defeats’) of governments; on the other hand, it is IMPOSSIBLE really to strive for such a transformation without thereby facilitating defeat ... THIS SLOGAN ALONE implies a consistent appeal for revolutionary action against one’s own government in wartime.” – Lenin
To the social reformists who advocate “revolutionary national defense” in one form or another, the class conscious proletariat answers: only on condition that state power is on the hands of the proletariat.
 
E. Proletarian Strategy Against Fascism
The frenzy with which the capitalist class embraces fascism is explained economically by the falling rate of profit which forces them to more ruthless exploitation of the working class. The resistance of the working class to these measures is met by fascist policy when other government forms fail. Bands of declassed petty-bourgeoisie crazed by the collapse of capitalism are organized by finance capital to smash the workers, to disorganized them, and annihilate their organizations and leadership.
Marxism counterposes the social revolution to fascism as the solution of the crisis of capitalism. This task is approached through the tactics of the united front of labor organizations for defense of democratic rights, based on extra-parliamentary mass action. These united defense actions consolidate the proletariat, give it confidence in its own strength. Eventually the struggle for democratic rights developes into an offense against fascist reaction. The proletariat arms itself, organizes and centralizes its councils, military committees and militias into national councils of workers’ representatives (dual power) which challenges and finally overthrows the bourgeois state and establishes the workers’ state. In countries where fascism has conquered, the scattered proletariat reassembles its forces by underground activity. While the proletarian organizations can be destroyed, the proletariat itself cannot be, since it is essential to capitalist production. Underground struggles for democratic rights under fascism, not with the perspective of the restoration of an outworn bourgeois democracy but for the building of a movement led by the proletariat for the establishment of a worker’ republic. There is as yet no historical precedent for this development, but Marxian science points to this course as the revolutionary solution of the historic contradictions of fascism.
 
F. The Revolutionary Marxist Party
A party cannot be satisfied with the best of programs. A Marxist program is indispensable but it is in itself not sufficient. The party must know how to apply this program to the conditions within the country, within sections of the country, within given struggles, and within different stages of the class struggle. By correct application of the program the party is enabled to reach the masses. Theory and action are coordinated in one application.
The Party and the Class: In capitalist society there are only two decisive class forces: the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. The historic mission of one is to maintain the capitalist system, that of the other is to overthrow it. The petty-bourgeoisie is unable to create its own state or party. All so-called parties of the petty-bourgeoisie are in reality bourgeois parties. Where several capitalist parties exist they serve the special interests of bourgeois groups. By claiming to represent the interests of the oppressed classes they really aim to tie them to the bourgeoisie. Anti-trust parties, farmer parties, farmer-labor parties, progressive parties, labor parties, reformist workers parties (Social-Democratic or Salinistic) – in fact all parties except the class party of the proletariat are therefore bourgeois parties whose special purposes are subordinated to the common aims of that class, that of defending the rule of the bourgeoisie and its state. The fact that certain parties appeal to and recruit their members from the working class does not make of them parties of the proletariat. There is and can be but one such party, that which works for the overthrow of capitalism and the establishment of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat.
Two Class Parties: The interests of two classes cannot be represented by one party, without subordinating the interests of one class to the other, small proprietors to the big capitalists, or workers to small owners (and through them to the big capitalists). Under no circumstances, said Lenin in 1906, may the non-possessors organize together with the possessors, “even though they be small ones, even though they ‘labor’.”
A Labor Party is a reformist bourgeois party. It is an instrument of the bourgeoisie against the proletariat, and secondly an instrument of the petty-bourgeoisie who utilize the workers for their purposes against the big bourgeoisie. The aim of the Labor Party is to reform (i.e. support) capitalism. Affiliation to a Labor Party means subjectively to most workers in the United States a step forward to independent political action. But in terms of the class interests of the workers it is a step backward. The Labor Party builds up a philosophy of gradualism, legality, parliamentarism, and thus prevents the workers from taking real steps toward independent political action. Objectively, therefore, the Labor Party is not a preparation for the formation of a revolutionary class party, as the centrists claim, but is the most effective way of blocking it. It is a trap for holding the workers back from the road to revolution. The role of the British Labor Party, the American Labor Party, the Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party as a brake on the development of the proletariat should be sufficient warning against building this formidable obstacle to the road to power. The party is an instrument of STATE POWER. There is only ONE road to power, and only ONE kind of party that can lead to this goal: the revolutionary Marxist party.
There can be no such thing as a REVOLUTIONARY Labor Party. All such parties are reformist. They deny the role of the Marxist party. Such substitutes cannot fill the bill. They pave the way for war and fascism, just as the reformist Social-Democracy did in 1914, in 1922 in Italy and in 1933 in Germany. Only a revolutionary class party can lead the struggle against WAR AND FASCISM.
Syndicalism: In contrast to Marxism, syndicalism (economism) is the point of view that political consciousness, active leadership, and a mass movement must spring or develop spontaneously from the economic struggle. It glorifies the backwardness of the working class and shirks the issues arising from the struggle for power and the necessity of a revolutionary party.
“The basic error (in economism) is the idea that political consciousness can be developed in the workers from within out of, for example, the economic struggle; that is, proceeding entirely or mainly from this struggle ... Political consciousness can only be impressed on the workers from the ourside; that is, outside the economic struggle, outside the sphere of the relations between workers and employers.” – Lenin
Without an independent political party, the working class is like a body without a head.
Composition of the Party:
“Men must be trained who will devote to the revolution not only their free evenings, but their whole lives; an organization must be developed of such dimensions that within it there can be carried out a precise division of labor for the various kinds of work that we want of them.” – What Is to Be Done
The party must be formed of the best, most intelligent, self-sacrificing and far-seeing workers. Advanced workers reach class consciousness in different ways, at different times. The working class as a whole does not participate in the creation and development of the party, but only the advanced workers, the vanguard. The dilution of the party by inclusion of sections of the mass who are still permeated with bourgeois ideology renders the party unfit for its historical task and its day to day activity in the class struggle.
Character of the Party:

To be Marxist the party must be international in character. Capitalism is world wide. All capitalist countries are interdependent. There is no place on earth that has not come under the rule of capital, and no country that can remain unaffected by economic conditions in other countries. The workers revolution is international in scope. The revolutionary party is a world party with sections in every country. The strategy and tactics that this party adopts must be based on the needs of the world proletariat. National parties must sacrifice for the advancement of the revolution in other countries.
 
“At all times and under all conditions the party must maintain its organizational and political independence. In its relations with other political organizations, in united front actions or other forms of labor cooperation the party, while obligating itself to discipline in common action, reserves the right of criticism and rejects, in principle, all pacts of non-aggression.”
 
The party must be Marxist in character, grounded on Marxian theory and practice, and opposed firmly to all tendencies seeking to divert Marxian principles.
 
Marxist theory becomes a power when it penetrates the masses. It is the duty of the party to penetrate the trade unions, cooperatives and all working class organizations, to imbue them with a common class purpose and to guide them on the revolutionary road by means of its party fractions. Only by being in the forefront of the workers struggles and by giving them effective leadership and guidance does the party win the confidence of the class.

The Party and the Revolution: The party is the driving force, the nerve center and the inspiration of the proletarian revolution. Without it the working class cannot seize power and hold it, no matter how favorable the objective factors may be, no matter how heroic and self-sacrificing its struggle may be.
The Party and the Workers Councils: The working class cannot take power through the existing governmental apparatus. It can do so only by smashing the state machinery of the capitalist class and establishing in its place its own state power. This power is the workers councils, a representative dictatorship by the working class against any and all who would destroy this rule. By graining a wide influence and the majority within the councils, the revolutionary party of Marxism enables these councils to carry out their historic functions as instruments of the revolution. The party directs the work of the councils as well as of the revolutionaries industrial unions. “Left” communists assert that the party must “adapt” itself to the ideas prevailing in the councils. This is a hazy expression of the reactionary idea that the party should dissolve itself into the councils and that the councils should take over the functions of the party. To perform its historic duty, the party must not adapt itself to the vacillating ideas that may prevail at certain points in the council, but must see to it that the councils do not adapt themselves to the bourgeoisie and to their opportunist agents. Conversely, no concession can be made to those who advocate the “democratic” coexistence under the dictatorship of parties who oppose a complete proletarian revolution alongside of the revolutionary Marxist party.
The Party and the Proletarian Dictatorship: The role of the party after the acquisition of power by the working class becomes more important than before. By having within its ranks the best part of the working class it is possible for the party to overcome the difficulties that arise in the dictatorship after the victory of the proletariat. The problem of organizing the Red Army, the practical abolition of the bourgeois government machine, the construction in its place of a new proletarian state apparatus, the struggle against local and provincial “patriotism”, clearing the way for the creation of a new cooperative labor discipline - in all these undertakings decisive leadership is given by the party, whose members by their own example animate, guide the majority of the workers./archive/trotsky/1930/hrr/index.htm
The Withering Away of the Party: The necessity for a political party of the proletariat ceases with the complete abolition of classes. The party will disappear when Communism ceases to be an object of struggle, and the whole of society shall become communist.
* * *
Required Reading
The Communist Manifesto – [Marx & Engels] pp. 30–1 (International Publishers)
Theses on the Role of the Party – II Congress of the CI
Infantile Sickness of Leftism – Lenin
Civil War in France – Marx
What Is To Be Done – Lenin
Suggested reading
War and the Second International – Lenin
Road to Power – Karl Kautsky
Militarism and Anti-Militarism – Karl Liebknecht
History of Russian Revolution – Trotsky: Vol. III
Lenin on Organization – Art of Insurrection
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (4. The Development of Capitalism)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Lesson Four
The Development of Capitalism

The clearest understanding of the Marxist conception of history can be obtained by studying the actual evolution of the mode and technique of production and tracing the effects of these changes on social institutions and class relations. We will now single out some of the more important factors to help build a background for our future study. The following is a brief survey of the rise of capitalism and its further course of development.
 
A. The Rise of Capitalism
Capitalism arose after a long period of struggle between the feudal nobility and the church on one hand and the rising class of merchants and manufacturers on the other. The latter were the revolutionists of their time. They represented a new order of society and swept aside the remnants of feudal power in a series of revolutions which began in Britain in 1642, reached a climax in France in 1789 and found further expression in the revolutions of 1848 in Germany, Italy and Austria. As a result of this combined economic and military struggle, the merchant and manufacturers triumphed and established the system of society known as capitalism. They became the new exploiters of labor. The old feudal state and the church were transformed into instruments at the service of this new class.
 
B. Three Conditions Necessary for the Rise of Capitalism
However, before capitalism could arise, three major conditions had to exist: One, trade or commerce must have been developed to world-wide scale; Two, a certain degree of wealth must have been accumulated by a small group of people; Three, there must have arisen a new class of people who have nothing to sell but their power to labor and who are compelled by these circumstances to sell their labor-power in order to live.
 
C. Development of Trade and Money Economy
Trade existed in primitive form even in prehistoric time, first as simple barter of goods for goods, and then through the employment of tokens to facilitate exchange (wampum cowrie shells). Precious metals were used as tokens later. Finally, with the rise of villages and early manufacture, the need for money, a universal commodity, arose. So, the previous metals were coined and stamped.
The use of money has the following effects:

all good used in exchanged become commodities;
 
wealth is concentrated in the hands of merchants;
 
products of labor pass out of the hands of the producers and no longer under their control;
 
nobility is forced to use money;
 
the merchant class becomes dominant within the framework of, and undermines, the old feudal society.
 

D. The Age of Discovery and the Establishment of the World Market
During the middle ages, two main commodities were imported from the East: spices for the preservation of food; silks for the ruling class. Italian and Hanseatic cities became rich and powerful through this trade with the Orient. But in the 14th century, the overland route to the Mediterranean was conquered and closed by the Seljuk Turks. The need for new routes brought on the age of discovery and colonization. The discovery of the compass made possible extended sea travel. Metals, textiles, clock-making, navigation, astronomical instruments, printing and scientific research in general, kept pace with the tremendous development of industry.
Bourgeois economists ascribe the origin of wealth to individual initiative industry, frugality and far-sightedness. Truth of the matter is that primitive wealth has always grown through theft, plunder and conquest. The invention of gunpowder and cannon revolutionized warfare, putting the common man in the military sense on an equal footing with the armored nobile on horseback. Standing armies of common people were used to subdue the nobility and consolidate nations. The discovery of Africa, America, India and China meant an enormous growth of markets and trade. Production spurted. Europe went mad for precious metals to act as money. The frightful extermination of natives was part of this frenzy (Cortez in Mexico, Pizzarro in Peru). The second half of the 16th century was a period of colonization aided by exploitation of virgin lands with slaves. From 1508 to 1860 15,000,000 negroes were landed in America from Africa. About the same number, it is estimated, died on the way. Many cities got their primary accumulation from the slave trade. The vast improvement in transport and communication resulting from the extension of world trade, helped tranfer culture from one land to another. Thus cotton was introduced in England from India, potatoes and tobacco from America to Europe.
 
E. Early Manufactures In England
The factory system first came to England from Flanders. Wool manufacture became so important to English merchants that they revolutionized the entire English agricultural system. For the purpose of raising sheep large tracts of land were taken by force and fraud from the peasant villagers who held the land in common were “enclosed” for pasturage (See the English Laborer, 1300 to 1925 by M. and T.R. Fordham). The peasants, driven off the land and into the towns, were converted into wage laborers in the newly rising factories.
Division of Labor. The factory system was not marked at first by any subdivision of labor within the crafts. A factory merely housed the craftsmen. But this assembling of workers and artisans under one roof made possible the minute division of labor within each craft, and later to apply machinery to the simpler mechanical tasks. The first simple division of labor gradually gave way to more complex division and finally, with the industrial revolution, to MACHINOFACTURE. Thus we see how the need for goods to exchange for imports from the Far East leads to new methods of production. A series of remarkable inventions: spinning jenny, power loom, steam engine, etc. by Hargreaves, Arkright, Compton, Watts and others, completely revolutionized the methods of production. Skill was transferred to the machine. Less skilled labor was substituted for more skilled; female for male labor; child for adult labor. These developments mark the beginning of the period of modern industry.
F. Effects of the Industrial Revolution

Workers become machine tenders. Highest division of labor arises in the factory, in society and on an international scale.
 
The two main classes of modern society arise.
 
Industry concentrates in towns and cities. Large costly machines require special buildings. Workers are thrown into poverty-stricken homes around the factories.
 
Sharp division between town and country. “The foundation of all highly developed division of labor that is brought about by the exchange of commodities is the cleavage between town and country. We may say that the entire economic history of society is summed by the development of this cleavage between town and country.” – Marx (Capital)
 

G. The English Revolution of 1649 to 1688
This was the first social revolution; that is, the transformation of the foundations of society on a vast scale and a brief time, and the establishment of new class relationships. At first the bourgeoisie united with the king in a common struggle against the lords. The Crown was granted large sums by the House of Commons. In return it received remission of duties and other aids to free trade. The merchants helped to make the Crown powerful, thus establishing and unifying the national state. But the Crown then became the last stronghold of feudalism, making ever greater demands for money on the merchants. Under the prerogatives of feudalism, the King granted trade monopolies to his favorites. Gradually the merchants achieved a national outlook. They felt a need for a strong political power to protect their interests, a centralized capitalist government with a powerful navy to protect their ships against pirates. They needed a stable currency untampered by the King’s whims. When cromwell finally overthrew the King and a “capitalist” monarchy was set up, the bourgeoisie established the Bank of England, a public debt (to stabilize money and values by acting as a safe, guaranteed field of investment), a strong currency and a strong navy.
 
H. The French Revolution of 1789 to 1793
(P. Lafargue – Evolution of Property) Here again the merchant class could overthrow feudalism only with the aid of the exploited masses, the peasants and workers. Under the slogan of “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity”, this revolution was an attack of one form of property on another. It achieved the liberty and equality of capitalist property owners. The French Revolution, like the English, rid the merchants of trade restraints, permitted the unhampered development of new forms of property, set up a national bank, a public debt, a stable currency and a strong national military force.
 
I. The American Revolution of 1776
Here also those who did the actual fighting were betrayed. The revolutionary masses were composed of small farmers and artisans. From 1783 to 1789 the Left Wing of the revolution still remained in control and prevented the formation of a strong centralized capitalist government which could be used against their interests. By a coup d’état the richer sections of the population led by Hamilton maneuvered the adoption of the Constitution over the opposition of the “Lefts”. Under this constitution the propertied interests established their national bank, public debt, stable currency, and strong central authority supported on bayonets.
 
J. New Forms of Oppression and Exploitation
In all bourgeois revolutions the exploited classes are betrayed at a certain stage. The capitalists, having succeeded in gaining power, compromises with the older ruling class to “put the lower classes in their place.” The first act of the Cromwell revolution was to crush the Levellers. As Cromwell said: “You have no other way to deal with these men but to break them, or they will break you.” Similarly the French Revolution declared against all combinations of labor almost immediately.
The capitalist was actually released from all responsibility of labor upkeep. This was now up to the “free” laborer himself. The worker is:
“free to work for wages in the new favorites – or starve. The peasant was promised the land and freedom from feudalism. But the bourgeoisie subjected them to new and more intense exploitation. The land was once more taken from them and put into the hands of large property owners.
“History shows that when a subject class becomes the ruling class it is prepared to compromise with the old ruling class in order to consolidate all the propertied interests of society against the interests and demands of the propertyless.” – Lafargue
* * *
Required Reading
The Communist Manifesto – Marx and Engels; finish Part I
Socialism, Utopian and Scientific – Engels; Chap. II
Capital – Marx; Volume I. Part VII [Chaps. 16, 17 &18]
Whither England? – Trotzky; Chapter on Chartism
The Evolution of Property – Lafargue; pp. 166 on
Suggested reading
Capital – Marx (Eastman edition); Chaps. 15 and 21
French Revolution – P. Kropotkin
Conditions of the English Working Class in 1844 – Engels
English Laborer, 1300 to 1925 – M. and T.R. Fordham
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (10. The Four Internationals)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Lesson Ten
The Four Internationals

A. Tendencies In The World Labor Movement
The World War brought sharply to the fore the old differences existing between the basic tendencies in the world labor movement: reformism; centrism and revolutionary Marxism.
Reformism is the expression of the interests of the capitalist class in the ranks of labor. It is a doctrine and system of tactics designed to subordinate the proletariat to the bourgeoisie. It is essentially counter-revolutionary. Its classical representatives today are the parties of the Second and Third Internationals.
Revolutionary Marxism represents the interests of the international proletariat as a whole. It organizes its independent class activity, unifies its struggles on a national and international scale and puts the proletariat at the head of the struggle for emancipation of all the oppressed classes in society. It aims at the forceful overthrow of the capitalist system and the building of a socialist society. It participates in the struggles of the proletariat for immediate demands as a means to this end. Its classical representatives in this generation have been the Bolshevik party and the Communist International under Lenin's leadership.
Centrism is the expression within the labor movement of the pressure both of the bourgeoisie and of the proletariat. It attempts to reconcile revolutionary aims with opportunist means, to combine revolutionary phraseology with reformist practice. It is unstable, vacillating between reformism and revolutionary Marxism. In periods of sharpening class struggle it tends to disintegrate, its elements flying to the camps of the revolution or reformism. In periods of lull, it may consolidate and even attract and trap forces moving toward revolutionary Marxism. It constitutes an obstacle on the road to revolution. The designation “centrists” does not sufficiently characterize a tendency or movement. The irreconcilables it is trying to reconcile must be specified concretely; also its general direction and how far it has travelled. Centrism is the subjective expression in the labor movement of the objective situation of the petty-bourgeoisie, crushed between the major classes.
 
B. Historical Setting of the Internationals
Each of the three internationals played a decisive role in history. They correspond to the three main stages of capitalist development. Shortly after the birth of capitalism when the proletariat first began to assume an independent role in the class struggle the First International arose. The Second International was founded and grew with developing capitalism. The Third International was the outcome of the World War and the victorious October Revolution in the stage of capitalist decline.
 
C. The First International (1864–76)
Before the revolution of 1848 there existed a secret international organization known as the Communist League. Marx and Engels were its founders and leaders. They were commissioned to write its program, the Communist Manifesto (1847) which laid down the basic concepts of the revolutionary working class movement. Following the revolutions of 1848, capitalism entered a period of lusty growth. National labour unions sprang into being in England and France. The cotton famine produced by the American Civil War (1861–5) and the Polish Insurrection of 1863 gave a profound impetus to the European labor movement. Out of the growing demand of European unions for international solidarity against scabbery organized by mass importation of foreign workers in labor disputes, the International Workingmen’s Association was organized in 1864 at a congress in London. It has since been known as the First International.
Throughout its life the First International was torn by internal struggle over policy. The communists under Marx and Engels had first to fight and defeat the Proudhonists, a movement inspired by ruined French small producers who advocated a gradual substitution of capitalism by mutual credit and cooperative associations. In the second half of its existence a fierce struggle was fought against the anarchists led by Bakunin, who believed that smashing the state alone could solve all social problems. He regarded all participation in day-to-day struggles as rank opportunism. He maintained that not the industrial proletariat but the pauperized peasantry, the lumpenproletariat and the young intellectuals would make the revolution. In the main the IWMA was an international organization of revolutionary propaganda groups rather than a mass organization of workers.
In 1871 the International took part in the Paris Commune, the first great struggle of the workers for power. After its defeat the reactionary forces persecuted the International in every land. A wave of reaction swept all capitalist countries. In 1870 the Bakuninists set up a rival organization in Switzerland. This was the beginning of the end. The International office was transferred from London to New York and then to Philadelphia, where it died in 1876, just a few years after the Commune. With all its shortcomings the First International laid the foundation for proletarian internationalism. Its service to the proletariat must not be underestimated.
 
D. The Second International (1889–1914)
After 1871 capitalism developed industry on a gigantic scale. Huge combines dominated economy. The earth was divided among the leading powers. A struggle arose among them for a new division. Again the working class movements surged forward. Socialist parties began to grow in various countries. In 1889 an international conference of these parties was held and organized the Second International.
The Second International was more homogeneous ideologically than the First. It was all “socialist”. The German and Austrian Social Democracy, Socialist Party of France, labor parties in Belgium and England, and the American Socialist Party were all affiliated. Within the International, however, were united the two otherwise irreconcilable tendencies of revolutionary Marxism and reformism: Debs, Berger, DeLeon; Hardie, Hyndman, Henderson and MacDonald; Bebel, Bernstein, Kautsky and Luxemberg; Bulgarian orthodox Marxist (“Narrows”) and the revisionists (“Broads”); Pannekoek, Gorter and Troelstra; Lenin; Plechanov, Martov and Martinov; Jaurès and Guesde – were all part of the Second International. The Right and Left Wings represented basically different class forces. The “center” (Kautsky) was the link between the two. It was the buffer protecting the Right wing against Marxist criticism and acting as a screen behind which the Right Wing everywhere took control of the key positions in the various parties.
In the absence of convulsive revolutionary struggles the socialist parties placed all emphasis on day-to-day reforms and in practice forgot, except for verbiage, the revolutionary goal. Thus they became reformist parties. They revised Marxist theories to conform to their day-to-day practices.
 
E. Second International and the State
The Socialist International rejects the Marxian theory of the state. Its Right Wing regards the state not as an instrument of class oppression but rather as a permanent and necessary organ which serves society as a whole. It stands above and removed from class relations. Other theoreticians of the Second International admit the class nature of the state, but believe society under capitalism can, through the pressure of the working class, develop more and more democracy until socialism can gradually be introduced. The Second International is opposed to all dictatorships, including the dictatorship of the proletariat. Pure democracy is an absolute principle with them, regardless of particular social or class setting. They reject the Marxist method of analysing society.
The tactics and strategy flowing from these theoretical conceptions of the Second International have brought the workers nothing but setbacks. In 1914, at the crucial moment, the leading sections of the International threw overboard all Marxist pretensions and came out in support of “their” countries. To cap this treachery, they openly aided their capitalists in suppressing revolutionary uprisings, as in Germany.
Since the war, the October Revolution and the rise of the Third International, the Second International has taken on new life. The “stinking corpse” again has a being. The period of its new lease on life closely corresponds to and is explained by the degeneration of the Comintern. A new revolutionary wave will deal a death blow to both these treacherous bodies.
 
F. Collapse of the Second International
The decisions adopted at the Basle (Switzerland, 1912) congress of the Second International to oppose war and to organize socialist revolts in case of an imperialist war were ignored when the war broke out. All the big parties became social-patriotic – socialist in words, patriotic in deeds – except the Swiss, Italian, Russian, Serbian and a few other minor parties. From then on it was clear to the revolutionists that no matter how large the parties, or how big the mass following, the fact remained that the INTERNATIONAL COULD NOT BE REFORMED, could not be used as an instrument for the revolution.
The Second International serves only to hinder the development of workers to a revolutionary position. The Second International may contain militants and leftward moving elements. These elements must be made to see the implications of their position, to realize they must break with the Socialist International, that only a new, Marxist International – the Fourth – can lead the workers of the world to victory.
 
G. Zimmerwald
When the war broke out the International Socialist Bureau refused to convene the Congress which was to have dealt with the war. Clara Zetkin, secretary of the Women’s Buro, called an International Women’s Congress at Berne, Switzerland in March 1915, where anti-war resolutions were adopted. The resolution of the Bolsheviks was rejected. In September 1915 the Italian SP together with the Swiss party convened the first real anti-war International Conference at Zimmerwald, Switzerland. Lenin’s resolution: “Convert the imperialist war into a civil war” and break with the Second International was overwhelmingly rejected. The conference condemned the pro-war socialists, urged workers to unite for socialism and peace, but barely mentioned the International Socialist Bureau. The Second Zimmerwald Conference (held at Kienthal, Switzerland in March 1916) again rejected Lenin’s resolution but for the first time denounced the “social-nationalists” and “bourgeois pacifism”. It called peace under capitalism an illusion. It condemned the ISB in detail. The centrists were still dominant but losing ground. These two conferences prepared the ground for the Third International.
 
H. The Third International (1919–28)
The victory of the Bolsheviks under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky and the establishment of the Soviet government placed Russia in the forefront of the international working class movement. Here was the material basis for the establishment of the Third International – the task set by Lenin in 1914. Without such a basis the founding of the International would have been a travesty.
The Third International was established in 1919. It immediately became the center for revolutionary forces both within and without the Soviet Union for the maintenance and extension of the October Revolution to other countries. It attracted myriads of new forces, many of which never fully assimilated the basic principles of revolutionary Marxism.
The first four congresses of the Comintern (up to the 1923 defeat in Germany when Lenin died) made classical contributions to Marxist theory and practice. No revolutionist today can afford to be without their guidance. All important actions of the proletariat in all countries were subjected to minute scrutiny. The basic laws of revolutionary strategy and tactics were formulated and applied in all countries. From 1923 on, however, the isolation of the revolution in Russia as a result of the numerous defeats in Europe laid the foundation for the adaptation of the Comintern to the coexistence of the Soviet state with capitalist environment (Socialism In One Country) The Communist International degenerated steadily into a mere frontier guard or foreign office, serving the narrow national interests of Russia. It no longer represented the interests of the world proletariat and ceased to be the revolutionary Marxist Party. (See page 30)
Theoretically the Comintern has revised Marxism on a series of fundamental questions. Here are the most important:

The international character of the proletariat and the revolution;
 
The relation of class to party (Kuomintang);
 
The nature of the capitalist state and democracy (People’s Front);
 
The road to power (Democratic Dictatorship of the Proletariat and Peasantry and against the Dictatorship of the Proletariat);
 
Struggle against war and fascism (Social-fascism on one hand and Leagues Against War and Fascism on the other);
 
Character of Trade Unions (red trade unionism).

Ideologically and politically the Comintern has been brought to the position of the Social Democracy. The Fifth and Sixth Congresses widened the gap between Stalinism and Marxism and marked the final repudiation of the revolutionary tasks of the proletariat. The CI has long become a counter-revolutionary force and an objective ally of the world bourgeoisie. Like the Second International it may undergo a period of growth in one country or another, but IT CAN NEVER BE REFORMED. It can lead the proletariat only to defeat. It is the duty of all revolutionary elements to break with it politically and organizationally, and join in the building of the Communist Fourth International.
 
I. The Fourth (Communist) International
The fate of the proletariat and of mankind as whole depends today upon the creation of a new communist world party, the Fourth International. Its foundations must be laid today, in spite and because of the disintegration which has swept through the world labor movement since the rise of Fascism. A firm clear vanguard working for a new communist international is the only means to counteract this tide of disintegration. The Third International was established on the wave of victorious revolution. But the Russian victory was possible only because the directing forces had been prepared by years of struggle against opportunism during the period of disintegration after 1905 and 1914. The Marxists face the preliminary task today of creating a propaganda and organizing center for the new International, to gather and steel the forces to work for the victorious outcome of the next revolutionary upswing of the movement.
Spurious Internationals: The movement may expect various abortive attempts by immature or treacherous elements who have broken with the Second or Third Internationals or both, to mechanically set up paper propaganda centers or actual “internationals”. The Trotskyists, for example, have founded two such scarcely more than two years apart, behind the backs and without the participation of any section of the world proletariat. Such travesties tend to discredit the Marxists conception of a revolutionary proletarian international, should it become widely known. In trying to escape from their self-imposed isolation, the Trotskyists have veered from the policy of building the 4th International through the Second back to a policy of proclaiming another paper Fourth International opposing the Stalinist Third. A living international must be in a position to TAKE THE PLACE OF, not merely oppose the reformist bodies. It must organize and lead millions of workers through decisive victories against the capitalist system. It must DISPLACE THE CORRUPT INTERNATIONALS IN ACTION. This the paper “internationals” cannot do. The revolutionary masses are the stuff out of which a revolutionary Marxist International is made.
“The Communist International is the concentrated will of the world proletariat. Its mission is to organize the working class of the whole world for the overthrow of the capitalist order and the establishment of Communism ... The working masses will overcome all obstacles and create this new International. The present triumph of opportunism is short-lived. The greater the war losses, the clearer it will become to the working masses that the opportunists betrayed the cause of the workers and that it is necessary to turn the weapons against the governments and the bourgeoisie of their respective countries.” – Lenin
* * *
Required Reading
War and the Second International – Lenin
Theses of the II Congress (Comintern)
Workers Answer to Boss War (RWL)
Suggested Reading
History of the First International – Steklov
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (1. The Basic Ideas of Marxism)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Lesson One
The Basic Ideas of Marxism

By a profound study of the modern capitalist system of production, Karl Marx was enabled to discover certain scientific laws that explain the general historical development of mankind. These laws constitute the basis for modern social science. Our work in this course will serve to illustrate and give some content to these laws. It is a preliminary to more exhaustive study.
Briefly, Marx’s discoveries may be summarized under 4 headings:
 
A. The Material Conception of History
The form of society in which men live is determined by the way they make a living, that is by what is called the mode of production. When the mode of production undergoes a change, the form of society changes accordingly. Economic factors are not the only ones that determine social evolution, altho they are basic ones. Social institutions are based on the prevailing mode of production, but these institutions and the ideas through which man becomes conscious of his environment also become forces in social evolution. Marx expressed this conception in the Critique of Political Economy as follows:
“In the social production that men carry on, they enter into definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their will; these relations of production correspond to a definite stage of development of their material powers of production. The sum-total of these relations constitute the economic structure of society – the real foundation on which rise legal and political superstructures and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness.”
 
B. The Theory of Class Struggles
“In the work of production, men do not stand in relation to nature alone but also to each other.” These relations are the relations of property. In modern society the few own the property, the many are propertyless. Men thus fall into different classes. Classes are the product of the mode of production. They have divergent and opposed economic interests. In the productive relations these contradictory interests bring about the class struggle. Every class struggle is basically a political struggle. Such a struggle carried to its highest expression becomes a complete revolution. With the abolition of capitalism and the establishment of the classless society class exploitation disappears and the class struggle is resolved. Human will enters into the class struggle. It can therefore be said that man makes his own history, although “not out of the whole cloth, but within the material conditions at hand. All history is the history of class struggle.”
 
C. Dialectic Materialism
The material world including society undergoes constant change. It evolves. It is never static in any absolute sense. Dialectics is the method of analysing and explaining the process of material and social change; it enables us to understand and deal with the contradictions inherent in class society. In the struggle between the two opposing and irreconcilable classes dialectics show how society is lifted to a new and higherplane where opposing elements disappear in a new social synthesis. A change in the mode of production brings about the abolition of classes and a new evolution of humanity begins.
 
D. The Labor Theory of Value
Capitalism can be characterized by the fact that by and large all human needs can be bought and sold in the form of commodities. Among other commodities the worker sells his labor-power to the boss who employs him. Now by capitalist law, whatever the worker produces belongs to the employer, who in return pays the worker only part of the value of his product in the form of wages. The value retained by the capitalist in this exploitive process is called surplus value. Under capitalism the class struggle centers about the relative portions of the value produced by the worker that go to the worker in the form of wages and to the capitalist as surplus value.
* * *
Required Reading
The Communist Manifesto – Marx and Engels
Socialism, Utopian and Scientific – Engels
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (3. Dialectic Materialism)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Lesson Three
Dialectic Materialism

We now enter an important stage of our study – the discussion of dialectic materialism, the method by which scientists analyse the objective world and arrive at their conclusions. Dialectic materialism is the science of evolution of matter. It is the “science of the general laws of motion and development in nature, human society and thought” – according to Engels.
 
A. Society and Science in the 18th and 19th Centuries
By the middle of the 18th century, the development of capitalism had gone far. In England it had practically conquered; in France it was about to conquer. The bourgeoisie had acquired tremendous wealth because of the possibilities for increased production which the physical sciences opened up for it. By the 19th century, not only had the bourgeoisie conquered most of the world but the proletariat had sharply differentiated itself from the bourgeoisie and had begun to struggle in its own behalf.
The bourgeoisie gave tremendous impetus to the physical sciences. Later, in attacking the citadels of feudalism and in building its own economic foundations, it began to develop the social sciences to a certain point: economics, sociology, jurisprudence. But because of the social implications of these sciences to the bourgeoisie their scope and development was limited. It becomes increasingly clear that only the proletariat can possibly develop these sciences properly.
The 19th century society, dominated by metaphysical dogma and theology, certain attitudes in the sciences became more and more definitely established. Kant and Laplace were the first in modern times to apply the idea of evolution to the astronomical world in their theory of the development of the solar system. In 1858 the same idea was applied to the development of animal and plant species by Charles Darwin. Marx and Engels expressed and applied hypothetically the same idea of evolution to society in 1843–4. But even before the latter two applications, the conception of evolution had taken hold of the philosophical world, beginning with Kant and culminating, in an idealistic form, in Hegel. Revolutionary changes taking place in society at that time emphasized the idea.
 
B. Development of the Dialectic from Kant to Hegel
Without clearly understanding the significance of his analysis, Kant nevertheless did extraordinary work in showing the contradictory nature of universal principles when applied to the material world. To Kant the dialectic (the logic which analyses and points out the contradictions in the world) acts as a shield against the misuse of reason. To him the dialectic was the logic of illusion and proved that to know TRUE REALITY is impossible.
Hegel took the dialectic of Kant seriously. He declared however that the world (reality) was contradictory by nature. He showed that the dialectic was not the logic of illusion but the logic of reality. But as an idealist, he declared mind or spirit to be independent of and superior to matter. He assumed God, or spirit, to be the source of all things. God is external and harmonious, according to Hegel, though he reveals himself in the form of contradictions, i.e. Development.
The general process of development by contradictions was formulated by Hegel into a series of fundamental principles which can be summarised as follows: (a) Transformation into opposites; (b) Quantity differences cause quality changes; (c) Negation of the negation.
The first law (a) means that anything, under certain conditions, can be transformed into a thing having exactly the opposite nature. (Primitive society based on collective ownership of property is transformed, under the influence of certain factors, into a society based on private ownership). The second law (b) means that the continued addition of identical elements leads to a change in the properties of the thing added to. (Add successive units of heat to water changes it into steam.) The third law (c) means that under certain conditions a thing not only changes into its opposite, but if the development continues, it changes back into its former self but on a different plane, and with an added difference. A new cycle of development now begins again with the generation of new opposite.
While Hegel formulated the laws of the dialectic correctly in the formal sense, he could not apply them because, as an idealist, he used them to deduce realities from ideas instead of shaping ideas to reality. He tried to make the world conform to his ideas, instead of making his ideas conform to the world. He assumed as true what had to be proved to be true.
 
C. The Laws of Dialectic Materialism
1. Law of the Unity of Opposites (“polar unity of all things” – Lenin; thesis-antithesis – Hegel). Every developing situation contains contradictory elements (opposites). These opposites involve each other. One of these opposites is positive in the sense of resisting change; the other is negative, in that it seeks to destroy both itself and its opposite.

First Corollary: Opposites are not mere differences. They must involve each other’s existence. The existence of the one implied the existence of the other; the destruction of one implies the destruction of the other. Example one: The existence of the capitalist class involved the existence of the working class; the existence of the working class involves the existence of the capitalist class. The capitalist, one who hires and exploits workers, is unthinkable without workers. Neither could the wage-worker exists, for without capitalists to whom could they sell their labor-power? Example two: The capitalist class represents the positive element in modern social development. It seeks to keep intact the worker-capitalist relationship. The proletariat is the negative element. It seeks to destroy both the capitalist and itself by creating a classless society.
 
Second Corollary:
REAL opposites are those by which the development of a situation can be explained. False opposites cannot do so. Example one: St. Simon divided men into workers and idlers. This mechanical, non-dialectical antithesis is not capable of demonstrating social development. It therefore must be rejected.
 
Third Corollary: Opposites capable of explaining development cannot be selected through inner contemplation; but only through experiment, careful analysis and test. Only in this way can the spurious opposite be detected from the true.
 
Fourth Corollary: Opposites must involve a going-beyond, a development into a new situation in which they lose their original character. Otherwise they are not real opposites. Example: Empedocles, Nietszche, Spengler conceive the world as eternal repetition of what existed before. This concept denies that essential change can take place, that new properties can ever emerge.
 
Fifth Corollary: In real situations opposites are often complicated by other opposing forces which influence the fundamental opposition. Example: Capitalism today is not pure capitalism, consisting only of two classes; it contains the remnants of feudalism, also intermediate classes like farmers and professionals.
 
Sixth Corollary: There may be additional contradictions developing on the basis of the old opposition. Example: With the development of credit, money economy is subjected to new factors operating according to new laws, which complicate the fundamental laws of money economy. Example: Atoms combined in the form of molecules carry their contradiction to a higher plane when molecules combine to form complex organic compounds known as colloids, etc., up to the appearance of living matter.

Summary of First Law: We have stated the law of the co-existence or unity of the opposites. We have therefore stated the BASIS for change. We will now state the laws of change themselves, that is, the operation of these antagonistic forces thru TIME.
 
2. Law of Quantity Into Quality (Quantity differences cause quality changes, and vice versa) This law, as Hegel stated it, asserts that the addition of elements identical in their properties to a given situation will suddenly or ultimately change the properties of the situation. This law is a fundamental law of matter whose action in nature and society can be traced step by step. Example one: In geology, many illustrations. The addition of sand particles to a given area ultimately leads to the formation of rock. The addition of more rock superimposed on the old rock leads to the transformation of this sand-stone into another metamorphic rock like schists or slate. Example two:
In biology, it can be illustrated in cell-fission. Simple increase in volume of the cell due to addition of content leads to splitting up of that cell in two. Further the mere aggregation of cells ultimately leads to differentiation of function; outer skin, inner organs, excretory, etc. Example three: In political economy, numerous illustrations. Money must accumulate to a certain point before it can function as capital to buy machinery, raw material and labor. The working class much reach a certain size before the overthrow of capitalism can be accomplished. The aggregation of money in banks must reach a certain size before it can supercede industrial capital. Markets must reach a certain size before they can support large-scale machine industry which superceded handicrafts. NOTE:
This law has meaning only where the field of its operation is specified. For example, the mere accumulation of shoes will not alter the shoes, although it will have a terrific effect on the price of shoes. The mere accumulation of water in a given area will not change the character of the water, but will have an enormous effect on the habitat of humans.
 
3. Law of the Negation of the Negation (“permeation of opposites” – Lenin; thesis–antithesis–synthesis – Hegel) A basic, general law of motion. This law asserts that, in changing, a thing is permeated by and transformed into its opposite (negation) It is then permeated by and transformed into the opposite of the opposite (negation of the negation) that is to say, the original thing, only this time complicated by other factors – on a different plane. Example: Primitive communism, a controlled society, collective in character develops into its opposite, a class society, based on private property, and uncontrolled. Class society returns to its original status of a controlled, collective society, which, in turn lays the basis for the development of further contradictions on new planes. Each stage is created by the generation and triumph of the opposite which destroys the entire previous relationship.
 
D. Methodological Considerations
1. To be scientific the dialectic must be based on materialism. It should be obvious that the world must be conceived as independent of the human mind. The dialectic grew out of the need for a method of explaining motion and change in the material world.
 
2. The dialectic process is always subject to test and proof by demonstration. The mere knowledge of the existence of the dialectic process does not give you the right to declare that a certain law is operative in a given situation, unless it is SHOWN to be operative. It must be shown to inhere in, to describe the nature of the transformations taking place. In short, it must fit the facts. (See Hegel’s failures.)
 
3. The dialectician must acquaint himself thoroughly with the facts. The dialectic does not of itself reveal the secrets of nature. It helps reveal the movement and changes in reality only when we have thoroughly acquainted ourselves with its past and present.
 
4. The proof of the dialectic depends on the fact that the world moves dialectically, and not the other way round. The dialectic does not regulate how the world shall move. Matter, changing dialectically, is proof of dialectics. In other words, the dialectic is subject to the fundamental test of practice.
 
E. Relation of Formal Logic to the Dialectic
1. Logic, i.e. formal logic, aristotelian logic, is non-dialectical. It assumes that nature is static and not contradictory; that a thing cannot be itself and something else; that everything is entirely different from everything else. The metaphysical attitude which formal logic emphasizes grows out of the fact that at first mankind thought of things as entities. Because things changed so slowly, they seemed distinct from each other. He therefore discounted all change or motion. It also arose from man’s natural desire to have things sharply and clearly distinguished and to overlook the vague and obscure.
2. Nevertheless, logic is a useful science and has a very definite place in scientific thinking. Science succeeds in making distinctions that are clear and sharp, whose logical relations are well-defined. Here logic plays an extremely useful role. It is also useful in revealing mistakes in thinking due to ambiguous concepts or conclusions derived which are not warranted by the premises. When the domain of logic is properly delimited, it becomes part of the general science of the dialectic, a special phase of the dialectic.
3. All scientific method is really dialectical. It formulates the methods by which reality and its changes are discovered. It is therefore a formulation of dialectics. Most books on the scientific method are handicapped by a static approach. So far as it has gone, however, it has approached a clear statement of the dialectical method.
4. Broadly speaking, therefore, dialectics is that science which deals with the general laws of motion; with those properties all motions have.
* * *
Required reading
Critique of Political Economy – Marx; Introduction
Anti-Dühring – F. Engels; Chapters XII and XIII
Materialism and Empirio-Criticism – Lenin; Appendix on Dialectic
Fundamental Problems of Marxism – Plekhanov; Chapter V
Feuerbach – F. Engels; pp. 94–8 (on Hegel); pp. 60–2 (on Kant)
Suggested Reading
Historical Materialism – N. Bucharin; Chapter on Dialectic
Dialectic Materialism – A. Thalheimer; a brochure
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (6. Capitalist Contradictions and Decline)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Lesson Six
Capitalist Contradictions and Decline

A. Capitalism Characterized by Constant Change
The capitalist system like every material entity undergoes constant and rapid change owing to the inherent laws of its development. In their competition for profit the capitalists are forced to seek cheaper and better ways to produce commodities for exchange on the market. The continuous transformation and revolutionizing of the methods and instruments of production makes a perpetual disturbance of social conditions, an everlasting instability affecting relations of production as between boss and worker and in society in general.
“The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionizing the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production and with them the whole relations of society. Conservation of the old modes of production in unaltered form was, on the contrary, the first condition of existence for the earlier industrial classes. Constant revolutionizing of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones.” (Communist Manifesto)
 
B. Competition the Basic Law of Capitalism
Capitalists compete with each other for control of the market. Similarly workers content against one another for the sale of their commodity, labor power. Engels says:
“Competition is the most complete expression of this war of all against all which dominates modern bourgeois society. This war, a war of life and death, for existence, for everything, is waged not only between the various classes of society but also between the individual members of these classes. Everyone is in everyone else’s way; and consequently everyone tries to thrust aside and take the place of those in his way.”
 
C. The Falling Rate of Profit
No business can stand still and hope to survive in modern society. To compete successfully the boss is forced to expand his scale of operations, to increase production, and to take the market away from his competitors. To do this he seeks continually to lower the price of production, the value of his commodity. For this purpose he introduces newer, more productive machinery. Such machinery is more expensive and can only bring profits thru mass production. Now the factory building and machinery are not consumed directly in production. Hence they are called fixed or constant capital. Capital used to pay wages is directly consumed in the process of production. This is called variable capital. The boss may lower the value of his commodity by:

paying less wages;
 
working his help longer hours and/or speed-up.

And as capitalism develops “labor saving” machinery the composition of capital changes – the percentage of constant capital increases while variable decreases. This change in the composition of capital produces a fall in the rate of profit, because while profit is derived from surplus values realized by the employment of variable capital, the rate of profit is calculated on the total capital (both types) invested. Constant capital cannot create new values; it can only pass on to the commodities produced its own value as it is consumed in the production process. As the proportion of constant to variable capital increases, therefore, the rate of profit falls. This iron law of capitalist production drives the ruling class to attempt to overcome this falling rate of profit by increasing the mass of profit through the employment more productive (labor-saving) machinery and large scale production.
 
D. Anarchy of Production
Under capitalism production is not planned according to the needs of society. On the contrary each capitalist produces blindly for the world market, hoping to make a profit. He is not aware in advance how many other capitalists are producing the same commodities, nor how much each is throwing on the market. Thus, although he carefully plans production inside his factory, in society as a whole, complete anarchy reigns. When profits are high in any field capital rushes in, overproduces and brings down the profit and stifles production.
 
E. Overproduction and Crisis
Capitalism is the only system in history in which periodically – once a decade, now much oftener – a colossal volume of commodities are thrown on the market and cannot be sold. This is an overproduction for the market. The result is a capitalist crisis. Industry and commerce come to a standstill, factories close, workers are thrown out of work to starve in the midst of “too much”. In other words the forces of production have broken through the capitalist property relations which fetter them.
“We have seen that the ever-increasing perfectibility of modern machinery is, by the anarchy of social production, turned into compulsory law that forces individual industrial capitalists always to improve this machinery, always to increase its productive force. The bare possibility of extending the field of production is transformed for him into a similar compulsory law… The extension of the markets cannot keep pace with the extension of production. The collision becomes inevitable, and as this cannot produce any real solution, the collision becomes periodic as long as it does not break the capitalist mode of production into pieces. Capitalist production has begotten another vicious circle.” (Socialism, Utopian and Scientific – Engels)
“Things cannot be otherwise in a mode of production where the worker exists to promote the expansion of existing values, as contrasted with a mode of production where wealth exists to promote the developmental needs of the worker. Just as, in the sphere of religion man is dominated by the creature of his own brian, so in the sphere of capitalist production, he is dominated by the creature of his own hand.” (Capital, Vol. 1, p. 685)
Marx shows the effects of crisis on money and commodity prices:
“A crisis occurs whenever the returns of those merchants who sell at long range, or whose supplies have accumulated also on the home market, become so slow and meagre that the bank press for payment, or the notes on the purchased commodities become due before they have been resold. It is then that forced sales take place, sales made in order to meet payments. And then we have the crash, which brings the deceptive prosperity to a speedy end.” (Vol. III, p. 359)
The crisis is invariably international in character:
“And once the crisis has broken our say in England, it compresses the succession of these terms of payment into a very short period. It then becomes evident that all these nations have simultaneously overexported (and overproduced) and overimported (over traded); that prices were inflated in all of them, and credit overdrawn. And the same collapse follows in all of them.” (Vol. III, p. 578)
The crisis is a violent attempt to readjust the equilibrium of the capitalist mode of production, just as fever in case of human infection is an attempt on the part of the organism to readjust physiological equilibrium. Economic cycles and crisis must be analysed in terms of the stage of development or decay of capitalism under consideration. In the present epoch of capitalist decline, contracted, spasmodic periods of revival or prosperity are invariable followed by violent periods of depression and crisis.
“In crisis the contradiction between socialized production and capitalist appropriation ends in violent explosions.” (S – U & S – Engels)
 
F. Overproduction and Underconsumption
Underconsumption is a natural result of exploitive society, but it is not the cause of crisis.
“The underconsumption of the masses is a necessary condition of all forms of society in which robbers and robbed exist, and therefore of the capitalist system. But it is the capitalist system which first brings about the economic crisis.” (Anti-Dühring – Engels, p. 236)
“It is not a fact that too many necessities of life are produced in proportion to the existing population. The reverse is true. Not enough is produced to satisfy the wants of the great mass decently and humanely. It is not a fact that too many means of production are produced to employ the able bodied portion of the population. The reverse is the case… On the other hand there is periodically a production of too many means of production and necessities of life to permit of their serving as means of exploitation of the labourers at a certain rate of profit. Too many commodities are produced to permit a realization of the value and surplus value contained in them under the conditions of distribution and consumption peculiar to capitalist production, that is, too many to permit continuation of the process without ever-recurring explosions.” (Vol. III, p. 303)
“Overproduction of capital is accompanied by a more or less considerable relative overpopulation.” (Same)
 
G. Constricting World Markets
To overcome the declining rate of profit, the capitalist are compelled to introduce large scale industry. The home market cannot absorb the enormous mass of commodities produced by large scale industry. In the early period of capitalist development, crisis were overcome by colonial conquests; by wholesale destruction of excess commodities and capital; and by more thorough exploitation of the old markets. But in the modern world, all markets belong to one or another imperialist country. No part of the earth remains unclaimed. Capitalism can no longer expand its world markets on a world scale. On the contrary, markets are progressively restricting, strangling the economic life of society as a whole. The capitalist system, therefore, is said to have reached its stage of decline.
“While the productive forces increase in geometric, the extension of markets proceed at best in an arithmetic ratio.” (I – p. 365)
 
H. Monopoly Capitalism
In the competitive world the capitalists find it to their advantage to combine forces to make the most profit out of a given market. Trusts and monopolies come into being, controlled and manipulated by bankers and financiers through the credit system. Far from eliminating competition, monopoly creates a deadlier competition on a higher plane: between vast international monopolies. These tremendous concentrations of capital reach out and seize hold of the backward countries and make them colonies or semi-colonies for the purpose of exploitation. The national rivalries for control of these markets lead inevitably to war. The imperialist powers are today marching rapidly toward such a war.
 
I. The Struggle Between the Big and Little Capitalists
Monopoly capitalism and large scale production tends to drive the small manufacturer, farmer or banker out of business. He is powerless to compete with such overwhelming forces. Many of them exist by working for larger capitalists. They are mortgaged to the hilt and at the mercy of the banks. The falling rate of profit hits hardest the individual with small capital. Large sections of the middle class are being driven into the proletariat.
 
J. The Industrial Reserve Army
Large scale production has another important effect – the development of a reserve army of workers who are superfluous to industry. The continual introduction of new machinery to reduce costs means unemployment for more workers. Under capitalism unemployment must always exist. A vast army of permanently unemployed now exists which the capitalists use as a club over the employed worker to extract more surplus value. The problem of the employed and unemployed is closely bound up.
 
K. The Slum (Lumpen) Proletariat
There comes into existence a completely ruined and demoralized “class” which has lost all power to resist the bourgeoisie. It is devitalized. It produces tramps, thieves, drunkards, prostitutes. This “class” has forgotten how to work. It is the slum proletariat.
 
L. The Role of Reformism in the Class Struggle
Up to the beginning of the 20th century the conditions of the working class was gradually improving at the expense of the colonial peoples. Much of the labor movement of the pre-war period was permeated with the idea that by reform and the ballot-box the worker could improve his lot and bring about more and more socialism. This idea dominated the Social Democratic parties of the Second International. It has now conquered the Third. It governs much of the labor movement today. It is based on the illusion that the capitalist class controls its own destiny, that it can continue to improve social conditions. Following the world war, capitalism had entered the stage of decay. In order to keep profits up the capitalist class must force down wages. Wage-rates as a whole are failing. This leads to an intensification of the class struggle which undermines the basis for reformism in society.
 
M. Irreconcilable Nature of the Class Struggle
The capitalist exists only at the expense of the working class. The latter can gain better conditions only be irreconcilable militant struggle. The worker can gain complete freedom from exploitation only by overthrowing the capitalist class and taking over the means of production. The struggle between the worker and capitalist is incessant. On the economic plane it takes the form of strikes for wages and conditions. On the highest plane, when the worker becomes conscious of his position in society, it takes the form of building the revolutionary party aimed at the overthrow of capitalism.
 
N. The Central Contradiction in Capitalist Economy
Competition, inherent in the very nature of capitalism, tends to develop its opposite – concentration and centralization of the productive forces. Production is socialized. Yet the relations between men in the productive process remain anarchistic. Continuous warfare rages amongst the classes in society. The dialectics of capitalist development are now clear. Capitalism bears within itself the seeds of its own destruction.
* * *
Required reading
The Gotha Program – Marx
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte – Marx
The Decline of Capitalism – E. Varga
Capital – Marx; Vol. III, Chapter on Crises
Suggested Reading
History of Great American Fortunes – G. Myers [Vol. I & Vol. II]
The Decline of American Capitalism – L. Corey
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (Appendix: How to Organize and Conduct Successful Study Groups)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Appendix
How to Organize and Conduct
Successful Study Groups

Thousands of workers are seeking a way out of conditions becoming daily more intolerable. In every community it is not difficult to bring together a group willing and eager to study Marxian science, provided they have the assurance that the study will really teach them how to understand and influence the world they live in.
In assembling the group, select elements who not only want to KNOW but who want to PUT THEIR KNOWLEDGE TO USE. Windbags and dilettantes looking for a place to spout off should be excluded at the outset.
Size of Class: Too large a class is an obstacle. This course implies intensive study. When there are more than ten or twelve many members of the class will not be able to discuss and digest the material properly. Six or eight is a good size to begin with.
Object of the Class: Marxism is not an academic study. It is a training for action in the class struggle. This training, of course, will open up NEW FIELDS OF STUDY. But the mastery of each new field increases by that much the value of the student’s ACTIVITY. The goal of the study of Marxism therefore is a combination of scientific study and revolutionary action.
Organization of the Class:
Library: Before beginning the class it is important to have available for use the reading material indicated at the end of each lesson. Demos Press will supply almost all items on the reading list at cost. But there are certain inexpensive elementary Marxist works that every member of the class should be required to own. These are: The Communist Manifesto, Value Price and Profit, Wage-Labor and Capital, Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State and Socialism, Utopian and Scientific. These items constitute the beginning of a Marxist library. Copies for all should be on hand at the first session of the course.
Registration: Impress on the applicant that he is registering for a complete 10 week course of connected study and not for a weekly forum. Unless he intends to go through with the entire course, the registration should not be made. Strict adherence to this rule will immensely improve the character of the course.
Fee: Experience has shown that charging a nominal fee establishes a sound relationship between the member and the course as a whole. It also makes for regular attendance and a greater concentration on the subject matter. Where the fee cannot be paid in a lump, it can be paid in installments, but not for each session. The latter rule is necessary to discourage casual attendance. Where a worker is unable to pay the fee free tuition may be offered after consideration by the class committee.
Records: Strict record should be kept of registration and fee payments, of attendance, of the reading done by each member outside of the class and of the written answers to review questions made in the class. For this purpose a secretary or class committee (according to the size of the class) should be elected to assist the class leader.
Class Leader: Often the biggest obstacle to a successful class is the lack of a qualified leader. By “qualified” is not necessarily meant one who has great Marxist erudition, but rather one who has the ability to guide, stimulate and integrate the class and the material with life and the class struggle. Very often inexperienced people possess this quality. For such leaders, the following is presented as guiding principles:

The members of the class do not expect you to know it all. Assume you are on the class, learning and profiting along with the rest. Earn the recognition of the class by PREPARING yourself between sessions on the material assigned. Admit you do not know when you don’t. Never give a phony or evasive answer to a serious question.
 
When a question arises which you are not immediately capable of answering, assign the point to a member of the class to look up and report at the following session. At the same time ALWAYS DO SO YOURSELF. At first there may be a problem where to look for the desired information. If there are no local sources available, Demos Press will always be glad to get it for you. Be honest with the group consistently and you will build up your integrity and, in the final analysis, the integrity of the movement.

Class Method:

Marxism is not a set of dogmas to be memorized. It is a method of thinking and a guide to action. Every obscure or “unreasonable” point can be resolved by discussion and demonstration.
 
Encourage the habit of NOTE-TAKING, both at home and in the class. Every member is expected to jot down:

(1) points NOT UNDERSTOOD;
(2) points with which he DISAGREES, for discussion in the class; and
(3) definitions, formulae or striking statements which he considers worth preserving.

The notebook will become a valuable treasure of information and material.
 
Make the following clear to the members of the class: In this elementary course they cannot hope to cover and assimilate the material simply by listening to the lecture and discussion. They must make up their mind to spend not less than one evening per week studying the material assigned. As many of the class as can should get together during the week to argue out points. In any case each member is expected to come to class prepared to give a report on all of the assigned reading. Three quarters of the value of the course is lost to those who merely sit and listen.
 
REGULARITY OF ATTENDANCE is essential. Better an individual not attend at all than drop in once in a while. The casual visitor demoralizes the class and hampers continuity of study. He raises questions previously dealt with and wastes the precious time of the group by raising questions the class has already covered. Strict adherence to this rule will amply repay the class. Casual attendance will convert the class from one of intensive study to the open forum type of loose discussion.
 
Aim to COMPLETE THE COURSE or do not start it. Every uncompleted course makes the following course harder to begin. Go through with it. In doing so the morale of the members is lifted. They can say: WE HAVE GONE THROUGH this course – as something definitely accomplished. This will redound beneficially to the leader and to the class. Both the leader and the class as a whole will learn HOW TO CONDUCT the course.
 
Each session should be roughly divided into three parts of one half hour each. The entire session should not be over one and one half hours long. The first part is devoted to discussion and digestion of the reading material assigned the previous week. After determining and recording how much of the assigned material each member has read, two or three questions should be dictated for answer in writing. The written answers should be discussed by the entire class. The second part should be devoted to a presentation by the class leader of key material for the following session. This key material can be found in the text of this pamphlet. After assigning the reading for the following session the leader then, in the third part, throws the floor open for discussion of all the points of agreement and disagreement recorded in the notebooks.
 
The object of CLASS DISCUSSION is to stimulate workers to think out problems for themselves. The leader should prepare leading questions designed to do so. Do not allow the more capable comrades to monopolize the floor. Spread the questions around to cover all comrades, not forgetting the shy and backward members of the class. Let them present their own ideas, even if wrong. The class can criticise and discuss them. Allow the members to correct their own errors. A good leader will talk little – except in the second (lecture) part – but will guide the discussion, so that the class itself will develop the point of the lesson.

Practical Work: There will become evident, after the class has progressed three or four weeks, a close and living connection between the subject matter and the actual labor movement. The leader should plan, together with the League unit – where there is one – or with the class committee, various activities designed to illustrate that connection. Union and labor defense mass meetings, political demonstrations, picket lines should be visited and participated in. Leaflet distributions to industrial plants, visitations and discussions with contacts and reports of their arguments for or against Marxism should be made to give the class a practical understanding of the functioning of a revolutionary Marxist organization.
With these simple rules as a basis, and with others that the class leader will develop through his own experience, serious groups can take great strides towards the development of a new cadre of revolutionary Marxists in this country.
* * *
“Marx and Engels have left a monument stronger than any granite, more eloquent than any epitaph. They have left us a method of scientific research, rules of revolutionary strategy and tactics. They have left an inexhaustible treasure of knowledge which is still serving as a fathomless source for the study and comprehension of surrounding reality.” – from Marx and Engels by Riazanov.
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (Introduction)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Introduction

The whole capitalist world is in a crisis from which it cannot recover. Everywhere society is in chaos and ferment. Unemployment and starvation; crises and war are shaking up the thinking of millions of American workers and impelling them on the road of struggle against the system which oppresses them and drives them toward annihilation in the impending slaughter. The coming world war, as did the last, will bring a train of revolutions in its wake. The first of these may be in the United States. The shibboleths of prosperity and democracy, the American way and patriotism are being revealed as capitalist snares to increasing thousands of workers, who are groping for a solution to the problem of existence.
Marxism is our only hope. Marxism is the science of human society which supplies the key to the development of social existence, past and present, and projects the direction in which it is moving – must move if it is to survive. It is the theory and practice of working class action, of proletarian revolution.
Marxism is the only sure guide by means of which the worker on the picket line can win his strike; the union man can defeat the bureaucrat who sells him out to the boss; the unemployed worker can win a piece of bread; workers’ demonstrations can defend themselves against police brutality and the bayonets of the militia.
Marxism is the guide which alone can point out, lead and organize the struggle to smash the Fascist snake, turn the imperialist war into a civil war for the overthrow of the capitalist system, thus opening the way to a new and decent life.
The coming struggles will raise up thousands of bold, courageous and self-sacrificing working men and women who will constitute the vanguard of the coming revolution. To play their part they must understand the theory and practice of Marxism. To assist this work of education and training the Central Committee of the Revolutionary Workers League of the United States offers this course which has been in preparation for over a year.
May 1939
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (2. The Evolution of Society)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Lesson Two
The Evolution of Society

The deepest understanding and demonstration of the laws of social science (Marxism) can be derived from a study of the evolution of society from the beginning of time to the present. This evolution can be divided into four distinct stages: 1) Primitive Communism; 2) Chattel Slavery; 3) Serfdom (Feudalism); 4) Wage-slavery (Capitalism).
 
A. Primitive Communism
The earliest known system of society, of which there exist examples today in certain backward spots of the earth. Men lived together in groups known as gens or clans. These were units of a larger group called the tribe. This type of organization is built up on kinship or blood relationship. There was no private property, and hence no classes. The land was owned and exploited in common. While the simple tools and weapons of the period might be held and used temporarily by the individual, the products of labor were owned in common. Each person got what he needed from the common store or supply. Necessarily life was extremely primitive. Great changes in the material conditions of primitive existence brought about changes in social organization. Domestication of animals and the introduction of simple agriculture permitted man to be less dependent upon the hunt for his food supply. Thus he adopted new habits of life. A long period of social development under savagery and barbarism laid the basis for the system of chattel slavery.
 
B. Chattel Slavery
The extension of the domestication of animals and agriculture meant that more labor had to be expended and employed by the shepherd and planter in these industries. Labor become more valuable. Various tribes learned not to kill their captives in battle but to use them as slaves, because the captive could thus produce more wealth than necessary to maintain him. Greece and Rome were the classical slave states of antiquity, although slavery existed in all parts of the world where society was emerging from primitive communism. Slavery arose through the development of private property in land and the recognition of the right” to mortgage, to buy and sell land. The debtor who failed to pay his debt became the slave of the creditor. The rise of private property broke down the old tribal system of life. It introduced a new form of social organization: the state. The state was created by the propertied class to protect their property from those who possessed no property. But the very system of slavery proved its own undoing. Freemen could not compete with slaves and themselves fell into slavery. The system was extended to such an extreme, wealth became concentrated into so few hands, that the whole system was weakened from within by corruption and rebellion and fell under blows from without by invasion. The prevailing mode of production under chattel slavery was agricultural.
 
C. Feudalism
Feudalism is the dictatorship of an armed ruling class over an unarmed peasantry based on a system of land tenure. In grows up in the period of incessant warfare following the dissolution of the slave states. A special class of warriors arises to “protect” the toiling peasants in order at the same time to exploit them. The peasants become “bound” to the soil. The military leaders assume hieratical ranks from a king and nobility down to the knight. Feudalism is a “static” system in that it exists in local isolation with fixed customs. Economy is at a subsistence level. Money economy, trade, the new luxuries from the East, the rise of towns within the feudal economy – all these are alien and inimical elements that arise to break down the feudal system and gives way to the modern system of capitalism. Agricultural production gives way to hand tool production (handicraft). Feudal economy loses its fight with handicraft production which is much more efficient. This development gives birth to what we call capitalism.
 
D. Capitalism
Capitalism arises out of exchange economy, trade, buying and selling in the market. The rising merchant class spread this system over the entire globe and created the world market. Everything becomes a commodity, a useful article produced not for consumption by the producer but for sale on the market. It is this system that we shall study more in detail in this course. The capitalist mode of production, based on the monopoly and private ownership of the means of production, is distinguished from all other past and future modes of production by 1) wage-labor; 2) commodity production; and 3) surplus value.
* * *
Required Reading
The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State – Engels
The Communist Manifesto – Marx and Engels
Suggested Reading
The Evolution of Property – Paul Lafargue
Two Pages from Roman History – Daniel DeLeon
The Mark – Engels
Marxism and Darwinism – Pannekoek
Ancient Society – Lewis Morgan
 

Cowl: ABC of Marxism (8. The State and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat)



Carl Cowl Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

ABC of Marxism

Carl Cowl
ABC of Marxism
* * *
Lesson Eight
The State and the Dictatorship
of the Proletariat

A. Definitions
The Marxist theory of the state can be summarized as follows: It is a machine for the suppression of one class by another; it is “the executive committee of the ruling class” (Marx); and the “summarized reflected form of the economic desires of the class which controls production” (Engels). It is an organization of people by national territory; it is a public power of coercion (police, army, prisons); it exacts taxes and creates public debts; it is a bureaucracy “above society”.
The state is a machine created to maintain the domination of one class over another. Before the advent of slavery no classes existed. Although humanity lived under primitive conditions of equality and low productivity of labor, primitive man had the highest form of social organization of all time. There couldn’t possibly have existed groups of people who occupied themselves exclusively with administration and dominated the rest of society. Slavery, the first form of social division into classes, arose when primitive agriculture was able to produce a surplus. (See Lesson Two). This surplus became the means of consolidating a slave-owning class. But in classless society there was no means – because there was no need – of holding captives in slavery. One section of society cannot be forced to work systematically for another section without the maintenance of a permanent apparatus of power. Wherever classes appeared, there rose the state.
 
B. The Slave State
The slave state was an apparatus which empowered the slave owners to control and dominate slave labor and to protect their property from rival slave states. Slave states were relatively small because they had inferior methods of communication and transport. Mountains, rivers and seas were tremendous obstacles. The states consequently developed within small geographical boundaries.
 
C. Greek and Roman Slave States
The forms which slave states took varied. The Greek were republics, democracies; the Roman became monarchic. Literally translated, democracy means rule of the people; monarchy, rule of a royal individual. Despite these formal differences all slave states were states of slave owners. They all regarded the slave as sub-human and unworthy of citizenship. Roman law established the slave as chattel or private property. Laws against murder and for the protection of integrity and dignity of the person did not apply to slaves but only to slave owners. They alone enjoyed civil rights, took part in elections and other political functions. The common principle of all forms of slave states were to deprive the slave of all rights and to oppress him.
 
D. The Feudal State
Essentially the same principle applies under feudalism. The serf was chained to the land he worked. Certain days he worked the land given him by the feudal lord. The rest of the days he worked the lord’s land. Class rule remained. The feudal landowners enjoyed all civil rights. The serf was absolutely without political rights. Both monarchies and republics existed under feudalism. But only landowners having serfs under them were the dominating force in society.
 
E. Slave and Serf Insurrections
History is an unbroken series of attempts by oppressed classes to shake off their chains. Wars lasting decades were waged for and against the emancipation of the slaves. One of the greatest insurrections of antiquity was led by Spartacus, a Roman slave who, 2,000 years ago, organized and led an army of slaves which shook the all-powerful Roman Empire to its foundations. Feudal history, also is full of serf insurrections and revolts. In Germany, for instance, the struggle of the landowners and serfs in the Middle Ages took on the character of a tremendous civil war. The peasant revolts continued right on into the capitalist system.
 
F. Rise of the Capitalist State
The development of commerce and commodity exchange led to the crystallization of a new social class, the capitalists. Capital came into being toward the end of the Middle Ages when the discovery of America permitted world commerce to develop to an unprecedented degree. (See Lesson Four). The increase in supply of the precious metals and the introduction of currency permitted the accumulation of tremendous wealth in the hands of the few. Gold and silver were recognized as riches all over the world. The economic strength of the old class of feudal landowners diminished and that of the new class of capitalists developed. Society was transformed. The former division into slaves and slave-holders, serfs and feudal lords, disappeared. Everyone was considered equal before the law, irrespective of how much property or wealth he possessed. The law protected the property of the rich and poor alike from the attacks of the propertyless masses who became impoverished and, finally, were forced to become wage workers. This period opens the capitalist era.
The new society opposed the bondage of serfdom with the slogan of personal freedom. In practice however, this meant freedom only for those who possessed property. The state recognized the right of the industrialist, the factory owner and the tradesman to private property. Admitting these rights and the complete subordination of the propertyless workers to them, the capitalist state at the same time proudly declared that its rule is based on freedom and equality; that the state is no longer a class state; that it represents the will of the whole people. It proclaimed freedom of speech, press and assembly and finally universal suffrage. Its preachers, scholars, philosophers and lawyers declared the class struggle to have been abolished.
 
G. Character of the Capitalist State
But the state continues to be a machine with which the capitalists hold the working class and middle classes in check. The form of capitalist rule, as in previous states, varies from country to country and from time to time.
Bourgeois Democratic Form: The more democratic the form, the more cynical the rule. In the United States, one of the most democratic republics in the world, power is held by a little group of finance capitalists who control society through corruption and open brutality. No democracy or franchise can alter the essence of this state of affairs. They control the working class movement by corrupting and buying its leaders. But they use merciless brutality when the working class exceed the bounds set by their corrupted leaders. Officially, Engels says, the democratic republic “knows nothing about property.” The possessing class rules through the elections system, by corruption of officials and by the tight alliance of finance capital with the government, the former having the national economy and means of communication and transport concentrated in its hands. Congress and elections are its marionettes.
Compared to the feudal state the democratic republic represents tremendous progress: It gave the proletariat the possibility of attaining the organization and discipline necessary for systemic struggle against capitalism. Neither the serfs nor the slaves had anything of the sort. The latter revolted, began civil wars, but were never able to organize a conscious majority of the population. They never clearly understood their goal. Consequently they were pawns in the hands of the rulers. For the first time in history the subject class is able to recognize its own role and to develop incentive for building an international movement of millions of workers all over the world. Without parliament and the franchise this development would have been impossible. That is why these institutions have taken on great significance in the eyes of the masses and why they are slow to recognize that they are outlived and to follow the revolutionary road to power.
 
Fascist Form: “The democratic republic is the best possible political shell for capitalism ... no change, either of persons, institutions or parties in the bourgeois republic can change it.” (Lenin). As the revolutionary forces develop under capitalism, the deception of democracy falls away. Fascism emerges. It is the desperate reaction of the bourgeoisie to the threat of proletarian revolution. It is the form adopted by the capitalist state when the democratic means of subjection have failed.

It shatters and suppresses all working class organizations: unions, parties, cooperatives; shoots and tortures working class militants and terrorizes and regiments the whole working class. At the same time it accuses Marxism of destroying freedom, of aiming to build a coercive state, of desiring to suppress one section of society by another.
 
It uses the middle class to secure power, then thrusts them down to the level of the workers.
 
It establishes a tighter amalgam of finance capital with the state against the workers and petty-bourgeois masses and against rival nations. Nationalism becomes rampant. Fascism is the open, violent, unmasked form of capitalist rule.
 

Social Democratic and People’s Front Forms: Both social democracy and the People’s Front are varieties of bourgeois democracy in which the “socialist” or labor features are exaggerated. They arise in the period of wars and revolutions when the working class is moving toward power. They are instruments used to head off the final conflict by feeding the workers illusions about

a ready made socialist state under capitalism; and about
 
the bourgeoisie as friends of labor.
 

State Capitalist Form: The objective basis for socialism is created by capitalist production itself. So capitalist government takes over or intervenes in private enterprise as part of a “social” program. It does so, however, in an attempt to overcome the anarchy of production and for the purpose of maintaining capitalism. In the early growth period of capitalism state capitalist enterprises were progressive because they stimulated more rapid economic development. Not today. Many reformers believe that state capitalism can unfold progressively into a new social order, that capitalism can be “organized” and “grow over” into socialism. Like Fascism, state capitalism in its monopoly form uses a vulgarized socialism to combat the coming of socialism. It is not a transition to socialism but the direct opposite. It is a form of capitalist struggle to retain power.
 
H. Communism – The Classless Society
Capitalism has developed productive capacity to the point where it is possible to supply every human being with more than enough. Yet capitalism can continue to exist only by aggravating want and starvation. Only a classless society, communism, can produce order out of this chaos, a society based on the socialized economic foundations already built by capitalism in its progressive period. The following are the essential characteristics of communism:

Common ownership of the means of production and distribution of wealth. The elimination of the right of individuals or groups to dispose of the means of life. That right belongs to society as a whole. Hence, no exploitation of one group by another.
 
Economic and social planning on a world scale: This is made possible by the abolition of competition between capitalists, the anarchy of production, wars and militarism.
 
Production for use, not for profit: Substitution of the good for the commodity.
 
The abolition of the state: Under communism the state is unnecessary. Government in the form of armies, police, prisons, property laws gives way to a system of administration, of accounting, management and supervision of industry and agriculture by all the people, such as is necessary to maintain world economy in smooth running order.
 
Disappearance of artificial differences and barriers fostered by capitalism: Nationalism, race hatred, religious dissention, caste envy are destroyed by international production and cooperation.
 
A tremendous increase in the productive capabilities of the human race: Human energy now necessarily spent in the class struggle or destroyed in war, unemployment and unproductive pursuits such as competitive advertising, soldiering, relief, etc., will be set free. Increased productivity means a shorter work day, security and increased leisure. Society can then take from the individual according to his abilities and give to him according to his needs. The higher form of human organization that existed in primitive society with low productivity now is recreated on a highest level of productivity. On this foundation culture – the arts and sciences – can rise to undreamed of heights.
 

I. The Workers State – Dictatorship of the Proletariat
No ruling class in history has voluntarily given up its power and privileges. The more recent experiences of the Paris Commune, the Russian Revolution, the German and Hungarian revolutions, the development of Fascism prove that when the workers challenge the power of the capitalist class, democracy is scrapped and armed aggression is substituted. Reform and the ballot box are no avail. Victory can come only by revolutionary struggle.
“Between capitalists and communist society lies a period of revolutionary transformation of the former into the latter. To this also corresponds a political transition period in which the state can be no other than the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat.” (Marx – Gotha Program)
“The working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machinery and wield it for its own purpose.” (Marx – Preface to Communist Manifesto)
The working class must break up, shatter the bureaucratic and military machinery as a precondition for any real people’s revolution. When this is done the class war is not suspended. The bourgeoisie still exists. It has money. It still has tremendous ideological and institutional hold on the masses. It can recruit armies with the aid of foreign capitalists. It will engage in sabotage and counter-revolution. It would be suicide for the revolution to allow the bourgeois enemy to do this, or to allow it to share in any way in government or political powers.
The suppression of the former exploiters immediately produces a fuller democracy. The dictatorship of the proletariat creates democracy for the vast majority, something that never existed before in class society. The standing army is abolished and the armed people take its place. All officials are elected, subject to immediate recall and receive workers wages.
Organization of national unity: With the working class at the head of the nation, bourgeois-military-burocratic centralism is replaced by conscious, democratic, proletarian centralism. As the resistance of the former capitalists, bankers, landlords and generals is broke, the class lines tend to disappear. Little by little the state loses its reason for existence. It withers away and society passes into communist conditions of life without further revolution. Thus the dictatorship of the proletariat is really a transition period between capitalism and communism.
 
J. The Workers Councils
History has revealed a new form of government, the workers’ councils (soviets). They are combined legislative and executive bodies composed of representatives elected from industrial units. By their nature they are class organizations from which all capitalists, landlords and other exploiting elements are excluded. They are not created by decree from above. They develop spontaneously through united actions of the working class during the revolutionary crisis. By means of the workers’ councils the class not only takes power, but is able to hold it.
 
K. Degeneration of the Russian Soviet State
The Russian revolution of 1917–18 overthrew the bourgeois state. Workers’ councils were established as organs of the dictatorship. Bourgeois democracy was overthrown and proletarian democracy established. Industry, banks, transport were nationalized into state property. Bourgeois relations in big industry were overthrown. Workers control of production was instituted. Workers militias were created. The land was given to the peasants though it remained state property legally. Foreign trade became a state monopoly. The Bolshevik party controlled the state apparatus. The foreign policy of Soviet Russia was designed to extend and promote world revolution. Bureaucratic capitalist oppression of national minorities was replaced by the right of self-determination of nations.
But it is not possible to completely eliminate capitalism by the seizure of power in one country. Capitalist forms continue to exist side by side with new economy. The historical contradiction produced by this state of affairs can be resolved only by:

the extension of the revolution on a world scale or by
 
retrogression back to capitalism.

Following the defeats of the Finnish, Hungarian, Italian and German uprisings, the second process began in Russia. By 1924 the pressure of the bourgeoisie, strengthened by the defeats of the world proletariat and the revival of capitalist economy, seriously affected Soviet life. The state bureaucracy, originally of the working class, emerged as a petty-bourgeois stratum with interests conflicting with those of the proletariat. The betrayal of the English general strike of 1926 and of the Chinese Revolution of 1925–27, the expulsion of the left wing of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the execution and exile of thousands of its leaders and members, the adoption of nationalism and revisionism as the program of the Communist International at the Sixth World Congress – all these events marked the victory of Stalinism over Marxism, the political subordination of the proletariat to the interests of the world bourgeoisie and of the petty bourgeoisie in the Soviet Union, the triumph of “bourgeois law” over workers democracy. The foreign policy of the Soviets stifled revolutionary action by the working class. The bureaucracy used the state to destroy all control by working class of the dictatorship. Out of the expanded industrial and agricultural enterprises rose an enormous bureaucracy and a new bourgeois stratum of millions of human beings and thousands of institutions.
The bureaucracy ruled by police and terror and scrapped the soviet forms of the workers state. The new Stalin constitution established the juridical basis for the reintroduction of private property in land, industry and trade. The Soviet state is used by Stalinism as an openly counter-revolutionary force.
Situation Today:

Private property in industry legalized and restored to an extent;
 
Group private property established;
 
Inheritance of wealth reintroduced;
 
Appropriation of surplus values thru interest and a disguised form of profit (enormous salaries) restored;
 
“State in hands of a political-industrial bureaucracy which oppresses the masses in its own interests and in that of the world bourgeoise.”
 
The economic foundations on which the soviet state were built in 1917 are today largely fictive, on their last legs. But
(I) They still stand.
(II) The traditions of October 1917 are still alive in the masses.
 

L. The “Permanent Revolution”
The working class cannot take power in every country at the same time. The revolution occurs in single countries. The Russian revolution was the first to hold power after seizing it. But “the completion of the socialist revolution within national limits is unthinkable.” In order to succeed it must develop beyond national boundaries and kindle the already revolutionized masses in other countries to revolt. The classless society can be introduced only on a world scale.
 
M. Summary
“So long as exploitation exists there can be no equality. The landowner cannot be equal with the landworker, the capitalist with the worker, the hungry man with the statesman. The machine of state before which people bow with superstitious veneration, believing that it represents the power of the whole people, is uprooted by the proletariat which declares their old ideas to be lies. We have taken this machine away from the capitalists. We have rebuilt it for us. With this machine we will drive all exploitation out of the world, and, when all possibilities for exploitation have been abolished and not a single landowner or factory owner exists, then one human being will not be overfed while another goes hungry. Only when the last possibility of exploitation has been abolished will we fling the machine into the scrap heap. Then there will be no state and no exploitation. That is the standpoint of the Communist Party.” (Lenin)
“The state, then, did not exist for all eternity. There have been societies without it, that had no idea of any state or public power. At a certain stage of economic development, which was of necessity accompanied by division of society into classes, the state became the inevitable result of this division. We are now rapidly approaching a stage of evolution in production, in which the existence of class has not only ceased to be a necessity, but becomes a positive fetter on production. Hence these classes must fall as inevitably as they once arose. The state must irrevocably fall with them. The society that is to reorganize production on the basis of a free and equal association of producers will transfer the machinery of state where it will belong: into the Museum of Antiquities by the side of the spinning wheel and the bronze axe.” * (Engels – Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State)
* * *
Required Reading
Origin of the Family – Engels; Chapter IX
Critique of the Gotha Program – Marx
The Russian Question (RWL Thesis – outline)
Civil War in France – Marx
State and Revolution – Lenin
 

