


After nearly two years of silence, Father Coughlin has once again come out of his hide-away and has begun his anti-Semitic, anti-labor rabble-rousing rantings at his Shrine of the Little Flower.
In the spring of 1942, Attorney-General Biddle announced that he intended to bring a charge of sedition against Coughlin’s Social Justice for its attacks upon the govern ment and the way it was prosecuting the war. After challenging the Department of Justice and even offering to appear as a witness, Coughlin suddenly decided to pull in his horns, and ceased publication of his hate-mongering weekly. He knew that a public trial would reveal who his backers and supporters were – something which might have proved very embarrassing to a number of people in high society and the upper brackets, and therefore he decided on a policy of underground existence, for a time at any rate. The Department of Justice assisted in this cover-up by abruptly dropping all talk of charges, indictment and trial.
It would, of course, be erroneous to believe that with this Coughlin and his organization ceased to exist. No, he was merely biding his time until circumstances had changed and he would once more be able to spew forth his fascist doctrines. At the present time, Coughlin is getting ready for the post-war period, which he knows will be filled With a great many economic and political issues.
 
A Post-War Program!
What, then, is Coughlin’s post-war program?
As has always been the case with him, he has not stated clearly and lucidly what he stands for. Like every fascist, he hides behind high-sounding, but often meaningless, words in order to attract a following without at the same time revealing to it exactly what his aims are. To such a manner of operation Coughlin seems to be exceptionally well suited. His biographer, Ruth Muggle-bee, reveals that as a youth in school he discovered how useful it was to cover up gaps in knowledge with brilliant oratory. This talent, which he has developed since then, has served him well in his fascist pursuits. What he lacks in clear thinking, in ideas, he compensates for by dazzling speeches and histrionics. That is why so many of his speeches are contradictory. His schemes for getting the country out of the depression, for example, were so faulty that any schoolboy could have torn them apart.
And yet, his are not simply the ravings of a madman. Just as Hitler’s speeches did not seem to pass the test of logic and reason, and yet had a logic and reason of their own, so it is with Coughlin. In spite of all the irrationality of Hitler’s oratory, the program which his movement, eventually evolved arid put into effect in Germany turned out to be very rational from the point of view of the German capitalist class. An examination of Coughlin’s past reveals that he follows the pattern of Hitler, not as his agent, but rather as his admirer and imitator.
Coughlin, an obscure, Canadian-born priest, began his career in 1926 in Detroit, when the Free Press (with which he later had a fall-out) helped him get radio time, ostensibly to preach religious sermons. A little later, when Coughlin turned from religion to politics, and the CBS and NBC networks refused to sell him time, the Free Press once again came to his assistance by helping him hire his own stations and connecting telephone service.
It was only in 1929, after the big crash, that Coughlin’s radio speeches began to appeal to larger audiences. He denounced the “international bankers” who had caused the depression, but urged his listeners to support Hoover. Soon he switched his allegiance to Roosevelt and the New Deal, making his famous. Roosevelt or Ruin speeches.
 
Anti-Union Program
In the early days of the New Deal, Coughlin spent his time attacking the banks and big business. He said he was for the “little man,” the small business man and the unemployed worker. He even declared himself in favor of a just annual living wage.
His program for getting the country out of the depression boiled itself down to the following points:




Organization of a central bank.
Raising the price of silver.
Nationalization of the trade unions.
Return to small-scale production.




Though still not the complete sixteen-point program which his National Union for Social Justice adopted in 1934, its fascist tendencies were already revealed. As for the first point, it was never made clear how a central bank, operated by a government in control of the bankers and industrialists, would abolish the power of these same bankers and industrialists. The second point was intended to take care of Coughlin’s own financial interests, for in 1934 Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau revealed that the largest holder of silver futures in the state of Michigan was none other than Amy Collins, Coughlin’s personal secretary.
By nationalization of the trade unions, Coughlin was really calling for their company unionization. He was trying to introduce into this country Hitler’s method of dealing with labor unions, namely, by having the government take them over and run them in the interests of big business.
Coughlin declared: “I believe not only in the right of the laboring man to organize in unions, but also in the duty of the government to facilitate and protect these organizations against the vested interests of wealth and intellect.”
 
Controlling Unions
Later, during the Detroit strikes of 1934, he told what he meant by “vested interests of intellect.” He was referring to the leaders of the trade unions, especially the more progressive and militant ones.
In the Detroit Times, on October 10, 1934, he stated:
“Make the Department of Labor a real power! Let it take over the functions of collective bargaining, the function which the AFL (the CIO was not yet a factor – R.C.) is now trying to fulfill. Let it supplant the AFL entirely. Why should the workers pay dues to a labor organization to protect a right which is guaranteed by law? The service of the federation should be a government service paid for by taxation.”
Every trade unionist today knows that the right to organize, the right to bargain collectively, remain rights on paper only unless the workers enforce them by actually organizing and actually engaging in collective bargaining. No government agency has ever enforced these rights for the workers. This they have had to do themselves through their own organizations. What Coughlin was proposing was the destruction of the free and independent trade union movement and the substitution for it of trade unions, if such they can be called, which exist today in fascist countries and in Stalin’s Russia. We can be sure that as he renews his activities, this will constitute one of the chief planks of his new platform.
In the past, Coughlin’s proposal was rejected by the entire labor movement, and denounced by every liberal as the fascist “solution to the labor problem.” Now Coughlin will at least be able to count on the support of one group, the most reactionary, INSIDE the labor movement, the Communist Party, whose leaders are already sending up trial balloons for the proposition that the government take over the trade unions which the American working class has built and fought to keep free from such interference for many years and in many bitter battles.
 
What’s Wrong with Industry
The last point in the above-mentioned program is really the most reactionary of all, since it seeks to turn back the wheels of history and progress. The United States today is among the most advanced countries in the world by virtue of its great industries, its huge factories and mills, its huge productive capacity. The trouble has been, and is today, that these industries, created by the toil of millions of workers, belong to a numerically small class of capitalists, who operate them for the purpose of extracting profits. It is not the industries, it is not the large sizeof the factories, which cause the impoverishment of the great majority of the American people. On the contrary, these very same industries make POSSIBLE a vast improvement in .the standard of living of all the people, PROVIDED they are owned and operated by the people, through a government owned and operated by the people. What is wrong in the United States today is the OWNERSHIP of these large-scale industries. Change that, by establishing a workers ‘ government which will take over these industries, and the problem is practically solved.
Coughlin’s “solution” to the problem of ownership of the big factories is to get rid of them and revert back to the outlived way of producing the necessities of life through small-scale production. With this plank he appeals to the small business man who dreams of successfully competing with the big capitalist by reducing the latter also to a small business man. Hitler too rallied the desperate middle classes behind him on such a program. Once in power, however, Hitler revealed how impossible it was to put such a program into effect and he ruthlessly crushed those of his followers who had taken him seriously and proceeded openly to operate as the agent of his real masters, the big industrialists and bankers.
The working men and women, naturally, have nothing to gain from such a course.
 




Another plank in Coughlin’s platform, though not officially listed, but nevertheless one which is constantly emphasized and stressed, is anti-Semitism. Coughlin has denied from time to time that he is “against the Jews,” yet on every possible occasion during his silver price campaign he has spoken about “Gentile silver” as opposed to “Jewish gold.” He constantly denounces the “international bankers” without specifying by name the leading bankers of the United States, most of whom are not Jewish. While he was busy condemning the bankers, he counted among his friends Winthrop W. Aldrich, president of the Rockefeller Chase National Bank; was on intimate terms with Robert M. Harris of the New York Cotton Exchange and George Le Blanc, described by Coughlin as “perhaps the world’s foremost gold trader.”
The purpose behind his attack on the “international bankers” is not to point out the fundamental antagonism between the working class and the capitalist class, but to deflect the dissatisfaction of the former with the real culprits into the channels of anti-Semitism and racial hatred.
The National Union for Social Justice adopted a sixteen-point program which was an elaboration of what we have described above. In1939, Coughlin wrote in Social Justice:
“Practically all the sixteen principles of social justice are being put into practice in Italy and Germany.”
While this is not exactly true, especially with that plank which called for conscription of wealth in time of war, a living annual wage, etc., Coughlin here revealed what the PURPOSE of his sixteen principles is – to institute a fascist regime in this country. He has spoken in favor of a corporate state on the Italian model and against democratic government, which he labeled as “majorityism.”
 
Founder of Christian Front
In 1938, Coughlin embarked on a new venture. Through Social Justice, which weekly spewed forth its anti-Semitic, anti-labor venom, he sponsored the organization of the Christian Front. This organization was to be the training school for the coming fascist gangs in the United States. In the main, it was composed of discontented middle class elements who were attracted by Coughlin’s demagogy and promises. Its purpose was to “combat communism,” which actually meant to combat the organized labor movement. For a period of time, the Christian Front goon squads spent their time breaking up union meetings, working class gatherings, attacking individuals connected with the labor movement, terrorizing Jewish children, acting as strike-breakers, etc.
These hoodlums were brave only so long as they were unopposed. As soon as the labor movement began to take steps to resist their assaults, these hoodlums were not difficult to deal with. During the two years during which the Christian Front operated in this manner, many workers came to learn that they could not rely upon government agencies to protect them from the fascist gangsters. In New York City, for example, it was a common occurrence for the police to stand by and merely look on while these gangs proceeded to break up workers’, meetings. A good number of the policemen themselves were members of the Christian Front; others cooperated with the Fronters.
In 1939, the workers of New York City showed how it was possible to deal effectively with fascist hoodlums. The Christian Front decided to organize a parade for Father Coughlin. This was shortly after the famous anti-Nazi demonstration called and organized by members of the Workers Party and the Socialist Workers Party to which 100,000 workers turned out.
In response to the proposed “Manifestation of Christianity,” as the Coughlinite parade was to be called, the leaders of the anti-Nazi demonstration issued a call to the workers of the city to prevent such a march. The call itself was enough to make Coughlin and his Christian Fronters change their minds and call off their “manifestation.” For, confronted with the organized force of labor, consciously combatting fascism, the fascist gangs cannot stand up and fight.
In 1940, when members of the Christian Front were under arrest, charged with conspiracy to overthrow the United States government, Coughlin repudiated the organization. No one seriously believed this repudiation, but it saved his own neck and kept him out of the courts. He acted in the same way later when Social Justice was banned from the mails and when he gave up publication of his paper to avoid facing trial for sedition. In this way, he has been able to continue his activity underground until recently, when he began “preaching” again in his church.
Although Coughlin has been repudiated by individuals connected with the Catholic church, he has never been officially denounced or thrown out. The church has refused to take responsibility for him, but it has never seen fit to expel him, thus indicating to thousands and thousands of Catholics that Coughlinism is quite in keeping with at least some of the doctrines of the Catholic Church. Coughlin’s New York henchman is the Rev. Edward Curran, president of the International Catholic Truth Society, and in New England, Francis Moran headed the Christian Front.
Among some of the notables who have supported Coughlin, or with whom he worked closely, are James H. Rand, Jr., of Remington-Rand, notorious for its anti-labor policies; Vincent Bendix of Bendix Aviation; the former Borough President of Queens, George Harvey, defender of the Christian Fronters; Henry Ford, Walter P. Chrysler and William Randolph Hearst. He has had dealings with Merwin K. Hart, agent of Franco in the United States. Joe McWilliams and Silver Shirter Pelley have also sung his praises.
Coughlin’s Catholicism may stand in the way of his becoming THE leader of a unified fascist movement, if and when such is organized in this country. But now that he is back in circulation, we can be sure that he will contribute all he can to the spreading of fascist doctrines, and sponsoring fascist organizations, utilizing his priesthood for this purpose. In this way, he is an important factor in the general fascist network and bears watching.
 




One of the points of difference between the United States and Great Britain is the problem of India. The former prefers that the British adopt a more liberal policy toward India for two reasons: First, to arouse greater interest and participation by the Indian masses in the war by giving them, or more accurately, by promising to give them something to fight for. The second reason is more important and far-reaching. The United States would like to break England’s monopoly on India so that American business can enter and compete on equal terms with British business. Given the loss of British political control, American business could easily gain the upper hand.
On numerous occasions, however, when Roosevelt tried to discuss the Indian problem with Churchill, he got a cold shoulder, according to a statement by Drew Pearson, newspaper columnist. Pearson reports further that when U.S. Ambassador Phillips returned from India and talked with Churchill, the latter banged the table and declared:
“I have always been right about Europe. I’m also right about India. Any change in policy now will mean a blood bath.”
Now this statement of Churchill may be interpreted in several ways. Undoubtedly the apologists for British imperialism will state that what the Prime Minister had in mind was the threat of “civil war” inside India between Hindus and Moslems should the British withdraw. Actually, this is the old hypocritical contention of the British imperialists that England’s role in India is primarily an altruistic one. India is divided up into a number of religious groups and races, they maintain, and would be at each other’s throats were it not for the British armed forces which keep the peace in that country. England is preventing a “blood bath,” they claim.
 
Britain Fosters Division
This is one of the great frauds invented for the purpose of concealing the real motives for British retention of India. In the first places the differences between Hindus and Moslems are based on religious and not racial or national differences. These could easily be resolved on the basis of democratic government which guarantees to everyone freedom of worship. When clashes occur between the two groups in India, the cause is almost exclusively economic and not religious.
Secondly, it has been the deliberate policy of the British to magnify these differences and to encourage political divisions along religious lines. As far back as 1858, Lord Elphinstone, British Governor General, outlined the policy when he declared:
“Our endeavor should be to uphold in full force the fortunate separation which exists between the different religions and races; not to endeavor to amalgamate them.”
And thirdly, the overwhelming majority of both Hindus and Moslems see their common enemy in British imperialism and are ready to unite in a struggle for national independence. It is precisely for this reason that the British look with favor upon Mohammed Ali Jinnah and his Moslem League, who have been demanding the establishment of a Moslem Federation within India (”Pakistan”) and who threaten “civil war” should the British withdraw from India. Actually, the Moslem League represents only a small minority of Indian Moslems, the majority of whom are making common cause with the Hindu Indians for freedom from English domination.
Gandhi’s Proposals
Recently Gandhi released a set of proposals which he had made to the Moslem League for the settlement of the differences between the League and the Congress Party, which is opposed to any sort of division of India. These proposals constitute a compromise of the Congress Party principle of a united India. The proposals can be summed up as follows:

The Moslem League must cooperate with the All-India Congress in the formation of a transitional government.
 
At the end of the war, a plebiscite on the basis of adult franchise will be held in the areas where the Moslem population is in an absolute majority. If the verdict favors a sovereign Moslem state, border districts will obtain the right to choose whether they will join the new Moslem India or the new Hindu India.
 
It must be open to all parties to advocate their points of view before the plebiscite is held.
 
Any transfer of population must be on an absolutely voluntary basis.
 
The terms shall be binding only in case of a transfer by Great Britain of full power and responsibility of government to India.

Jinnah’s only reply thus far has been that he will present these proposals to the Working Committee of the Moslem League if Gandhi makes them directly. The British, who are supposedly interested in getting the Hindu-Moslem problem settled, have refused to allow Gandhi and the other leaders of the Congress Party to confer with each other for the purposes of working out their plans.
Returning to Churchill’s reference to a blood-bath, we firmly believe that he was talking about something quite different than the outbreak of warfare between Hindu and Moslem in India. He has in mind a repetition of the events of August and September of 1942, when hundreds of Indian workers and students were mowed down by British machine guns.
 
The British Record
The British stake in India is too great for the imperialists to allow the Indian people their freedom without a blood-bath. Here are but a few of the facts:

Interest on the Indian public debt of $3,600,000,000 amounts to $100,000,000 per year.
 
Fifty per cent of the capital in industry, mining and transportation is British.
 
Two-thirds of the capital in banking, insurance, plantations and commerce is British.
 
British hold monopolies in shipping, tea, coffee, rubber, jute. They control fifty per cent of cotton and milling capital.
 
Grand total of British capital in India – $7,800,000,000, which yields an average profit of $700,000,000.

Small wonder that Churchill refuses to preside over the liquidation of the British Empire!
Contrasted to the above, we present the following facts:

The average annual income per Indian is $13.50, as compared with $369.00 in England and $680.00 in the United States.
 
Coal miners’ wages: Men, twenty cents a day; women and children, ten cents a day.
 
Plantation laborers: six to ten cents a day.

S.A. Dange, president of the All-India Trade Union Congress, revealed in a recent interview that:
In Bombay and Ahmedabad, centers of India’s large textile industry, twenty per cent of the workers sleep on the pavements, while the leading textile firms are making 100 percent gross profits.
Skilled textile workers in Bombay, the highest paid center, work fifty-four hours a week and average thirty-three rupees a month ($11.00). In the northern part of India, the average wage is about twelve rupees a month ($4.00).
Dange stated further, in an interview with Allied Labor News, that any trade union in India which becomes powerful is attacked by the employers and government. Paid union officials are the exception. Indian trade unions take a great interest in politics and almost every union platform puts forward a demand for national independence. Because of this, he added, there is hardly a trade union wherein some members of the executive board have not made a minimum of one trip to jail.
Here is the basis of the bloodbath with which Winston Churchill, coauthor of the Atlantic Charter, threatens the people of India should they dare to reopen their struggle for national independence and democratic rights.
 




One of the services which the native fascists perform for big business is spreading distrust and conflict inside the ranks of the labor movement, with the aim of so dividing and disrupting it as to render it helpless against the onslaughts of reaction and fascism. This destructive activity is carried on not only from outside the labor movement. On the contrary, any number of native fascists have wormed their way inside the working class and under the guise of calling themselves “workers’” organizations, have been carrying out their pernicious Work.
The device used by the fascists is to set up organizations with “worker” names in order to create confusion. An additional reason, however, is to take advantage of the popularity of labor organizations. They even take the name “socialist,” which is so popular with hundreds and thousands of workers. Thus, in Germany, Hitler calls his party the “National Socialist Workers Party of Germany.” In Italy, Mussolini set up his labor corporatives, giving the impression that they were really organizations in favor of the workers, when, in reality they were the means of enslaving Italian labor for the benefit of the big business interests. The pattern, as already indicated, is the same in this country.
Unfortunately, some workers, though not many, have fallen, victim to the propaganda of these fascists – and while sincerely believing that they have been helping the labor movement, they have actually been helping labor’s most deadly enemy, fascism.
 
NWL Makes Headlines
Prominent among these so-called “workers” (read: fascist) organizations has been the National Workers League of Detroit. It came into the limelight in the spring of 1942, when together with other local fascist organizations, Klan elements, and aided and abetted by Congressman Tenerowicz, some government officials and the Seven-Mile Fenelon Improvement Association, its members sought to prevent by force a group of Negro families from occupying apartments in the Sojourner Truth Housing Project, built by the federal government for these families.
This attempt ended in a bloody riot, in which over a hundred Negroes were arrested, some twenty injured and only a few of the instigators of the riot were arrested. Although there had been trouble and repeated attempts to keep the Negroes out of the houses designated for them since the completion of the project early in the year, the federal government did nothing to enforce their right to move in. This naturally encouraged the local hoodlums. When the rioting took place, the police stood by without coming to the aid of the lawful and rightful occupants of the houses.
Among those arrested were Parker Sage, head of the National Workers League, and Garland Alderman, secretary of that organization. The National Workers League was founded in 1938 by Sage as an anti-union, anti-Negro, anti-Semitic and highly nationalistic group. It attracted to its ranks Bundists, Silver Shirters, Klansmen, Christian Fronters and the remnants of the Black Legion, which had flourished in Detroit and through six Mid-Western states in 1935-36. The latter’s membership had been composed of strike-breakers, convicts, rapists and murderers, and it functioned as a secret, hooded terrorist group, whose special duties consisted of bombing labor headquarters, burning the homes of prominent trade unionists and outright murder. At least fifteen murders were ascribed to this organization, but when the state of Michigan finally decided to clean out the Black Legion, only a few of its members were convicted. The real ringleaders were never brought to trial and the whole matter was mysteriously hushed up.
 
Terror and Division
The National Workers League became the heir of the Black Legion. It changed the tactics somewhat, began to operate more shrewdly and subtly, but its aims remained the same as those of its predecessor – namely, the terrorization, disruption and eventual destruction of the organized labor movement. It was only natural that Detroit, the heart of the automobile industry and militant unionism, should be chosen as the center of operation by this group. Its main target was there, and from Detroit it hoped to spread out to other territories.
The NWL functions inside the factories of Detroit with the aim of spreading its poisonous race-hatred and anti-CIO doctrines among the workers. It places its members in industry so as to catch the ears and minds of these workers. Allied with the NWL is the Society of Tool & Die Craftsmen, an organization devoted to besmirching and prejudicing workers against the legitimate labor movement. Roy Carlson, in his book, Under Cover, relates what he was told by one of its hired thugs as to how these organizations operate.
“You begins your woik by talkin’ against the Jews and N____rs. The Jews got us into the war. You tell ’em that. The Jew is keeping labor down by controlling the money. It’s the Jew who hires the N____rs and gives them low wages. There is angles, see; there is angles. When a guy in a shop gets up and talks against the kikes, and some other guy don’t like like it, we call on this second guy ... There is angles. You gotta loin ’em. You ties in the N____rs with the Jew, den you call the Jews Communists. That gets ’em.”
There are angles, yes indeed. The angle taken by the NWL is the one of creating and sharpening the prejudices of the workers, the race and national prejudices, for the purpose of dividing and destroying the best protection that the workers have, the fighting trade unions. Division in the ranks of the workers is just what the boss is angling for, just what he is banking on to prevent the workers from putting up effective resistance or a successful battle for increased wages and better conditions. The NWL is thus the direct agent of the boss, operating among the workers in the shops.
Typical of their methods of operation was the “strike” last summer instigated by Klan elements at the Packard Motor Co. in Detroit against the upgrading of Negroes. Working closely with the industrial relations director of the company, C.E. Weiss, who told the white workers that they did not have to work with the upgraded Negroes, the Klan and its successor in Detroit, organized a walkout against the Negroes. When the Army stepped into the situation, it suspended some twenty-seven workers, including some of the Negroes, as instigators of the stoppage. Unfortunately, the union at the plant, under Stalinist domination, satisfied itself with pointing out who the real trouble-makers were, but did not come to the defense of the suspended Negroes who had stood up for their rights and were the real victims of the Klan action.
 
Friends of Smith, et al.
The National Workers League has cooperated and continues to do so with any number of other known fascist organizations in this country. Many of its leading members got their first introduction to fascist thinking through the literature put but by Pelley and Coughlin. Gerald L.K. Smith is on very friendly terms with the leaders of the NWL, who, in turn advertise and help build up his meetings. His secretary is an officer of the NWL. George E. Deatherage, now on trial as a seditionist, was on the advisory council of the NWL. Robert Vietig, formerly of the America First Committee, works very closely with the NWL. Carlson mentions he receives aid and support from two top-rank industrialists, but unfortunately does not mention them by name.
Here is the heart of the problem. Behind every fascist movement, every fascist organization, stands big business, collectively or individually. Hitler was supported and financed by Ruhr industrialists. I.G. Farben, friend of the Standard Oil Company, spent millions to put the Nazis into power. Mussolini’s main support came from Italian financiers, industrialists and rich landowners. We are certain that if information is made available, it will be found that behind the numerous fascist groups in this country are representatives of the big business interests anxious to destroy the labor movement.
In spite of its record and associations, the Dies Committee never investigated the NWL, although it did spend its time and large sums of the people’s money going after labor organizations. Perhaps Parker Sage, head of the NWL, hit the nail on the head when he wrote:
“Dies does have a large nuisance value BUT we feel that the real reason he is against us probably is because he is a politician. Hell, we found that Dies is or was a Klansman. We have nothing to fear from him. The FBI have never bothered us and we never concern ourselves about them.”
The job of cleaning out the fascists from the labor movement is the job of the labor movement itself. The CIO unions are absolutely in the right when they expel from their membership and cause to be dismissed those who are found guilty of spreading racial hatred and disunity in the ranks of labor. But that is only part of the job. The rest consists in the education, by the trade unions, of the workers that the way to victory lies through working class solidarity and unity.
The organized labor movement must take upon itself the struggle against all forms of race prejudice and discrimination, whether this be preached by the fascists or practiced by any section of the labor movement, by the boss or the government. In that way a tremendous beginning can be made in the fight against fascism and its organizations in this country.
 




The policy and activity of the British in Greece must rouse the indignation of. every thinking worker, every person who believes that the people of a country must have the right to choose their own government, without interference from foreign imperialists.
The events in Greece today, criminal and shameless as they are on the part of England’s rulers, and justified and right as they are on the part of the Greek people, have not taken us by surprise.
Nearly two years ago, the Workers Party forecast in general what would happen in the European countries under Nazi occupation. In its resolution, The National Question in Europe (published in The New International of February 1943), the Workers Party outlined the main course of events to come. The actual events are every day verifying what we wrote at that time. The power to predict – and to prepare – is based on the thorough-going analysis which the Workers Party made of the war, the role of the belligerents, and the position of the working class.
What are the majority of the workers and peasants, fighting in the resistance organizations in Greece and Belgium, demanding now that the Nazis have been driven out? Why are they refusing to give up their arms and surrender to the Allied military forces?
 
What the Greeks Fight For
These workers are fighting for something which is vital to their very existence. During the Nazi occupation, they fought to drive the invaders from their soil. They did not surrender to the fascists; they did not collaborate with them. On the contrary, under the most difficult conditions, risking their lives and. the lives of their friends and families, they organized in underground resistance movements to fight the fascists. But the, fighters in the resistance movements did not risk capture, imprisonment, torture and death to make way for another oppressor in place of the Germans when the latter were finally ousted.
The people who did not run away, they who stayed and fought fascism, did, so because they wished to be able to reorganize their countries in the way they thought best to prevent another war, another surrender and another occupation, with the, attendant sufferings.
Today the resistance fighters in ELAS, for example, are fighting for the right to elect their own government, to get rid of the Greek King and his agents, who are really agents of fascism and foreign imperialism. The Greek people do not wish to be told by Mr. Churchill when and under what conditions they may hold, an election; the Italian people do not wish to be told by Mr. Eden who shall represent them in the government or what form of government they shall have; the Belgian people do not wish to be told to leave the punishment of pro-Nazi collaborators in the hands of those who were responsible for the debacle of the war.
The people of the “liberated” countries want to liberate themselves. They want the right to elect their governments democratically; they are demanding the right to punish the collaborators; they want to put an end to the black market; they want food; they are demanding higher wages. In short, they are fighting for the right to live as free human beings. And they want to keep the arms they used in getting rid of the Nazis until some of these things are attained.
 
The WP Resolution
“To overthrow the regime of national oppression (the rule of the Nazis), armed struggle was needed. Even assuming that the burden of this struggle is borne by advancing Allied imperialist troops, a good deal of it will have been accomplished by armed, organized workers who have not been incorporated into regular imperialist formations. There, at the very outset, is the core of the future proletarian army. Despite all democratic illusions, experience has shown that this popular armed force will regard with suspicion and meet with resistance any attempts by the new capitalist government [Pierlot, Papandreou – R.C.] to disarm it in favor of ‘regular’ troops.”
The workers who helped rid their countries of Nazi occupation have every right to be suspicious of the
attempts made to disarm them, for the regimes which are being foisted upon them are not concerned with the need to purge the country of fascist collaborators, to get rid of the black market, raise wages, or hold free, democratic elections. They are primarily concerned with installing the old system, of putting in the saddle the capitalists who had run away and had sat it out together with the government in exile in London until it was safe to return, or those who remained to work with the Germans. It is precisely against this which the people who fought the Nazis are rebelling.
All this the Workers Party forecast two years ago. The resolution continues:
“In this resistance to the demands of the workers and peasants, the bourgeois elements in power will not hesitate to call for the armed intervention of big imperialist powers or even surrender real or nominal power to victorious imperialism in the hope of crushing the masses. [Italy, Belgium, Greece – R.C.] The latter will then see more clearly that the national struggle of their own bourgeoisie was only a husk covering the aim of restoring their old class property and power. From realizing this fact to a realization that the national struggle, of the masses was only a form within which they too must fight for their class position and power is not too far a step in the political development of the people.”
 
Allies Crush Democracy
The Allied imperialists will stop at nothing, not even the shooting and killing of workers, as in Greece, in order to crush this movement. Food – or, rather the withholding of food – is already being used as a weapon against rebellious people.
“From this standpoint, a tremendous responsibility lies upon the shoulders, primarily of the British and American working class. A series of revolutions in Europe is a certainty. To a large extent, however, it depends upon the workers of the two big imperialist lands whether these revolutions succeed – and the world rises to a new height – or they are strangled in the egg by imperialist intervention and blackmail – and the world is hurled to a new depth. Active, aggressive international solidarity, in deeds as well as in words, is mandatory upon the Anglo-American working class in this connection. For the European workers, who stand on the threshold of great decisions, this solidarity is an indispensable ingredient in the formula of victory.”
 




The brutal intervention of British imperialism against the Greek people who are seeking the right to determine for themselves the kind of government they want has outraged the labor movement of the entire world. The Greek events Jjave shed some light on what the war is about – and the function of the Atlantic Charter, especially that, section which grants to the oppressed peoples the right to govern themselves.
When the Allies needed the support of these oppressed peoples, no promise was too big to make. As soon as the tide of battle turned, however, the true aims of the mighty powers in the war became more and more obvious.
At the conference of the British Labor Party held last week, Ernest Bevin, British Minister of Labor and leader of the party, spoke out on what was behind England’s actions in Greece. Speaking to the angry and rebellious delegates who wished to condemn Churchill, Mr. Bevin declared:
“The British government cannot abandon its position in the Mediterranean. It is impossible for it to do so.”
Bevin – Partner in Crime
And to guarantee England’s position in the Mediterranean it was necessary to “stabilize” Greece, according to Bevin, which is another way of saying that the only Greek government which England will recognize is one subservient to its “position in the Mediterranean,” i.e., subservient to the needs of the British Empire.
Further, according to Bevin, it was necessary for the British to resort to armed force against the Greek people because “the British Were attacked by guerrillas without uniforms.” The latter statement, of course is a great lie, since every impartial observer has reported that the British fired upon and bombed unarmed and defenseless Greek demonstrators who were presenting their demands to the British-backed Papandreou government.
There is, then, according to Bevin’s own words, a conflict between England’s position in the Mediterranean and the right of the Greek people to govern themselves. Which of these is more important?
The war, you see, is being fought to protect the British imperial lifeline in the Mediterranean and for other such lofty ideals. That is what Mr. Bevin told the Labor Party Conference, if not in so many words, then certainly by implication.
Having revealed that much, you would imagine that the leader of the British Labor Party was going to launch into a vigorous attack upon the government which pursues such policies. Mr. Bevin had something else in mind. He was speaking, not in defense of the Greek masses, not in order to clear the name of British labor, but rather as a stooge of Mr .Churchill. For he, declared:
“The steps which have been taken in Greece are not the decision of Mr. Churchill. They are the decisions of the cabinet. I took part with my labor colleagues in the whole of these discussions, going over nearly four years trying to work out these terrifying problems that would arise at tie end of the war.”
In this way Bevin attempts to place the dirty mantle of imperialism upon the shoulders of the British labor movement – and thus to lighten the attacks which are being levelled at the Churchill government which stands for the defense, at any and all costs, of the British Empire.
The turbulence at the Labor Party Conference, the more than twenty motions of condemnation of the government which were presented by various trade union delegations, show that Bevin does not speak for the British labor movement. Only by offering some sort of compromise resolution and ruling out of order speakers who rose against the Bevin policy was the leadership of the Labor Party able to obtain the endorsement of the conference. But the workers have not yet had the last say.
Ernest Bevin is a misleader, a traitor to the class he purports to represent. He is the man who turned against the striking miners’ apprentices last year. Hie is the man who today stands up to defend the heinous rule of British imperialism. He is the self-acknowledged partner-in-crime of Winston Churchill, His Majesty’s Prime Minister – friend of Kings and dictators. His position flows from the policy of political and economic collaboration of the Labor Party with the direct enemy of labor – the capitalist class and the capitalist government. A complete break with class collaboration and its practitioners is the only way out for British labor.
 




A large, interested audience filled the meeting hall at the Irving Plaza on Sunday, January 30, and listened to Albert Gates, editor of Labor Action, and Max Shachtman, national secretary of the Workers Party, discuss the significance of the “dissolution” of the Communist Party which had been “announced” some weeks earlier by Earl Browder.
Comrade Shachtman began by explaining the purpose for which the Communist Party, was originally organized, namely, to teach and prepare the working class of this country for the abolition of the capitalist system, for the establishment of a workers’ government which would reorganize society on a socialist basis of brotherhood and real equality. Through a series of events, declared Comrade Shachtman, the workers in Russia lost control of their government until the power was finally usurped by Stalin and his circle of bureaucrats, Who now rule and exploit the Russian people even more brutally than did the old czars. The Communist Parties everywhere became the tools of Stalin.
When Stalin and Hitler embraced each other in 1939, the American Communist Party became violently anti-British and was opposed to United States entry into the war on the side of the Allies. During that period, the American Stalinists advocated strikes – even when these were not beneficial to the working class – opposed conscription, and called the war an imperialist war.
Then came war between Russia and Germany, with the former’s entry into the camp of the Allies.
Overnight, the American Stalinists’ became advocates of American participation in the war, of the opening of the second front, of “more production regardless of wages,” of “national unity,” of the “no-strike pledge,” of “incentive pay” and of similar anti-labor measures.
Browder’s recent proclamation in favor of the capitalist system, of free enterprise and of the two-party system in the United States was an open admission that the Communist Party had long ago given up the struggle for a better world.
It would be erroneous, however, Shachtman stated, to believe that Browder and his cohorts are now working in the service of the American capitalists. No, they still are in the pay and service of Joe Stalin.
At the present time, this means – by Browder’s own words – that the workers should continue to produce at ever-increasing speeds, that they should not try to increase wages or to improve their conditions, that they must be satisfied with any crumbs thrown their way.
The Browder boys will continue, as in the past, to disrupt any labor organization or trade union which: does not allow itself to be used to further Stalinist policies.
Comrade Shachtman was confident that, despite the Stalinists, the working class as a whole will find out what the more wide-awake workers already know ... that capitalism offers them no way out of the mess into which the world has gotten ...
To be successful in this fight, to prepare for it today, the working class needs a party of its own – a party which stands clearly for the immediate and ultimate interests of labor. The national secretary of the Workers Party called upon the workers in the audience to be on guard against the Stalinists in their unions and organizations. He urged those workers who wished to join ranks in the fight for a better world, for socialism, to become members of the Workers Party.
At the end of the meeting a number of members of the audience indicated a desire to learn more about the Workers Party, and one worker joined the party.
 




There are many workers in the United States who erroneously believe that fascism is a foreign “ism” and that its danger comes from foreign shores. While they justly are horrified at and condemn the barbarism and brutality of Nazi despotism, they are often prone to dismiss lightly any talk of the American variety of fascism with “It can’t happen here.”
 
It Can Happen Here
This false conception is often fostered by the native brand of fascists themselves, who even repudiate the name fascist in order the more effectively to beguile and befuddle their followers. They are unwittingly assisted by those people who constantly emphasize the connection between the American fascists and the spies and agents of the German Nazi government while neglecting to tell what is more important, namely: that the growth and development of the American fascist movement takes place on American soil upon the basis of American conditions and that this movement is and will be the servant of the American bankers, big businessmen and profiteers – in short, of the American capitalist class.
While some of the would-be American fuehrers, the small-fry of the fascist movement in this country, have worked with the Nazi agents here (as the current sedition trials are revealing), .the greatest danger does not come from them. American fascism will develop because the capitalist system in this country will create the same or similar conditions which German capitalism developed. If such a movement becomes a real threat to the American working people, it will be because it is supported, financed and directed by the big capitalists in this country, just as happened in Germany.
The native fascist movement has not yet achieved the strength and size where it is actually on the verge of seizing the government and establishing a dictatorship on the German style. As yet, there is no unified fascist party in this country, nor do the many fascist leaders see eye to eye on a number of problems. Some of the smaller and less influential ones have been linked to the Axis agents in this country and have been arrested. Some have already been sentenced; others are still being tried.
Yet it would be the greatest folly if the American workers were to shut their eyes to the existing fascist organizations, in the belief that we in this country are safe from their poisonous propaganda and deadly activity. In the last half year, many of the pro-fascist organizations, which have been keeping quiet since Pearl Harbor, have come into the open again. They have begun holding rallies and meetings, preparing for the days to come.
If the working class can learn to recognize the fascists, no matter under what name they disguise themselves, if we can prepare now to beat them down, then they will never grow strong enough to be a real danger to the American labor movement. But to be able to do this it is necessary to understand what fascism is, how its operates, whom it benefits and whom it seeks to destroy. In addition, the labor movement must have a program and organizations of its own with which to combat the incipient fascist movements.
 
Capitalism Breeds Fascism
Even now, men and women working hard and long hours in the great war production plants, are wondering how long the current “prosperity” is going to last. When the war is over, what is going to happen to these vast plants which are now turning out the instruments of death and destruction? Will they be put to use, producing the things needed to sustain life and raise the standard, of living of all the people? Will they continue to operate so that every man and woman who lives by his or her toil will have a job? Will the returning soldiers find decent jobs at decent wages?
Government experts have predicted that even under the best of all possible circumstances the post-war period will witness ten millions of unemployed in the United- States. That is, they consider ten million unemployed as “normal” in this country. And if the circumstances are not the” best, as is most likely, there will be between twenty and thirty millions out of work.
What do these cold-blooded statistics signify? They mean working class families starving, or near-starving on home relief handouts. They mean ruination for the storekeepers, the professionals, the small businessmen. They mean that the owners of the idle plants will have to take a vacation from profit-making and live off their fat wartime profits.
Now, such a situation cannot continue for a long period of time without the workers and middle class becoming restless and looking for a way out. Even the big capitalists will be itching to get back to business, because while they will not starve or suffer, they know that they make money only if the wheels of industry are turning and that their profits are created by the work of others.
The workers want jobs in order to live and in order to produce the things they need to live. The capitalists want industry going in order to make profits. In this lies the insoluble conflict between the two classes, the workers and the capitalists.
 
Assault upon Labor
To get industry going again and to guarantee the highest profits, the capitalists will try especially hard to cut the wages of the employed workers and to use the unemployed against them. This means an assault upon the workers’ organizations, the unions, in the first instance.
Fascism will be consciously and deliberately financed, directed and used by big business to smash the resistance of the workers and poor people against the unbearable conditions imposed upon them. It is not the fascists who will hoodwink the capitalists in order to get the money from them, as Vice-President Wallace seems to believe. On the contrary, big business will use fascism for its ends. The only ones to be hoodwinked will be the people who will not understand what fascism is.
Race-hatred, regional hatred, anti-Semitism – these are the weapons of division, disunity and distrust aimed at destruction of the labor movement. Outright hoodlumism and terror are the weapons used. The fascist movements are perfectly cut out for these practices.
 
Fascist Camouflage
It would be foolish to think that the fascists will declare that they are working for the preservation of the rule of big business. They would hardly be able to attract any followers in that way. Instead, they offer a program of “social reforms” which on the surface appears to be directed against the capitalist system. They make all sorts of promises – which they never intend to keep – to those who have lost hope in their own resources.
In this way they hope to gather to themselves the disillusioned youth, the veterans without jobs, the unemployed and the ruined middle classes. They will blame labor for the evils of which it is the chief victim and which stem directly from the capitalist system. Their real aim is the establishment of a bloody dictatorship which will suppress the labor movement, its organizations, and all those who in any way want to fight for a decent way of life.
Already these forces are at work. The seeds of fascism are planted in the American soil. They are waiting merely for the right weather in which to sprout. Some of them are even now creeping up above the surface, fostered by interested individuals in business, in industry and in government. Tomorrow they may well become the unified fascist party.
The American labor movement can smash these incipient fascist movements by: (1) recognizing them for what; they are, and (2) evolving and presenting labor’s program for the solution of the post-war social problems.
To throw the spotlight on today’s . native American fascists is the purpose of this series. Forewarned is forearmed.
 




On November 7, 1917, the workers and peasants of Russia shook the entire world by overthrowing the capitalist government and establishing the first workers’ republic dedicated to the interests of all the downtrodden, oppressed and exploited.
By this act, the heroic Russian working class showed the way out of the hopelessness and devastation wrought by the imperialist war, the way to socialist freedom as the only road for the forward march of humankind, in spite of all that has happened subsequently to this revolution, its initial success has at least established this much: The working class can take power and establish its own rule; the working class can organize and run the country in the interests of all the people; the working class, and the working class alone, can and will open the door to the new socialist society of peace, plenty, freedom and security.
The Russian Revolution did not occur at the instigation of a handful of conspirators who wished merely to replace the old rulers. It grew out of the deepest needs and aspirations of the Russian people, who were sick and tired of being pushed around – and who longed for a chance to govern themselves. The success of the revolution depended upon the capable and courageous leadership supplied by the Bolshevik Party, which, showed the masses how to achieve what they yearned for.
 
Human Suffering Brought Revolution
In 1917 – the third year of the First World War – Russia, one of the weakest and most backward of its participants, was under a heavy strain. Its people were paying dearly for the accomplishment of the war aims of the ruling class. Millions of peasants, dragged from their land, inadequately armed, hungry and underclothed, were dying in a war that made no sense to them. What interests had they in the annexation of Turkey, Persia or Galicia, when their fields were unsowed and untilled, and their people back home were starving! At the front, they thought not of killing, but of getting back home.
On the home front, the farms went untended. In the cities, speculators and black marketeers grew fat while the people waited and starved on the breadlines. Food riots were put down by armed force. As the war-weary people starved and froze, the dance of the profiteers grew more frenzied. They feared nothing worse than an early peace, which would put an end to their blood-sucking. In the palaces, the Czar and his camarilla enjoyed their tea parties and costly banquets. Outside, the people mumbled about the hardships and suffering, the lack, of food and the cold.
The, longing for peace was in the hearts of all the people – the cry for bread on everyone’s lips! The peasant soldiers wanted to come home. As the war went on, the resentment toward it mounted until the masses went from grumbling to direct action.
On February 23, 1917, International Women’s Day, the Petrograd workers went out on strike; and demonstrating on the streets, demanded bread, peace and an end to the czarist autocracy. This was the beginning of the revolution. The Czar abdicated and made way for a provisional government which sought to establish “order.”
 
Provisional Government a Failure
As the weeks and months rolled by, and one coalition replaced another, it became increasingly evident that the new provisional government was incapable of meeting the demands of the Russian people. The democratic republic headed by Kerensky found itself between the horns of a dilemma: it did not wish to break with and overthrow the capitalist and land-owning classes. At the same time, in order to remain in power, it had to give the people what they wanted. But to do this meant doing precisely what it wished to avoid, namely, a break with the old ruling classes. For to give land to the peasants, it had to confiscate the big landed estates, or at the very least, not to interfere with the peasant seizures of these estates. Instead, the provisional government sent troops into the rebellious areas where the peasants themselves were carrying out the revolution as they understood it.
To give bread to the people would have meant destroying the black market and organizing production. Kerensky’s government did not wish to interfere with the profiteering of the capitalist class. And the most important demand of all – peace – meant a break with imperial Russia’s war aims .and with, its imperialist allies. The provisional government was more concerned with preserving the war investments than with the loss of human lives. It restored the death penalty for soldiers who left the front and answered the cry for peace with preparations for a new offensive in the war.
Every political party during the days of the provisional government promised to fulfill the demands of the people, but the promise was always made in the future, tomorrow, later, after the war. From the very start of the revolution, the workers had established their Soviets, where they discussed their problems and decided on their actions.
 
All Power to the Soviets!
These Soviets were simply councils to which workers’ delegates were elected from the factories. They were directly responsible to those who elected them and were Subject to recall if they failed to carry out their mandates. The soldiers elected their Soviets, too; and the poor peasants theirs.
Inside the Soviets one party alone offered a solution to this dilemma and it was a simple one. The Bolshevik Party stated that the interests of the misses should have first consideration, and that their demands.must be acted upon immediately. The Bolsheviks explained again and again that if the workers and peasants wanted to obtain their, ends; they would have to take the government into their own hands and operate it themselves. The Bolsheviks said: The Soviets are the most representative body in the country. Let these Soviets become the government. ALL POWER TO THE SOVIETS!
It was a matter of months before the: overwhelming majority of the workers understood and supported this idea. On November 7, 1917, the Soviets did take power and established the first workers’ republic. Hardly a shot was fired in defense of the old regime. It simply fell apart at the slightest shove.
The very first act of the new government broke the back of the imperialist war machine. Its declaration called upon the warring peoples and their governments to cease hostilities, to open immediate negotiations for a just, democratic peace without annexations and indemnities. The Russian example inspired the workers throughout the length and breadth of Europe to revolt against their governments and the war.
 
Backwardness of Russia in 1917
The leaders of the Russian Revolution, the Bolshevik Party of Lenin and Trotsky, did not promise to the people that a socialist society would be established on the very morrow of the overturn. They were fully aware of the backwardness of Russian economy, inherited from czarism, to which had been added the devastation of three years of war, and later three more years of civil war, foreign intervention and blockade. The country was bankrupt; whatever industry had not been destroyed, was paralyzed; the land was laid waste; communications and transportation disrupted; famine stalked the land.
But if the Bolsheviks knew that socialism could not be established on such a foundation, were they not wrong in taking power?
In the first place, in order to achieve even the immediate needs of the people – peace, bread, land to the peasants – it was necessary that the workers and peasants take the power. Experience had shown that there was no other force in the country capable of accomplishing even this.
Secondly, having taken power, the Bolsheviks considered this but the first step in a series of workers’ revolutions throughout Europe and the world. Without the success of these, the Russians did not expect the workers’ state to survive for any length of time. Thus they wrote and spoke in the early days.
But while waiting for these revolutions in the West, the new regime had to settle down to the task of reconstruction of the country. It was only after three years of civil war and intervention that the Russian people could turn to this job. In the meantime, several workers’ revolutions had come in the West; but they had gone down to defeat, derailed from their purpose by compromise, betrayed or outnumbered by superior enemy forces and drowned in blood. The Bolsheviks in Russia proceeded with the reorganization of the country, still convinced that salvation lay in the success of the international proletarian revolution.
In spite of the heroic efforts of the workers in many countries to come to the assistance of their Russian brothers and comrades, the first workers’ republic remained isolated. While it was strong enough to resist the armed .assaults of the hostile capitalist governments, this isolation began to choke the revolution from the inside.
 
Non-Revolutionary Influences at Work
Many changes had occurred during the years of the civil war. In the first instance, war communism, as this period is called, brought about the abrogation of some of the democratic rights which had been established by the revolution. Again, many of the best Bolshevik fighters were killed in the effort to defend et Soviet Republic. The party, now renamed the Communist Party of Russia, was beginning to be infested with all kinds of careerists, office seekers who, now that the revolution had succeeded, were eager to attach themselves to the new regime. And finally in 1924, the wisest and most able of the Bolshevik leaders, Lenin, died. Inside the party a struggle commenced over who was to replace him, a struggle between the conservative wing and the Bolshevik wing.
As early as 1923, Trotsky, co-leader of the revolution with Lenin, sounded the alarm against the non-revolutionary influences which were penetrating the Communist Party. Trotsky opened the fight against the developing bureaucracy and for the restoration of democratic control of the party and the country, with his pamphlet, The New Course.
The failure of the revolutions in the other European countries, however, strengthened the influence of the conservative wing, personified by Stalin. Russia, they believed, could no longer hope for any help from the workers on the outside. It must rely solely upon its own strength. “Socialism in a single country” became the battlecry of the Stalinists.
In saying this, however, they were in reality negating socialism, for socialism is an international system. The revolution which would make socialism possible had occurred in one -country, but it could not succeed in achieving its socialist goals unless similar revolutions were successful in at least some of the leading and more advanced countries. Why?
Socialism is a system which is based upon plenty for all. Its aim is to raise the standard of living of all humankind far higher than that reached in the most advanced capitalist country. It means, therefore, the utilization of the most modern and advanced means and methods of production. It means the most scientific utilization of all the natural resources of the entire world. It means the closest cooperation of the peoples of the entire world.
Socialism cannot be based on scarcity and want, for these breed inequality, rivalry, class divisions. Socialism seeks to eliminate these forever from the face of the earth.
Russia, left to her own resources, could not and did not produce sufficiently to satisfy even the basic needs of all the people. Those in office, therefore, found it possible to utilize their positions in order to guarantee for themselves and their families some of the good things that were denied to the rest of the population. Therein lay the basis for the development of the inequalities which exist in Russia today and which are in direct violation of the aims of the revolution.
 
Ascendancy of the Bureaucracy
The Trotskyist wing of the party was defeated. The bureaucracy against which Trotsky had warned the party, triumphed by destroying the democracy which had existed inside the Bolshevik Party, by destroying the democracy inside the workers’ organizations, their unions and the Soviets themselves. The bureaucracy resorted to arrests, frame-ups, murders – legal and illegal. The Moscow Trials, the frame-ups by which, the leading members of the old Bolshevik Party were killed off, were only the crudest example of what occurred in Russia during the years when the bureaucracy was intrenching itself and killing off what remained of the glorious Russian revolution.
Today, the Russian Revolution and the workers’ government which it established, are dead. A new revolution in Russia is on the order of the day! Even the most casual observer cannot fail to see the difference between the Russia of Lenin and Trotsky and the Russia of Stalin and his henchmen.
The 1917 revolution established freedom of speech, freedom of the press, free trade unions, free and universal elections, free and universal education. Today these no longer exist.
The 1917 revolution established the practice of paying workers’ wages to all government officials, even the highest. Workers were to be trained in how to run the government. Today the privileged bureaucracy, the new ruling class, lives off the exploitation of the working class and peasants. The inequalities between the rulers and the ruled are greater today than they were under the Czar.
The revolution gave freedom, even the right to secede, to all the small national minorities. It was opposed to forceful annexation. Today the Great Russian bureaucracy has reestablished the “prison of the peoples.” Stalin is seeking in the present war to annex as many small countries to his empire as he can.
The revolution abolished secret diplomacy and published the secret treaties for all the world to see. Today Stalin conspires with the imperialist powers for a division of the booty of war.
The revolution established a government of the people, run by the people in their own behalf. Through this government, the workers controlled the means of production, the factories and the land. Today the government no longer belongs to the workers. It is the possession of the new ruling class, the bureaucrats.
The Red Army, child of the revolution, once stood poised, ready to come to the aid of the fighting proletariat of other lands. Today it defends the privileges and revenues of the bureaucrats and it comes to foreign lands not as a liberating force, but as an enslaver.
Nothing is left of the Russian Revolution – save the memory and the nationalized property, which is now the tool used by the bureaucrats to Exploit and oppress the masses. Lenin was right when he said:, “Either the revolution comes in the more highly developed countries, or we perish.” For this Jirst workers’ revolution has perished, overcome by terrific odds, killed by a thousand blows delivered by the treacherous Stalinist bureaucracy and world reaction.
And yet we defy the scoffers and skeptics, the defenders of capitalism, who point to Russia as proof that the working class is incapable of reorganizing society on a socialist basis. We say:
NEW SOCIAL SYSTEMS DEVELOP SLOWLY
The capitalist system came into being only after a number of revolutions and half-revolutions. The period of its birth lasted for decades, The change from the feudal system to capitalism was not as drastic as will be the change from capitalism to socialism, for the latter implies not the change of one system of exploitation for another, but the elimination of all exploitation and class rule.
The attempt of the Russian workers was but the first. Their workers’ state was the first to be established and naturally it was full of imperfections. The Russian workers gave all they could in their effort to bring about a socialist world, and, were defeated because their class brothers in the rest of the world were unable to aid them sufficiently.
Thanks to the efforts of the Russian workers, thanks to the Russian Bolsheviks, we are wiser today. better prepared to meet the problems that the transition to socialism involves. We know from their experience what pitfalls to avoid and how to proceed. We gain confidence, from their initial success. Tomorrow, the working class throughout the world will be following the example of Russia of 1917. Tomorrow, however, we will do it better.
 




As stated in a previous article, the American fascist movement is not yet organized into one unified and cohesive organization or party. It is composed today of many groups and grouplets, which, though frequently rivalling each other for leadership, are nevertheless bound together by common aims and find it possible to co-operate with each other.
In many instances they are run by interlocking directorates, with key people serving as sponsors or financial backers in practically all the groups, or at least the most important ones. Their form of contact is that of a network, with lines crossing and intertwining, so that information and propaganda material passes on from one group to another with comparative ease. Their common hatred of the same things, and their common long-run goals would make it very possible and, under certain circumstances, very simple, to unify these groups into one strong and menacing fascist organization.
Among these groups, one of the loudest and most active sections is that known as the “Mothers” group. They exist in numerous cities and states under a variety of names, and they seek to utilize the anguish of mothers whose sons are serving on far-flung battlefields of the world. These organizations see to it, however, that the real culprit, the real source of the war, goes unnamed, and instead divert the attention of their feminine followers along channels of anti-Semitism, anti-New Dealism and extreme nationalism.
There are the groups which specialize in anti-Semitism; those which concentrate on anti-Negro propaganda; the anti-foreigners; the religious groups. What binds them together is their common opposition to labor and unionism.
The more serious fascists, however, realize that in the long run, if their propaganda and work are to be effective, it will be necessary to organize a strong, highly centralized fascist party, which will be able to reach out and control the smaller specialized groups now in existence and which will be able to rally all the reactionary, anti-labor, anti-Negro and anti-Jewish forces behind it.
What is especially disquieting is the fact that the fascist leaders realize the need for a fascist political party much more keenly than the labor leaders today recognize the need for an independent political party of the working class. And yet it is only such a party, with a bold program of action, that will be able to combat and beat back the fascists.
 
Gerald Smith’s Background
Among those most actively engaged in the attempt to build a fascist party is Gerald K. Smith, father of the America First Party. If he succeeds in his plans, he will head a movement which could become the greatest threat to the American working class and which will seek to install a fascist dictatorship. His entire past history has prepared him for this role.
Gerald Lyman Kenneth Smith started his political career as a member of Pelley’s Silver Shirts and devoted his energies to speaking on subjects like: Why I Left the Conventional Pulpit to Joint the Christian Militia of the Silver Shirts. That was in 1933.
He soon dropped Pelley and moved to Louisiana, where he established himself as pastor of the King’s Highway Church, one of the wealthiest in the country. It was in Shreveport that he met Huey Long, the late “Kingfish,” dictator of Louisiana. This time Smith left the pulpit for good to join the corrupt political machine which was running the state. Here he got his real training, for his job was to tour the state speaking on the Share the Wealth Plan, by which every man was to become a king. Smith turned out to be a rabble-rousing orator who had learned all the tricks of holding and swaying a crowd while saying nothing.
Smith was with the Kingfish when the latter was killed. The squabble for power among Long’s boys after his death found Smith left out in the cold, without a job and without a machine. Smith had opposed any “deals” which the Long boys were making with the national Democratic Party, by which Roosevelt and Farley succeeded in buying up Long’s heirs, later dubbed the “Second Louisiana Purchase.”
For the next period of time, Smith devoted himself to propagandizing for the Townsend Plan. This was in the midst of the great crisis and depression when the masses of unemployed, particularly those faced with insecure old age, were looking about for some solution to their situations.
 
Smith Joins with Coughlin
In 1936 Smith found a new job. He became the promoter of the Coughlin-sponsored candidate for President, William Lemke, of the National Union for Social Justice, and of William Townsend and his panacea. Smith declared himself to be “contact man for the Union Party, director of the Townsend organization, a keynote speaker for Father Coughlin and supporter of Lemke for President.” Not a very attractive combination.
Not satisfied with the job of mere “promoter,” Smith set out to organize his “Committee of One Million,” which program included a number of pseudo-patriotic planks, but emphasized its intention to “issue a call to farmers and laborers to resist what is now known to be an international plot to make them part of a world revolution.”
Actually, this plank had only one purpose – to smash, if possible, the .growing influence and power of the CIO, which in 1936 was beginning to draw thousands and hundreds of thousands of hitherto unorganized workers into the union movement for the first time.
In Detroit, especially, the workers in the auto industry flocked into the unions in great masses. The industrialists looked about them for means of stopping this influx into the unions for they well knew that once the workers built up their own organizations, the days of open shopism were numbered.
 
The Union-Buster Emerges
Gerald K. Smith was just the man they were looking for. His committee was actually financed by Horace Dodge of Detroit, Henry Ford and others. He was aided by Representative Woodruff of Michigan, Senator Nye and Congressman Day, who spoke for him. At first, Smith’s job consisted of descending upon communities “plagued” with strikes, and through the preaching of the gospel of Americanism and old-time religion trying to get the men back to work. He toured through Akron, Flint, Toledo, Chicago Detroit – the big sit-down centers of those days.
In 1939, Smith settled in Detroit, the heart of America’s militant trade unionism. Here he works well for the men who pay him, most notably, Henry Ford, of whom he said in a radio address:
“I defend Henry Ford tonight, not because he needs defense, not because he needs anything I possess, but because America needs Henry Ford and other Henry Fords ... I use the name of Henry Ford not as the name of a man, but as the symbol of American opportunity that was and the American opportunity, pray God, that should be kept alive for the generations yet unborn.”
Every union man knows what Henry Ford symbolizes: open shop, terror, speed-up, anti-labor espionage. And it is this system which Smith seeks to spread and keep “alive for the generations yet unborn.”
In 1942, during the great strike at River Rouge, which finally broke the open shopism at Ford’s and established collective bargaining for the Ford workers, Smith declared: “Naturally, the first thing that should have been done by the Governor was to call out the militia.”
Today Smith cooperates with the National Workers League, an organization which is attempting to disrupt the labor movement. (The National Workers League will be the subject of a future article.) He was endorsed by this organization in his fight for the Republican nomination as senatorial candidate in 1942 in Michigan. It constantly urges attendance at his meetings and exchanges mailing lists and other material with him. His magazine, Cross and Flag, carries on where Coughlin’s Social Justice left off.
 
Smith’s Politics
In 1943, Smith launched the America First Party. While this organization (read: Smith) has not yet decided its course in the coming presidential election, it has made clear its attitude on what kind of a man it would chose as its standard bearer. If Huey Long had not been slain – “the America First Party would not now be rummaging around for a presidential candidate who would stand for none of this globaloney.”
On his list of possible candidates, he would support Smith names: General MacArthur, Senators Taft, Nye, O’Daniel, Johnson, Brooks, Reynolds, Congressmen Fish, Hoffman, Short, Sumners – and Charles Lindbergh. Actually, Smith is waiting to see whether the Republican Party will nominate a man reactionary enough to suit his taste.
The platform of his party fits the above list. Its first calls for “free speech for all good Americans [to be defined by Smith, of course], including Coughlin.”
“A farm program based on Genesis, 46th Chapter, 46th to 57th Verses, inclusive.” How this will bring the farmer a better standard of living is not revealed.
“Support all patriotic labor movements which are kept in the hands of patriotic American leadership.” Read: Company unionism.
Gerald K. Smith, servant of big business, is flinging the challenge to the labor movement. He is well protected by the powers that be – a recent investigation by the FBI declared him “not subversive.” His weapons are demagogy, fake patriotism, promises. But his past actions in decisive moments show where he stands with regard to labor. Today Smith’s fascist America First Party is in its infancy, but it is being carefully nurtured by those who intend to use it against the labor movement in the days to come. Will the American workers be ready to meet the challenge?
 




How Fascism Comes About

An Exposé of Gerald K. Smith and the America First Party

Father Coughlin, Anti-Labor Apostle of American Fascism

Apostle of American Fascism

Angling for Labor – The Hitler Way
 




In last week’s Labor Action we discussed why it was dangerous for the working class to adopt the position that the entire German nation is responsible for the war and the crimes of Hitlerism. We pointed out that this idea is deliberately sponsored by the ruling classes of England, America and Russia for the purpose of diverting the attention of the masses of people from the real causes of war, which are rooted in the capitalist organization of society; and secondly, in order to facilitate the imposition of very stringent peace terms upon the German people.
The labor leaders who foster this idea that all the German people are guilty of Nazism are. really helping the capitalists to escape the responsibility for war and fascism. These leaders claim that a “just” punishment of the Germans, even if it is “distasteful,” is necessary for the sake of avoiding a Third World War. But then along comes William Z. Foster, leading spokesman for the Communist (Political Association) Party with an added reason for the imposition of a “hard” peace upon the German people. Such a peace is necessary not only to insure peace after this war, he writes in a recent article in the Daily Worker, Stalinist mouthpiece in the United States, but also in order to strengthen democracy inside Germany. So you see, all proposals for the occupation of Germany by Allied troops, enslavement, forced labor in foreign countries, payment of huge indemnities, loss of territory – all these are really set forth for the good of the German people themselves! They will not only bring peace to Europe and the world, but they will also cleanse Germany and the German people of reaction and fascism, and therefore they should be greeted warmly by the German masses.
Now these punitive measures are not to be confined to a small section of war criminals in Germany. They are so conducive to democracy that they are intended for the whole nation. After paying some lip service to the idea that the “peace terms cannot be directed uniformly against the whole German people,” Foster goes on to say what he really wants to get across:
Foster’s Lie
“True the German people as a whole are responsible for the Nazi government and its maraudings. And it is not simply that they passively allowed this deadly regime to fasten itself upon them. Huge sections, probably a majority of the population, including a large percentage of workers, have been so deeply corrupted by Nazism that they have actively supported Hitler, and been eager- to share in his imperialist loot, seized by shedding the blood of other peoples.”
And further:
“While thus recognizing the national responsibility of the German people as a whole for the murderous Hitler regime of cutthroats ...”
We might note here that these slanderous remarks about the German workers are being made by a man whose party only some four years ago declared that “fascism was only a matter of personal taste,” and whose boss, Stalin, found it perfectly feasible to combine with the “murderous Hitler regime of cut-throats” for the joint invasion of Poland.
What are Foster’s proposals for a “hard” peace which is supposed to restore democracy in Germany? The same ones that are now being prepared by the imperialists who are interested in crushing Germany as an economic rival and don’t give a rap about bringing or restoring democracy for the German people-They are the proposals made by the very people who assisted Hitler into power and thanked their lucky stars for fascism as a preventive against workers’ revolution and socialism. The peace terms, which according to Foster should have “a democratic orientation from; the beginning” include: Military occupation by British, Russian and American forces for a long period; dismemberment of Germany through the return of such territories as East Prussia, Sudetenland, Schleswig-Holstein and Silesia to their “rightful owners”; imposition of large indemnities in money, machinery and other goods; and rebuilding of war-devastated areas in invaded countries by German labor. These are the measures which Foster hopes to make the “democratic forces in Germany” understand as “necessary for the creation of a prosperous, democratic Germany.”
 
The “Hard” Peace
Military occupation after unconditional surrender should be carried out “in the spirit of democracy,” says Foster. The troops should support the “democratic forces.” Just who these forces are, after Foster excludes “a majority of the population, including a large percentage of workers” who have been “deeply corrupted by Nazism,” is left to the reader’s imagination. To Foster, of course, the “democratic forces” will be those people in Germany who advocate subservience to Russian foreign policy.
The dismemberment of Germany on the basis of “returning” parts of that country to “rightful owners” (these, of course, to be determined by the imperialists of ihe Allied countries, and nat by the peoples who inhabit these territories) means re-creating the very conditions which have helped bring about World War No. 2.
Imposition of large indemnities in money, machinery and other commodities is a more monstrous repetition of the Versailles Treaty which has always been called by the labor movement a “Robbers’ Treaty.” Foster tries to polish up the old remedy by insisting that the “main burden should be loaded on the backs of the wealthy classes,” through capital levies and confiscatory taxes. War reparations and indemnities, payments in commodities and machinery, are always made through the most intense exploitation of labor. Socialists have ever been opposed to peace through annexations or indemnities because they know that it is not the rich who suffer by this, but the toiling masses who are thus doubly robbed of the product of their toil.
 
“Nationalization”
At one point Foster sounds almost radical, as if he were opposed to capitalist exploitation. Prevent the German capitalists from preparing for another war by nationalizing industry, he says. Nationalization, however, is not proposed as a measure to be taken by German labor in order that industry might be run to furnish the needs of the people, but as a measure under Allied occupation so that the payment of war reparations and indemnities can be made more efficient. The German workers are to toil in the “nationalized” factories in order to supply the goods and commodities for the imperialists, in the first place, of Stalinist Russia. German labor is to be squeezed and oppressed through taxation, work, occupation, enslavement in order to pay for a war which was not of its own making any more than it was the making of American, British, or Russian labor.
And finally, German labor is to rebuild war-ravaged Europe! Foster suggests that even this act of enslavement of at least twelve million German workers can be turned to the advantage of democracy! Foster realizes that it is going to be a difficult task to convince the German workers that these prospects are calculated to help democracy triumph in that country. But there are always prison camps, the occupation armies and other “convincing” ways of doing this. And these are the methods of the imperialists and their agents.
 




One of the points up for discussion at the Quebec meeting between Roosevelt and Churchill, it is understood, will be the Indian question.
The dispute between these two allies over India was brought into the open by the report of U.S. Ambassador Phillips, based on his special mission to India in the spring of 1943. In it he told the President of the United States that the British policy toward India is threatening military operations in the Far East and he suggested that this country press Britain to declare a specific post-war date for Indian independence.
Upon disclosure of this report, the British declared Phillips “persona non grata” and forced his recall to this country. Later the British Information Service denied the points contained in the Phillips report and stated that “Britain has gone a good deal further than offering India self-government on a specific date. The Cripps proposal left the date to the decision of the Indian leaders themselves. In the meantime they were asked to join the government of India under the existing constitution.”
 
The Cripps Mission Hoax
Actually, all the facts concerning British policy toward India, and especially the Cripps proposals and subsequent events, reveal that the British imperial government had and has no intention of granting even the most elementary rights to the nearly 400,000,000 people of India, and that this policy is motivated by the oft-made declaration of its chief spokesman, Churchill, who has stated: “The loss of India would mark and consummate the downfall of the British Empire.” By this, of course, is meant that without the exploitation and outright robbery of the Indian masses, the profiteering of the British capitalists would be seriously, if not fatally, impaired.
The Cripps mission to India was an attempt on the part of the British government to trick the Indian people into the support of a war in which they felt they had no interest. In response to the announcement of England that India was at war with the Axis – an announcement in which the Indian masses were never consulted and certainly never consented – the Congress Party, under the pressure of the restive Indian population, declared early in 1940 that nothing short of complete independence would satisfy the desires of the people of India. The Cripps proposal was then an attempt to palm off a “post-dated check” on independence for the genuine and complete independence which the Indian people so rightly demanded.
The people of India, however, saw through the Cripps hoax, which proposed firstly that independence be postponed until after the war, something with which India had already had a negative experience during and after the First World War. Secondly, Mr. Cripps proposed that in the new Indian government (for the setting up of which he offered no date), any of the, Moslem majority provinces could secede. However, this right of secession was not, based on democratic consultation of the people involved, but rather on the constitution proposed by the British in 1935. According to this document, the “independent” India would be headed by a British-appointed Governor General who could veto or approve any bill, suspend the constitution, appoint or dismiss any minister, make police rules, issue decrees, etc.
 
British Reveal Themselves
The spontaneous outburst of strikes, especially among the industrial workers, who fought side by side with the radical students and went over the heads of the conservative leaders of the Congress Party, was India’s answer to Mr. Cripps and the imperialists he represented. Only the most brutal suppression, murder and arrests were able temporarily to still the revolt.
In recent months the British have revealed with what little sincerity they had proffered even the miserable Cripps proposals. Since his release from prison, Gandhi has been trying to start negotiations with the British for the settlement of the “Indian problem.” As a starting point; he made a series of proposals, many of which are closely akin to the Cripps proposals. He set forth a transition government, in which civilian affairs will rest with the Indian representatives, and military affairs will be in the hands of the British, with a cabinet responsible to the Legislature and not to the Viceroy. Gandhi has expressed himself as prepared to support the War against Japan and has issued a sharp injunction to the Indian nationalists to cease underground political activity against British rule. He proposed to the Moslem League that it enter the transition government.
What was Britain’s answer? A frigid rebuff! If you keep in mind that Gandhi’s mild demands upon the British have never fully reflected the aspirations of the Indian masses, that they were usually made under the pressure of these masses, who threaten to get out of control, and that Gandhi, representing the Indian capitalist class, has been ever ready to compromise with the British, the reply of Lord Wavell to Gandhi’s invitation is all the more significant.
Now that the danger of Japanese conquest of India has passed, the British feel that they do not even have to negotiate with the Indian nationalists. In an arrogant and insulting reply, Wavell expressed the attitude of the British rulers:
“I believe that the greatest contribution that the Congress Party can make toward India’s welfare is to abandon the policy of non-cooperation and join wholeheartedly with the other Indian parties and with the British in helping India forward in economic and political progress – not by any dramatic or spectacular stroke but by hard and steady work toward the end ahead.”
Put into undiplomatic language, this means: You, the Indian people, must not fight for your independence, even by such mild measures as non-cooperation, to say nothing of revolution. Instead, you must cooperate with us, your enslavers, and work hard, while we – we will just continue to live off your hard work.
 
The Gandhi Proposals
What Gandhi was proposing, and what the British rejected, was not independence for India. He was merely proposing that the Indian national leaders be permitted to share the government, with the British, in a set-up which would leave the most decisive factor of government, namely, control of military affairs, in the hands of the British.
The proposal that, at the end of the war, a plebiscite should be held in the Moslem areas to determine whether they shall constitute independent states or be part of an all-India federation was likewise turned down by the British, who have no wish to see the “Moslem problem” settled. Jinnah, head of the Moslem League, with the help of the Viceroy, has raised numerous technical obstacles in the way of considering the proposition, even though he has resumed discussions with Gandhi.
The proposal for the plebiscite can have meaning only if it is made in conjunction with the establishment of democracy in India. Without at least freedom of speech, press and organization guaranteed to all sections of the population, a democratic vote in the Moslem areas cannot even be taken and the will of the people involved cannot be expressed.
To attain these rights it is necessary that the Indian people break completely with the British, take matters into their own hands and establish a democratic government with a National Assembly elected by free and universal suffrage. But it is just such a break that Gandhi is NOT advocating. Instead, he proposes a “share-the-government” plan, which would only strengthen Britain’s position in India during the war and make independence more difficult to obtain later on.
It is at this point that the Gandhi proposals show their inherent weakness. On the one hand, they are unacceptable to the British, who do not wish to see the Moslem problem settled and who are sticking to the Cripps proposals as the only basis for discussion. On the other hand, they offer no solution to the Moslem question because they do not go far enough. It is impossible to obtain democracy in one sphere – that of national self-determination – without fighting for it in all spheres, especially in a country like India, where none of the democratic rights, commonly known in the United States, are in existence. But these rights are not obtainable, by any “share-the-government” plans with the British, but only by an all-out fight against British rule.
The Gandhi method of proceeding against the British rulers can only end in a blind alley. The British refusal even to consider the Gandhi plan is only additional proof of the fact that negotiations and bargaining will get the Indian people nowhere. Their freedom will be won only through clear-sighted and direct struggle.
At the Quebec conference between Prime Minister Churchill arid President Roosevent it is most likely that the United States will not press for the immediate liberation of India, although Roosevelt may seek certain concessions for American big business. The imperialist interests of the two great democracies represented at Quebec will overshadow the issue of democratic rights of the millions in India.
It is quite possible that in the days to come the United States may, for the purpose of strengthening its own imperialist interests, demand that England “liberate” India by declaring an “open door” policy. A demand for such “liberation” will have nothing in common with the demand made by the Indian people, who want freedom from British rule, not in order to come under the domination of another imperialist power, but in order that they may govern themselves as they sees fit. The Indian people will inevitably resume active struggle for freedom, and in this fight we place ourselves unmistakably and unconditionally on their side.
 




In adopting the report of the Anglo-Soviet Trade Union Committee, the Trade Union Congress of Great Britain revealed that it had fallen for one of the eldest lies maintained by the ruling class in every country. The report, carried by a vote of five to one, linked the German people with their fascist oppressors in the atrocities committed by the latter, and stated that the German people could not be absolved from responsibility for these crimes.
There are several things which are wrong in such an attitude, which is extremely dangerous to the working class, especially in the “democratic” countries.
 
Who Was Responsible for Hitler?
In the first place, every worker must remember that the German workers and people in general were the first victims of Nazism. Before the Nazis were able to extend their barbaric practices beyond the borders of Germany, they had to break by force and violence the working class organizations in their own country. The first Nazi concentration camps were filled and still are filled with German workers who fought. Nazism long before the capitalist statesmen of the democratic countries discovered that they could not “do business with Hitler.”
Such workers cannot be held responsible for the crimes of Hitler, who was aided in his climb to power by labor’s mortal enemies, both inside and outside Germany.
But why didn’t the German workers do something to stop Hitler? Doesn’t the fact that they didn’t stop him make them at least partly responsible for his crimes?
The German workers were prevented from stopping Hitler and his hordes by the very people who today shout the loudest about a “hard” peace for Germany and not “absolving” the German people. The German working class was organized into two gigantic working class parties, both of them led by men who did next to nothing to organize the fight against fascism. The leaders of one of these, parties, the Social-Democratic, relied upon Hindenburg to stop Hitler. The leaders of the other party, the Communist Party, on orders from Moscow, preferred the fight against the social-democrats to the fight against the fascists. The division inside the ranks of German labor at such a crucial moment, and the lack of a bold, aggressive fighting program against fascism, for which the leaders of both these parties are equally responsible, permitted the fascists to get to power. Now these leaders, and their prototypes in other countries, shout about the need to punish all the German people for the crimes of fascism. At the very least, says Sir Walter Citrine, general secretary of the Trade Union Council, the German people were quiescent while Hitler’s armies ravaged the European continent, and they must therefore be considered accessories to the crime.
 
Labor Leaders Helping Capitalism
Leaving aside for the moment the fact that Sir Walter at the time of Hitler’s rise to power was busy selling the virtues of capitalism to the British workers, this kind of argumentation is very dangerous to the British working class.
By this kind of reasoning, all the crimes of British imperialism in Asia and Africa can be placed on the heads of the British working class. What if the Indian people should some day decide that EVERY Englishman is responsible for their enslavement, and that the British labor movement was “at least an accessory” to that crime? How would Sir Walter defend the honor of the British trade unions, of which he is general secretary?
By the same token the American labor movement could be held responsible for every lynching in the South, for every injustice and crime perpetrated by or inspired by the American capitalist class.
When Mr. Churchill and Mr. Roosevelt (and they, are speaking respectively for the capitalists of England and the United States) say such things, it makes a great deal of sense. (President Roosevelt declared that he does not hold the German people responsible, but they will have to make their way toward a democratic way of life “without the burden of carrying a gun.” What he is actually saying is that the German people will have no weapons with which to wipe out the Nazis.) For neither of them can tell the truth about German fascism, namely, that it is the product of German capitalist society, and that the fascists are the agents who do the dirty work for the capitalists. They can’t tell the truth lest the workers in their own coutries draw some conclusions about who and what is actually responsible for oppression, fascism and war, and decide to do something effective about ridding the world once and for all of these scourges.
 
Let the German Workers Act
Given not even half a chance, the Italian people have already shown how little they had in common with Italian fascism. Every Italian worker wishes for nothing better than the opportunity to wipe out the Italian fascists and establish a new and better order. It is not the responsibility for fascism which has been pinned on the Italian people which prevents them from doing a more thorough job on the fascists, but rather the presence of Allied troops and the same kind of labor leaders who in England now pass resolutions condemning the whole German nation.
In Germany too, the workers will yet show how little they cared for Hitler and how great was their suffering at his hands. But they will not be aided in their fight against Hitlerism if the workers in England and the United States and their ruling class insist in placing the responsibility for the crimes of fascism upon them.
Instead, the labor movements in these countries must insist that the German and Italian workers not be hampered in any way in their dealings with their native fascists. Every bit of aid and encouragement must be sent to the German and Italian workers, even over the opposition of the ruling classes and governments of America and England. The workers of Germany and Italy are the only ones really capable of destroying fascism in their own countries.
 





Indian Independence
The question of Indian independence is moving into the limelight again. The White Paper issued by the Secretary for India, Leopold S. Amery, in which the British government reoffering in slightly modified form the 1942 Cripps proposals as a substitute for national independence, is a sign of the times.
The current proposals are designed not so much to break a deadlock in negotiations between a few Indian leaders and the British government. If that were all that was involved, Churchill could slap Gandhi back into jail and forget the whole business.
What produces these proposals at this time are three factors, the most important of which is the fact that India’s millions have not given up their century-old desire for freedom and are ready to take up an active struggle for it again.
Added to this is the growing popularity of the United States, which for its own imperialist aims presses for the loosening of England’s grip on India.
And finally, there are the British elections, in which Churchill wants to appear as the friend of the Indian people. Britain is seeking, not to break a deadlock, but to prevent the outbreak of the Indian revolution.
 

The Cripps Proposals
The Amery document declares that the Cripps offer, rejected in violent struggle by the Indian people in 1942, remains open. The Indians threw this offer back into the faces of their British masters because it had in no way satisfied their demand for immediate and unconditional independence. It had proposed to retain the 1935 Constitution, which deprived about 365 million out of a population of 400 million of the right to vote, and which gave to the British Viceroy the following powers: to veto all decisions of the Provincial Councils, to control the police, army and use of troops, to order arrests, to levy taxes, to control the banks, foreign relations and finances. The matter of defense was to remain entirely in the hands of the British government. In the sweet bye and bye, some time after the war, nobody knows just when, Cripps proposed that a new Constitution, which would aim at not independence but “semi-dominion” status, be drawn up. In the meantime, the Indian masses were to throw all their energies behind the British war effort.
That was in 1942, when Japan’s armies were on the borders of India. In defense of their country the Indian people unceremoniously gave Sir Stafford the boot and opened up an active struggle against British imperialism.
Vacillation of the leadership and superiority of the British forces temporarily suppressed the struggle. Thousands were arrested, thrown into jail, and the Constitution was suspended. The British ruled India by executive decree.
 

The New Proposals
Now Mr. Amery is offering to reconstitute the Executive Council, to be composed of Indian political leaders who would be chosen by a conference of recognized party leaders. The Viceroy would, naturally, retain all his old powers. Represented on a parity basis at this conference, called for June 25 at Simla, would be the Moslems, who constitute less than one-fourth of the population, and the caste Hindus, or a very small proportion of the remaining 300 million. The great bulk of the Indian masses would not be represented at this conference.
Mohandas K. Gandhi, leader of the Congress Party, has stated that he is willing to study these proposals. However, he is very careful not to commit himself too definitely since he is not too sure that the Indian people are ready to accept. He therefore states that he is prepared to recommend to the Congress Party that it study these proposals. Later reports declared that Gandhi would oppose the British plan.
This is characteristic of Gandhi’s conduct. He is an Indian nationalist, that is, he wants national freedom for India. But he is at the same time a representative of the small Indian capitalist class, and therefore wants this freedom so that his class will be able to exploit the Indian workers and peasants. That is why he is opposed to active mass revolutionary struggle, for he knows that such a struggle can very well sweep away the Indian capitalist together with the British imperialist. This is at the root of his compromising attitude.
However, the Mahatma is far too shrewd to oppose the will of the masses directly. He seeks therefore to deflect their struggles into passive resistance, always leaving them unprepared to resist the armed intervention of British imperialism.
In 1942, we know that the Congress Party leaders were ready to accept the Cripps proposals, but it was the insurgent masses who prevented that. Gandhi, more sensitive to the moods of the people, got the Congress leaders to reject the Cripps offer. Today, Gandhi is ready to recommend to his party to accept the Amery offer, but leaves himself free to change his position should the Indian people once again force their will upon the Congress leadership.
We have every reason to believe that the Indian masses will not be fooled by the Amery proposals any more than they were by the Cripps proposals. The famine of the last three years, entirely the product of Britain’s misrule and mismanagement, is a stark reminder to the Indians that they have nothing, absolutely nothing to gain from across-the-table negotiations with their imperialist overlords, and that direct action is the only language the latter will understand.
 

British Labor Leaders Accept
Clement R. Attlee and Sir Stafford Cripps, leaders of the British Labor Party, have endorsed the Amery proposals. In this they were certainly not shaking for British labor. The working people of England have no interest in the continued retention of India as a colony.
At a Labor Party conference last December, the worker delegates showed where they stood on the question. Over the objections of the Party leaders, who threatened that the passage of the resolution introduced by the National Union of Railwaymen meant that the “British should quit India tomorrow,” the great majority of the conference called for the immediate release of all Indian political prisoners.
While Churchill shows that he understands how the British workers feel about freedom, for India, the leaders of the British Labor Party show that they are at one with Churchill, i.e., British imperialism, in regard to foreign and colonial policy.
A new stage in the struggle for Indian independence is opening up. A very important factor for the success of this struggle is the solidarity of the British workers with the Indian masses. Spearheading this solidarity are two organizations – the British Revolutionary Communist Party, which calls for immediate and unconditional freedom for India, and the Bolshevik-Leninist Party of India, which calls for the attainment of national freedom through independent class action of the working classes.
 





Imperialist Altruism
India is still the richest jewel in the crown of the British Empire, but it shines ever less brightly. Under the colonial system, the development of her agriculture and industry has been greatly impeded. Both were subordinated to the design of keeping India a source of raw materials and cheap labor for the British imperialists, rather than raising the standard of living of her people. Agriculture was reduced to a few money crops for export, with little or no attention paid to the raising of food for the Indian population. Industrial and railroad construction were planned solely for the transport of goods from the interior to the coastal cities and thence to England.
We have dwelt at length on previous occasions on what this exploitation has meant for the Indian people, the untold suffering it has imposed upon them. The current famine in that country tells the story.
But the imperialist treatment of India has had another result. While India has continued to be a great supplier of the raw materials for Britain, her role as purchaser of British manufactured goods has steadily declined. For example, in 1913 Britain exported to India 15 per cent of her total exports; in 1929, 10.7 per cent and in 1938, 7.2 per cent.
At the present time, when England looks to an expansion of her foreign trade as a means of retaining her position as a great power, a section of her ruling class is advocating an industrialization policy in India for the purpose of raising the purchasing power of the Indian people. Through retention of India as a colony, this purchasing power can then be exploited by the British manufacturers.
Only a section of the British industrialists are now advocating this policy, that section which is interested in export trade. They are motivated solely by considerations of trade and profit, and not at all by considerations of the conditions of the Indian people. An important factor which spurs them in the advocacy of this policy is the threat of United States competition for the Indian market.
More and more openly, United States big business talks in terms of “our stake” in India. An editorial in the New York Times describes this stake in very precise terms:
“If we of the United States think that the troubles of far-away India are no concern of ours, we shall do well to consider some of the facts which this new organization (American Relief of India, Inc.) has assembled for us. For American business men, India is one of the mightiest potential markets on the globe, about to enter upon an industrial era that will release the latent energies of one-fifth of the human rac. She will want machinery for farm and factory; she will want tens of thousands of products that America can provide. We of this country have a stake in India. For our own well-being, if for not higher reason, we can no longer think of India as outside our world. We cannot deny her our interest or leave her ills and misfortunes to others to cure.” Emphasis mine – R.C.)
You may rest assured that whenever the representatives of the business interests express concern about the plight of the oppressed peoples and propose ways and means to help them, there are motives other than brotherhood and love of man involved. Aid to starving India is looked upon by big business as a good investment for the future. Without the prospect of future exploitation, both the British and American business interests would not care a damn, as they haven’t for decades past, about the Indian people of any other colonial peoples.
 

   Under the guise of uniting the Ukrainian people, an agreement was signed between Moscow and the new Czechoslovak government whereby Ruthenia, or the Carpahto-Ukraine, is ceded to Russia. The agreement states that this action was taken “in accordance with the desire shown by the, population of the Carpatho-Ukraine,” although no mention is made of the manner in which this “desire” has been expressed in recent times. The hint by the Czech premier some months back that the question would be settled by popular vote died a quick death. The Ukrainian people have for decades been the pawn of imperialist machinations on the European continent. The violation of their desire for national unification and national independence dates back t obefore the First World War when they were under the domination of Russian czarism and Austro-Hungarian despotism. At the end of that war, the treaty-makers who had pledged themselves to abide by the right of self-determination of nations once again trampled on the clearly indicated wishes of the Ukrainian people. Unification at the end of the first world war could have meant only one thing: the Ukrainian people organized as a united Soviet Ukraine, that is, a workers’ Ukraine federated with the other workers’ republics established by the Russian Revolution of 1917. To prevent this, and thereby weaken the first workers’ government, the imperialist victors divided up the Ukrainian people, parcelling out the Western Ukraine to Poland, and the Carpatho-Ukraine to the newly-established Czechoslovakia. This latter territory was later organized as the autonomous province of Ruthenia under Czechoslovak rule. Thus was the Ukrainian nation forcibly kept dismembered. As war once drew near, the Ukrainians were subjected to further shifts. In 1938, Hitler took Ruthenia from Czechoslovakia and handed it to Hungary in exchange for an alliance. In 1939, as one of the stipulations of the Hitler-Stalin pact, Russia obtained Western Ukraine when she seized the eastern half of Poland. The Yalta agreement of the Big Three gave Western Ukraine to Stalin once more. The latest move, cession of Ruthenia to Russia, has finally “united” all the Ukrainian people in Europe. But this is a far cry from the national unification and independence which the Ukrainian people have so long wanted. Unification under the dictatorship of the Kremlin means unification in a prison, not national freedom.   Difference Under Lenin In the early years after the Russian Revolution, the many nationalities federated in the Soviet Union enjoyed all the privileges of nationhood plus the advantages of cooperation. The Soviet constitution provided that the Soviet Union be based on voluntary adherence, and granted to each nationality the right of self-determination, including the right to separate from the Union, if it so desired. Finland obtained its separation from Russia without even having to go through any prolonged negotiations. Lenin simply signed the request placed before him. The right of national self-determination, that is, the right of a people to decide for itself how it shall be governed, was one of the many democratic rights achieved by the workers’ revolution in Russia. But this right, as well as all other democratic rights, has long ago disappeared in Russia under the rule of the Stalinist oligarchy. Just as these other rights remain only on paper in that country, so does the right of self-determination.   Trotsky’s Position As far back as 1939, Leon Trotsky, in writing about the question of the Ukraine, indicated that national rights, guaranteed by the Russian Revolution, had disappeared. He advocated the organization of an independent Soviet Ukraine as the only means by which the Ukrainian people could obtain national unification and freedom. Everything that has happened since that time, the forceful annexations and incorporations of territories by all the imperialists, especially the Russian, indicates that the struggle fornational freedom cannot be left to he carried on in the negotiating chambers of the big powers, but must be conducted by the masses of the people themselves as a part of the struggle for all democratic rights and socialist emancipation.   






The New York Local of the Workers Party has just made public the text of a letter which it sent more than a month ago to the corresponding branch of the Socialist Workers Party in an effort to arrive at an agreement which would avoid the presentation of two conflicting candidates for the office of Mayor of New York in the present municipal election.
The Socialist Workers Party, while it never acknowledged receipt of this letter or sent a reply to the proposal, has, however, decided to reject the offer to arrive at an agreement or even to discuss the possibility of joint action.
As readers of Labor Action know, Local New York of the Workers Party announced some time ago its decision to nominate Max Shachtman, national secretary of the party, for the office of Mayor. It was only after this announcement was made public that the Socialist Workers Party decided to enter a candidate of its own for the same office.
In spite of this fact, the Workers Party felt it its duty to the cause of revolutionary socialist unity to address a letter to the Socialist Workers Party in the hope of averting the confusion that might well be created among many militant, radical and socialist workers who would be confronted with a choice between two candidates whose election platforms do not have any fundamental differences between them.
As is to be seen from the letter, the terms of the agreement were left entirely open so that they might be arrived at in the course of discussion between the two organizations. The letter also points out that regardless of the terms of the agreement, it would not be necessary for either party to give up its own platform, its own views, or its own campaign, all of which could be put forward in complete political independence.
It is well known that such practical agreements are not only permissible from the standpoint of socialist principle, but have been made time and again between working class parties and organizations, even though there have been political differences between them on numerous questions.
The Socialist Workers Party, however, or rather the Cannonite group in the leadership of it, voted to reject the Workers Party proposal out of hand. The rejection was voted against the protest of a minority group, led by Albert Goldman, Felix Morrow and Oscar Williams, prominent party leaders, who pointed out the need and value of accepting the proposal of the Workers Party and appointing a sub-committee of the SWP to discuss the question with the WP.
The action of the Socialist Workers Party, which is animated by a narrow-minded and bureaucratic sectarianism, as well as by a violent factional antagonism toward the Workers Party, is only the latest of a series of such actions which have brought discredit to the SWP. Among the most discrediting of these actions in recent times, which aroused bitter criticism even in its own ranks, was its refusal in Los Angeles and Akron to join with the Workers Party and other groups in united picketing demonstrations against notorious fascists like Gerald L.K. Smith and Gerald Winrod.
The full text of the letter sent to the Socialist Workers Party by Local New York of the Workers Party over the signature of its organizer, Reva Craine, is as follows:




July 5, 1945
Local New York City Committee
Socialist Workers Party
116 University Place
New York, N.Y.
Dear Comrades:
As you know, the Workers Party has nominated Comrade Max Shachtman for the office of Mayor in the coming New York municipal campaign. We note that the Socialist Workers Party has nominated Comrade Farrell Dobbs for the same office, and Louise Simpson for the office of Councilman. The campaign platforms present by the Workers Party and the Socialist Workers Party in the New York election will, in all likelihood, reveal no fundamental or radical differences. Under these circumstances, much confusion can be created among workers, especially those who are more advanced politically, and the common cause to which we adhere can be harmed.
We believe it is possible to arrive at an agreement between the two parties which, while assuring the political integrity of both, would eliminate the confusion and avert the harm. While confident of the possibility of joint action in the election campaign, we do not wish, to anticipate its exact terms.
Therefore, we have selected a sub-committee to meet with a similar committee representing your organization for the purpose of exploring the possibilities of joint action in the New York election. Our sub-committee is prepared to meet with you at the earliest possible moment



 


Fraternally yours,
Local New York, Workers Party
Reva Craine, Organizer



 





Stalin Grooms Von Paulus?
Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin are at the present meeting somewhere in Europe in an attempt to come to some agreement regarding the Allied partition of that continent. Of central importance is the question: What to do with Germany, and which of the Allied powers is to do it? As his armies move on toward Berlin, Stalin is indeed in the strongest position to put into effect his ideas on, the subject. In the days of the agitation for the opening of the second front, Molotov, Russian Premier, had warned that he who gets to Berlin first would decide the fate of Germany. Stalin is seeking to make good this threat.
If Germany is “liberated” by the advancing Russian army, if Hitler’s government is “overthrown” in this way, what will replace it? Will the German people be able to establish their own government? Will they be able to go after the hated Nazis and capitalists who brought them into the war and to the brink of disaster? Will they be allowed to purge their country of every trace of the detested fascist regime? Knowing what the Allied attitude has been to the Italian, French, Belgian and Greek people – not to mention the Polish people – there is no reason to believe that the German masses will fare even as well.
 
The Real Allied Policy
The policy of the Allies is to make Germany “pay for the war,” that is, make the German people pay. The people must be held responsible for the crimes of Hitler. The most rabid proponents of this policy are the Russian rulers, whose spokesman, the writer, Ilya Ehrenburg, recently declared that the Russians are coming to Germany, not as liberators, but as conquerors.
Stalin wants to make Germany pay by confiscation of whatever industry is left in that country after the continual bombings and raids. He wants, moreover, at least ten million German slaves. The chastisement of the German people must be complete, and the anti-fascists among them will be marked for the severest punishment. Ehrenburg’s reply to a question on what the Russians would do about a revolt of the German people who would “overthrow Hitler and welcome the advancing Red Army with appropriate banners,” was, “Those would be the first people we would shoot.”
Up to this point there is agreement on the part of the Big Three with regard to Germany. On the question of the three-way partition of Germany there may not be that much unanimity. Now that the practical settlement of the German, problem appears to be at hand, the Russian interests become more clear. Whereas Anglo-American imperialism would benefit by the dismemberment of Germany, in that a rival or potential rival would be put out of the way, Russian interests dictate the maintenance of a Germany sufficiently strong to act as a buffer against the other two Allied partners. Russia, desires a weakened, but not crippled Germany, one that is friendly, peaceful and “safe,” i.e., safe to the Russian ruling class.
 
Resurrecting the Junkers
The Kremlin has prepared for its policy through the establishment of a committee which it is rumored will be introduced as the provisional government for Germany. When the Russians turned back the Germans at Stalingrad, they not only reversed the European military situation, but captured a group of German generals who have been worked over into a Union of German Officers who have been acting with and for the Russians.
In addition, there is the Free German Committee, which is composed of some of these Junkers and loyal Stalinists. The committee is headed by General Walther von Seydlitz, who was a commander in the German Sixth Army, which surrendered at Stalingrad. Seydlitz is an old-line military man, comes from an old aristocratic family, is a descendant of Bismarck and has been in the army since 1908. He served his class under the Kaiser, under the Republic and under Hitler. Up to Stalingrad, he was a loyal German militarist. Now he serves his class in what he considers to be the best way, under Stalin.
In addition to the German generals, there are the Stalinist henchmen headed by one William Pieck. It is already being spoken about quite openly that Stalin is moving to install the Free German Committee as the provisional German government, which will be headed by Field Marshal von Paulus. He too was captured at Stalingrad, but it took him over a year to leave Hitler. Since then he has become a renovated Junker. Italy had its Badoglio – Germany will have its von Paulus.
We see then that it would be a mistake to take too seriously the Russian contention that all Germans are guilty, hopeless, incapable of changing. At least some “good” Germans have been found. They are the Junker generals who believe that Hitler has lost the war and that the best way to save German capitalism and German Junkerdom is to abandon Hitler, call off the war and establish “law and order” in Germany. In return for the privilege of doing this, they have become friends of Stalin.
On the other hand, Stalin sees in a government headed by these people a way of’ preventing civil war in Germany, that is, revolution, which might not stop merely at the overthrow of fascism, but which might make passible the victory of the German working class over capitalism.
 
Beheading a Revolution
We are sure that the Russian secret police have ways of winning over German generals. What is most important is that on the very basic point of what is to be the role of the made-in-Moscow provisional German government there is complete agreement and unity of interests between the generals and the Russian bureaucracy. There is to be no democracy in Germany, there is to be no. free government, no independent workers’ movement and organizations and, above all, no revolution. The new regime is to be a totalitarian one, without Hitler. In this aim Stalin has found the perfect instrument, the German army staff.
As one of the “free” officers stated in a radio broadcast: “Our first task is to save the lives of these German soldiers, to save them from the certain and useless death to which Hitler leads them daily. Our second task is to cleanse the besmirched honor of the German officers’ corps. The third task is to act as a preventative against the civil war which Hitler will be faced with.”
Not one word – and how could there be from this source? – about the restoration of those rights which fascist rule has stamped out.
 





Imperialist Big Three
The Big Three have met, conspired and plotted the division of Europe. Each of the three jockeyed for the most advantageous position on that continent for each knows that control and domination of the world lies through control and domination of Europe. They also know that the success of their plans is contingent upon many factors, most important of which is that the people of the continent quietly acquiesce and accept their decisions and “settlements.”
The decisions were real enough. The imperialists will get what they are after, the power to exploit the European masses. To these masses, however, they have presented a reiteration of, the principles of the Atlantic Charter, or, at any rate, one of these principles – “the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live.” The Big Three pledged themselves to assist the European peoples in achieving this, even undertaking to “facilitate” the holding of elections.
What this promise is actually worth has already been demonstrated in those countries that have been “liberated” and where the people have been trying to put this principle into practice.
*

Struggle in Belgium
In Belgium, the Pierlot government, which had been imposed upon the Belgians and propped up by British and American tanks, fell because of complete lack of popular support. As Premier, Pierlot had disarmed the Belgian resistance movement, protected the collaborators, of whom the people wished to be rid (of the 100,000 arrested as collaborators, 12,000 have been sentenced and ten executed), maintained high prices and low wages.
Popular dissatisfaction with this policy forced Pierlot from office. He did not even wait for a vote in the Chamber of Deputies. In his speech, he blamed the situation in the country on the failure of the Allies to implement their promises of food deliveries to the hungry populace. The puppet reproached his masters. But he had fulfilled his duty – he disarmed the people – and when he was no longer able to hold them in check, he had to go.
The new government, headed by the so-called socialist, Van Acker, has announced that it will continue the policies of the Pierlot regime. The communists and socialists who entered this government are going to try to make these policies more palatable to the Belgian people, but this cannot work for long, since in Belgium, as in every country in Europe, obtaining the barest necessities of life – food and shelter – requires drastic social changes, beginning with a purge of the collaborators, who, in the main, are the wealthy industrial and. financial classes.
The Belgian miners, most oppressed and exploited section of the working class, are out on strike. From the start, the socialist and Christian Union leaders tried to get them to return to work. In the Charleroi district, the Revolutionary Communist Party (Trotskyist) is active in the strike, urging the workers to maintain their ranks, and spread the strike to other districts.
*

Italian Partisans
In northern Italy, still occupied by the Germans, Italian partisan groups have been fighting heroically to liberate their country. When the Allies considered that the offensive in Italy would clear the Germans out very quickly, they urged the partisans on, even supplying them with small amounts of arms and munitions. They also dropped from airplanes royalist officers who were to place themselves at the head of the partisan troops.
When the winter standstill on the Italian front set in, the Allies cut off all supplies to the partisans and advised them to go home. The Italian partisans have no home to which they can return, since these are in the hands of the Germans. They have no jobs waiting for them. To return to their native villages is tantamount to surrendering to the Germans.
The heroic partisans chose to remain in the hills and fight as best they can, exposed to the hunger and cold of the open country. They have been left to the mercy of the Germans. This does not in any way conflict with the Allied policy toward “liberated” Italy, since the smaller the number of self-liberated Italians, the smaller will be the “trouble”, from them one day when “free” elections are permitted.
*

Democracy: Allied Type
The promise of democracy by the Big Three, the promise of free elections, takes on the same pattern in, every country “liberated’’ by the Allies.
First – before anything else is even considered – comes the disarming of the resistance movement, of the people who fought and helped drive the Nazis from their lands. Examples: Greece, Belgium, France.
Where they cannot be disarmed, they are left to be killed by the Germans. Examples: Warsaw, Northern Italy.
Second – strengthen the reactionary regimes, support and prop up the monarchies, protect the collaborationists. This is called “restoring internal peace.” Then, when it can no longer be helped, permit an election and “facilitate” it to make sure that it goes right. To date, of course, no such elections have been held anywhere in Europe.
The European people have shown that they will not accept this without fighting back. This is the obstacle – plus the assistance given by the working people of England and the United States – that will yet upset the plans of the Big Three for the partition and domination of Europe.
 





French Resistance Movement
The French resistance movement has been divided into two major organizations. The one known as the Front National is Communist (Stalinist) dominated, while in the other the Mouvement de Liberation Nationale (MLN), the Socialist Party predominates.
At its first national congress, concluded last week, the MLN concerned itself with two problems: the adoption of a political program and a decision on the question of unity with the Front National.
Its political resolution coincided with the recently expressed objectives of the French Socialist Party, which calls for a “socialized form of economy” to be realized through the socialization of banks, insurance companies and public utilities. Of course, this program is to be carried out some time in the vague future, since the congress pledged itself, for the present; “to support General de Gaulle’s government in its war effort and in its work for the restoration of French greatness through economic and social liberation.” We indicated last week what de Gaulle’s work of economic and social liberation is worth in practice.
 
Vote on the Merger
On the proposition that the MLN merge with the Stalinist-controlled Front National, the congress, voted in the negative by a vote of 250 to 119. The delegates voiced some very just suspicions about this proposition, and when a delegation from the Front National lingered in the hall to listen to the speeches, shouts of “Leave! Leave!” were heard from the gathering.
The Stalinists have been trying to “unify” the resistance movement for some time. At first blush, this seemed like a very good and reasonable suggestion, but as proposed by them it is obvious that this is a move calculated to bring the entire resistance movement under Stalinist domination and control and to make its policies prevail. The Stalinists represent the greatest totalitarian danger in the labor and resistance movements and it was against this danger that the delegates of the MNL spoke out.
Recently, when it was announced that elections were to be held in France, the Stalinist press immediately started an agitation that only one slate, representing all the parties in the resistance movement be put up. They hoped to obtain places on the slate for many of their own members and sympathizers, not only through their own party channels, but in disguised form in the representatives of the other parties. This would save them the embarrassment of appearing publicly, on their own platform, before the masses of the French people. It would at the same time prevent other political parties from putting forward their programs and criticizing and attacking the Communists.
 
Stalinist “Democracy”
The French electorate would be confronted with only one list of candidates and they would have the choice of voting for or against. This is the way “elections” are held in Stalin’s Russia and Hitler’s Germany. For in those countries there is but one party, the party of the dictator, and one program, the program of the ruling class. Such elections are called plebiscite’s, in which the people have no way of expressing what they want;
The French Stalinists are eager to “unify” the resistance movement in order to bind it to their newly adopted conservative program, which dates from the recent friendship pact sighed by Stalin and de Gaulle. During the Nazi occupation, the. Stalinists waxed very radical and participated actively in the underground resistance. Their influence among the French working class grew rapidly as a result. For a time after the “liberation” of France they continued this apparently, left-wing policy. They were very critical of de Gaulle, demanded a stern policy of punishment for the collaborationists, insisted upon democratic rights, improvements in the living conditions of the masses of people and denounced de Gaulle’s decree ordering the FFI to disarm. This policy was designed to retain their popularity with their followers and, what is more important for the henchmen of the Kremlin, to pressure de Gaulle into an alliance with Russia.
As soon as de Gaulle, whom they had been attacking violently, signed up with “dear, powerful Russia,” this agitation ceased. Thorez, the leader of the French Stalinists, has ordered his party to assist de Gaulle in the disarming of the resistance fighters. His party tried the device of “unification” of the resistance movement in order to retain the popularity it had achieved in its “radical” days and to compel subservience to Russian political needs on the entire movement.
At least some of the delegates to the MLN congress saw through this ruse. One of them from Marseilles declared that he opposes unity with the Front National not because the Communist Party was revolutionary, but, on the contrary, because of “the fact that the Communists have lost their revolutionary character and forgotten their duties as members of the resistance.”
The rejection of the unity proposal by the MLN is a good sign. It is an action against the attempts of the Stalinists to totalitarianize the resistance and workers’ movements in France. What the people of France need more than anything else is the opportunity to work: out a correct-political program. This is possible only if there is freedom to establish their political parties and to listen, read, discuss and agitate freely for their ideas. In this way it will be possible for all political parties to present themselves before the working class to be judged in words and actions, and for a revolutionary party to be established and built. The Stalinist attempt to prevent this suffered a setback by the action of the MLN congress.
*

Stalinism in Italy
The desire of the Stalinists to introduce their type of totalitarianism in the form of “one party’’ (which they naturally will seek to dominate and control) manifested itself in Rome a few days back. In Italy, it is possible to publish a newspaper only if permission is first obtained from the government, since it controls the supply of paper. Most of the working class papers are still published illegally, under the most difficult and harrassing conditions, as a result of this control.
The government’s authorization of a dozen more daily newspapers in Rome brought forth a blast from the Communist paper L’Unità , which urged not the expansion of the freedom of the press, but rather the reduction of dailies to one paper for each big city, to be issued by the Committee of National Liberation.
 





Struggle in Belgium
A recent editorial in Le Peuple (Belgian socialist paper) declared that while “the big democracies may well be victorious on the fields of battle, the reign of democracy is by no means assured in our country ... one realizes more clearly each week that the war has left capitalism intact in our country. Let us have no illusions.”
The editorial goes on to warn that the enemies of democracy and social reform inside Belgium are not attacking openly, but that they continue their anti-labor and anti-democratic activities in more subtle ways.
“They do not contest the rights of the public powers in matters of national economy. They merely prevent them from exercising them.
“They do not revolt against the social laws, but they set about sabotaging the financing of them.
“They do not talk about the new order any more, but they are already beginning to attack what was good in the old order for fear of the radical reform which the country is demanding ...
“Until the day when the lessons of this war have been obliterated by cunning and confusing propaganda, these same people will consider themselves Strong enough – with the support of all those who have escaped from an inadequate purge – to settle their accounts with democracy. Fascism is dead, but the fascist mentality still exists; it is biding its time ...
“We shall see organs of national union, with no political label, springing up. They will show a fine contempt for all political parties and will publish malicious rumors about all the left wing men. They will address their remarks principally to the middle classes, flattering their prejudices and stirring up their discontent. They will defend the sacred rights of property, the collaboration of classes, order and authority. If need be they will set the country against the government. They will never mention banks or trusts. The money which is going to support them will not have been paid in vain.”
Such is the warning of the Belgian Socialist Party against the danger of a resurgence of fascism in that country, unless drastic action is taken against the benefactors of fascism, the trusts and the banks and the entire capitalist class.
On February 10, only a few weeks after this warning was sounded, a new government was formed in Belgium to replace the one that Pierlot could no longer hold together. This “unity government” is built around the four major political parties, the Socialists, Liberals, Catholics and Communists, and is headed by Achille van Acker, a so-called Socialist.
Three days later the new Premier outlined his government’s policy in a very brief speech. This is how he dealt with the major problems facing the country:
UNEMPLOYMENT: Everybody in Belgium wants to work he said. Unemployment will be solved by the conscription of labor.
THE COAL SHORTAGE: “The output of coal must be increased and it will be.” METHOD: Recruitment of workers, required for the coal mines.
The recovery of Belgian industry depends on the cooperation, loyal cooperation at that, of the industrialists, declared the “socialist” Premier.
Having undertaken to head a capitalist government, the “socialist” van Acker must carry out capitalist politics. That is why no mention is made of the trusts and the banks, no attack leveled on capitalism. As for the collaborators and those of “fascist mentality,” the purge is to be eased even more. The government intends to release many of those now imprisoned and to make it easier for those retained to be let off easy. All the vigor of the new regime is to be reserved against the working class, for van Acker does not intend to tolerate for a minute demonstrations like those which occurred last November, parades, riots or strike’s.
While in words the Belgian socialists recognize the danger of fascism, they are powerless to to anything effective to stop its advent because they are in practice collaborating with the supporters and beneficiaries of fascism, the capitalist class. in this, they are once again repeating the policy which has paved the way for fascism.
* * *

Situation of Greek Seamen
(ITF) The leaders of the Federation of Greek Maritime Unions, who are preparing to return to Greece, report in their journal:
“The question of unemployment is already very acute for Greek seamen owing to the fact that our shipping has sustained great losses which so far have not been replaced. The reconstruction of our merchant fleet alone will be the means of absorbing all unemployed seamen. In addition, the reconstruction of shipping is most essential for our national economy, since it constitutes one of the main resources of the country’s finances. The transfer of the various insurance funds for the benefit of our seamen in Greece and the families of those abroad who have been impoverished during the occupation. The conclusion too of the collective agreement is long overdue, having been postponed so far by the shipowners, with the clear purpose of taking advantage of the poverty and numbers of the seamen at home, and using them as cheap labor.”
This confirms what we have long contended – namely, that the owners of the means of production in all countries, be they shipowners, factory owners, mine owners, land owners are alike in their attitude toward the workers and their organizations. The alleviation of such conditions is one of the things that the Greek people were fighting for.
 





“Enough” Is To Much
ILYA EHRENBURG, until recently the official Kremlin hate-monger against the German people, has fallen from grace. He has been taken to task for over-reaching himself in an article entitled Enough in which he attempted to explain why the German people fled from the advancing Russian army instead of welcoming it as a liberator.
We need only recall that it was Ehrenburg who said, with official sanction, that the Russians were coming to Germany, not as liberators but as conquerors, and that those Germans who would welcome the advancing Russian army would be the “first people we would shoot.”
In his latest article, he states that all Germans are the same, that is, fascists and murderers, and that they must all be held equally responsible for the crimes of Hitler. He writes that the German people are a “huge gang which is scattering and fleeing now that the time has come to answer for their-deeds.”
 

They Came as Conquerors
For these statements, Ehrenburg, who was merely carrying out orders, is now being reprimanded in the Russian press. That the German masses did not enthusiastically welcome the armies of Stalin cannot be denied, not even in Stalin’s official press, which has been able to create all kinds of fables. The German masses, no matter what they may think about the nature of Russia itself, know one thing: Stalin’s armies are not coming as liberators, but as conquerors.
They know this from the pens of all the Ehrenburgs, and they know this from the past deeds of Stalin’s armies as they occupied one country after another. They know it from the proposal of tfte Russian ruling class to take at least ten million German workers into slavery. And they have not forgotten that Stalin is the ex-partner of Hitler and has his own system of concentration camps, torture chambers, frame-ups and confession trials.
The Russian press is now trying to explain away the fact that the German people fled upon the approach of the Russian armies. The Stalinist writers have been instructed to say that all this has happened as a result of a plot on the part of the Nazis who tried to sow intrigue and dissension among the Allies by frightening the German masses about the Russians and making them less apprehensive about the western Allies.
Ehrenburg is how repudiated for having lumped all the Germans into one mass. No, he is now told, not all the Germans will be punished or exterminated. That is all a Nazi lie, you see. And Ehrenburg is helping the Nazis by writing as he does. The reason for this change should be sought in the increasing difficulties of the Big Three.
Nothing in the criticism of Ehrenburg, however, repudiates the Russian proposal for ten million German slaves. There is no indication of who the “good” Germans are, except a passing reference that those “who behave loyally toward the Allied armies are not threatened.”
*

Changing the Line
How serious may be the differences between Russia, on the one hand, and Britain and the United States on the other, is reflected in the as yet cautious words of Earl Browder, American mouthpiece for Joseph Stalin. The San Francisco conference is daily revealing these deep-seated conflicts among the Big Three in their desire to dominate the European continent. The dispute over Poland may well be the crucial question.
Should a break occur between Russian and American policies, the Communist Party in this country will again “change the line.” And Earl Browder, in his capacity of leader of that party, is the official line-changer.
His recent piece in the Daily Worker is preparing for any change that might be called in Moscow. From an all-out endorsement of the foreign policy of the United States, there are now squeezed in cautious words of criticism. As yet, it is not an all-out break and condemnation. Browder utilizes Roosevelt’s death to say that the latter’s policy of collaboration with Russia is now being distorted by the U.S. delegation at San Francisco and questions whether it is not Vandenburg who is making U.S. foreign policy.
 





Puerto Rico
THE defenders of imperialism have often resorted to the argument that the benefits of that policy in the form of roads, schools, hospitals, churches, etc., more than offset the intense exploitation to which the colonial peoples are subjected. We have been able to show that these “benefits” are introduced primarily to further the aims of the imperialists and only secondarily, or incidentally, are they designed to raise the cultural level of the colonial populations.
A case in point is the school system established by the United States in Puerto Rico. This has been used to shield the fact that the presence of United States imperialism in that island has disrupted its entire economy, reduced it to a one-crop economy, and made it entirely dependent upon the United States for food, clothing and the other necessities of life.
Spanish is the native language of the Puerto Ricans, but the schools of the island are conducted in English, the language of the United States. The result has been that the meager education received by Puerto Rican school children is of little practical value to them, since it is given in a language which is foreign to them, and which they will not use in adult life.
Recently the Puerto Rican Legislature passed a resolution asking for the re-establishment of Spanish in the schools. The resolution was promptly vetoed by U.S. governor Rexford G. Tugwell on the ground that “as long as the present close relation between the U.S. and Puerto Rico exists, retention of this system (which makes English the language of the schools) is wise and necessary. In spite of opinion to the contrary, the problem of language is mixed with that of the political status ...”
 

Elections and Strikes
In the absence of an influential revolutionary socialist party in France, the workers there expressed their desire to see some very radical changes in government policy by the very large vote they gave to the Socialist and Communist Parties in the French municipal elections just concluded. They voted for these parties not so much in endorsement of their actual programs, but rather as an expression of their discontent with the way things are now run in France and as an expression of their class solidarity.
What the French workers want, however, is even more clearly expressed by the spreading strike movements. Hardly had the coal miners in the North gone back to work when a general strike was declared in Lyon and the Rhone Department in Southern France.
On the evening of May 16th, the strikers assembled outside the office of the prefect and demanded a settlement of their grievances. They wanted ah increase in wages and sufficient food supplies. They demanded “the achievement of the social reforms for which the entire country has been struggling.”
In Paris, too, delegations of striking workers have descended upon the Ministry of Finance and National Economy, and protested against the insufficiency of wages, food and civil liberties. They have pointed out that, despite the small increases in wages and promises of greater food distribution, the cost of living has run way ahead of them, and that most workers are still living on starvation wages.
The workers of France are finding out that they cannot rely on the present government for amelioration of their conditions and that is why they link with their demands for wages and food a demand for the “achievement of the social reforms.”
 

German Industry
What to do with German industry poses a dilemma for the Allies. If they destroy what is left of it, how will Germany pay the war reparations which the Allies wish to impose? But if they permit industry to exist, and even help rebuild it, what will prevent the German industrialists from competing with the Allied industrialists for the world market, and what will prevent the former from using the industries to prepare for a new war?
While the Allied nations are pondering this problem, a partial solution is being worked out inside Germany. This solution involves those industries which are owned by American and British capital. Representatives of American firms which owned German factories are already in Germany, getting ready to re-open their businesses. American investors in German industry are demanding that their investments be protected. They believe that the function of the Allied Military Government inside Germany seems to be to protect just those interests.
John MacCormac in the New York Times relates the following incident:
“When the public utilities officer of the Nuremberg Military Government tried to explain to the manager of the S.A.&F. factory that it would probably not be allowed to manufacture cables and electrical equipment for the outside world as it had been doing for the Wehrmacht, the manager grew indignant.
“‘I shall report this to Major General ______,’ he threatened
“S.A.&F., he asserted, was an International Telephone & Telegraph Corp. factory and Major General ______ of the United States Army had been a director. That was enough for him.”
 





As the military defeat of their common foe, Germany, approaches, the conflicts among the so-called United Nations, primarily among the Big Three, unfold. The two seem to go almost hand in hand. These conflicts are not created by German propaganda or ill wishers, as the Communist press would like to have us believe. They are the result of conflicting interests and ambitions, which were pushed into second place only while German might threatened them all. Now the conflicts come to the fore again.
The disputes which have arisen among the Big Three on Poland, on Greece and other situations were not caused by “misunderstandings” but rather by the attempts on the part of the big powers to jockey for more advantageous military and political positions in Europe. What is being decided is which of the Big Three shall dominate that continent.
*

Tito in Trieste
The entry of Tito’s armies into the Adriatic seaport of Trieste has given rise to a new dispute. When he was visiting with his boss, Stalin, in Moscow recently, Tito declared that he would lay claim to Trieste .and the entire Istrian peninsula. This area was granted to Italy after the First World War and for years has been a bone of contention between Italy and Yugoslavia, each claiming that it is inhabited mainly by their respective nationals.
It would seem that such a dispute could be settled easily enough by the simple expedient of having the people who live in that territory decide the matter for themselves. But such a solution demands a number of preconditions.
In order that the people of Trieste, as well as the people of all other disputed or occupied territories, may decide their own fate, that is, exercise the right of national self-determination, it is necessary that they have the means of expressing their wishes. This means that they must have the right of free speech, free press, free organization, free assemblage, free elections – none of which exist in Tito’s totalitarian regime. In Italy, these freedoms exist only in a very limited way.
That is why neither of the disputants can make the simple proposal of having the people choose for themselves. Tito demands annexation and Italy begs for the Allied military authorities to govern Trieste.
*

Behind Tito’s Demand
Tito’s demand has nothing whatsoever to do with satisfying the national feelings of the people of the Istrian peninsula. He is merely carrying out the instructions of Stalin, who sees in this an opportunity of bringing the Adriatic seaport under his control. Stalin does not have to act directly in this matter. He is well supplied with agents throughout the world and they carry out his policy.
That Tito is acting on behalf of Russia in this matter is borne out by the fact that the Italian Stalinists are now demanding that Italy yield Trieste. Since Stalin does not have the exclusive power in Italy, as he does in Yugoslavia, he much prefers to see Trieste held by Tito. The Italian communists, by their agitation, carry out their assigned part in this set-up.
*

Stalin in Austria
The new provisional government set up by the Russians in Austria should be recognized for what it is. It is the Austrian counterpart of the Lublin government established by Stalin to rule over the Polish people.
The fact that this government is headed by an old social-democrat, Dr. Karl Renner, should not deceive anyone into believing that it is in any way representative of the Austrian people, let alone of the Austrian working class.
Most of the old social-democrats of Austria have been “won over” to Stalin’s successes. Their own inability to lead the Austrian workers in the struggle for socialism, an inability which springs from their political concepts, has led them .in turn to surrender to Stalin. They were the leaders who tried to hold back the Austrian workers from the struggle against fascism on the theory of the “lesser evil.” Their half-heartedness brought about the victory of fascism. Now they choose Stalin as the lesser evil to what for them is impossible, namely, independent struggle.
Thus far the United States and Britain have refused to recognize this regime, which they claim was formed in violation of that Yalta provision which called for joint action on the part of the Big Three in the solution of problems which arise in the “liberated” countries. Stalin will of course reply that the Austrian people formed this government and that he did not violate any such agreement. In the meantime, he proceeds as in Poland – acting first and negotiating afterward.
In one sense Stalin has the edge on his two partners. He has an international organization, with a branch in every country, which, while carrying put his orders, gives the appearance of acting independently and in the interests of the people of their respective countries. When Churchill wanted to install a puppet regime in Greece, he had to use British arms. But when Stalin installs his puppets in any country he has at his service the national section of his international organization, the GPU. This, of course, does not make the Moscow-created regimes any more representative than the Quisling regimes of Hitler or the puppet regimes of Churchill. They are only more difficult to detect and hence more dangerous.
 





All is not going so well with the proposed world security set-up. The plans for the San Francisco Conference have hit a number of snags. These are not caused by the capriciousness of the Big Three, as many commentators would have us believe, but rather by the actual deep-going conflicts which exist in that camp. We have written before that what decides the relationships among the Big Three is not some idealistic desire for peace and harmony, or the interests of the people, but brute power.
At Yalta, Russia was in the most favorable military position, and this enabled her practically to lay down the law. That explains why it appeared that Roosevelt and Churchill had capitulated to Stalin. Since Yalta, the military scales have been tipped more in favor of the Western powers and this is immediately reflected in the sterner attitude which they now take toward Russia.
The boldness or timidity with which the Big Three treat one another is in direct proportion to their respective military positions, but these momentary shifts in no way wipe out the deep-going economic and political differences which divide them. These are rooted in their imperialist rivalries.
 

Molotov to Stay Home
Poland is in the limelight again – that is, the conflict over the “Polish problem” has flared up again. Russia is demanding that her puppet Warsaw government be, invited and recognized at San Francisco. England and the United States are holding out because this government has not yet been “broadened,” as prescribed by Yalta.
In retaliation, Russia has been playing down the importance of the San Francisco Conference. Stalin told his partners off by announcing that Foreign Commissar Molotov would not come to the conference. A lesser figure, Ambassador Gromyko, has been assigned to head the delegation.
Stalin, like all realists, knows that all talk about “world security” is just so much talk, valuable only for fooling the naive and serving up illusions to the masses throughout the world who yearn for real peace and security. What counts for hard-headed dictators and rulers is something more “tangible.” Stalin wants definite commitments about German industry, about lend-lease. from the United States – and he wants some action on these things.
 

Russo-Turkish Pact
Something “more tangible” is, for example, greater influence and control of the Black Sea area which Stalin regards as his special sphere. Hence the Russian denunciation of the treaty with Turkey which was signed in 1925 and the demand for certain “revisions.” Exactly what these “revisions” are we do not now know, but undoubtedly they are intended to strengthen Russia’s position in the Dardanelles, to provide an outlet to the Mediterranean Sea which England regards as her special sphere. Another purpose is to bring Turkey into closer political collaboration and break her away from British friendship.
 

Mandates
Another sore spot is the matter of the mandates which were established by the League of Nations. The United States now proposes that a conference of the “Big Five” (Russia, England, France, China and the U.S.) be held to discuss the internationalization of the mandated areas.
It is quite natural that England and France, the individual possessors of most of these mandates, interpret this proposal as a direct blow at them. They had accepted these mandates in order to bring these areas closer into the orbit of their empires, and finally as integrated possessions, and they certainly do not wish the interference of the United States. The United States wishes to retain the military and naval bases obtained from England during the war, and to expand in this field by obtaining more of them. It wants the mandated areas open to free trade, aviation and communication, for it knows that in free competition it can easily displace England and France.
To allay the fears of England and France, the United States is willing to confine this proposal for international control to the mandated areas, leaving the colonial possessions in the hands of their present owners – for the time being. But here is the unfolding of the drive made by United States imperialism to remove and displace its rivals, from their imperial strongholds in order to establish itself as the one great power of the world.
 

Finnish Elections
None of the parties in the Finnish elections operated on the basis of a clear-cut working class program which places the interests of. the masses above any others, particularly the interests of foreign imperialisms. Hence the lack of a clear-cut decision.
The gains made by the Popular Democrats (Communist-controlled coalition) are not only an indication of the deep-going dissatisfaction with the other parties, especially among the workers who had previously supported the Social Democrats, but also reflect the pressure and warnings from Russia to vote for its party.
At the same time, the victory of the Popular Democrats was very indecisive, reflecting the justified suspicion that the policy of this coalition was to tie Finland to the imperialist apron-strings of Russia. The Finnish people have learned through bitter experience that friendship with Russia means subordination to the Stalin regime. Hence, their merely partial support to the party which made its main plank “cooperation with” (read: subservience to) Stalin.
Only the existence of an independent party, independent of all imperialist pressures, Russian as well as Anglo-American, could have given the masses of Finland the means of accurately expressing their desires and oriented them in a struggle against foreign and native oppressors. Without such a party, the elections could not in any way represent the interests of the masses of Finnish workers and peasants.
 





A Matter of Interpretation
World War II was started ostensibly to keep Poland free. That is, England declared war on Germany because the latter together with Russia (Russia’s participation is now conveniently forgotten) had violated Poland’s territorial integrity, which the British were pledged, to defend.
Many things have happened since then. Old friendships have been broken, new alliances have been formed. Poland was conquered, “liberated” reconquered and divided up again. But the loyal allies stick to the guarantee made to Poland. Never let it be said that the British rulers have reneged on a promise.
The London Poles, whose government is still recognized by Downing Street, demanded that, since Britain had guaranteed to defend Poland’s borders, this promise be made good now that Russia has encroached upon them. They forgot, only, one small detail which is brought to their attention by a recently issued “White Paper.” The British government points put in the “White Paper” that what was really meant on August 25, 1939, when the Anglo-Polish pact was signed, was that England would defend Poland from Germany, not Russia.
Although the treaty clearly states “against aggression by a European power,” the “White Paper” explained that “by the expression ‘a European power’ employed in the agreement is to be understood Germany.” Just a small matter of interpretation, all of which leaves His Majesty’s government with a clear conscience.
*

Hate Propaganda
In order to carry out their, designs against the German people, the Allies, through the press and other propaganda means, have carried on a continuous campaign against the German people to prove that all of them are “mad dogs,” “beasts” and worse. This campaign is directed primarily at the people back home for the purpose of making them swallow the drastic measures which will be taken against the German people. Most vicious, of course, has been the propaganda of the Stalinist press, since it is their contention that all Germans, including all the workers, are Nazis. This campaign has fooled many people, but it certainly has not fooled the Nazis themselves, who know quite well what the German people think of fascism.
What better way to disprove this anti-German, not anti-Nazi, propaganda than by reading what the Nazis in their confidential reports have to say! The following excerpts are taken from a confidential report dated November 20, 1944, sent by the Security Service in Mannheim to the Gestapo headquarters in Strassbourg. (Reprinted from the International Federation of Transport Workers Bulletin)
“It should not be overlooked that in many circles, especially among practicing members of the two church denominations and among evacuated women incapable of appreciating the necessity of the fight, the Fuehrer is looked on as nothing less than the cause of all the trouble. For these citizens the Fuehrer is responsibble both for the outbreak of the war and its disastrous outcome.”
The report goes on to state that the people have lost confidence in the Nazi leaders, Goebbels, Ley, Goering, Himmler and Ribbentrop. And further:
“It is recognized what the party has done in many places in the way of social and political work and how many honorary party officials devote their leisure time to the service of the community. Also deep respect is felt for the all-powerful party, whose power is constantly increased. But this respect is based on fear rather than esteem.” (Our emphasis.)
”There are both soldiers and workers, and especially evacuated women and war widows, who have had more than enough of the war and would rather see it end today than tomorrow, But such despondency is at present still in a minority.”
*

Foreign Workers in Germany
Another revealing document is one issued by the Labor Front (Hitler’s organization which organized the slave labor) which states that the army high command on May 20, 1944, had addressed a circular to all military service points stating:
“The Fuehrer has received repeated complaints which show that soldiers assigned to the duty of supervising prisoners of war with a view to increasing their labor output, have not cooperated sufficiently or have counteracted measures taken by factory managements in order to increase productivity or sheltered the prisoners. All concerned are enjoined once more to make it their first duty to apply themselves everywhere to achieving a higher output of the war prisoners and, to cooperate and participate actively in this. Whoever in the future offends against this principle or is negligent in respect of It will be severely dealt with.”
Here, out of the mouth of the Nazi officials, comes proof that the elementary class solidarity which they have sought to destroy by their race-hate doctrines, and in which they are being aped today by the Allied imperialists, cannot be wiped out by decree. German soldiers, at the direct threat of severe punishment, are protecting and sheltering their class brothers who have been taken prisoners.
*

In a Berlin Factory
A Swedish worker, returning from Berlin, relates in the Svenska Morgenbladet of February 1:
“The Germans are not National-Socialists. I worked in an enterprise employing 300 workers, among whom there were three National-Socialists; all the others were anti-National-Socialists, We call ourselves PG, but that does not mean ‘party members’ but ‘enemy of the party’ (Parteigegner). The National-Socialist bosses are hated and despised by the population, which cannot rebel because the power of the Gestapo and SS is terrible. If anybody raised a finger it would mean that thousands would be murdered in cold blood. Today the German people consider themselves the nation worst treated by the National Socialist criminals. On the trains and trams one hears more often than before openly expressed displeasure at the regime.”
 




This article is dedicated to the hundreds of thousands of toilers in every part of the world whose deeds under the most difficult circumstances of war and fascist tyranny kept alive the spirit of struggle for a better world. It is dedicated to them moreover because they have shown the only way in which humanity can be saved from the consequences of these scourges: the destruction of civilization.
 
Five Years Ago
When the Workers Party and Labor Action were founded five years ago, just after the outbreak of the Second, World, War, they placed themselves unreservedly on the side of this struggle and declared that it, and it alone, carried to a victorious end, could bring about the kind of world that the peoples everywhere yearned for.
In spite of all the official proclamations about democracy and the Four Freedoms, the war was being fought by all the big powers for the sake of expansion and domination or for retention of empires formerly obtained through armed force.
The Workers Party declared then, and the subsequent events have borne out, that the victory of either of the imperialist camps in the war – Axis or Allied – could not possibly usher in the freedom, peace, security and human decency so desired by the down-trodden, enslaved and oppressed. This could be achieved only by the people themselves, through independent organization and struggle – independent of the imperialist interests of both camps in the war and loyal only to the interests of the people.
We called this struggle the Third Camp of Labor, and to its encouragement, furtherance and conscious organization we have devoted all our energies.
Many were those who jeered because they had lost faith in the capacity of the ordinary people to fight for themselves. The scoffers challenged us “to produce the Third Camp.” In the meantime. they themselves joined up with one or the other of the imperialist camps and did all in their power to discourage and belittle the efforts of the slowly emerging Third Camp.
But in one country after another, the people, getting over the initial daze of the outbreak of the war, the overpowering victories of Hitler’s hordes, and the betrayal by their own capitalist classes, began to stir, to organize and to act. This was especially true of those who had been led to believe that the way to fight fascism was to support the program of the Allied governments and whose honest and genuine anti-fascist feelings had been exploited by the “democracies” to plunge them into the slaughter.
When Hitler’s armies marched across the European continent, the ruling classes in the occupied countries who were responsible for the war, divided into two groups. One section surrendered to and compromised with the invader. They became the collaborators of the Nazis and the overseers of the workers! They preferred to supply the “enemy” with war materials – at a profit, of course – to a fight against fascism. The other section ran off to safety in London or elsewhere, where they established, themselves as the “governments in exile.”
The people, however, could not and did not run away. Neither did they collaborate with the fascists. They stayed and were subjected to the double torture of war and foreign oppression. Under such circumstances, when even a wrong glance might mean arrest and deportation and worse, the people began slowly to organize their resistance.
Despite the reign of terror, the dangers and almost certain death that many risked; despite the fact that they were leaderless, deserted, betrayed; despite the loss of all the old organizations; and in face of the obstruction of their own ruling classes, the peoples in the occupied countries formed new types of organizations and renewed the fight against the despotism.
 
The Underground
Underground movements for national liberation came into existence in almost every European country – Italy, France, Belgium, Norway, Poland, Yugoslavia, Greece. These movements embraced the most courageous men and women, sons and daughters of the toiling classes, who kept alive the will to struggle and made possible the future reorganization of the working class movement.
That these movements were at first directed against the German invader did not mean that the people in them were ready to stop once the Nazis were driven from their soil. This was for them but a first step in the struggle for democratic rights, for the possibility of settling accounts with those who had gotten them into this appalling situation and who had benefited so handsomely from the war. Whether this was consciously understood or only vaguely felt, the movement represented a new beginning of the struggle for a new world order. The people of Europe do not want to go back to the old days of exploitation, unemployment, crisis, fascism and preparations for yet another world war. Neither do they wish to exchange one tyranny for another. They want a new way of life.
To recall only a few of the outstanding battles of Labor’s Third Camp, we salute:
THE NORWEGIAN WORKERS for the 1941 strike in defiance of the Nazi authorities. They struck over the heads of their own union leaders and called to the world’s attention that labor resistance to fascism was alive.
THE FRENCH WORKERS AND UNDERGROUND FIGHTERS, who carried on the struggle against foreign oppression after the shameful betrayal by their own ruling class. They organized the resistance to deportations, drove the Nazi troops out of Paris and began to purge all fascists and collaborators. They continue to oppose, their own leaders, who want to disarm them, to curb them and keep them from completing their fight.
THE WORKERS OF ITALY, who astonished the world with their general strike and struggles which causjed the collapse of the Mussolini regime and showed that twenty-two years of fascism had not corrupted their spirit. They demanded the abolition of the monarchy, release of all political prisoners, an end to the war and freedom of the press and organization. The struggle which they started so heroically under the Nazi occupation they must now continue under the domination/of their “liberators” – England and the United States.
THE WORKERS OF DENMARK, who in July 1944, answered the attempt of the German authorities to deport the Jewish people with a general strike. They stayed out, despite pleas of the Danish Freedom Council to return to work, until a number of their demands were met.
THE PEOPLE OF WARSAW AND THE REST OF POLAND, who kept up an unrelenting struggle for five years against the invader which culminated in the glorious battle of Warsaw last summer. For sixty-three days, the lone Warsaw workers kept up the fight to oust the Germans, pleading for help from Stalin and Churchill, who stood idly by watching the massacre of over 300,000 poorly armed, starving people. Only when Warsaw was bled white did its people surrender. Our admiration for these fighters is equalled only by our condemnation of their betrayers, the imperialist rulers in London and Moscow.
THE WORKERS AND PEASANTS OF GREECE, who never stopped their fight to drive out the occupying armies of Hitler and continued this fight against the British, who backed the Greek reactionaries and collaborationists and sought to restore the hated Greek monarchy. Through the shameful betrayal of the Stalinist leadership this struggle was halted mid-way, but it is far from over.
THE WORKERS OF GERMANY, who, at the greatest peril, solidarized themselves with their foreign brothers, helped them escape, and even went on strike whenever they could. They are the workers who are now slated by the Big Three to be taken into slavery to pay for the crimes of their fascist rulers against whom they struck.
THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, in their struggle for national independence from British imperialism, in 1942 rejected the hypocritical Cripps proposals to postpone independence until after the war and staged a civil disobedience and strike movement, demanding immediate freedom. Only brutal suppression by superior forces of the British and the half-hearted leadership of the Congress Party temporarily halted this fight. But the Indian people are as determined as ever to have their freedom.
THE BOLIVIAN TIN MINERS, who struck in 1942 against the inhuman conditions of toil, against brutal suppression and against intervention of the U.S. Ambassador on the side of the mine owners.
IN THE UNITED STATES we remember the coal miners’ strike of 1941 and the three strikes in 1943 which showed the way to break the Little Steel formula. There was the great strike in 1941 at North American Aircraft into which the U.S. Army was sent by the President. There were also the rubber workers’ strike in May 1943; the Detroit strikes and struggles against the companies’ anti-labor drive; the sit-in demonstration of the Brewster workers in June 1944 against the closing of the plant and ensuing layoffs; and the gallant effort of the Rank and File in the UAW to free labor from the shackles of the no-strike pledge,
There were the struggles of the Negro people for democratic rights, for economic, political and social equality, which led to the formation on the March on Washington Movement. It was the timidity and incorrect policy of the leadership which stalled this battle half-way.
And we must recall the magnificent fight put up by the sharecroppers and farm laborers of Southeast Missouri in the summer of 1942 in which they won their thirty-cent hourly wage demand and other improvements.
All of these struggles, no matter how different may have been their immediate goals and forms, have this much in common: They testify to the irresistible urge that the working people everywhere have to secure those improvements in the conditions of life which are made possible by the tremendous achievements of industry and science; they testify also to the great capacity to recuperate from past defeats and to sacrifice anew for what they consider a just cause.
In the course of these battles, they have, had to face not only superior strength from the direct foe, but what is far worse, treachery within their own ranks. The most pernicious influence they have had to contend with was that of the Stalinists in their organizations, who have always tried to seize the leadership of these movements in order to convert them into appendages of the Russian ruling class. Wherever they have not succeeded in this they have sold out the movements in the most brazen manner. In other cases, the workers have been confronted with leaders who, in the interests of class peace, preferred to derail the movements and. to give up the struggle. And finally there were the leaders who did not know where they were leading and got stalled in the middle of the battle.
Yes, the Third Camp exists! It lives and it fights! It has the will to struggle and the capacity to sacrifice. It needs above all clarity of program, consciousness of aim and goal. It needs a program which is consistent with and embraces all the aspirations of the peoples; a program which means fighting on till these are achieved. This is the program of world socialism, the order of democracy, freedom, peace, security and plenty.
That program is now emerging in the form of revolutionary socialist parties in Europe, in the as yet small groups of French, Italian, Belgian and Greek Fourth Internationalists, as well as the growing Revolutionary Communist Party of England. In the United States, this program is represented by the Workers Party.
On this May Day, when we salute all the fighters in the Third Camp, we extend special greetings to our co-thinkers and comrades in Europe who have withstood the years of reaction and are now prepared to take, their places in the coming struggles.
 





Belgian Miners’ Strike
In a recent column we reported the activity of the Belgian revolutionary socialists (Trotskyists) in connection with the mine workers’ strike. While the reformist and Christian Union leaders were trying to get the workers back into the pits without any gains, the Brussels section of the Revolutionary Communist Party issued a leaflet containing the following, which explains the reasons for the strike and calls upon the rest of the orkers to support the miners’ struggle:
THE MINERS WANT TO KNOW WHERE THE COAL IS GOING.
The miners of Limbourg, the Center and Charleroi have gone on strike.
They are demanding an increase in wages, clothing priority, an increase in the pension, the re-employment of union delegates who have been arbitrarily sacked.
These demands are completely justified, except in the eyes of the conservative and reformist papers, which are already blaming the miners and their union leaders as being responsible for the lack of coal. Yet the Belgian miners have worked hard since the ‘liberation.’ In spite of the absence of several thousands of their comrades, their production has exceeded that of their French comrades by fifty per cent.
In reality, it is not the lack of coal which is disturbing the reactionaries and reformists; but the fact that the miners are thinking of intervening in the control of production.
THE MINERS WANT TO KNOW WHERE THE COAL IS GOING!
The miners want to know what scandalous profits the coal barons are accumulating in the midst of the general poverty!
Workers in industry, in the yards and offices! Transport workers! Housewives! Small shopkeepers! The miners’ struggle is that of the whole population against the incapacity of the government and the rapacity of the bosses.
If the miners call on you for aid, be ready to support them by all appropriate means!
Together with them you will establish a serious control over production and the distribution of coal.
*

Belgian Dock Workers
The dock workers in Antwerp went out on strike a few weeks ago in protest against the low wages on the dockside. After a promise of an increase, they returned to work. The promise was not kept. When the workers started another stoppage the authorities locked them out for fifteen days. Only a mass protest demonstration at the Town Hall caused the lockout decree to be lifted. In connection with this strike, two members of the RCP of Belgium, Dielis and Lowet, were arrested because they had warned the dockers that the promises of the authorities would not be kept unless a formal agreement were reached and their organisation recognized. A protest movement is now under way to demand the release of the two men.
*

British Miners Reject Plan
The condition of the British coal industry has been notoriously bad for many years. Due to the lack of modernization, inefficient methods of operation and the general mismanagement by the mine owners, productivity has fallen to lower than the 1914 level and the industry has been unable to keep up with the wartime demand for coal.
The coal operators appointed one Robert Foot to investigate the situation and bring back suggestions for a remedy. He labored and labored and finally brought forth the Foot plan, which starts out by declaring that “the only possible basis for the organization and policy of the industry is that of National Service.”
Of course, “National Service,” according to Foot, means to be applied only to the miners, since he goes on to say that “the best people to run the coal mines are the coal owners.”
The miners of Britain have for a long time understood what was wrong; with the mines and, have had incorporated into their union program a demand for the nationalization of the mines. They know that only in this way will it be possible to reorganize the mining industry, introduce the necessary technical improvements, increase productivity and, by eliminating the profit of the mine owners, increase the wages and living standards of the coal miners.
The National Union of Mine Workers therefore has rejected the Foot plan, which in essence calls for the centralization of the industry through the creation of a monopoly which would be in a position to raise prices on the home market, and increase production rates through the time-honored method of the employers, the speed-up, by the extension of “National Service” after the war. The British mine owners hope to get into a favorable position to compete with American coal at the expense of the mine workers’ living standards.
 




Our readers should not be surprised that despite agreement by all the parties on the appointment of Archbishop Damaskinos as regent of Greece, fighting should continue to rage in that country between the ELAS forces and the British troops. The establishment of the regency does not solve a single problem over which the Greek people took up arms.
That the masses of the Greek people don’t want King George II back on the throne of Greece, that they want the monarchy itself overthrown and the establishment of a republic is a foregone conclusion. No one knows this better than the King himself, who fears a plebiscite on this question like death. And also his boss, Mr. Churchill.
But what is more important is the reason for this almost unanimous opposition to the monarchy. The Greek people want the King out because of what he represents – namely, totalitarian rule, absence of democratic freedoms, suppression of the aspirations of the Greek working people, and subservience to the imperialist interests of Great Britain. The desire for freedom from foreign rule and for the right of self-government is what impelled the Greek people to take up arms against the Nazi invader. The same desire, which has not been met by Allied “liberation,” impels them to continue this struggle.
The temporary substitution of Damaskinos for the puppet King, which is what the regency actually signifies, in no way meets any of the demands of the Greek people, as expressed by the EAM, The basic demands of the EAM still remain to be fulfilled and the people of Greece are still fighting in the streets to gain them.
 
Peace Terms
The peace terms of the EAM, as listed in the newspapers, consist of ten points, the first of which is agreement on the establishment of a regency. This is obviously conceived of as merely a temporary measure, since the other terms deal with the basic demands, and until these are met there will be no laying down of arms. These may be summarized as follows:
The holding of a general election of a National Assembly in which the Greek people will be able to select their own government. Prior to that election, the EAM demands, a plebiscite to decide on the return of the monarchy. Until the time of the election, the EAM wants the punishment of all collaborationists, the purging from the government services of all fascist elements, most particularly the town police, which are the same police who served the Nazis so well.
Although these demands, as far as they go, are in keeping with the general aspiration of the Greek people for self-government, there are some serious omissions! The holding of a general election, a demand which we wholeheartedly support, requires certain guarantees in order that it be fully democratic. These guarantees consist of the right of free press, free speech, the right of free assemblage, and the right of organization, in order that all political parties, especially the working class parties, may appear before the Greek people for judgment. Without these guarantees, a holding of a general election cannot serve the purpose for which the Greek people want this election, namely – to be able to choose a government which will in their opinion best serve their interests.
After denouncing the fighters of the ELAS as nothing but a lot of “bandits from the hills,” Winston Churchill had to spend his Christmas holiday in Athens trying to negotiate with them.
His trip to Greece was not made because his feelings for the Greek people had suddenly changed, but was made under the pressure of the outspoken criticism of British labor, which, over the heads of its official leadership, demonstrated by work stoppages and resolutions that the British working class had no interest in the suppression of the democratic rights of other peoples. Compelling Churchill to negotiate with struggling Greece is but an initial triumph both for the Greek people and British labor. It shows what determined struggle and international working class solidarity can accomplish.
 
Meaning of Churchill’s Trip
We call Churchill’s trip to Athens an initial triumph because of its symbolic nature rather than because of the actual concessions granted to the Greek people. Actually, what Churchill agreed to was more or less an accomplished fact. He, more than anyone else perhaps, knows that the Greek King cannot return. He gave away the Greek King – the puppet he could no longer use. In his place, Churchill seeks to establish the regency. The Greek people see this only as a temporary step in the direction of getting rid of the monarchy and British control altogether. Churchill sees the regency as a substitute for the King who has outlived his usefulness and will try to use this institution in the same way as he used the monarchy.
The very manner in which Churchill told the Greek King that he was turning the country over to a regent characterizes the whole relationship between George II and British imperialism. The mighty monarch of Greece was simply summoned to 10 Downing Street and told that he was through – that he had lost his job, whether he consented or not, a regent was going to be appointed for Greece.
At this, the King decided to “issue a statement” – in which he announced that having “deeply considered the terrible situation” into which Greece had fallen, he had resolved not to return to the country “unless summoned by a free and fair expression of national will.” For this to happen, we might add, King George has about as much chance as a snowball in hell. In the meantime, the King was “appointing” Damaskinos as regent.
The archbishop’s first official statement called upon the Greek people to lay down their arms as an “indispensable precondition” toward solving the present situation. To this, the ELAS properly replied: It would order the laying down of arms only when the current political questions were settled.
It is because the establishment of the regency has not solved any of the current political questions in Greece that the fighting continues. If Mr. Churchill thought that by putting up a regency he could give his old orders through another mouth, that the Greek people give up their struggle for independence, he would be more successful, he now finds that he is very much mistaken. The Greek people see through this as they will see through any other ruse attempted by Churchill.
And such a ruse is in the making. The Greek people have made the situation too hot for Mr. Churchill. He is now seeking the aid of the other Allied imperialists to maintain British domination. This he expressed at a press conference in which he hoped that agreement could be reached between Russia, the United States and Great Britain for “some sort of joint responsibility” for the maintenance of “law and order” in Greece, through the establishment of an “international government.”
 
Statement to Tommies
The Greek people will accept that kind of solution as readily as they have accepted General Scobie’s orders, that is, with arms in hand. Their attitude has been eloquently expressed in a message sent from the ELAS to the British soldiers fighting in Greece. We have room to quote it only in part:
“We have resolved to die till one, for our independence. The independence for which we struggled three and a half years, and will fight three and a half more if necessary.
“We believe that the British people do not appreciate and will never allow such an action. But we believe that it’ll be condemned very soon.
“British brothers:
“Do not accept to be sent to do such a crime. Do not accept to be the executioners of a people that does not support any kind of slavery.
“Do not assassinate the Greek people, which has no difference with you.
“If you’ll accept the murderous orders of General Scobie for the continuation of such distructeous fight for our countries, then the history of tomorrow will notice this action as the greatest crime, and your descendants will be ashamed to spell your name.” – (Literal quotation)
 





A Man to Admire
A week after he wrote that he thought that “Churchill had made a case for the British attempt to maintain order in Greece provided the facts were as he stated them in his speech,” Norman Thomas leader and standard-bearer of the Socialist Party, salutes Mr. Churchill on the courage which took him to Greece. In The Call of January 1, Thomas writes:
“Sharply as I have criticized and shall continue to criticize Winston Churchill, I salute the courage, moral and physical, which took him at his age to Greece. At the least he accepts responsibilities for situations which he has done so much to create as Roosevelt does not.”
Everyone even vaguely connected with the labor movement should know that it was not courage, but rather the necessity for British imperialism to try to palm off another puppet on the Greek people which compelled Winston Churchill even at his age (Thomas ought to know!), to travel to Greece. The Greek workers, at any rate saluted Winston in somewhat different fashion from that of Norman Thomas.
Thomas goes on to enlighten us a little more about the Greek situation.
“And speaking of Greece, where does ELAS get all those arms? Did it capture them from the Germans? Or did the Germans leave them behind on purpose to aid the expected civil war? Or do Stalin and his Communists know ... something about it? Popular Greek support for ELAS may explain much. It cannot explain those arms.”
In the first place, who, besides Mr. Thomas, is now asking for an explanation of those arms? It is not where the Greek people got their arms – the people always know how to get arms when they want them – but for what they used these arms, that is important. What does Thomas think of that?
Secondly, Thomas should refer to the man he so admires for an answer. Churchill himself acknowledged that the British helped arm the Greek people when they were struggling against German oppression. Now that the Greek people have shown themselves ready to struggle against even British oppression, along comes Norman Thomas, the man who stands for “socialism in our time,” to raise questions about where the people got their arms, and to insinuate that they might even be working for the Germans.
When the Greek workers win their struggle, which is proving to be a hard and bloody one, despite the Stalinist leadership of ELAS, which has sold them down the river, they will, we are sure, take time out to give Norman Thomas a detailed accounting of the source of their arms. Right now, there are battles to be won.
* * *

Social Justice in Portugal
The Lisbon radio broadcast the following announcement of government labor policy on November 8:
“The Under Secretary for Corporations has published a just and necessary order which aims at ending erroneous ideas and blatant abuses. It is laid down that, once minimum wages have been fixed under an order from the Under Secretariat, employers affected are forbidden to pay any higher rates, except in special cases where maximum rates may also be fixed. Carrying out this principle should present no difficulties. It is a pity that even in these days there are still people who do not understand what is meant by social justice and the cooperation of capital and labor. There are none so blind as those who won’t see.”
It is obvious that carrying out the principle which forbids paying more than the minimum wage should present no difficulties to the employers especially if that is the law. Too bad, but the workers of Portugal somehow cannot see the justice in this principle. But they are not blind. On the contrary, their eyes have been opened to the extent of seeing that cooperation of capital and labor means that capital gets all and labor a fixed minimum wage which becomes the maximum
* * *

Belgian Coal
The coal crisis is so serious in Belgium that the Allied military authorities have begun an investigation. Major-Gen. Erskine charges that theft and dishonesty on the part of the coal industry are responsible for the situation. Coal allocated for civilian use is being pilfered from the yards and sidetracked into the black market. Military trains are held up and the coal stolen and sent, to the black market.
General Erskine further charges that some of the trouble arises through the close links between the mines owned by certain industries and the industries controlled by the coal owners. They seem incapable, the General said, of forgetting their own interests and pooling coal as directed!
The mine owners and industrialists have never forgotten their own interests; not even under Nazi Occupation. At that time the coal miners refused to work the mines. They went on a four-year strike. Thousands of them preferred unemployment and its attendant sufferings to any collaboration with the invaders. The Belgian mine owners, on the other hand, operated the mines with scab labor. They collaborated with the Nazis and assured the continuation of their profits.
After the “liberation” of Belgium, the coal miners, who had fought the Nazis in their own way, wanted their jobs back. The government of “liberation” replied by placing them on the relief rolls, and retaining those who had worked the mines under the Nazis on the job. The mine owners, collaborators of yesterday, naturally, retained their ownership and continue their profiteering at the expense of the Belgian population. In the entire coal crisis, this little detail has been overlooked.
 





French “New Deal”
When General Charles de Gaulle was still living in exile and seeking to establish his leadership over the resistance movement, he promulgated a program of social reform which he promised to put into effect once France was liberated and he became the actual leader of the country. This program was hailed by some as a sort of French “New Deal,” in which all the evils, or at least the outstanding ones, of capitalist monopoly were to be eliminated.
Among the promises made by de Gaulle Was the one which provided for the ruthless purging and punishment of all Nazi collaborators, Vichyites and pro-fascists. In another he called for such social reforms as would guarantee the establishment of France as a country of social, political and economic equality. Big business was to be curbed. The banks and key industries were to be nationalized and run for the benefit of the people instead of the profit-makers.
This program, though it was by no means a socialist program, was welcomed and greeted by the French people because it corresponded to their desire for a social change which would end the constant threat of starvation, war and fascism. The fighters in the resistance movement insisted upon the carrying out of this program and for that reason sought to retain the arms they had obtained in the struggle against Nazi occupation.
Once de Gaulle landed in Paris and took over the reins of government he came into conflict with this movement. His attempts to incorporate the FFI into the regular army or to disarm it met with a great deal of resistance. The French workers proceeded to the purging of the collaborationists, that is, where they were not interfered with by de Gaulle’s police and courts of justice.
 
De Gaulle in Practice
From the time de Gaulle gained recognition by the Allies, his talk about punishment of collaborators and nationalization of the banks and key industries has become softer and softer, so that it is barely audible. He has established courts which proceed against collaborators very slowly, if at all.
Recently he addressed the Consultative Assembly, in which he urged greater tolerance toward those who held office under the Vichy regime, and making it possible for them to run for office in the coming elections!
The financiers and bankers, who cooperated so wholeheartedly when the Nazis were in control of France, are proceeding quite freely now to prevent any measures of nationalisation. The banks have thrown the entire holdings of the northern coal mines on the market in order to destroy their credit position. In the case of the chemistry industry, the banks simply stopped all credits as soon as plans for nationalization were announced. No measures have been taken against the banks!
 
Attitude Toward Labor
The measures taken with regard to the labor situation are somewhat different. There are over 600,000 unemployed workers in France, more than half in Paris alone. A trade unionist recently disclosed that these workers were not idle because of lack of materials, but rather because the banks refuse to advance the necessary credit. Instead of nationalizing these industries – that is, taking them over and operating them, the de Gaulle government has another plan for solving the unemployment problem. It has announced that it will resort to the conscription – not of industry – but of labor, for the “rebuilding of France.”
The French “New Deal” has in very short order followed in the path of its predecessor in the United States. Unlimited freedom for big business and the bankers, conscription for labor.
* * *

Ruthenian Secession
Once more, we see what treaties of friendship between imperialist powers are worth. At the end of last year, Russian signed a twenty-year pact of friendship with the Czechoslovak government in exile. President Benes went to Moscow and in return for a promise to enter within the Russian orbit of influence, he received from Stalin a guarantee that his country would be reconstituted on the basis of its pre-1939 borders.
Stalin has begun to demand payment from Benes, first in the form of recognition of the Russian-sponsored Lublin government and, second, Benes’ transfer from London to Czech territory, where he can be under the more direct influence of Moscow. Thus far, Benes has not complied with these orders.
Now Stalin prepares a new landgrab for himself. The Russians are demanding that Ruthenia, that is, the Carpathian Ukraine, be joined to the Russian Ukraine and thus come under Stalin’s domination. This territory was originally given to Czechoslovakia, a state created after World War by the Versailles Treaty makers, to insure the policing of Germany’s eastern border and to block the Russian revolution. It was seized by Hungary in 1939. The people who inhabit it are mainly Ukrainians who have always wanted their national freedom.
 
Stalin’s Aims
Stalin’s plan to unite Ruthenia with Russian Ukraine has nothing to do with national self-determination, in spitee of his attempt to pass it off as a demand coming from the Ruthenians themselves. It is rather for bargaining purposes, and as a threat to the Czechs that Stalin now supports any secession movement among; the Ruthenians. In the course of this, Stalin seeks to bring another territory under his control to be exploited by the Russian ruling class.
Indications are that Benes is prepared to cede this territory to Stalin. In exchange for what, is not now clear. Most likely in exchange for the hope that Stalin will make no further demands on him, such as swallowing up all of Czechoslovakia.
The people of Ruthenia, should they form part of a greater Stalinland, will become just so many new inhabitants of the “prison of the peoples” into which Stalin has reconverted Russia. They will exchange one oppressor for another. Their national aspirations and freedom will be no more realized than are those of the peoples at present oppressed by the Kremlin. Imperialism can only enslave peoples, it does not free them.
The solution to these aspirations lies in the reorganization of Europe on the basis of a voluntary and free union of all nations, that is, the socialist United States of Europe.
 




“If there is one fundamental, underlying cause of the rift in Allied relations, it is in the basic differences of their national aspirations and outlook. It is strange that this flaw in the Grand Alliance was not obvious sooner to the peoples of the Allied nations. If it had been; there would not have been so much stunned surprise in the Allied countries when it first began to show itself on the surface.”
In these words, Raymond Daniell, writing in the New York Times, explains the difficulties which the Big Three are now encountering in their attempts to “settle” among themselves the reorganization of the world. Actually, this rift, which is at last being recognized by everybody, comes as no surprise to revolutionary socialists. It was there from the very beginning for all who wished to see it. If the people did not see it sooner, the news analysts, who think it strange that it was not obvious sooner, played no small part in obscuring this fact, which even today Mr. Daniell treats as a “flaw” rather than as THE motive of the war itself.
 
Inter-Allied Competition
What is this “fly in the ointment” of Allied unity, which, if gently removed, would insure freedom, security and peace? What is this “basic difference in their national aspirations and outlook” mentioned by our Times reporter?
Each of the major belligerents entered the war in furtherance of its national imperialist interests, which conflicted with similar interests of the others.
Defeated in the 1914–18 war to end wars, capitalist Germany sought to regain its world position through the only way possible in the capitalist scheme of things, through force. In preparing for war, the German ruling class first crushed the German labor movement, and thus made the German workers and their organizations the first casualties of World War II.
Fascist Germany began its second great attempt at imperialist expansion in the territories nearest at hand, in Europe. In order to obtain a position of at least equality with its imperialist competitors, let alone world domination, Germany sought mastery of Europe.
 
British Aims
But a dominant position in Europe is necessary to satisfy the imperialist appetites of several other, powers. Holding together the Empire is the motive force of British policy. Success in this regard is directly dependent upon England’s strength on the European continent. Since she cannot dominate by direct occupation, England has always sought to operate in Europe through the formation of blocs and governments friendly to her interests.
As long as German fascism confined itself to crushing and exterminating the labor, movement, imperialist Britain raised no objections, but even looked on with admiration and approval. The attempt of German fascism to push England from its position in Europe led to war between the two.
If England was unwilling to yield her position to Germany, she is no more eager to yield .it to any other power, even to a “dear” ally. At present she aims at the organization of a bloc of western countries friendly to her, from the Scandinavian countries down through Belgium, Holland, France, Spain and Portugal. Hence her support of the reactionary Pierlot government in Belgium, the monarchy in Holland, fascist Franco in Spain, and de Gaulle in France. In eastern Europe she wants to retain her control of Greece in order to safeguard her position in the Mediterranean lifeline to Egypt and India. She seeks not merely anti-German governments but strongly pro-British ones.
 
Russian Imperialism
Russia seeks to enhance her interests or, more properly speaking, the interests of her ruling class, through control of at least the eastern half of Europe. At the expense of the liberties and democratic rights of the peoples of Europe, she demands half of Poland, control of the Balkan countries, in addition to the annexations already made of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia. For the Russian ruling class, this is but a stepping stone to the domination of Europe which every imperialist power seeks.
Churchill delivers Poland to Russia and gets Greece. Or so it seemed. Each of them yields reluctantly and tries to hold out for as much as possible. Churchill holds off recognition of the Lublin set-up, hoping to strike a better bargain: Stalin withholds approval of British action in Greece, hoping to lop off a piece of that country, Macedonia and placing it in his sphere of influence, perhaps in the Balkan Federation.
De Gaullist France is allowing herself to be wooed by both sides – England, which seeks to involve her in a western bloc, and Russia, which wishes to prevent this bloc from becoming too strong and threatening. France doesn’t wish to be a mere junior partner of the western bloc and therefore signs a treaty with Russia to strengthen her bargaining powers with England. The two big allies vie with each other for France’s support. In the end it will go to the stronger, the one which can offer more.
 
Role of the U.S.
And the United States?? The inner-Allied conflicts strengthen the position of U.S. imperialism. A Europe torn within itself, war weary, half destroyed, starved, helpless, looking for help from the outside, is the perfect place for intervention through money investments, lend-lease and, if necessary, armed force.
With no single European power dominating the Continent, and without a voluntary and harmonious unity of the European peoples, U.S. domination of Europe and the world is made easier. That is, provided the conflicts with England in the Far East, over India, in the Near East, in aviation and shipping can be fought out to the advantage of United States imperialism.
The seeds of World War III are already planted.
 





Romanian Overturn
The crisis and fall of the Radescu government have been reported in all the newspapers as “the first big test of the effectiveness of the Yalta decisions.” By that is meant that the test will come on whether Russia alone will decide the issue in Romania or whether the Big Three, acting in unison, will settle the fate of that Balkan country. One thing is certain, Yalta does not provide for the people settling their own fate.
Censorship imposed by Moscow and Bucharest makes impossible a complete picture of what has been happening, but the main outline is fairly clear.
1. The Romanian People: As everywhere throughout Europe, the people of Romania want peace, freedom, economic security and the necessary changes that will produce these things. The workers want work at decent wages; the peasants want the big estates broken up and the 1and returned to them. All of them, want a change from years of political reaction, starvation, exploitation, war and destruction.
None of these things have been achieved since the Germans were driven out and the Russian armies took over. Even the abolition of the anti-Jewish laws decreed by the Nazis has remained on paper, since the government, and all the parties which supported it, has done nothing to implement it.
The various Romanian governments which have been set up since the “liberation” have been governments “of the capitalists and landlords, and like their similars, throughout the world, they have not solved a single one of the problems which the masses of people face. In addition, the masses are saddled with the burden of the stiff reparations terms foisted upon Romania by Russia, occupation of the oil fields, the carrying off of their plants and deportation to Russian labor camps of thousands of Romanian workers (supposedly of German descent, but actually coming from groups which have lived in Romania for two or more centuries).
2. The Role of the Stalinist-Communists: This can be understood only if we realize that they are the agents of Russian imperialism and that their actions are always determined by the needs of their masters. Through the National Democratic Front, organized last October, the Stalinists occupied forty per cent of the Radescu cabinet. They saw nothing wrong in cooperating with this extreme right-wing conservative.
Making use of the popular demand for the purge of all fascists from the army and other government agencies, the NDF placed itself in the leadership of the movement. The interest of the Stalinists, however, was limited to the purge of all anti-Russian elements, since they themselves remained loyal to the King and collaborated with any pro-Russian fascists in Romania; They were also demanding increased representation in the cabinet in order to strengthen their political position in the country before any elections were held.
The attack on a popular meeting and the shootings and arrests which occurred on February 24th served as the pretext for the Stalinists to break with Radescu and demand his resignation. Had he yielded to their earlier demands, he would not now be called a fascist by the Romanian communists and by the Moscow press.
The pattern of Stalinist behavior in Europe is the same. They try to obtain political control, and friendship, that is, subservience, to Russia through deals at the top, even with fascists. Where this fails, or is not executed: satisfactorily, they will call into being, or place themselves at the head of the popular movement. Their purpose, is to derail this movement, use it as a bargaining point, and eventually to betray it when the bargain, suitable to Russian needs, is struck. The last thing the Stalinists want is the victory of the masses.
3. The Role of Russia: It is difficult to judge the exact reasons Moscow had for dumping Radescu. In all probability it did not judge his government “reliable” enough for Russian interests. The denunciation and demand for resignation carried in the Russian press certainly had nothing in common with the demands and desires of the Romanian people whom Stalin seeks to dominate and enslave. The Russian army has remained in the background thus far, allowing the NDF to do Stalin’s work.
In every country where the Russian armies have entered, deals were arranged with the capitalists and landlords at the expense of the masses of people. The revolt of the people is never encouraged, and; where the “Red” Army encounters such revolts, as in Bulgaria, it quickly puts them down.
John MacCormac in the New York Times correctly states that “nowhere has a revolutionary solution been encouraged by Soviet Russia in any liberated country of Middle Europe, unless the revolt of the ELAS in Greece was such an attempt.” And in Greece the Stalinists delivered the goods too by selling out the splendid ELAS fighters in the agreement with Churchill’s puppet in exchange for what Stalin got at Yalta. MacCormac adds:
“With the possible exception of Greece, it (Russia) has discouraged revolutions from below. The solutions it has imposed have been from above. What has been happening in Middle Europe – and at Yalta – has been that Soviet Russia has been holding the European revolution in check, where its own national interests could be served without it, in order to reach an accommodation with the capitalist and, democratic world.”
The first part is absolutely correct, but the reason that Russia plays this counter-revolutionary role in Europe is the reason which all imperialists have in suppressing the free action and movements of the oppressed and exploited. The counter-revolutionary role of the Russian imperialists is all the more dangerous because they have at their disposal organizations which pose as “communist” and “revolutionary” and which can and do sidetrack and betray the popular movements.
 





Chapultepec and Oaks
The recently concluded Inter-American Conference was correctly described in last week’s Labor Action as a diplomatic attempt to bring the Latin and South American countries more securely under the economic domination of the most powerful of the Western Hemisphere nations, the United States. The problems which the conference decision raised, more than anything else, reveal that this is true.
By the Act of Chapultepec, now hailed as the modern Monroe Doctrine, the twenty republics pledged to take united military action against any American nation which resorted to force in settling inter-American disputes. Since the United States is the only country which can supply the necessary materials for such action, it was generally understood that this country’s vote would be the decisive one in declaring war.
At the same time, the United States is partner to the Yalta decisions on the Dumbarton Oaks proposals for the world security organization by which any one of the seven permanent council, members of the future world organization may veto any proposed action against an aggressor. This means, for example, that if the United States wished to take military action against one of the South American countries, Argentina, for example, England, through the world organisation, could veto such action.
*

Argentine Sidedish
It is generally agreed that the threats made in the Act of Chapultepec are aimed primarily at Argentina, the only South American country absent from the Mexico City gathering. The criticisms and charges leveled at Argentina by the others had nothing to do with the fact that that country is run by a dictator, that there is no political freedom in that country. The conditions put to Argentina were primarily that she join the Allies in declaring war on the Axis and endorse the economic decisions arrived at by the conference. Of the latter, the most important sections are those which guarantee that the Latin and South American countries continue to supply the basic products and strategic materials, needed by the Allies in the conduct of the war; that the United States would supply these countries, after the war with needed machinery and equipment. In other words, the Latin and South American countries will serve as the sources of vital raw materials which the United States will purchase and also serve as a market for the sale of machinery and for investments for the United States.
The proposed condition to Argentina that she hold free elections and guarantee other political liberties was dropped, because, as it was explained in the press, “some delegates felt that this would be interfering in Argentina’s internal affairs.” Free elections are certainly the last thing the other South American dictators would consider a fair condition. Even the United States does not put such a condition to them as a basis for recognition, but on the contrary manages to remain on very friendly terms despite, the absence of that condition (Brazil, Bolivia, etc.).
The real reason for Argentina’s peculiar position lies not in the fact that she is a totalitarian state, but rather in the fact that she is the only country in South America not completely, under the economic heel of the United States. Argentina is the last economic foothold of England in the Western Hemisphere; Argentina also considers herself as a potential rival to the United States in South America. Her agricultural products compete with those of the United States. In addition, she is more interested in becoming the leading industrial country of her continent than in being a mere supplier of raw materials to the United States. She seeks to become the leading power in South America.
Argentina is not at war with the Axis because she does not see any immediate economic benefits that she could obtain from such participation and does not wish to enter merely as an appendage of the United States.
*

An American Dilemma
It is precisely over Argentina that the contradiction between Chapultepec and Dumbarton Oaks becomes real. What if England should veto any action that the United States should propose to undertake against the recalcitrant?
At first the American delegation was divided on this question. Some thought the United States must have the right to deal with inter-American affairs without any interference by any European power. But this did not look so good for the build-up that was being made for the San Francisco confab to be held next month, at which the Yalta decisions on world organization were to be presented for adoption. And yet the United States does want this free hand in the Western Hemisphere. And Chapultepec meant the Monroe Doctrine accepted and agreed to by all the countries from which the United States wants to exclude her imperialist rivals.
How to overcome the dilemma? The Inter-American Conference discussed this problem and approved a resolution which called for such changes in the Dumbarton Oaks proposals as would permit the American republics to solve their own disputes – that is, inter-American disputes would remain the exclusive province of the Americas and the United States would be free from any restraining influence by England and Russia. This, of course, was presented as an “original” idea which came from the Latin and South American countries themselves, for the next day it was announced that the United States would not take responsibility for the Latin-American criticisms of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals.
*

Bargaining Point?
Of course, the United States officials hastened to assure the world that this did not necessarily mean “that they would oppose settlement of purely regional disputes by regional machinery. They merely made clear that they wanted to go to San Francisco with a free hand and without any, obligations to support the other American republics there.”
In short, the United States will appear at San Francisco ready to strike a bargain. She will feel herself free to choose between various aspects of Chapultepec and Dumbarton Oaks, depending upon what concessions she can wring from the big United Nations. In the meantime, she holds as a club over England’s head the threat to exclude her from any say in South America, and the Act of Chapultepec remains a club over the head of Argentina which will be used to saving her into the orbit of the United States.
 




The pact which was signed by the Stalinist leaders of the ELAS and the puppet Greek government of Nicholas Plastiras is an outright betrayal of all that the Greek masses were fighting for when they took up arms in a struggle that was waged for over a month
The heroic Greek people who had fought for freedom and democracy against the Nazis and had continued the fight against the British were once more betrayed by the agents of one of the Big Three, Stalinist Russia.
Under the Nazis and later when the British took over through the Papandreou regime the Greek people had learned that the only way ini which they could press for and defend their rights was through the use of arms. What led to the direct outbreak of hostilities between the ELAS and the government was the attempt of the latter to disarm the resistance fighters, while permitting the pro-fascist and royalist military groups to retain their arms.
Popular opposition to the Papandreou government and the King, whom the British were trying to ram down the throats of the Greek people, led to the removal of the former and the appointment of a regency. The new Plastiras government then entered into negotiations with the ELAS in order to establish “law and order.”
During the armed conflict, in which London directed the bombing and strafing of the Greek people and Washington limited itself to words of indignation at British policy (not before it cut off UNRRA supplies to Greece), Moscow maintained official silence.
 
Yalta Aids Pact
On the day the decisions of the Yalta Conference were announced, the world was also informed that the leaders of ELAS had finally signed a pact with the Plastiras government. The terms of the pact and the fact that it was signed by the Stalinist leaders of ELAS indicate the close connection between it and the “pacts” signed at Yalta by the Big Three.
The accord stipulates that the ELAS fighters are to surrender their arms within two weeks. No political amnesty will be given persons who refuse to give up their arms by March 15th. In place of the armed people, the National Guard will start calling up men by age groups. At the same time the reactionary and royalist military formations were to retain their arms. ELAS is to turn over a minimum of 41,500 rifles, 1,000 light machine guns, 163 mortars, submachine guns, heavy machine guns, 32 pieces of assorted artillery and 15 radios, and ELAS guards are to collect these from the people for the government.
Negotiations which finally resulted in the agreement to disarm the Greek warriors and peasants had been going on for many weeks, with the government refusing to meet the conditions made by ELAS, which included the demand that all military groups be disarmed, including the reactionary and pro-fascist Mountain Brigade and Sacred Squadron; that political amnesty be granted to all who participated in the fighting; and that collaborationists be punished. Suddenly, but coineidentally with the Yalta agreement, comes the news that an agreement was signed in which not one of the above conditions was included.
 
A Betrayal of Labor
The general secretary of EAM stated to the press that this agreement would contribute to the “pacification of the country,” and that EAM will continue to exist “with a view of securing the people’s rights.” He’ did not say how this jibed with what the people had learned, namely, that their rights could be secured only by their own armed strength.
Partsalides went on to repudiate the ELAS “for taking things into their own hands” and promised an investigation of the executions carried out by them.
The role of the Communist Party and the Stalinists in EAM and ELAS was suspect from the very beginning, when, as members of the Papandreou government, they had voted to disarm the fighting forces of the people. When this proved to be impossible, they placed themselves in the leadership of the fighting ELAS and sought to utilize the opposition of the Greek people to British domination for the purpose of strengthening Stalin’s hand against Churchill.
The role of the Greek Communist Party, and this holds for the Stalinist parties throughout the world, is clear only if we understand that what motivated it was the service it renders to the policies of the Russian ruling class. Stalin saw in the conflict in Greece an opportunity to pressure Churchill into reinforcing agreements previously reached for the partitioning of Europe in which domination of the eastern half of that continent would go to Russia: Hence the militant action of the Greek Communists.
The Greek situation was undoubtedly another of the “arguments” Stalin used at the Yalta Conference to “persuade” the other two partners of the “justice” of Russia’s claims. Once these were conceded, Stalin agreed to the liquidation of the Greek situation, that is, he instructed his agents to sign the pact with the British puppet government by which all that the Greek people were fighting for, and the means which they had for achieving their aims, were surrendered. Stalin’s aims may be satisfied, and the militancy of the Greek Stalinists may be at an end, but the Greek people still have the struggle before them.
 





British Labor and India
The Revolutionary Communist Party of England (a Trotskyist organization of revolutionary socialists) is running Jock Haston, general secretary, for Parliament in the by-election in Neath district. The party is calling upon the workers to support their candidate because, among other things, the RCP stands for:
“The complete and unconditional granting of freedom to the Indian people. We stand for giving all the necessary assistance to the Indian workers in their struggle, for power.”
Thus is true internationalism expressed. The RCP is for the freedom not only of those people dominated by the imperialisms of other lands, but, primarily for the freedom of those who are oppressed by its own, that is, British imperialism.
* * *

Workers in Japan
In order to put across their plans to punish and enslave the German workers for the war into which their imperialist rulers dragged them, the slander campaign about the “mad German beast” has proceeded unabated. The aim of this campaign is to make the German workers appear responsible for the war, and thus let the real culprits go free. It will pale beside the campaign which will be launched against the Japanese people once the “plans” for them are announced,
Actually, it is the working classes of all countries which are paying for the war. The same pattern is found everywhere – increasing profits for the war-makers; high prices, decreasing wages and lowered living standards for the people. The Japanese workers, in their struggle for a little more bread, sometimes resort to desperate and unusual methods.
A Tokio paper recently described one method, which is said to be widespread. The workers of concern A steal a raw material which is in short supply, such as aluminum or special steel, and offer it at black market prices to concern B, which buys it eagerly. In concern B the workers do likewise and sell the material to concern C, where the same thing happens until the sequence gets back to concern A. Tokio police report that many workers are involved in such activities.
* * *

“Liberation” in the Congo
From the time of its conquest as a colony, the native people of the Belgian Congo have been subjected to forced labor by the Belgian imperial overlords. The cruel treatment and intense exploitation of the Congo people by the profiteers in rubber, oil, copper, copal – to name but a few of the wonderful resources of that region – for a long time were an international scandal. So great, in fact, that in 1908 King Leopold, whose colony the Belgian Congo was considered, was compelled to order an investigation and reluctantly granted some “reforms.”
Forced labor, however, continues to this day. In 1933, the Belgian government magnanimously issued a decree which allowed a person called up for forced labor to send a substitute for himself. The decree became known as the Native Circumscription Decree.
We are informed that many people in the Belgian Congo used to pay an agency which specialized in hiring substitutes for the forced labor service, and that the Belgian government found this a more satisfactory arrangement because “laborers hired under more normal conditions worked more efficiently than forced laborers.”
And now, at last, in 1945, comes another great reform! The Belgian government has announced in its Administrative Bulletin of the Congo that this system of circumscription has been legalized, and that the purchasing of labor service may be legally organized by the agencies, except in cases, of course, “where conditions are not opportune and particularly where the necessary labor for executing the projects cannot be recruited voluntarily.” Also excepted are forced labor for the following projects: road repairing, building of schools and prisons (!), hygiene and reforestation.
“These reforms,” states the Bulletin, “come at a happy time. They constitute another step toward the suppression of forced labor in all its forms.”
Another little imperialist blessing!
* * *

Principles Absent at Yalta
Every thinking person knows that the decisions arrived at by the Big Three at Yalta were not based on any principles save one – each power was out to get what it could at anybody else’s expense. The decisions were based on military strength and economic power.
Drew Pearson reveals in his column of February 23 that when the question of Poland was being discussed, Stalin, in making his demands, turned to his two friends and asked:
“Did your army liberate Poland, Mr. Churchill? Did your army liberate Poland, Mr. Roosevelt?”
The Russians are now busy denouncing anyone who even suggests that they were planning to use the “Free German Committee” headed by von Paulus and von Seydlitz, former officers in the Nazi army, as a provisional government in Germany. Getting what he did at Yalta, Stalin simply did not have to use this trump card against Churchill and Roosevelt, at least not at the present moment.
 





Big Three Domination
In typically blunt and cynical fashion, Prime Minister Churchill told the House of Commons that Yalta had indeed made a distinction between the rights of the small and big-nations, and that there was nothing in the Yalta plan which would prevent a conflict among the leading powers. The editors of the New York Times enlighten us with the following:
“First, while it is true that there is nothing in the Yalta plan to prevent aggression by any of the five great powers – Britain, Russia, France, China and the United States – this omission is more important in theory than in practice. Surely the reality of the situation is that if a point is ever reached when one of the five great powers must be coerced by force, then peace will have been lost anyway, beyond the possibility of salvage by any voting procedure that can possibly be devised; and a new world war will be in the making. The Yalta plan provides a method of preventing smaller wars which could easily grow into larger ones.”
One of the ways of “preventing, smaller wars,” that is, wars over issues not fully recognised as necessitating an immediate world conflict, is by eliminating the “danger zones” from the San Francisco conference. If in this manner several of the “smaller countries” lose representation at San Francisco, so much the worse for them.
*

India Again
With a population of nearly 400 million, this by no means small or insignificant country will be represented at San Francisco by three titled gentlemen chosen by the British Governor-General. Not one of them represents the Indian masses or their aspirations for national freedom! A spokesman for the India League justly declared: “These three titled collaborationists have no following whatsoever anywhere in India. At San Francisco they can accept no obligations for the prople of India.”
The bothersome and disagreeable problem of Indian independence, at any rate, won’t disturb the peaceful proceedings at Frisco.
*

Lebanon and Syria
Another embarrassing (for the Big Three) problem is eliminated by the exclusion, from the confab of Syria and Lebanon. Following the Yalta conference they were invited to join the United Nations by declaring war against the Axis, which they promptly did. Now they are busy fighting their “friends” for recognition and representation at the United Nations Conference.
Syria and Lebanon have been trying to throw off the yoke of the French mandate, and in this they had been encouraged by England. Recently, however, a change has crept into the British policy toward the matter of independence for these two countries: In February of this year, it was rumored, the London government upheld the French in their decision to retain troops in the two Near Eastern countries. This is undoubtedly part payment for French friendship in Europe.
Best way to avoid the awkwardness of confronting two small nations betrayed by Perfidious Albion is to keep them away. Hence no tickets to San Francisco.
*

Polish Struggle
The arrangements made at Yalta with regard to “broadening” the Russian-controlled Lublin government have hit a snag. The three-power commission sitting in Moscow has not yet been able to agree on how to “broaden” and have thus far failed “to get Mikolajczyk, former Premier in London and Peasant Party leader, who was slated to act as window-dressing for the Lublin set-up, to go to Moscow.
Since there is no Polish government, the Polish people will not be represented at San Francisco. A simple solution to a harassing problem.
*

Big Three Conflict
Not all the conflicting interests of the Big Three can be wiped out by exclusion from the April meeting. The Yalta decision that problems arising in the “liberated areas” be settled by the cooperative efforts of the Big Three is beginning to crack. Each of the powers tries to act independently of the others in order to get into the strongest .possible position. Thus we have England going ahead in Greece, Russia in Romania, and the U.S. in Latin and South America.
*

The Pot and the Kettle
The Russian-engineered change of government in Romania has evoked protest from the United States and England. A three-power commission is now supposed to be investigating the events which led to the establishment of the Groza government and the swift return of Transylvania by Russian agreement.
England expressed her disapproval by granting refuge to the ousted Radescu in the British legation. In retaliation, Russia broke her silence on Greece (which was maintained during the entire, period of fighting between ELAS and British troops) by declaring in Pravda that the regime of Plastiras “reminds every Greek of all the horrors of the Metaxas dictatorship and of the German occupation.”
Says England to Russia: According, to Yalta you must consult with us if you want to make any changes in Romania.
Says Russia to England: If you don’t keep your nose out of my sphere of influence, I’ll rake up all the dirt about your fair-haired boy in Greece, and maybe even encourage a little more trouble.
*

“Free Elections”?
Finland is the first of the “liberated areas” to hold elections. These are supposed to be the free expression of the people, uninfluenced and unhampered by foreign powers. Stalin’s party paper, Pravda, has thrown an ominous hint to Finland about what he considers the proper outcome should be. “The present elections are not to be considered an internal affair of the Finns,” the Russian paper wrote, and concluded with the warning that “some leaders must understand that friendship with the Soviet Union is the main guarantee of Finnish independence.” The results of the election have not yet been announced, but early reports seem to indicate that the pro-Russian Popular Democrats, a sort of popular front composed: of dissident Social Democrat, Communists and pro-Russian politicians did not make out too well.
If this is true, what will be the concrete consequences of Pravda’s threat?
 




The rôle of Russia in the Second World War has been largely misunderstood. There are the superficial observers who believe that Russia has simply reverted to the policies of the old Czarist Empire. If the conversion of the Communist International into a branch of the Russia Foreign Office did not in the past fifteen years dispel the belief that Russia was continuing international socialist politics, then the formal liquidation of the Comintern should make even the blind see. There are also those self-styled Marxists who interpret Russian foreign policy as flowing from its position as a “degenerated workers’ state.” While they condemn the individual acts of this policy (Russo-German pact, partition of Poland, invasion of Finland, etc.) on the grounds that they were executed solely in the interests of the Stalinist bureaucracy, they nevertheless cling to the idea that the totality of this policy defends – poorly, to be sure, but defends just the same – the remaining “conquests of October.” They fail to see that these remainders (nationalized property) are themselves instruments whereby the bureaucracy rules and exploits the working masses of Russia.
The present policy of Russia is as different from the policy of the workers’ state as night is from day. The latter was based on the concept that only the international socialist revolution, or its success in one or more of the major countries, could save the October Revolution from attack or degeneration. As a matter of fact, it was the workers’ movements outside of Russia which in the early days prevented the interventionists from realizing their plans against a weak Soviet Russia. In its early treaties with capitalist powers, the young workers’ republic always made clear to the world its motives. The bourgeois signatories to the Brest-Litovsk, Polish and Esthonian treaties were never designated by the Soviets as “friends of peace” or of the Soviet Union, and these treaties were regarded not as a substitute for the support of the workers’ movement abroad, but rather as a temporary breathing spell until this movement could gather strength, reorganize itself and come to the assistance of the first workers’ state. Thus it was with the Brest-Litovsk peace, which an exhausted and weak workers’ Russia was compelled to sign with Germany. Lenin openly and publicly called it a “Tilsit peace,” “an incredibly oppressive and humiliating peace” forced upon the Soviets by an “imperialistic brigand.”
“When we made our revolution,” said Lenin in 1921, “we said either the international revolution would come to our assistance, and in that case victory would be assured, or we will carry on our modest revolutionary work with the firm conviction that even our defeat will clear the road for the next revolution. In spite of our clear understanding that victory for us is impossible without an international revolution, and in spite of all obstacles, we did everything in order to consolidate the Soviet system. We acted, not only for the sake of our own interests, but for the interests of the International Revolution.”
This was the underlying concept which guided decisions in internal and external affairs. The Russian Revolution can live only if the workers took power in other countries.. In the event of a postponement of the world revolution – then Russia is a “beleaguered fortress” holding out until the international proletariat could come to its assistance. Defense of Soviet Russia was a first duty of the international working class, but never at the expense of its class interests, never by tying the proletariat to the political kite of the bourgeoisie.
The defeats of the proletariat in one country after another came in rapid succession. The international revolution was delayed. Lenin and Trotsky looked to socialist construction as a way of holding out until the revolutionary wave surged again. But after Lenin’s death, the official state policy became “socialism in a single country.” The continued defeats gave a material base to this theory and permitted its adherents to advocate it more openly. In turn, the theory became the cause for more serious and crushing defeats of the working class in China, England, Germany. The Communist International had become nothing but an instrument of Russian foreign policy. Socialism in one country led to no socialism at all – not even in Russia.
The main tenet of Russian foreign policy thenceforth changed from world revolution to the maintenance of the status quo. The internal changes, the result of the degeneration and finally the destruction of the workers’ regime, were accompanied by corresponding changes in the aims and methods of foreign policy, which is, after all, a continuation of domestic policy, conducted by and for the new Russian ruling class. Just as in the sphere of domestic politics the bureaucracy rules in its own interests, so in the field of foreign policy it has changed from socialist politics to power politics. It is only as a logical consequence of this change that the individual acts of Russian foreign policy can be understood. Seen in this light, Russian policy is neither “a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma” (Churchill) nor “simple and clear” (Stalin).
Dallin’s book [1] is the story of Russian foreign policy between 1939 – the signing of the Russo-German pact – and 1942, when the Russian and German armies were engaged at Stalingrad. It is told in terms of the diplomatic struggles and maneuvers conducted by the various powers. Dallin’s sources are as objective as they can be under the circumstances where most of the material is still hidden in the foreign offices of the warring governments. (One of Soviet Russia’s great contributions, under Lenin, had been to end secret diplomacy and publish all treaties, agreements and pacts signed by the governments so that the working class could see how wars are made.) The chief sources are therefore the scattered diplomatic reports and notes of the Foreign Offices as far as they have been published, official documents and collections of documents, speeches and discussions on foreign policy by various political leaders; and the daily press of Russia, America and Western Europe.
In the book Dallin makes a number of observations which reveal that he has not probed very deeply into the basic causes of the war. For example, he believes that the war could have been avoided had Germany been pressed from East and West by strong military states and thus denied the elbowroom for expansion at the expense of smaller and weaker states. “Only a military alliance of Britain, France and Russia could successfully have opposed Germany’s growing might.” Dallin does not see the war as inevitably arising out of the continued existence of capitalism, but believes that it could have been avoided through collective security. Fortunately, however, his political observations comprise a very small part of the book and most of it is devoted to factual material which is exceedingly interesting and valuable. So, disregarding for the time being the inadequate and incorrect analyses, we turn to the history of Russia’s diplomacy since 1939.
 
Europe After Munich
Britain’s policy of appeasing Hitler aimed at diverting his attention to the East. To involve Germany in a war with Russia in which both would be exhausted and thus leave Britain master of Europe was the essence of British foreign policy which culminated in the Munich agreement. If war with Germany was to come, England wished, through appeasement, to gain the necessary time for military preparations. By the spring of 1939, however, after the German occupation of Czechoslovakia, British policy changed. It became clear that German expansion in Europe must be halted. To prevent Hitler from realizing his policy, Britain began to seek a rapprochement with Russia. On March 18, four days after German troops had entered Prague, the press reported that important conversations were taking place between London and Moscow which aimed at “closer collaboration between the two countries.”
Following on the heels of the invasion of Prague, Hitler sent off another note to Poland with new demands for changes in the status of Danzig and for an automobile road across the Polish Corridor. These demands were accompanied by a proposal to create a German-Polish military alliance against Russia. Poland, assured of England’s backing, rejected the German proposals. Although Hitler believed that Poland could be bluffed into accepting his plan, he came to see that in order to realize it he would have to resort to the use of force. In such an eventuality, it was necessary that Germany be assured at least of Russian neutrality. By the middle of April, Germany was ready to start negotiations with Russia.
In the spring of 1939, therefore, “London and Berlin were the ones who were bargaining against each other at Stalin’s counter.” Russia cleverly utilized one bidder against the other in an effort to extract the highest price – which Germany eventually offered.
The full account of the Anglo-Russian negotiations has not yet been given. From the available material, however, the following can be concluded. Russia preferred an alliance with Germany to one with England, because, among other reasons, she thought the democracies incapable of stopping Germany. However, in order to assure herself that Hitler was not setting a trap for Russia, she continued negotiations with London and made a proposal for a full-fledged military alliance with England. Concretely such an agreement would mean that both sides were to come to each other’s aid in the event of direct or “indirect” aggression. Should Germany attack Poland, Russia would have the right to cross the Polish border. This proposal was later extended to include the Baltic states. Moscow was obviously interested in guarantees that would extend the Russian border westward. Poland would not agree to such conditions and threatened to desert to Hitler. In less than two months more than thirty different schemes for an Anglo-Russian agreement had been considered and rejected.
It is obvious from the proposals made by the Russians, and the concessions made by the British, that Russia was playing for time. The agreement with Germany was the preferable course for Stalinist Russia. By early August it was fairly clear that the Russo-German pacts were an accomplished fact. At that time the negotiations with Germany turned from trade matters to military matters; the generals replaced the diplomats in the Moscow conferences. The Anglo-Russian negotiations, however, continued after that as a safeguard for the Russians, who feared that Hitler might still change his mind about concluding the pacts.
By the end of the month, negotiations between Russia and the Allied powers had all but completely broken down, although as late as August 21, two days after the conclusion of the first agreement with Germany, the Russians continued to demand of the British that in the event of war, Russia be granted the right to occupy Eastern Poland. The Allied military missions agreed to allow the Red Army to take up positions on the frontier until such time as Poland herself should request the entry of the Russian troops.
On August 19 Germany and Russia concluded their first trade agreement; on the 23rd the military and non-aggression pacts were signed and became effective upon signature without waiting for ratification. So great was the haste created by the mutual distrust of the new partners that they would not wait for the usual procedure in which the Supreme Soviet and the Reichstag would ratify the pact. Certainly neither party expected that the pact would be repudiated by their governments, but Russia feared that Hitler, armed with the pact, might reopen negotiations with the British, while Germany, in turn, was anxious to begin the attack on Poland. Twelve hours after the signing of the military and non-aggression pacts, Germany took over Danzig through a coup d’etat. The holocaust was soon to begin.
 
The Three Pacts
In the latter part of August 1939 Russia and Germany signed three agreements – a commercial agreement, a non-aggression pact and a secret (military) agreement.
The commercial agreement obligated Russia to sell to Germany within two years 180,000,000 marks’ worth of commodities and Germany extended credit to Russia in the amount of 200,000,000 marks at five per cent interest and payable over a period of seven years. Some five months later a new commercial treaty was worked out and in 1941 a third trade agreement was concluded by the two countries.
Although non-aggression pacts were by this time not novel to Russian policy, the one signed with Germany contained some very unusual terms. For example, it omitted the usual clause which stipulated that if one of the contracting parties should commit an act of aggression against a third party, the other contracting party would be entitled to renounce the pact. The coming attack on Poland, worked out and agreed to by both parties, made such a clause superfluous.
The secret treaty or treaties are the most interesting and important of all. They contained the terms which the two signatories offered each other Although their exact contents have not yet been published, some of the terms are known. On the basis of the information available and of what actually transpired, Dallin concludes that the secret pacts provided for the following:
Russia was to annex Eastern Poland outright, with the privilege of “socializing” its economy as it saw fit. Esthonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Finland and Bessarabia were allotted to the Russian “sphere of influence.” These were not to be “socialized”; their economies were to remain intact. Bulgaria and the Dardanelles were designated as a Russian “security zone.” German inhabitants of these territories were to be returned to the Fatherland. The Franco-Soviet pact of 1935 was to be annulled. Russia was guaranteed participation in post-war problems. A small Polish state, under German domination, was to be created of Western Poland.
 
Invasion of Poland
Played up as instruments of peace by the German Nazis and the Stalinists, the Russo-German agreements released the brakes which were holding up the start of the Second World War. On September 2, Germany, assured of having to fight on only one front, invaded Poland. On September 17, the Russian troops marched into Poland from the East. The Russian people were taken completely by surprise when they heard of the mobilization of the Red Army. Few people realized that the mobilization which had taken place between the 7th and the 16th of September was intended for attack, as planned by Hitler-Stalin. Molotov’s note to the Polish Ambassador contained the typical diplomatic hypocrisy: Russia was attacking to defend the rights of the Polish people, to protect the life and property of the Ukrainian and White Russian minorities, “to extricate the Polish people from the unfortunate war into which they were dragged by their unwise leaders and to enable them to live a peaceful life.”
Five days after the Red Army invaded Poland the new line of demarcation was announced. The German Army had apparently gone further East than had been agreed upon and withdrew when the Red Army approached. Russia annexed Eastern Poland outright. In October a mock election took place: over ninety per cent of the population voted for the single ticket run by Moscow.
Soon afterward, Russia carried through the other terms of the secret pacts. Afraid that with the close of the Polish campaign Hitler might try to offer peace to the Western powers, Stalin speeded up the diplomatic offensive against the Baltic countries. Although she did not annex or sovietize these countries, Russia obtained the right to maintain troops in Esthonia, Latvia and Lithuania. In the last named country, in the city of Vilno, the working class population had hailed the Red Army as liberators from capitalism. But, writes Dallin:
No sooner had Soviet troops entered the city when there began what is described in Communist terminology as a rapid process of socialization. To Stalin this was indeed a triumph. Then suddenly, for some inexplicable reason, Vilno was transferred to “capitalist Lithuania,” which was at the same time assured of sovereignty and of economic and social inviolability. The Lithuanian Communists organized a demonstration in front of the Soviet Legation in Kaunas, carrying placards which read: “We do not want Vilno to become Lithuanian; we want Kaunas to become Soviet.”
The Russians cooperated with the Lithuanian police. Arrests were made and in Vilno the GPU rounded up many socialists and revolutionists and shipped them off to the interior of Russia. Why Vilno, the ancient Lithuanian capital seized by Poland in 1920, was turned over by Stalin to Lithuania is not quite clear. It may have been agreed upon with Germany, but the answer still lies hidden in secret archives.
From the point of view of military strategy, Russia’s occupation of the Baltic countries could be aimed at only one power – Germany – which dominated the Baltic Sea. Since these were the days of the honeymoon of the Russo-German friendship, Moscow indulged in its by now usual hypocrisy to explain its actions Thus, for example, The Bolshevik, No. 18, 1939, wrote: “Basing itself on Esthonian territory, the British fleet attempted in 1919 to attack Kronstadt. In the post-war years the British fleet held maneuvers every summer in the Baltic Sea, and there were even negotiations regarding the sale of the Esthonian island of Oesel to England.” Thus, while the Baltic seizures aimed at extending the Russian border as a precaution against Hitler, Stalin carried them out under the blessing of the Russo-German pact, and dressed them up before the masses as a preventative measure against England. For reasons of his own, Hitler played along in this game.
 
At the Height of German-Russian Collaboration
The Polish and Baltic successes marked the high point in Russian-German relations. The conquest of Poland in less than twenty days made Germany appear invincible. The bloodless expansion of Russian territory seemed to justify Stalin’s policy. It was at this time that von Ribbentrop paid his second visit to Moscow to negotiate new trade agreements and to fix the new Russo-German frontier. The reception accorded him is symbolic of the depths to which Russian diplomacy had fallen under the reign of Stalin. Dallin describes the triumphal procession which greeted the fascist Foreign Minister. When von Ribbentrop landed at the Sokolniki airdrome the Russian band struck up the Internationale. Next came the Horst-Wessel song, the Nazis’ gory anti-communist anthem, which was played without a single flaw! Von Ribbentrop presented Madame Molotov with a Mercedes automobile and she thanked him in her little speech, saying that she liked it better than the gifts presented by the French. This was followed by sumptuous feasting, during which von Ribbentrop recited Georgian poetry which he had memorized to please Stalin. When von Ribbentrop left, the Russian guard of honor which saw him off raised their right hands in the Hitler salute!
 
The War with Finland
On October 5, the day Latvia signed her mutual agreement pact with Russia, Molotov called the Finnish envoy and suggested that the Finnish Foreign Minister visit Moscow to “discuss a number of concrete questions.” From that date until the outbreak of military hostilities, negotiations between the two countries revolved around a number of territorial changes demanded by Russia, specifically the Karelian isthmus and the Hanko and Rybachi peninsulas. Finland’s capitulation on one point after another proved unsatisfactory to the Russians, who realized that Russia would sooner or later be drawn into the world conflict. Territorial expansion had now become the strategy in Russia’s maneuvering for position.
Like the Baltic seizures, the war against Finland was ostensibly aimed at the Allied powers. Again, from the point of view of military strategy, Germany stood to lose more by Russia’s successful conquest of Finland than did the Allies. But the peculiar relationship of forces at the moment made the continuation of the Russo-German friendship desirable to both partners. Russia needed to maintain the pact in order to gain the necessary “breathing spell” in order to prepare for war. Under the aegis of the pact she was able to carry through her policy of territorial expansion aimed at Germany. This constituted what many called the paradox in Russia’s foreign policy. For Germany, the pact’s continuance was necessary in order to obtain supplies and raw materials and maintain her prestige, her seeming invincibility and to Increase her pressure against England. To do this, Russia had to be appeased. Germany paid for Russia’s support by consenting to the expansionist policy. Russia paid her price to Germany in the form of increased economic aid and political support. During this period the Communist Parties throughout the world concentrated their attack on the Allied imperialists and war-mongers while the stability and sensibility of the German-Russian bloc was played up. Russia’s war on Finland was dressed up as a defense against “the outpost of Allied capitalism,” and not a few non-Stalinists fell for this line.
In expectation that a Finnish capitulation would follow in quick order, Moscow resurrected the Finnish Stalinist, Kuusinen, and set him up as the head of a farcical “people’s government.” After a series of initial defeats, the military superiority of a large power made itself felt, but in spite of the fact that complete victory was easily within the reach of the Russians, Moscow’s attitude suddenly changed and at the end of January peace feelers were sent out.
Why did the Russians suddenly reverse their policy and decide to end the war? It certainly was not, as the Stalinists later tried to explain, that having achieved what they had originally demanded from Finland, the Russians were satisfied and desired peace. The answer lies in far less idealistic reasons. The first, but not decisive, reason was that Russia feared becoming involved in a war with the Allies, who were using Finland’s predicament as a pretext to press the Scandinavian countries into permitting them to open a Northern front against Germany. Russia was also eager to start her long-planned Balkan drive. But even more important was Germany’s rôle in this whole affair. While Germany was willing to allow Russia to strengthen herself in the Baltic, knowing full well that it was at her own expense – this was the price she was willing to pay for Russian neutrality and economic help – Germany did not want the Allies to open a Northern front. She would brook no interference with what was to her the main war.
At first Germany denied having started the Russo-Finnish peace negotiations, but after the treaty was signed, a well-informed German controlled newspaper commented: “Now one can reveal that Germany was in the center of all the moves which led up to the peace negotiations and to the signing of peace. During the preparatory campaign for peace, Berlin was in regular contact with Moscow.”
On March 12, 1940, a peace treaty was signed, the terms of which differed little from the terms Moscow had offered Helsinki during October and November. Finland ceded to Russia the entire Karelian peninsula, parts of Rybachi and Sredni peninsulas and a number of islands in the Gulf of Finland. Finland was to lease to Russia the Hanko Peninsula for a period of thirty years. In return, Russia agreed to withdraw its military forces from the Petsamo area. The peace, however, was short-lived.
 
The Fall of France and the Balkans
The fall of France alarmed Moscow to the point of panic. The Russo-German pact had been signed by the Russians in the hope that a long-drawn-out war between Germany and the Western powers would either exhaust both sides or, if war became unavoidable for Russia, it would at least give her sufficient time to prepare. The successes of the German blitzkrieg upset these calculations, and Russia seemed to be Hitler’s next target. Between June 15 and 30, 1940, Russia therefore speeded up her westward drive. Should the war come to a speedy end, Russia wished to present the peace conference with accomplished facts. She occupied and incorporated (and nationalized) the Baltic states, Esthonia, Latvia and Lithuania, and concentrated large forces on the German frontier. Next came the occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina, demands on Finland that the Aland Islands be demilitarized, the establishment, for the first time since the revolution, of diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia, mobilization of Russian economy for war, the increased work day and new, severe discipline for the workers in industry, and finally the acceleration of the reorganization of the Red Army, which had begun at the close of the Finnish war.
It is quite true that after the fall of France, Hitler faced the dilemma: which way next, East against Russia or the continuation of the war against the West, namely, England. A number of very practical military reasons underlay the decision against an immediate attack in the East, but while Hitler concentrated his military forces against England, he began a feverish campaign in the Balkans to lay the diplomatic groundwork for the anti-Russian alliance with was to aid in the future attack on Russia. Under the cloak of friendship, Germany had decided against any further expansion by Russia in Eastern Europe. Acquiescence in the case of Bessarabia was to be the last concession. Hitler’s Axis partner, Italy, which viewed Russia’s Balkan policy as a special threat to herself, found the new German policy particularly agreeable. Moscow recognized the significance of this change, and while keeping up the fiction of continued friendship with the Reich, pursued her own diplomatic campaign in the Balkans.
During the diplomatic tug-of-war, both sides found it to their advantage to keep up the myth of great friendship for each other. For example, Molotov declared in August, 1940, in a speech before the Supreme Soviet: “We can only emphasize again and again that friendly relations (between the two> countries) are based, not upon accidental considerations of a conjectural nature, but upon basic principles of state interests ...” Two months later, the official Völkischer Beobachter wrote: “Since the conclusion of the German-Soviet pact, nothing has occurred that could disturb the newly regulated relations of both states. That pact has proved so fruitful that the impetus which led to its conclusion is now stronger than ever..’
Behind this facade of declared love and everlasting friendship, the struggle continued. In November, Molotov accepted von Ribbentrop’s invitation to visit Berlin for the purpose of settling a number of urgent questions. (During this visit the Russian Foreign Minister brought greetings from the Russian Communist Party to the German Nazi organization.) Although the true facts surrounding the conferences in Berlin have been revealed only gradually and piecemeal, it is known that Hitler proposed that Russia become a full-fledged partner in the Triple Alliance, a proposal which Molotov turned down. Germany was motivated by a desire to unify the Axis camp by (i) strengthening the rapprochement between Russia and Japan, (2) subordinating Russian economy to an even greater extent to German war needs, and (3) impressing England with Germany’s military invincibility. Much as the Russians wished to maintain Russo-German collaboration, they found this step too costly and refused to join what they correctly considered a military bloc completely subservient to Germany’s war needs. Thus the attempt to cement the widening cracks in Russo-German relations ended in failure.
In the diplomatic struggle which ensued, Germany succeeded in winning to the Triple Alliance one after another of Russia’s small neighbors: Hungary, Bulgaria (bribed with the cession of Southern Dobrudja, an act forced on Rumania by Germany) and Finland. Yugoslavia, which attempted to resist German encroachments, was overrun in eleven days and its government sent into exile. Here an interesting development occurred. As late as May 1941 Russia, trying to appease Hitler, withdrew recognition from the Yugoslav government in exile, in violation of the treaty she had signed with that country. Only in August, after the break with Germany, did Russia announce that the Russo-Yugoslav pact of April 5 remained in force.
 
The End of the Hitler-Stalin Pact
By the end of April 1941 war between Russia and Germany seemed inevitable. Every attempt to patch up the differences between the two countries ended in failure – Germany demanded what Russia could not give, namely, complete subordination to the war needs of the Reich through German control over Ukrainian heavy industry, demobilization of the Red Army, and, thirdly, agreement by Russia to work on military orders to Germany and to increase the export of Russian raw materials to Germany?
Why did Hitler suddenly change his strategy? In the first place, the war with England had lasted much longer than he had calculated, and the British, by expanding their industry and with increased aid from the United States, were rapidly overcoming the superiority which Germany had initially enjoyed. Hitler understood that as the United States threw more and more of her weight into the war, he would need a strong naval power to counterbalance it, namely, the active intervention of Japan. Relations between Tokyo and Moscow were such that the former wished to be assured of complete Russian neutrality before becoming involved in the conflict. Russia’s resistance to joining the Triple Alliance, however, was anything but reassuring to Japan. As Dallin puts it:
To fight England, Germany needed Japan’s active aid. Japan, in turn, needed the certainty of Soviet neutrality; to assure this neutrality, Germany found herself at war with Russia.
It is not true, as the Stalinist bureaucrats claim, that the German attack took Russia completely by surprise. In the first instance, Russo-German collaboration had been on the downgrade for some time and the aims of each of the partners were becoming more and more divergent. Secondly, Germany had given numerous hints that she was willing to make peace with England in order to turn to the East. In this way, Hitler was ready to betray his Japanese ally, but honor counts for little where more imperialist interests are involved. It was not love of the Russian people that prompted England to reject Hitler’s proposals, but rather that his terms, mastery of Europe, were unacceptable to John Bull. Hess’ mission to England, while it did not have official German sanction, at least had Hitler’s sympathy.
In May von Papen approached the Turkish Foreign Minister, Saracoglu, with a request that he act as intermediary between England and Germany. These, and numerous other German proposals, were forwarded to Moscow by London through Ivan Maisky. From Berlin, Russian diplomats and correspondents informed Moscow of the exact date of the coming German attack. As a matter of fact, by the end of May and in early June, the Red Army had begun large-scale maneuvers in the entire Western zone, and was later concentrated along the Russo-German border. All leaves were cancelled, the Baltic fleet was mobilized, all roads leading to Rumania were mined, bridges on the Lithuanian border were destroyed and entire villages evacuated.
 
Russia in the Camp of the Allies
Hitler’s attack in June 1941 catapulted Stalin into the camp of the Allies. It is not, as Dallin states, the realization of the “most realistic policy of all,” but rather a continuation of Russian foreign policy in the Stalinist era. This policy is not altered by a change in alliances. Only superficially is there a difference. Instead of “Anglo-American imperialism” there is now “Nazi barbarism.” But the motivation of Russian policy remains the same.
Inside the Allied camp, Russia again plays the rôle of a subordinate partner seeking to enhance her independence and position with relation to her allies. In spite of Stalin’s statement during the early months of the war to Russia does not aim to destroy the German state and that she will content herself with driving the invaders from her soil, the appetites and ambitions of Moscow have scarcely been concealed. With every favorable turn in Russia’s military situation, Moscow’s demands for territorial annexations grow. Moreover, Stalin’s declarations with respect to Germany are contradicted by the Kremlin propagandists, who promise that the proper revenge will be taken on the Reich. Under cover of complete understanding and friendship with England and the United States, Russia continues to jockey for position, playing off the differences and disagreements between the two major partners within the United Nations. Moscow wants at least part of Finland, Eastern Poland, Bessarabia, parts of Rumania, part of Manchuria, access to the Mediterranean and the Persian Gulf. Both England and America are already considering the “justice” of some of Russia’s territorial claims!
Each member of the Allied coalition, therefore, is trying desperately, while cooperating in the main war against the Axis, to improve its own position at the expense of the others. For the question of who shall control Europe is an acute matter to all the powers. In the long run, each one knows that it is economic and military force alone that will decide. In the meantime, diplomacy is the means by which each partner tries to maneuver into the most advantageous spot. Russian diplomacy can be understood only in this light. Its whole foreign policy must be evaluated against the background of what the Russian state is, who rules within and who conducts its foreign affairs.

Footnote
1. Soviet Russia’s Foreign Policy, 1939–1942, by David J. Dallin. Yale University Press, New Haven: 452 pages.
 




Big finance capital in one country can always buy up competitors in another, politically independent country, and always does so. Economically this is quite feasible. Economic “annexation” is quite “feasible” without political annexation, and constantly occurs. In the literature on imperialism one meets at every step with information such as, for example, that Argentina is really England’s “trade colony,” that Portugal is really England’s “vassal,” etc. This is true: economic dependence upon English banks, indebtedness to England, England’s buying up of the railroads, mines, lands, etc., in other countries, all this makes these countries England’s “annexations” in the economic sense, although their political independence is not violated. – Lenin.
Were Lenin writing today, he might easily have pointed to the relationship between Bolivia and the United States as an example of the feasibility of “economic annexation.” The conquest of the South American nation did not require the use of military force – or even the threat of such measures – but took place almost exclusively on the basis of Yankee “generosity.” Investments, loans, bribery, technical advice – and not a little chicanery – these were the instruments whereby the American capitalists came into the possession and control of the decisive portion of Bolivia’s major resources – tin and oil, the ownership of the railroads and control of the banks.
Early this year, as a result of the tin miners’ strike, a furious inter-departmental tempest arose over Bolivia, a country that is seldom mentioned in our daily press. The dispute was touched off by the charge of the chief of the Division of Labor and Social Information of the Pan American Union, Ernesto Galarza, that, contrary to the Good Neighbor policy of nonintervention, Pierre Boal, American Ambassador to Bolivia had been interfering in the internal affairs of that nation. Boal was accused of having informed the Bolivian President that the enforcement of the labor code (which the Bolivian trade unions had been demanding for a long time, and which was included in the strike demands of the tin miners), would raise the price of tin beyond the financial capacity of the United States purchasers. This in spite of the fact that the Board of Economic Warfare, responsible for procuring vital war materials, had already guaranteed a higher price. President Penaranda was advised by Boal to veto the minimum labor code, which included such elementary propositions as that the workers be paid every fifteen days. Boal cabled Hull that the miners “are now paid tardily deliberately in order to maintain them on the job, and to give them a stake in their next month’s pay.” Besides, he wrote, regular pay periods would increase bookkeeping costs! Other articles to which the Ambassador took exception required the operators to sign collective contracts and one which prohibits utilizing the services of labor collectors and contractors.
The State Department issued a denial, although Hull had to admit that Boal had been instructed to “make inquiries” to the Bolivian President about the effect on prices of the proposed code. For a few days, charges and counter-charges were flying back and forth, with the upshot that Galarza lost his job and a Bolivian-American Investigating Commission was sent down to South America to make a first-hand inquiry into Bolivian labor conditions. The report of the commission, whose revelations regarding the extreme poverty of the Bolivian tin miners are in themselves a refutation of the cry of the Bolivian government that the strike was Nazi-inspired, has not been released for general distribution; only a single copy has been passed around to newspaper reporters. A sketchy, unofficial, individual report, written by one of the labor members of the commission, Martin C. Kyne, vice-president of the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Employees of America, is now available.
There are two things to bear in mind regarding the findings of the commission. In the first place, its main concern is with the raising of the productivity of Bolivian labor through improvements in the living conditions. After all, the undernourishment of the Bolivian worker and the universal practice of chewing the cocoa leaf to dull the pangs of hunger are old, old stories. But increased productivity is a vital war necessity, especially since the other two large tin-producing areas, Malaya and the Dutch East Indies, are in Japanese hands. Today, therefore, the commission finds what it describes as “little short of feudal serfdom” and an appalling death rate due to industrial disease (silicosis and tuberculosis are prevalent and there are in all of Bolivia not more than four hundred and twenty-five doctors) contributing to the low productivity of the workers.
Secondly, in all the protest against the brutal treatment of the Bolivian miners by the government and the mine operators, no mention has been made in the liberal and labor press of the fact that most of the mines are either owned or controlled by American corporations (they justly condemn Simon Patino, but they forget to mention his partner – a New York company) and that United States imperialism is, in the last analysis, responsible for the deplorable conditions of Bolivian labor.
Two factors – nature and time – seemed to conspire to force Bolivia onto the path of economic servitude to one of the big imperialist powers. Geography is a key to Bolivia’s backwardness. Here is a country with an area of 416,040 square miles and a population of some three and a half millions, cut off from the sea (Bolivia lost the Pacific port of Antofagasta in the war with Chile in 1883), with climatic conditions which range from wintry bleakness to tropical jungle heat, split into two sections by the high mountain system which runs down the center of the continent in a longitudinal direction. On the west of the Cordillera Real, stretching from Lake Titicaca to the Chilean and Argentine borders, is the high, desolate plateau, where life is an eternal struggle for the barest necessities. Buried beneath the mountains which rise out of the Alto is the wealth of Bolivia – the tin deposits, second only to those of the Malayan states – the old silver mines, gold, copper, lead, bismuth, antimony and tungsten. The absence of coal, however, creates all sorts of difficulties for the mining industry.
 
Bolivia’s Backwardness
The Yungas mountain valleys lead down the Cordillera to the East, where lie the fertile plains capable of yielding enough food to feed a population several times that of Bolivia’s. But, for the most part, agriculture remains as primitive and undeveloped as in the days before the Spanish conquest, except for the large estates held by absentee landlords, where Indian peons raise large quantities of cocoa and sugar cane. Foodstuffs like rice and flour are imported from Chile and the United States, although both could easily be raised in abundance in the Bolivian lowlands. Despite all the favorable conditions for cultivation, the plains have not attracted many settlers because they are cut off from the outside world. Except for the partially completed La Paz-Yungas Railway, long, hazardous mountain trails and passes traversed on mule-back or by foot are the only roads leading to eastern Bolivia. It still takes nearly forty days to go from Santa Cruz to Cochabamba, a distance of some two hundred and fifty miles! In the 1920s, a loan was made to construct a railroad between these two cities. In 1937, surveys were still being made for this railroad, and today it still remains a dream for the future.
Railroads, indispensable for industrial development, have for a long time been and still are Bolivia’s most critical need. Railroads to unite eastern and western Bolivia; railroads leading out of the country – through Chile to the Pacific, through Argentina to the Atlantic. But railroads require large outlays of capital which are lacking within the country and have to be obtained abroad. Capitalism, however, will not make financial investments in backward areas out of altruistic considerations. Railroads in Bolivia, and loans for them, had to wait until they were profitable – not to the Bolivians – but to the money-lenders. It was not until the beginning of the current century that Bolivian tin began to play an important part in world economy, and it was this fact which provided the necessary impetus for investments in railroads. In line with this, however, only such railroads were constructed as were needed to carry machinery and fuel to the tin mines and to haul the tin concentrates westward to the Pacific Ocean. In 1937, of the 1,379 miles of railroad, none went further west than Potosi and Cochabamba, centers of the mining industry, and all but 271 miles were privately owned.
In 1908, Bolivia had no foreign debts; by 1927, her foreign obligations amounted to over $40,000,000, all of which, with the exception of a small amount to England, was owed to the United States. In 1908, Bolivia borrowed 800,000 pounds sterling (roughly $4,000,000) from J.P. Morgan & Co. at six per cent, for the purpose of stabilizing exchange; in 1910, 1,500,000 pounds (roughly $7,500,000) were borrowed from the Parisian Banco de la Nacion, and in 1913 the Crédit Mobilier lent to the Bolivian government 1,000,000 pounds at five per cent to build the Atocha-La Quiaca Railway. The Yungas Railway loan of 1917 in the amount of $2,400,000, taken at six per cent from Chandler & Co. and the Equitable Trust Co. of New York, marks the beginning of long-term financing by North American banks and their economic infiltration and conquest of Bolivia. This loan was secured by a first mortgage on the electric railway built from La Paz to the Yungas, a lien on the government-owned branch of the Arica-La Paz Railway, and the first charge on the general revenues of the department of La Paz. The loan agreement also stipulated that the material used in the building of the railway and the rolling stock and equipment were to be purchased in the United States. The railroad itself was never completed; its abrupt termination on the other side of the Andes, in an uninhabited region, makes it practically worthless. The loan on this railway hangs like a dead weight on the neck of the Bolivian people.
In 1920, the government issued $2,253,000 in six per cent bonds, the so-called Sanitation Bonds, which the Ulen Contracting Co. took in payment for the construction of sewer systems in La Paz and Cochabamba. The contract in this case too called for the use of American construction materials. These bonds were secured by a lien on fifteen different customs duties and internal revenues. Since sewers are not a source of income, the entire burden of this loan has fallen on the Bolivian government, to be met out of taxes – i.e., by an intense exploitation of the Bolivian masses.
 
The American Bankers Come In
It was in 1922, however, that Bolivia was really turned over to the United States bankers. The story of the 1922 Bolivian loan is worth retelling here because it is in many respects a classic illustration of the method by which American imperialism operates – through the employment of dollar investments whenever possible, rather than troops – an expensive and dangerous operation – in the building of the Yankee empire.
In 1920, the Liberal government was overthrown by the Republicans, whose leader, Bautista Saavedra, appointed himself president. Negotiations for a loan from Imbrie & Co. for the cancellation of the French debt were broken off as a result of the overturn. The new government, however, soon found itself in need of funds to meet the annual deficits in the budget, and in 1921 it turned to the St. Louis firm of Stifel-Nicolaus for a six-month loan of $1,000,000 at six per cent. In the course of negotiating the terms of this loan, the American banking house extorted a preferential option for three years on any loan that the Bolivian government might contemplate. In 1922, the Saavedra government was again seeking a foreign loan to carry through a program of railroad construction, without which no party could remain in power in Bolivian politics. In accordance with the 1921 contract, this loan had to be taken from Stifel-Nicolaus, although more favorable terms were being offered by several other banks.
In 1922, therefore, Bolivia became saddled with a loan of $29,000,000 – a sum far in excess of the amount originally requested by the borrowers – which would run for twenty-five years, until 1947, at eight per cent. Associated with Stifel-Nicolaus were the Equitable Trust Co. of New York and the Spencer Trask Co. The specific terms of the loan are so harsh that it came in for a great deal of criticism in Bolivia and numerous futile attempts were made to moderate them. During the recent controversy over Bolivia’s situation, Roosevelt referred to the loan as unfortunate, not in keeping with the Good Neighbor policy, and so forth – but Bolivia still labors under it.
The bond issue became known as Bolivian Eights of 1947 and was secured by the national revenue as follows:
Not less than 114,000 government shares in the Banco de la Nacion. Since this number of shares was sufficient to control the bank, the American financiers obtained a stranglehold on Bolivian banking. Should the capital stock of the bank be increased at any time during the life of this loan, the government must acquire such proportion of the additional shares as to maintain its control, and such additional shares are to be immediately pledged for security on the loan.
In addition, the following revenues were pledged as security on the loan: All revenues representing dividends on the bank shares; all taxes on mining claims and concessions, taxes on all corporations, net profits of mining companies, revenues from alcohol and tobacco monopolies, all import and export duties, surcharge on import duties, tax on mortgage interests, and finally mortgages and liens upon the properties and earnings of railroads constructed and to be constructed. In the event of foreclosure sales of railroads, the purchasers shall have the right to operate them for a period of ninety-nine years from the date of purchase. In brief, all revenues except taxes and royalties from oil and oil developments were pledged to the bankers.
Moreover, to insure the actual collection of these taxes, it was stipulated that a permanent fiscal commission of three – two members of which should be chosen by bankers – should have charge of the collection of taxes for the quarter century life of the loan. One of the two commissioners chosen by the bankers also serves as director of the Banco de la Nacion Boliviana; the other is director-general of customs.
Starting with a request for a loan to build railroads, the loan grew to $29,000,000 – part of which was to be used to refund a certain amount of the outstanding debt. In most cases, however, the refunding loan carried a higher interest charge than the obligations it was supposed to repay, involving an additional loss to Bolivia. By the time advance interest charges, etc., were deducted, Bolivia obtained $26,836,939, which was used in the following manner:



Refunding of old debts


$14,175,570




Services and commissions


      2,119,956




Railroad construction


   10,541,412




(or a little better than a third of the total loan)



Bolivia now spends $2,900,000 a year just to service this loan.
 
The Controllers of Bolivia’s Wealth
Bolivia is one of the three large tin-producing countries and is responsible for about one-fourth of the world’s output. With the Japanese occupation of the Malay peninsula and the Dutch East Indies, Bolivian tin has become extremely important to the Allied powers – the smelting industry in England and the manufacturers in the United States. The price of tin has been rising steadily since the beginning of the war and Bolivia shows a “favorable trade balance.” Actually this is more apparent than real, since most of the tin mines are owned or controlled by North Americans, who drain off the profits outside the country, and the taxes on mining profits are used to repay the notes held by the United States bankers.
The largest mining interests are organized in the Patino Mines & Enterprises Consolidated, incorporated in the state of Delaware, and owned jointly by Simon Patino, Bolivia’s absentee tin king, and the National Lead Co. of New York. Organized in 1924, the company is capitalized at $50,000,000, includes the richest mines, a private railroad, with interests overlapping in the Williams-Harvey tin smelting concern (British) which is one-third owned by Patino. In 1942, this enterprise produced nearly one-half of the tin exported from Bolivia.
Guggenheim Brothers own outright the second largest mines, the Caracoles Tin Co. in the Potosi region. They account for over twenty per cent of the total output, and the Aramayo Mines, British owned, contributed about seven per cent. The remainder is divided up among a number of small companies, which are owned fully or in part by United States interests.
The Bolivian oil fields, which stretch from the Argentine border norward along the Cordillera Real for some three hundred miles, fell to the possession of Standard Oil of New Jersey through a system of grants and concessions, which started in 1920, when the government turned over to the Richmond Levering Co. about one million hectares of oil lands. In 1916, all oil deposits had been nationalized by law and no oil grant was to be made in perpetuity. In 1921, the Bolivian government, profiting from the Mexican experience, sought to prevent the oil lands from falling to the permanent ownership of foreign companies, amplified the 1916 law by decreeing that no one company shall receive a grant of more than 100,000 hectares, and that oil concessions shall be limited to fifty-five years. Government royalties were set at eleven per cent. The Calvo clause stipulated that foreign concessionaires waive the right of appeal to their home governments in case of dispute and that transfer of holdings to foreign governments be prohibited.
Standard Oil, however, got around these legal restrictions through a system of subsidiaries. In 1921, at organized the Standard Oil Co. of Bolivia, which took over the properties held by William Braden, who had bought up $2,500,000 worth of old Chilean titles. The new subsidiary was capitalized at $5,000,000. Later that year, the Atlantic Refining Co., closely associated with Standard Oil, obtained a concession of 3,125,000 acres of oil lands in the Lake Titicaca region. In 1922, when the Saavedra government again reduced the royalty rates from the twelve and a half and fifteen per cent to which they had been raised by his predecessor, the Richmond Levering grants passed into the hands of Standard Oil.
Drilling began in 1923 under the most difficult conditions. The oil lands were accessible only by mule trail (the building of railroads was too costly) and it was in this manner that machinery and supplies had to be hauled to the wells. By 1928, Standard Oil had to its credit seventeen abandoned wells, five successful ones, with actual production of oil a thing of the future.
Tin, oil and the loan of 1922 combined to start the war of the Chaco. From 1926, the price of tin began a steady decline and by 1931 the Bolivian government, whose revenue depended so largely on tin profits, defaulted on its loan obligations. With every source of revenue mortgaged, the Bolivian government looked to the development of oil production as a new source of income. But oil could be piped out of Bolivia only through the Chaco region to Paraguay and thence by boat down the Paraguay and Plata rivers to Buenos Aires on the Atlantic. Paraguay and Argentina, however, have oil of their own, controlled by British Dutch Shell, which was not too eager to have Standard Oil start competitive operations. In the summer of 1932, the two South American republics were at war, with Bolivia encouraged and aided by the United States and Chile, and Paraguay by England and Argentina. The struggle, in which 100,000 men were killed, lasted until July 1938, when a commission of arbitration, composed of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Peru, Uruguay and the United States, fixed the new boundary. As a result, Paraguay kept the Chaco region, but Bolivia won the right of transit and free port privileges at Port Casado. It was an empty victory, since there has been no Bolivian oil produced which needed to be shipped through the Chaco. In 1937, the Bolivian government expropriated the oil properties and after a dispute of five years, Standard Oil finally settled in 1942 for $1,729,375 in payment for the oil rights, interest and properties, together with the maps and geological studies.
This, then, is Bolivia – American-type colony. Its condition today reveals all the unevenness and disproportion common to a latercomer on the scene of world capitalism. Its economy has had a one-sided development, useful only to the foreign imperialists. Capable of raising any number of crops to feed its population well, Bolivia suffers from starvation because all the productive energy is put into tin, for which the enslaved Indians have precious little use. Railroads have been built to carry tin concentrates to the sea, but the ordinary Bolivian still travels on mule back or afoot. For this privilege the whole wealth of the country has been mortgaged to the bankers. Today tin is bringing a high price and Bolivia is meeting her foreign obligations. Tomorrow, when the market drops or the tin deposits are exhausted, her position will become even more precarious. Bolivia is doomed to remain an economic colony so long as imperialism continues to rule the world.
 




We are sure that every worker who has recently had a request for a pay increase turned down by the WLB, every coal miner who has had hurled into his face the insolent decision of the WLB "granting" him a twenty-cent-a-day increase, every working person who reads and listens to speeches about "holding the line against inflation"—will be cheered by the following bit of news. The workers will certainly feel happier to know that when it comes to sacrificing they are not alone, that the bosses are in on this equality of sacrifice business too—sweating, suffering, going without—along with the rest of the boys.
The Department of Commerce disclosed the other day that — AFTER TAXES WERE PAID— corporation profits for the first quarter of 1943 were EIGHTEEN PER CENT HIGHER than in the corresponding period in 1942.
From January 1 to the end of March of this year, profits were $1,821,000,000. If this keeps up— and who's to stop it? — by the end of the year the corporations will have "earned" $8,000,000,000, AFTER TAXES. This is $1,200,000,000 MORE than in 1942, and $800,000,000 more than 1941, which was the peak year.
The automobile industry alone increased its profits by forty-one per cent over 1942. The workers of that industry will be inspired to know this. Poor automobile manufacturers — someone ought to take up a collection for them.
The corporation owners obtained these increases without having to incease THEIR production. That they increased the productiveness of their workers goes without saying. The bosses simply pocketed the difference.
There was no hue and cry about inflation, loafing:, absenteeism, lack of patriotism, undermining the morale of soldiers who risk their lives for fifty dollars a month when this report was made public. The halls of Congress did not thunder with demands for- investigations. Nor Connally-Smith bills were introduced to restrain big business from gorging itself on war profits. There were no presidential decrees about "holding the line." Nothing like when the workers in the coal mines, in auto and aviation get together and demand a decent, living wage. Just a routine statement by the Department of Commerce and a polite report in the back pages of the boss press.
 




When the Duke and Duchess of Windsor arrived in New York about a month ago they made some very enlightening and world-shaking remarks to the press. For instance, the Duchess was well pleased with the general situation but complained that the royal couple did not have enough American dollars to spend. This, of course, did not prevent them from attending every show and play – and even two visits to the circus (ringside seats, of course) – in the city or from ordering several new wardrobes in the swankiest tailoring and dressmaking establishments this side of the Atlantic.
The Duke visited a New Jersey labor camp where some four hundred of his “subjects,” imported from Jamaica to help with the farm labor shortage in this country, were engaged in asparagus picking. According to the Duke, the work was proceeding quite well and he was satisfied that “his” people were being cared for and treated with every consideration. His only regret was that he himself was not young enough to assist at this heavy physical labor!
The Duke’s age was certainly a fortunate thing for him, for had he undertaken to work at the farm he would have found the following conditions:
 
Living Conditions and Food
In Swedesboro, N.J., there are four hundred Jamaican farm laborers living in a labor camp which was built to accommodate only two hundred and fifty pebple. These workers came to the United States, together with thousands of others, under contract with the American government, to work in farming areas where there was a manpower shortage.
When they arrived at the government camp at Swedesboro, N.J., they found that they would have to live in wooden shacks. Others were not so fortunate; they were given tents which are hot by day and cold by night. The food which was accorded them consisted of: Weak tea and four slices of bread for breakfast; two sandwiches (cheese or jam, no butter), an orange or apple, cake, water for lunch. For dinner they were on their own. When they complained about this, the United States Army mess sergeant in charge added a third sandwich to the lunch and promised to supply a noon drink, something like punch.
These sumptuous meals, however, were supplied to only a part of the four hundred laborers; many others have gotten nothing! When the workers lined up for their rations, the leaders among them claim, as many as two hundred had gone unfed for many days, since the food would run out before the end of the line was reached. The government is willing to admit to only seventy or eighty unfed laborers!
 
Rules of Conduct for Natives
These workers are sick and tired of the way they have been treated and they want to return home. When they left their homes to come to these shores they were told by the Labor Department of Jamaica that they should live up to the reputation of hard-working, industrious, well-behaved men. “Be as courteous to your employer and to all those whom you meet as you would wish them to be to you.’’
“Social customs vary in different parts of the United States,” they were warned. “Remember, that in the United States the word ‘Negro’ is not used to offend but is used and accepted in the same way as the word ‘colored’ in Jamaica.” They were not warned that the word “Negro” in the United States is the excuse of lynchings, race hatreds and race riots. But they learned this soon after they got here.
But the real tip-off about the status of the Jamaican farm hand in this country is contained in this paragraph of the government-issued pamphlet of instructions: “Should you leave camp without authority, seeking work elsewhere, you will not be able to get it because you hold no United States Selective Service card which is demanded of every man applying for work.”
 
Jamaicans Are Indentured
In other words, these workers are in the United tates in the status of indentured servants – they are under contract to work for a given length of time, regardless of the conditions awarded them, and they cannot leave their jobs unless they wish to take up as refugees without any legal standing in the community.
Appeals to the camp authorities will yield nothing, except an additional sandwich. This is a job for the trade unions. The Jamaican workers must be granted full rights of a worker – the right to leave his job if he is not satisfied with it and to look for work elsewhere, if he wishes to remain in the United tates, or be given passage back home if he wishes to return. Those who remain at the camps must be organized into unions of agricultural workers through which they can fight for decent wages and living conditions.
 




In the January 4 Labor Action we reported the revolt of 60,000 tin miners who had gone on strike to obtain the enactment of a labor code which would grant them the elementary right of collective bargaining, establish minimum wage rates and guarantee regular payment of wages, The Bolivian government answered with a declaration of martial law and accused the miners of participating in a pro-Nazi plot to overthrow the regime. To date seventeen workers have been killed by soldiers, scores of others have been wounded, and the leaders of the strike are in jail. The strike has been broken.
But the story does not end here.
 
“Hemispheric Unity”
This one event richly illustrates what the Good Neighbor policy is. The prattle about “hemispheric unity” boils down to the solidarity of the financial interests of the United States and the Bolivian mine owners and other capitalists of Latin America. This solidarity is cemented by the State Department through its ambassadors.
Soon after the strike began, Ernesto Galarza of the Labor Division of the Pan American Union, wrote a letter to Under Secretary Welles of the State Department, protesting the activities of U.S. Ambassador Boal, who had intervened to prevent the passage of the labor code.
Both Secretary Hull and Welles have issued denials of such intervention, and Hull even stated that Ambassador Boal was instructed to avoid making any statements which could be construed as an attempt to influence Bolivian legislation, but merely to inquire of the Bolivian President how the passage of the labor code and the raising of wages would affect the cost of strategic materials, namely, tin, which the United States buys in huge quantities.
It has now been made known that the U.S. Ambassador held a long conversation with the Bolivian President in which he tried to induce him to veto the labor code should it be passed by Congress. The President of Bolivia, however, pointed out that such a veto would lead to strikes and protests and that it wasn’t a good idea. He said that the code was provisional and could be suspended in any given instance. Ambassador Boal was not satisfied and asked that the President make some of the provisions of the code effective by decree, but here the President said that labor would not be satisfied since presidential decrees do not have much status in Bolivia and could easily be disregarded by the mine owners.
 
Boal’s Suggestion
At this point Boal made another suggestion. There is a provision in the contracts made by the Board of Economic Warfare (the agency which buys much of the vital war materials needed by the United States) which calls for better wages and better working conditions. The contracts provide that the BEW pay all or half of the added labor costs. Boal proposed that the purposes of the Bolivian labor code, be achieved through the labor clauses in the BEW contracts.
While labor would be temporarily satisfied, the advantage would really fall to the mine owners, who were opposed to the labor code, not so much because of its immediate effect of raising wages (since their profits were guaranteed by United States contracts), but were thinking ahead to after the war, when it might be very difficult for them to reduce wages again. By applying the Boal formula the problem of wages after the war would be solved.
Boal cabled Washington that the mine operators would have to ask for increased prices from Metals Reserve (an RFC subsidiary) if the labor code were enacted. The truth of the matter is that Metals Reserve had already given the Bolivian mine owners an increase in price and it was on the basis of this increase that the Bolivian Confederation of Labor had asked for increases in wages.
Among other things which Boal cited in his telegram were the inconvenience collective bargaining would impose upon the mine owners, and the fact that the regular payment of wages would increase bookkeeping costs! Better that a man should starve than hire a bookkeeper! Boal explained that he also objected to regular payment of wages because it would induce the miners to quit their jobs. “They are now paid tardily deliberately in order to maintain them on the job and to give them a stake in their next month’s pay.”
Peonage has been the method by which the mine operators have been securing sufficient workers to run their mines. At fiesta time, when many of the Indians get drunk, advantage is taken of them to sign them up for work in the mines. By withholding wages, the miners are constantly in credit to the company and kept on the job. This condition is attested to by Boal himself.
 
The Facts – and Mr. Hull
The State Department has denied that Boal was instructed to intervene in the labor legislation of Bolivia. The telegram, sent to him by Secretary Hull, however, reads:
“It is, however, considered desirable that you discreetly express to the (Bolivian) President or other appropriate authorities your government’s hope and confidence that no steps will be taken which might result in the creation of situations which would inhibit the full performance of contracts made in good faith by both parties. You may refer to the fact that agencies of this government have entered into important contracts for the purchase of various strategic materials, particularly tin, tungsten, antimony and rubber. It is, of course, patent that the uninterrupted flow of these items is essential to the optimum prosecution of the war. It is consequently hoped that no action will be taken which might jeopardize hemispheric security. Discreet reference can be made to Resolution IV of the Rio meeting on the production of strategic materials.”
Resolution IV recommended that the countries of the hemisphere “eliminate or minimize administrative formalities and regulations and restrictions which impede the production and free flow of basic and strategic materials.”
As a result of his revelation of these facts, Ernesto Galarza has had to resign his post with the Pan American Union. This too is an instrument through which the United States controls the Latin American countries. The Labor Division of this organization was ostensibly created to protect the economic interests of labor of the western hemisphere and to act as an international link between the working classes of all these countries.
As it turns out, the Pan American Union finds that it cannot intervene in any disputes as described above. Should one of its officials speak but in the interests of labor, then he has to leave his post. According to the director of the Pan American Union, Leo S. Rowe: “it is obvious that any questions relating to the conduct of the American Ambassador involve only the State Department. Bolivian labor problems are a matter for the Bolivian government. If the Pan American Union went into such matters, it could not last long.”
Exactly so! The Pan American Union was not created for that purpose!
 




We publish below an itemized list of SOME of the historical falsifications of which the Davies-Warner Brothers movie, Mission to Moscow, is compounded. They prove that as an apology for Stalinism the movie will help Hoosevelt negotiate with Stalin, but as history it is the phoniest phony that ever came out of Hollywood.
1 – RIBBENTROP IN MOSCOW: Ribbentrop visited Moscow for the first time in August 1939, when he signed the pact between Germany and Russia, about which Stalin later commented: “The friendship of the peoples of Germany and of the Soviet Union, cemented by blood, will long remain firm.” In the movie, Ribbentrop is shown in Moscow long before 1939, at a state ball, conspiring with Bukharin. Davies is careful to omit Ribbentrop’s second visit to Moscow, in September 1939, where he was given a reception closely resembling a triumphal procession, at which the Soviet band played :the Internationale and the Nazis’ Horst-Wessel song, and where a Russian guard of honor gave the Hitler salute.
2 – WHY HE WENT: From the book, it is clear that one of Mr. Davies’ jobs in Moscow was to try to collect the Russian debt to the United States. In the picture, he is begged by President Roosevelt to find out “the truth about Russia.”
3 – TUKHACHEVSKY: In June 1937, eight Russian generals, including Tukhachevsky, were tried in secret and shot. In the movie, Tukhachevsky suddenly appears as a witness at the Moscow Trial, which takes place a a year after he was actually shot.
4 – ETHIOPIA AND RUSSIAN OIL: The movie shows a scene in the hall of the League of Nations, with Haile Selassie pleading for help against Italian aggression. Litvinov then makes a speech in defense of Ethiopia, and the Italian and German delegations stalk out of the hall. The movie does not show Italian planes being fueled with Russian oil to go on their marauding “missions” over Ethiopia.
5 – STARTING THE WAR: The Russo-German pact was signed on August 23, 1939, and became effective upon signature. The war started one week later and BOTH Germany and Russia invaded Poland. In the movie, Davies is explaining to a senatorial committee that war will come “in a month or two” – this, several weeks after the signing of the pact.
6 – INVASION OF POLAND: Russia invaded Poland on September 17, 1939. Five days later, Russia and Germany jointly announced the demarcation of their new frontier in Poland. In the movie, only the German invasion of Poland is shown.
7 – FINLAND: In November, 1939, after two months of unsuccessful negotiations, Russia attacked Finland on the pretext that several shots fired from Finnish territory had killed three Red Army men. At that time, England and the United States, and not Germany, were proclaimed by the Russians and the Communist International as the powers backing Finland. The invasion was condemned by Roosevelt, and a moral embargo, which covered the export of airplanes, aeronautical equipment, molybdenum, aluminum and aviation gasoline, was, proclaimed against Russia by the United States. That suited Roosevelt’s book then. Mission to Moscow suits his book now. An interesting example of imperialist “morality.”
In the movie we are informed that Russia was really acting against Germany when she invaded Finland; that Finland resisted only because Mannerheim knew that he had Germany’s backing. Warner Brothers-Davies neglect to tell us what happened to the “people’s” government of Finland which was set up and then dismantled by the Moscow bureaucracy.
8 – PADEREWSKY: In 1938, Paderewsky was retired from Polish politics and was devoting himself to his musical work. In the movie, Davies sees Paderewsky as the Polish figure who is to help preserve peace in Europe and the world.
9 – THE TRIAL: In December, 1934, Kirov, head of the Leningrad Communist Party, was assassinated. Before any trial took place, one hundred and four persons were arrested and shot for complicity in the assassination. On December 28 and 29, the trial of Nikolayev and his alleged accomplices took place in secret. Fourteen were condemned to death.
On January 15 and 16, 1935, Zinoviev and Kamenev, together with seventeen others, were tried for moral responsibility in the Kirov assassination. All were condemned to prison for five to ten years.
In August, 1936, the Zinoviev-Kamenev trial took place. The sixteen defendants were shot. In January 1937 there was the Pyatakov-Radek trial. Thirteen of the seventeen defendants were shot; the rest, Radek among them, were imprisoned. In June 1937 eight generals, including Tukhachevsky, were tried in secret and executed. In March 1938 the Bukharin-Rykov trial took place. All defendants were executed.
In the movie, Davies telescopes all the trials into one. Vyshinsky is the true-blue prosecutor. No inkling is given that Yagoda, who appears in the movie trial, had at one time been in the prosecutor’s box – for the simple reason that the previous trials would then fall apart.
At the real trial, Yagoda confessed that he had participated in gross frame-ups.
Tukhachevsky, who had long been dead, appears in the movie trial to accuse Bukharin and Krestinsky. This is done to create the impression that Tukhachevsky had a public trial.
The defendants confess to sabotage and to plotting to overthrow the Russian government by assassination and terror. No evidence is introduced, save the confessions of the defendants. Where Krestinsky refuses to confess, others do it for him.
Trotsky is presented as the arch-plotter and leader in all the machinations of the defendants. Warner Brothers-Davies do not dare, however, to refer to the published testimony in the trials, but resort to fiction. The reason is simple enough. Every fact, every detail contained in the “confessions” at the real trials were examined by the Dewey Commission and found to be false.
 




More than two and a half years after the murder of Leon Trotsky, Stalin’s henchman and confessed assassin, Jacques Mornard, alias Frank Jacson, was sentenced last week to serve twenty years in a Mexican prison. He was convicted for premeditated murder. Although the court which passed sentence did not directly link Jacson to Stalin’s GPU, there can be no question in anyone’s mind that Jacson’s act was carried through at the behest of the destroyer of the Russian Revolution, Joseph Stalin, and that Jacson himself was for a long period an agent of the notorious GPU. During his thirty-two-month imprisonment Jacson had plenty of money, and it most likely came from the Stalinist machine.
On August 20, 1940, when Jacson struck an alpenstock into the brain of Leon Trotsky, Stalin succeeded in crowning his long, bloody record of murder and assassination of the men and women who had devoted their lives to creating the first workers’ republic. For over fifteen years now, Stalin has been systematically wiping out not only the Old Bolsheviks, not only the Trotskyists, but all who oppose his counter-revolutionary regime. This terror has not been confined to the borders of Russia, nor has it ceased to this day. The GPU has spread its tentacles throughout the world.
Ever since his expulsion from the Russian Communist Party in 1927 and his deportation from Russia in 1929, Leon Trotsky had been hounded by Stalin’s agents. After a few years in Turkey, Trotsky took up residence in France. That was during the days of the long-since forgotten Franco-Soviet pact. Stalin saw to it that Trotsky was expelled from France. Norway, his next place of asylum, was pressured by Russia into expelling the world’s outstanding revolutionist. He was virtually a prisoner in Norway until Mexico agreed to offer Trotsky refuge. The Mexican Stalinists conducted an endless campaign to have Trotsky deported from Mexico. The GPU made several attempts on his life in Mexico. In August 1940 Stalin had his way.
From 1927 up to the time of his death Trotsky remained the indefatigable revolutionist he had been ever since he first entered the workers’ movement in the small Russian town of Nikolayev in 1896. His years of exile were spent in the most creative work. The large collection of books and articles written in those thirteen years is testimony of the fact that Trotsky never for one moment faltered in his devotion and faith in the idea of socialist emancipation, and that he worked with every resource at his command to hasten the day of working class victory.
Stalin thought he could destroy Trotsky by exiling him from Russia. He thought he could end Trotsky’s influence by slander. The Moscow Trials, the most infamous of all frame-ups, were used to smear Trotsky’s name, to tie him to the Gestapo, but the prosecutors only succeeded in revealing the depraved depths to which they had sunk. Trotsky’s record was vindicated by the Dewey Commission hearings held in Mexico City, and the Moscow Trials were exposed for what they were – a sham to cover the physical annihilation of the few remaining Old Bolsheviks, comrades of Lenin, who might serve as a reminder of the once-glorious Russian Revolution.
The outbreak of the Second World War, which found Stalin in a shameless partnership with Hitler, stripped the Russian bureaucracy of its last disguises. It stood revealed for all to see – a class which lives off the toil and sweat of the Russian workers, which conquers and plunders foreign territories for its own profits, and engages in imperialist war. Only the voice of the Fourth International rang out clearly against the war. It alone pointed to socialism as. the way out of the capitalist morass.
In his craven stupidity, Stalin sought to wipe out the Fourth International, the program and idea of proletarian solidarity and socialism, by killing its leader, Leon Trotsky. Like all despots before him, like all contemporary tyrants and oppressors, he seeks to still the inevitable revolt of the millions and hundreds of millions by jailings and bullets.
How wrong, how very wrong, Stalin is! His victory is but a fleeting one, for to destroy the idea of socialism, he would have to destroy the working class itself. A thousand and one times “Trotskyism” has been declared “liquidated,” finished, dead – and yet it lives on. It lives in the prisons of Stalin, in the concentration camps of Hitler, in the underground movements of Europe; it lives in the Indian and Ceylonese jails, in the faraway reaches of China and Indo-China; it lives and grows in every country where there is oppression and where men fight back. For Trotskyism is the hope and dream of human liberation; it is the road to the socialist revolution and to the international brotherhood of man. It can be hounded, it can be jailed, its leaders can be killed – but its ideas cannot be destroyed.
On this May Day 1943, when the entire world is aflame, when thousands are dying on the altar of profits, when the rulers Of the capitalist countries do not know how to extricate themselves from this chaos, we pause to pay our tribute to our fallen comrades, martyrs in the struggle against capitalist and Stalinist reaction, who saw clearly the road ahead and remained loyally at their posts until the very end. We remember also and honor the nameless hundreds and thousands who have given their full measure to the cause of socialist liberation.





BELGIUM: Leon Lesoil – executed by the Nazis, 1942.
BRAZIL: Hilcar Leite, Honorio de Frecras Guimaroes, Carlos Prestes.
CUBA: Gosron Medina – died of tuberculosis contracted in Cuban jail, 1938.
FRANCE: Jean Meichler – executed by the Nazis, 1942.
GERMANY: Rudolph Forko – died in Nazi concentration camp, 1937. Rudolph Klement – kidnapped and killed by the GPU in Paris, 1938.
GREECE: Scalaios – died in a concentration camp.
INDO-CHINA: Ta-Tu-Thau.
RUSSIA: Add to the thousands of proletarian fighters in the Siberian concentration camps; to the thousands murdered in the Stalinist purges: Glasman – suicide, 1924. A.A. Joffe – suicide, 1927. Heinrichsen, Butov, Sulov, Rabinovitch, Rosanoff, Zinzadze – died in Stalinist concentration camps. Blumkin – shot by GPU, 1929. Nina Trotsky – died in Russian hospital because of lack of medical care. Zinzaide Trotsky – driven to suicide by Stalinist persecution, 1933. Sergei Sedoff – missing in Russian exile. Leon Sedoff – died in hospital in France, undoubtedly at hands of GPU. Christian Rakovsky – reported dead in Russia exile. Ignace Reiss – murdered by GPU, 1937.
SPAIN: David Rabull – executed by Franco, 1939. Andres Nin, Moulin, Edwin Wolf – killed by GPU in Spain. Hans Freund – killed by fascists in Spain.
UNITED STATES: Sheldon Harte – kidnapped and killed by GPU in Mexico, 1940.



 



The Bolivian government answered the strike action, of some 60,000 tin miners by arresting labor leaders, declaring martial law and charging that the strikers were engaged in a pro-Nazi plot to overthrow the regime. The New York Times was quick to report the story of the alleged plot and the statement of the Minister of the Interior, but failed to mention the causes of the strike.
Bolivia ranks as the world’s third great tin producing country. Before the war all of its tin was sent to England for smelting, but since then the United States has been buying about 81,000 tons yearly. When Japan occupied Malaya, the Netherlands Indies and Siam (the other great producers of tin), Bolivian tin became of crucial importance to England and the United States. This tin comprises about 70 per cent of Bolivian exports.
 
Patino – Tin Tycoon
About half of Bolivia’s tin mines are owned by one man, Simon Patino, whose wealth is estimated at about $100,000,000. Since 1922 he has run his great tin empire by remote control, spending most of his time abroad as minister to Spain and France. In 1940 he settled down to a most modest existence at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York. His three magnificent, but unoccupied, palaces in Bolivia stand as a symbol of this absentee-owner relationship.
Last week, Indian workers at Patino’s Catavi mines went out on strike, demanding a 100 per cent wage increase, a Christmas bonus of a month’s pay and the passage of the labor code which was to have been approved by the Bolivian Congress on December 8. Although this revolt was labelled as a Nazi plot, the truth is obvious. The conditions of life of the Bolivian miners have always been sub-standard. Their wages have averaged about $5.00 to $10.00 a week, with no limit to the number of hours. There has been no social legislation protecting the workers, no health regulations, no safeguard requirements, so that most of the miners suffer from one of the most destructive occupational diseases, silicosis.
For years these miners have waited patiently for the passage of some sort of labor code which would give them, at least, the elementary protection of getting their wages on time, establish minimum wage rates, give them the right to organize and the right to bargain collectively. These were included in the code which was before the Congress early last month.
 
Cost of Living Mounts
In the last two years the cost of living has been mounting steadily, so that food costs are now about twice what they had been in 1940. Wages, however, have been frozen for that entire period.
In the meantime tin has been bringing higher prices, the profits on which have filled the pockets of the mine owners. The dissatisfactions and discontent have been accumulating, and the refusal of the Congress to pass the labor code was the last straw. The miners struck.
The institution of martial law, the arrests and suspension of all civil and constitutional rights have brought forth a statement from Ernesto Galarza, chief of the division of labor and social information of the Pan American Union, to the effect that the strike is the result of the long exploitation and failure to pass the labor code, a failure for which U.S. Ambassador Boal is at least partly responsible.
In a most interesting paragraph, Galarza points out:
“The code was to have been approved by the Bolivian Congress on December 8. On the days immediately preceding that date, the Ambassador of the United States in Bolivia, Pierre Boal, communicated to the President of Bolivia the viewpoint of the big mine operators and presented arguments and suggestions, the object of which was to delay or prevent the improvement of working conditions as set forth in the code.”
In this manner, the pressure and control of the United States makes itself felt – not by the force of arms, but by ambassadorial presence and intervention. The major arguments against the code chow which side the U.S. ambassador is on.
Boal and the mine operators were afraid that the payment of wages on time (the code calls for payments not later than fifteen days after performance of work) would encourage workers to leave their jobs. Conditions and wages in the mines have been so bad that many workers have left to seek work elsewhere, or have emigrated to Chile. By withholding their wages, the mine operators seek to keep the workers chained to their jobs.
Collective bargaining, minimum wage rates and the right to mediation and arbitration were opposed on the ground that if the cost of production went up, the United States would have to pay more for tin. This is entirely false, since the United’ State HAS been paying higher prices for tin without wage increases. (Tin is now sixty cents a pound as compared with fifty-two cents a pound previously.) Wage increases can easily be met out of the profits of the tin barons.
The Pan American Union states further that, “the conduct of Ambassador Boal is a clear example of how the foreign policy of the United States it operating to prevent raising of working standards and improving the living conditions of the masses of the people.” The Bolivian workers have just been given another taste of good neighborliness.
The AFL and CIO are preparing protests with the State Department and a demand to investigate Boal’s activities. American workers – your Bolivian brothers have risen in defense of their rights and to protect their living conditions. They are being arrested and slandered. You must help them. Demand the end of American intervention in Bolivia!
 



There is now a wholesale exodus of Puerto Rican governmental officials who are going to Washington to present their cases regarding the acute food shortage on the island. In it is revealed the situation of the Puerto Rican masses forty-five years after the United States took possession of the island. Although most newspapers and statesmen blame the present crisis on the war and the curtailment of shipping to and from the island, the truth is that forty-five years of American rule is responsible for a situation which is now coming to a head.
Even when there were enough ships sailing to Puerto Rico, bringing in rice, beans and salt cod, and taking away the cash crops, sugar, rum, tobacco and coffee, hunger was the daily lot of the people.
Every commission ever sent down by the United States government to investigate conditions has reported on the semi-starvation level at which most of the population exists. In 1930, for example, the Red Cross reported that one-eighth of the population was in immediate danger of dying of starvation.
 
Poverty-Stricken Masses
And how could it be otherwise, when in “normal” times, according to government statisticians, Puerto Rican workers needed about $1.35. a day to feed a family of five (on rice, rotten fish and rotten meat) but had an income of only $150 a year!
Today conditions are even worse! Half of the population of nearly two millions is dependent on relief or is unemployed. About 250,000 persons have no income whatsoever! This affects about half of Puerto Rico’s 340,000 families.
The average income today is about $200 a year, but the minimum requirement for food alone is about $2.25 a day. This does not take into account other living expenses – for shelter, clothing, medication, etc. One newspaper man reports that the cheapest kind of beef sells for 59 cents a pound, the smallest and cheapest eggs are $1.00 a dozen, onions are 40 cents a pound. Drugs and medication against malaria, the island’s most prevalent disease, are practically unobtainable.
 
Depend on Sugar
Today’s situation is not so much the outgrowth of the war (although it has served to aggravate it) as it is the result of American occupation. Until the United States took over the island, Puerto Rico was able to raise most of its own food. Gradually, however, the large corporations took control of agriculture, driving the Puerto Rican farmers off the best lands, which were converted into huge sugar plantations so that now sugar is the island’s basic crop.
Today the whole economy of the island is dependent upon the production and sale of sugar – and the population must depend upon imports for its food and other necessities.
The curtailment of shipping space caused by the war has meant that Puerto Rico has not been able to export its only cash crop, and has been unable to import the food items upon which its people subsist. In addition, the conversion of the island into a military base, and the large number of American soldiers there at the present time, has meant that whatever food does reach the island is used by the military.
 
Feud Over Tugwell
Those who are chiefly responsible for the critical situation are now trying to utilize it for their own ends. Governor Tugwell, appointed by the President last year, seems to be the main target of the attack by the sugar interests. Tugwell has been under attack by the reactionary elements of the country because upon his appointment he made some very “radical” proposals.
One of these was that the 500-acre law be put into effect, that is, that the gigantic plantations be broken into smaller farms, and, secondly, that the island begin to raise crops other than sugar in order to become more self-sufficient. These proposals were especially favorable to the native landed interests, who sought to curb the power of the big United States sugar corporations, which practically owned the island. These proposals were never put into effect (as Labor Action predicted last summer) since the sugar barons had sufficient means to prevent this.
Led by Bolivar Pagan, resident commissioner, the anti-Tugwell group blames the American governor for the food shortage. As unofficial representative of the sugar interests, he has come to the United States to demand the removal of Tugwell.
On the other hand, Munoz-Marin, president of the Puerto Rican Senate and leader of the Popular Party, represents the native landowners who would benefit by the Tugwell program. He has therefore come to the United States to defend Tugwell. But no one has yet appeared who will defend the people of Puerto Rico!
In Washington two committees have been set up to hold hearings on the food situation in Puerto Rico. We have already been given an inkling of how cynically and brutally the United States Congress will deal with the problem of getting food and relief to the hundreds of thousands of victims of the actual famine. Last month a congressional committee approved a bill for $15,000,000 to aid the Puerto Ricans grow their own food, but it attached a rider to this bill. It saw in its power to appropriate money an opportunity to take a sock at a political opponent. So, forgetting about the urgency of the situation, the committee decided to withhold all funds as long as Tugwell remains governor.
Caught in the conflict between the American and Puerto Rican property interests, and the corresponding conflict between the different government agencies are the Puerto Rican masses, whose condition grows worse from day to day. They know that the present situation is the accumulation of the economic ills the island has suffered for the last half century. They know, too, that even if Munoz-Marin’s proposition that Puerto Ricans elect their own governor is carried, the food problem will still remain.
The conflict between the two groups of exploiters over who shall wring the profit out of the sweat and toil of the Puerto Rican workers cannot end in an improvement of their conditions of life. Apart from the immediate shipment of food and medication to the island the only solution for them is liberation from both the American and native exploiters. Freed of these, and as the owners of their own land, the Puerto Rican people feel that they will be able to feed themselves.
 



Inter-American Affairs – 1941
Edited by Arthur P. Whitaker
Columbia University Press, 1942
This book is the first in a proposed series of annual surveys of the principal developments in inter-American relations, and was financed by the Division of Intercourse and Education of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Arthur P. Whitaker of the University of Pennsylvania has a review of inter-American relations from 1889 to 1940 and a chapter on politics and diplomacy in 1941; George Wythe, liaison officer of the Department of Commerce, contributes a chapter on economics and finances; the problems of cultural relations, public health and social welfare are superficially dealt with in two other chapters by William Rex Crawford and William L. Schun.
The authors claim to support no particular cause and especially not the cause of “hemisphere isolationism.” Actually the whole problem is viewed from the position occupied by the United States in relation to Latin America. The authors measure the success and progress of inter-American cooperation by the yardstick of U.S. influence and domination.
This volume is intended as an unbiased and factual account of what happened in 1941 to enable the reader to draw his own conclusions. The authors are handicapped at the very outset because the original plan to include a large section containing detailed statistical information about the American nations had to be abandoned because of wartime conditions. The scantier statistics, however, do reveal the most important trends in the relationships between Latin America and the United States since the outbreak of the war. The big failing of the book, however, is that the authors do not correlate the facts they present and do not establish these trends. Taking the book at face value will leave the reader lost in a maze of historical facts and economic data. The reader must contribute to the book as much as the authors contribute to the reader.
Whitaker opens the book with a hasty review of inter-American relations during the years 1889–1940. It is during this period that the United States becomes dominant in the Western Hemisphere. With the acquisition of overseas bases, including the Panama Canal zone, the strengthening of its naval power (by 1905 the U.S. Navy is raised from thirteenth to third largest in the world); and the Hay-Paunceforte Treaty (1901) in which England surrenders her right to any control of the Panama Canal, the United States begins to push England out of the Caribbean. With the turn of the century the economic influence of the United States grows at a rapid pace. Her investments in Latin America increase from $508,000,000 in 1897 to $1,650,000,000 in 1914 and by 1929 they represent a third of all her foreign investments, $5,430,000,000.
Whitaker’s main concern is with the development of Pan Americanism. Although he claims otherwise, it is obvious from even his meager examination of the numerous conferences that Pan Americanism is the program of the United States penetration into and domination of the Western Hemisphere. Starting with the 1928 Havana Conference, the United States has emerged from each of these gatherings stronger and in a better position to determine the rôle and policy of the Latin American countries. By the time the war broke out in Europe, Pan Americanism, according to Whitaker, “owed its vitality, if not its very existence, mainly to the leadership of the United States, or that leadership of the United States was effective mainly because it possessed an overwhelming preponderance of economic and military power in America.”
 
Toward U.S. Hegemony
Since 1939, the war and the position of the United States toward it have dominated all inter-American relations. As the United States shifted its position from neutrality to non-belligerency and finally to actual military participation in the war, it dragged the Latin American countries in its wake. This was not accomplished without objections and strong resistance on the part of many of its Southern neighbors, most particularly Argentina, which was more dependent than any other American nation on trade with Europe – but accomplished it was, step by step, in tune with the needs of the United States. At the 1939 Panama City Conference a Pan American “safety zone” was established. According to Whitaker, this measure was never really enforced but it nevertheless gave the United States power to patrol the Southern oceans along the coastlines of South America. The 1940 Havana Conference went even further in the direction of tying the Latin American republics to Uncle Sam. The Convention for the Provisional Administration of European Colonies and Possessions which was adopted at that time prohibited the transfer of these colonies to Germany or Italy and provided for American administration of these “orphaned” colonies. The old proviso calling for unanimous agreement on any action taken was dropped so that the United States was in reality authorized to take any action it saw fit. This Whitaker considers “sensible and realistic because the United States was the only American state that had the requisite power for effective action.” The proposed plan for a Pan American cartel, which would have assured the economic hegemony of the United States in the Western Hemisphere (presented, of course, as a plan to meet the menace of a totalitarian Europe) failed of adoption, and only the military and political measures outlined above were achieved. Whitaker fails to point out that the cartel plan failed because at that time a number of the Latin American countries still depended on the European market for the sale of their most vital products. The plan, however, is by no means permanently shelved.
 
Concrete Manifestations of U.S. Power
By the end of 1941, when the United States entered the war, most of the smaller states followed suit. The others severed diplomatic relations and prepared to take the next steps. Argentina did neither, but declared that it would not regard the United States as a belligerent, which made possible the use of Argentine ports by U.S. warships. Peru froze Japanese funds, but not Italian and German because their financial interests in Peru were so extensive that such a step would have disrupted the business system of the whole country.
Whitaker seems somewhat puzzled by the fact that U.S. investments in Canada did not produce the same resentment toward Yankee imperialism as was produced by smaller investments in Latin America. This is a problem he leaves to future students of Pan American affairs. Actually the riddle is solved in the difference of economic development of Canada and the Latin American countries. The economic backwardness of the latter causes U.S. exploitation to be so much more brutal and apparent.
The section on economics and finances during 1941 is by far the more interesting. Neither Whitaker nor Wythe, however, relate their particular subjects to the other, though it is obvious that there is a very dose connection between Yankee economic penetration and influence in Latin America and the diplomatic and political trends.
The war and the isolation it imposed upon South America accelerated the process which had been taking place since the United States embarked on its Good Neighbor policy. Cut off from the European market, the Southern “republics” one after another fell more and more into the orbit of American economic domination. Their dependence upon the United States as a market and as a source of supply has been greater than during the First World War.
The demand for large quantities of raw materials at higher prices and outright financial assistance through loans from the Export-Import Bank and purchases of strategic war materials by the Rubber Reserve Co., the Metals Reserve Co. and the Defense Supplies Co., all subsidiaries of the Reconstruction Finance Corp., stimulated and increased trade with the United States. While the British share in this trade declined sharply, and the share of Axis and pro-Axis powers was diminished by the export control and black-listing system of the United States, the latter’s share rose as follows:
Imports: In 1937–38 the U.S. supplied 35 per cent; in 1940, 54.6 per cent; and in the first six months of 1941, 60.5 per cent.
Exports: In 1937–38, the U.S. took 31 per cent; in 1940, 43.7 per cent; and in the first six months of 1941, 54.3 per cent.
The United States is not only taking advantage of the war to oust its rivals from Latin America, but has taken steps to continue its predominance in the future. That is the job of the Inter-American Financial and Economic Advisory Committee.
If the entire projected survey is actually carried through, the value of the book would be greatly increased. Standing alone there are far too many gaps in the study of inter-American relations. For the student of this most important subject one who already has some knowledge of the main trends in Yankee-Latin American developments, Inter-American Affairs has some value as a supplementary study of specific problems.
 




By refusing to carry through any of the long promised labor reforms, President Penaranda and the Bolivian government revealed once again who the real bosses of that country are.
Early this year, Labor Action reported that about sixty thousand tin miners – producers of nearly one-half of the world’s supply of tin – had gone on strike against unbearably oppressive conditions and in order to get the government to act on the labor code, which had been pending for a long time. The government responded with a declaration of martial law and the arrest of more than forty Bolivian labor leaders, who are still imprisoned.
On December 21 the government authorities brutally massacred between two hundred and fifty and five hundred workers, including many wives and children of miners, when they tried to disperse a meeting called to protest the arrest of their (the workers’) leaders.
 
American Big Business Behind Scenes
Soon after the strike was broken and the miners, literally driven back into the mines (recalcitrant miners were escorted to the mines by heavily armed soldiers, instructed to fire at the first sign of opposition), Ernesto Galarza, then connected with the Pan American Union, revealed that the United States Ambassador, Pierre Boal, had told the Bolivian President that the passage of the labor code might displease the United States, since its application would undoubtedly raise the price of tin somewhat.
Despite strong denials by the United States State Department, it was clearly shown by newspaper reporters that Boal was acting in accordance with instructions from this department. Further, Mr. Boal’s siding with the mine owners is also explained by the fact that most of the mining industry is owned or controlled by United States financial interests, and Mr. Boal knows who his masters are.
 
The Life of the Miners
What are some of the conditions which the miners were seeking to alleviate by their strike actions and the passage of the labor code?
Tin mining in Bolivia is an extremely hazardous and difficult occupation. The mines are located in very high altitudes, which create severe hardships for Bolivia’s underfed and underclothed workers. There is no limit to the number of working hours, and in some mines the men work in thirty-six hour stretches!
Silicosis, the miners’ disease, is so prevalent that the span of life of the Bolivian tin worker is very short. Yet in Bolivia there are less than 425 doctors. Wages range from $5.00 to $10.00 a week, but the cost of living jumped 1,158 per cent from 1931 to the end of 1941. In 1943 there was a further increase in the cost of living of 60 per cent. Is it surprising, then, that the miners live in a perpetual state of hunger and privation, and chew cocoa [sic!] leaves, whose narcotic effects still the pangs of hunger?
The mines are situated far from the farm lands, and poor Bolivian peasants had to be virtually kidnapped to the mining regions and put to work. The bosses follow the practice of holding back wages, so that the tin miner is always in debt to the company store and cannot leave the mine. Even such an apologist for the big mining interests as Boal had to admit that this was the reason behind the withholding of wage payments.
The workers of Bolivia demanded the passage of a labor code which would at least guarantee them a minimum wage, payment of wages on time and the right of collective bargaining. The reply was brutal suppression of the miners’ strike and a hue and cry on the part of the mine owners that they could not afford any substantial improvements in the living conditions of their workers. But this is the standard answer given by the bosses every time there is a demand for higher wages: “We just can’t afford it.”
Actually, however, the price of tin has been rising steadily and tin profits, like the profits of big business in this country, are at their highest in history. And as in this country, despite the rising cost of living, workers’ wages remain frozen.
 
The Committee of Investigation
In the early part of this year a joint Bolivian-United States Labor Commission investigated conditions of the Bolivian tin miners. The report they brought back described these conditions as being so horrible that the International Labor Office refused for a long time to make it public.
Martin Kyne, vice-president of the United Retail and Wholesale Workers, CIO, who was a labor member of the commission, issued his own report in which he told of the conditions which led to the miners’ strike and of the strike itself. Many workers in this country were angered by the revelations in this report, and the CIO made representations to the government that something be done to improve the conditions of the Bolivian miners.
Bolivian President Penaranda was in the United States when the Kyne report was released. He spoke at a number of labor rallies, at which he promised that something would be done to alleviate the sufferings of the Bolivian miners. He promised that the labor code would be passed and enacted. The “good President” then returned to his native land.
 
Perpetuating the Slavery
In August came the report that the Bolivian government is not prepared to carry out any of the recommendations of the investigating commission, which in essence are the same as the provisions of the labor code. It is further revealed that the two largest mining interests, Patino Mines & Enterprises, Consoliated (incorporated in the state of Delaware and owned jointly by Simon Patino and the National Lead Company of New York) and the Hochschield interests, are strongly opposed to any labor legislation.
They are now in the process of negotiating new contracts with the United States government, in which they are seeking to raise the price of tin from sixty to seventy cents a pound.
The CIO, on the other hand, is demanding that any contracts which this government signs for Bolivian tin should include improvements in the wages and conditions of the Bolivian miners.
The United States government, by controlling the purse strings, is in a position to compel the Bolivian government to pass the labor code and to guarantee some improvements for the tin miners. But the whitewash of Ambassador Boal, who so openly sided with Patino and Hochschield; the long suppression of the report of the investigating commission; the firing of Galarza because he exposed Boal’s role in Bolivia – all these leave little to hope for from the United States government.
Unless Bolivian and American labor act unitedly “and independently of government agencies”, it is most certain that the new contracts will be signed, granting higher prices to the mine barons and leaving the Bolivian miners in the same desperate condition they have endured for years.
 




The disclosure of even some of the facts about Alton Levy, former army sergeant who was “broken” by court-martial, demoted and sentenced to four months at hard labor, reveals that this case involves a good deal more than ordinary punishment for a simple infraction of army discipline. It is a case which involves a former trade union organizer who voiced his objections to the Jim Crow treatment accorded to Negroes in the army generally and in his camp in particular.
On August 16, Alton Levy was arrested and sent to the guardhouse. He was later tried by court-martial on three counts, two of which charged him with circulating slanderous remarks about the commanding officer and his wife, and the third with making “false statements ... wilfully and maliciously” about the mistreatment of Negro soldiers at the Army Air Base in Lincoln, Neb., where Levy was a sergeant.
For some time it was very difficult for any of his friends outside the Army to find out what the actual charges were and every attempt to investigate the facts around the case was met with a reply that since Levy was tried under a “special” court-martial, the case could not be appealed to Washington.
The Workers Defense League has taken an interest in the case and through its attorney, Leon M. Depres of Chicago, has been able to gather sufficient facts to point not only to anti-labor and anti-Negro bias in the Army and in this particular court-martial, but an admission by the court-martial that the evidence against Levy was inadequate.
Before he was drafted into the Army in May 1942, Levy was an organizer for the International Ladies Garment Workers Union. After his preliminary training, he was sent to the Air Corps Administration School and from there he went to the Lincoln, Neb., camp as a sergeant. In writing to his friends, he made mention of the fact that he was displeased with the way the Negroes in his camp were treated. For example, to July he wrote:
“Most of the whites in charge of them (the Negroes) are Southerners. Naturally, as a result, they are treated like dogs. They are kept in camp while others are allowed out. They are hounded and harrassed and yelled at and cursed and insulted and generally treated abominably.”
Inside the camp, he frequently discussed this problem with his fellow officers. Early in August, he was interrogated by army intelligence officers about his objections to the way in which the Negro soldiers were mistreated. Soon after that came the arrest and court-martial.
A very important fact about this court-martial is that only forty-eight hours before the verdict of guilty was pronounced the presiding officer at the trial, speaking for the court, expressed the belief that Levy was innocent. Depres, WDL attorney, wrote in his report on the case:
“On Saturday, August 14, the court reconvened and the president, Major Washington, said that the court believed Levy to be not guilty of the specifications as charged and asked whether he might be found guilty of a different offense. After receiving a negative answer, the court retired again. Everyone present congratulated Levy and he believed himself acquitted. On Monday the court again reconvened over defense counsel’s objection, recalled Miss Armstrong, a civilian, and then found Levy guilty of all specifications. Levy says that Miss Armstrong’s oral testimony on Monday added nothing to her written statement which had previously been Admitted into the record.”
Depres further revealed that two of the three counts against Levy were based on what was common gossip about the commanding officer, that everyone in camp was talking about it, and that, at worst, Levy was also discussing these rumors with friends. The third charge is the really serious one – namely, that he protested the treatment accorded the Negroes in the camp.
From the facts thus far it is fairly clear that Levy was chosen to be court-martialed because of his background as labor organizer and because he was championing Negro rights in the Army. The other charges against him are highly irrelevant.
At the trial itself Levy stated:
“I did say the Negroes were mistreated. I did say only forty were allowed passes each night. I did say that my training group, not the base, had about two hundred Negro soldiers. But here’s the strange thing: Although these are allegedly false statements, at no time did the prosecution attempt to prove or establish that they were false statements.”
In other words, though convicted of making “false statements,” the court did not investigate whether or not these statements were false. Instead, Levy was actually convicted because he dared talk about what; has been such a publicly recognized fact – that Negroes are Jim Crowed and mistreated in the Army.
The Workers Defense League, together with several unions and Negro organizations, is trying to get the case reopened, although the War Department has already sustained Levy’s conviction. It is to the direct interest of the labor movement to support this effort by the WDL.
 




The New York Times a few days ago lashed out editorially at the U.S. Governor of Puerto Rico because he had stated that the people on that island are still living at the same low level of existence that prevailed in 1898, and that unless the United States did something to alleviate these conditions, they would have to “suppress” an “angry people.”
In a report to the Chavez Committee of the Senate, which was investigating social and economic conditions, Governor Tugwell said, among other things, that Puerto Rico was no better off today than when it was first taken over by the United States from Spain in 1898. Tugwell complains that its people are kept in “humiliating suspense, by implication neither fit to govern themselves nor to become part of the United States.”
!The United States,” he wrote, “has not prepared the way for the honest settlement of this issue.” Pretty strong words, even for a New Dealer who has been kicked around and criticized both by the Puerto Ricans and at home.
 
The Times Gets Piously Indignant
Then along comes the newspaper that prints “all the news that’s fit to print” and lambastes Mr. Tugwell for daring to make public the scandal of American imperialist rule and ruination of the Puerto Rican population.
“Did it ever occur to Mr. Tugwell what use Axis propagandists can make of talk like this in an official report? Responsible officials are in a position to advocate reforms quietly to their superiors. As long as they hold office they need not belligerently and publicly indict the colonial policies of their own government.”
What the pious Times really means is that the report to the investigating committee should have been buried in the file morgue in some bureaucrat’s office in Washington because it revealed some very unpleasant things about the “colonial policies of our government.” Public investigating committees, congressional and senatorial committees, which, nominally at least, are supposed to be responsible to their constituents, should report back to them only if they can say flattering things about the government. If, on the other hand, harsh facts, no matter how true, are discovered, then the Times, so interested in publishing the truth, suggests that these be squelched and not publicly aired. The New York Times’ variety of democracy smacks a little too much of the totalitarianism which it so hypocritically denounces at least every other day.
 
An Editorial Writer on “Progress”
Not content with suggesting how to keep information from the people, the Times takes Mr. Tugwell to task for his specific statements. What does he mean by saying that the Puerto Ricans are no better off today than they were in 1898? Not true! politely insists the Times. Just look at the facts:
“The population of Puerto Rico in 1901 was 978,000; in 1940 it was 1,877,000. The rate of population growth in the island has, in other words, been even greater than that to the continental United States. An island that can support twice the population that it did in 1898 can hardly be said to be no better off.”
And the Times further points out that the imports and exports of Puerto Rico have increased tenfold during this period. How can you say that the island isn’t better off? And what about the increase in manufactures? Just to show that it isn’t thinking only of money, the Times reminds its readers that illiteracy on the island was reduced from fifty-five to thirty-one per cent, and that new housing projects have been built for the Puerto Ricans. How dare Governor Tugwell ignore all this? But here are some of the facts that the New York Times did not see fit to print, and we can readily understand why.
In 1898, when the United States took possession of the island, there began a process which has brought ruination and starvation to the Puerto Rican population. The introduction of United States currency at a devaluated rate of exchange ruined the native farmers so that almost all the land was snatched up by the United States interests. The island was converted to a one-crop country, with the result that the Puerto Ricans no longer raised their own food, but had to depend upon imports from the United States.
The 1901 tariff excluded trade with nearly all other countries so that ninety per cent of it fell to the United States. All cargo had to be carried in American ships, the most expensive in the world. This burden had to be borne by the island population.
Today four large American sugar companies control the economy of the country. They are the real masters and profit-makers.
 
More on Puerto Rican “Progress”
The per capital wealth of Puerto Rico is $200, as compared to $736 of our own South, the poorest section of this country.
The minimum wage law applies only to commercial and industrial workers, while the great majority of Puerto Rican workers who toil on the sugar plantations do not receive even this small “blessing.” In the sugar factories the average wage is $8.13 a week; in the coffee industry it is $2.37 a week. The income of the rural laborer is twelve cents a day to cover all his needs. How much worse could it have been in 1898 if the New York Times assures us that the Puerto Ricans are better off today?
The population has certainly increased, but because Puerto Rico has been deprived by the land-grabbing sugar interests from raising its own food, this increased population lives in a state of virtual starvation. To raise its own food again, the Puerto Ricans would have to confiscate the laage landed estates and take over the ownership of their own land. This means kicking out the large absentee American landowners.
Before the present war, 100,000 tons of shipping were required to barely keep the population alive, except for the Americans on the island and the few rich Puerto Ricans. Today the war has cut shipping down to 30,000 tons, which means that thousands upon thousands are not getting fed at all.
The Times points to the increase in population, but it “conveniently” forgets to mention that Puerto Rico has the highest infant mortality rate in the world. People die of hookworm and tuberculosis, and it is estimated that from 25 to 70 per cent of the population has malaria at all times.
Only 44 per cent of Puerto Rico’s children go to school. The others are too poor even to get to a school. Of those who attend, half attend only part of the day. teachers report back that nearly all of the children are undernourished, which is another way of saying that they are slowly starving.
 
Who Profits from Puerto Rico?
These are some of the facts that the New York Times would like concealed from the public. They don’t quite fit in with the theory that United States “colonialism” has greatly benefited the native populations.
Or could it be that by “improvements and benefits,” the New York Times really has in mind the four great sugar companies which in 1936 split close to nine million dollars in profits; the shipping interests, which have monopolies all of Puerto Rico’s trade at a tremendous profit; the garment manufacturers, who send down work to be done by Puerto Rico’s home workers at below-union rates, with the aim of breaking down union standards in this country? Could it be that the paid advertisements of the sugar refineries dictate the editorial policies of the New York Times?
 



INDIA IN REVOLT, by Henry Judd,
with an Introduction by Max Shachtman.
Published by the Workers Party of America, New York 1942; 101 pages, 25 cents.
Here at last is a book which tells the story of India without the usual apologetics for the aspirations of the Indian people and without appealing to them to lay aside their desire for national independence until the “Four Freedoms” are conceded by the United Nations. India in Revolt is written from the standpoint of the interests of the international working class, English and American as well as Indian.
In a style that is at once ardent in its devotion to the cause of Indian liberation and coldly objective in its analysis of the tasks confronting the colonial peoples, Henry Judd supplies the historical background of the present revolt and explains its relationship to the Second World War.
In the opening chapters Judd explains the development of India from its history and mode of life before the British conquest through two and a half centuries of British rule. The old communal system was ruthlessly and treacherously destroyed by the white sahib until the English today control every decisive and important factor of India’s life.
Today India is a land of contrasts – not, as Judd tells us, in the technicolor of a movie travelogue, but in the juxtaposition of the world’s worst slums and huge manorial estates; the contrast of the “kisan” working the soil as he did sixty centuries ago and the Indian proletariat working in the up-to-date factory in Cawnpore; the contrasts of extreme poverty side by side with the fabulous wealth of the British and feudal princes. “These are social. and political contrasts that explain the causes and source of the revolutionary upheaval that rocks, the Indian sub-continent,’’ says the author.
Arising out of the almost unbearable conditions of life, the nationalist movement has peculiarly Indian features, though basically it has the same characteristics common to all colonial movements. The conquest by the British overthrew the old class relationships but created new classes, and the struggle between these classes goes on unabated. Each social grouping behaves according to the dictates of its class interests. The writer clearly explains the aims and wishes of each class in India – the feudal princes, the native bourgeoisie, the peasantry and the proletariat – showing how their conduct flows from these aims.
Of all the classes, only two, the peasantry and proletariat, must have national independence, in order to achieve what they want – land and freedom from taxation for the one; and economic security and freedom from exploitation for the other. The national bourgeoisie can always compromise with imperialism – and always does. Therein lies the explanation of the conduct of the National Congress. An examination of the existing political parties shows that only one has an uncompromising program – the Bolshevik-Leninist Party of India – -because it is the party of socialism.
One of the most interesting sections of the book answers, a number of frequently asked questions about India, regarding the religious differences, language differences, national minorities, etc,; Finally, to the question as to whether India, for the sake of her own defense, ought not to wait until Japan is licked before demanding freedom from England, Judd replies: the Indian people can defend themselves against Japan only if they are free, only if they have something worth defending, their national independence, which they have desired for 250 years!
In a closing letter, Judd, speaking for the oppressed and gagged workers of India, tells the American and British workers why they must assist in the struggle for Indian independence and how the Indian Revolution is bound up with battles of the American workers.
At the end of the book there is a section called Facts on India which speak as eloquently as statistics can about conditions in that country.
The Indian people are on the march – their revolution has just begun. In the course of time, the Indian workers will create the necessary organizations and leadership for victory. The American workers must assist them. But first, we must understand what is happening in India – and why. For this, Henry Judd’s book is invaluable and is a must for every worker.
 



Napoleon’s Invasion of Russia, 1812
by Eugene Tarlé
Oxford Press, New York. $3.50
Eugene Tarlé, considered to be the outstanding authority on the history of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic era, has recently added a new work to his several volumes. His latest book, which deals wholly with Napoleon’s invasion of Russia, has been hailed in many quarters as a great and original contribution to the history of the war of 1812.
However, anything more than a superficial reading of the book reveals that it was written not so much as objective history as to fill the need of the Stalinist regime to rewrite all of Russian history with a new nationalist bias. If Tarlé had wished to write the history of Napoleon’s campaign of 1812, he had merely to turn to the two chapters on this episode contained in his biographical work, Bonaparte, which has all the information found in the new book. The biography is not just another story of the life of Napoleon, but a social and political history of the Napoleonic era. In it Tarlé analyzes the Russian campaign, its causes and effects, and the specific place it occupies in the general historical period. The Russian case as well as the French is presented, for Tarlé is not interested in taking sides in a war which occurred one hundred and thirty years ago – he is interested in writing a historical study.
In that book he cites interesting and irrefutable material to show that the cause of Napoleon’s defeat was primarily political, that his fear of emancipating the serfs deprived him of his best weapon against the Russian army, which, after all, was defending the interests of Russia’s ruling class. Napoleon himself recognized this mistake later when he was on St. Helena. He explained it by stating that he did not wish to let loose the elements of national revolt and thereby create a situation where there “would be no one with whom” to conclude peace.
 
The French and Russian Alliance
After Napoleon defeated Prussia and compelled her to sign the humiliating peace of Tilsit, a secret defensive and offensive alliance was concluded between Napoleon and Czar Alexander which obligated Russia to enforce Napoleon’s continental blockade aimed at the destruction of British power. In spite of the “gifts” granted to her in the form of Prussian Bialystok and some Austrian territory, Russia was reduced to the status of a vassal state. The nobility, however, felt itself threatened and its opposition to the Czar grew. When Napoleon failed to keep his promises to Alexander (he had promised him Turkey and also that he would remove his troops from Prussia) the latter allowed the anti-French sentiments in his court free rein. In the years that followed, English goods landed in Russia and from there made their way into Germany, Austria and Poland, practically nullifying the continental blockade decrees. In 1811 a new tariff increased the duties on imports of wines, silks and other luxury articles coming from France. Thus Napoleon was given an immediate excuse for preparing war against Russia.
This material is treated clearly and adequately in both books. The military problems and battles are also dealt with in parallel fashion. In the new book, however, “something new has been added,” for running through it like a red thread is a “national war” on the part of the Russian peasants, a phenomenon conjured up by Tarlé for the purpose of proving the historical roots of Russian patriotism and for making a thinly veiled analogy between the position of Russia of 1812 and contemporary Russia.
It is significant to note that in the biography all source and reference material is carefully listed, while this is just as carefully avoided in the new book on the invasion. The reader is referred for these to the original Russian!
For proof that the “national war” is of Tarlé’s own making one need only refer back to the biography. That his latest contentions are in direct opposition to what he wrote before does not in the least disturb him. He produces no new evidence to back up his contentions; he does not even bother to remember what he wrote previously on the so-called national war.
In both books Tarlé shows that Russian military strategy consisted of drawing the invader as far inland as possible, with the aim of stretching thin his line of communications. The scorched earth policy was also part of the strategy, but this was a policy carried out by the Russian army as a military measure. Yet by some peculiar twisting of facts, Tarlé tries to prove that the scorched earth policy was carried out by the peasant population as a defensive measure. Moreover, in the new book Tarlé endeavors to prove that the Russian people went over to offensive action against Napoleon, while this is categorically denied in the earlier book.
 
The Thesis of the New Book
A few examples will suffice to show this:
In the first place, Tarlé states that in 1812 Russia was fighting to preserve her economic and political independence. It was a “struggle for survival in the full sense of the word.”
“This is what gave the war its peculiarly national character and impelled the Russian people to wage it with such heroic fortitude” (page 4).
And further:
“‘The National War’ is not a mere chapter in the history of the year 1812. The entire war against the invader was from start to finish a national war. Napoleon’s strategy had counted on his own troops and Alexander’s troops, but he had to fight the Russian people, whom he had not counted. It was the hand of the Russian people that inflicted the irreparable, mortal blow” (page 269).
And now the “national war” is the guerrilla movement.
“The guerrilla movement, which began immediately after Borodino, achieved its tremendous success only through the active, voluntary and zealous assistance of the Russian peasantry. But this unquenchable hatred of the despoilers, destroyers, murderers and ravishers manifested itself, above all, in the enthusiasm with which the peasants joined the army and fought. The national character of this war was at once revealed in organized forms – in the army. In Spain, the national war assumed quite other forms, because in that country much time passed before military units could be organized. But in their indomitable hatred of the foreign ravishers and pillagers, in their thirst to give their lives for the destruction of a cruel and predatory foe, in their firm consciousness of their inner right, the Russian people was not a whit behind the Spanish people” (page 267).
And later on:
“As I have had occasion to note, the Russian national war was different from the Spanish. It was waged chiefly by peasants in army or militia uniforms. But this made it no less national” (page 346).
One might add that any war waged by the masses in army uniforms (and which modern war isn’t?) can, by this token, be considered “national.”
When news reached Moscow that the enemy was breaking all resistance and was heading straight for that city, Tarlé describes the resolution of the nobility to put up a stiff resistance, by pledging to send up to 80,000 peasant serfs into the militia.
“A national militia began to form. The morale of the people gained enormously. Not fear but anger was the dominant sentiment. Witnesses testify that in this terrible moment all classes merged in one common emotion. Better death than submission to the invading ‘ravisher!’ Peasants, lower bourgeoisie, merchants, nobility – all vied with one another in their eagerness to fight Napoleon to the death” (page 160).
Of course this does not prevent Tarlé from later saying the following about the militia:
“The militiamen demanded to be sworn in. Among the myriads of rumors going around in 1812, there was one to the effect that sworn militiamen would be emancipated from serfdom at the end of the war. More than likely this rumor was responsible for the demand to be sworn in” (page 264).
“Not the burning of Moscow and not the frosts – there was no frost until Smolensk – but the Russian peasants inflicted the most terrible blow on the Grand Army” (page 353).
And in summary, Tarlé writes:
“The popular character of the Russian war was manifested in the heroic conduct of the Russian soldiers on the battlefield, in the armed peasant attacks on the conqueror, in their successful efforts to starve him out; in Spain, the popular character of the war was manifest in independent fighting enterprises on the part of the irregular peasant masses. This required a great deal of heroism, but the results could not be as quick and considerable as they would have been if Spain had preserved a regular fighting organization. Such an organization was created in Spain only at a later stage of the struggle; in Russia it existed from the beginning to the end and could usefully exploit the surge of the national spirit” (page 409).
 
What the Author Wrote Before
So much for Tarlé’s proof of the “national war.” Yet, when Tarlé was writing freely, without the threat of a return to Siberia should he not bend with the political winds in Stalinist Russia, he could write as the true Marxist historian and scholar that he was:
It would not be amiss here to say something of the so-called Russian “national war” of 1812.
Never did Napoleon, or his marshals, or their companions in arms, speak of the War of 1812 as a “national” war, in the same sense that they spoke of the Spanish guerrilla war as a “national” war. Nor could they compare the two phenomena. The war in Russia lasted six months. Of these six months, the first three saw Napoleon constantly victorious as he advanced along a direct line from Kovno to Vilna to Smolensk to Moscow, interrupted by battles and petty skirmishes with the regular Russian army. There was, however, not a single mass revolt against the French – neither then nor after Napoleon’s entry into Moscow. Indeed there were occurrences of quite a contrary nature, as when the peasants of Smolensk complained to the French authorities that their master, the landowner Engelhardt, had been guilty of betraying the French. Incidentally, Engelhardt was shot by the French after this.
Following the battle of Malo-Yaroslavetz, when the frosts intensified the profound disorganization of the retreating French army, there came into being that phenomenon which contemporaries accurately described as “actions of the militia detachments” but which later came to be known as a “national war.” The heads of the militia – Figner, Davidov, Seslavin, Kudashev, Vadbolsky – were officers of the regular Russian army who had been authorized to organize detachments of volunteers (from among the soldiers of the regular army and willing newcomers). These militia detachments had instructions to harass the French army by sudden forays on its transport, on its lagging detachments and generally on those points where small “parties” (never consisting of more than several hundred men) might attack with some prospect of success. In these militia corps were to be found soldiers, Cossacks and reserves. The peasants as a group took no part in these activities. Their duties were to give topographical directions and generally to answer questions put to them by the militia chiefs. On occasion they were ordered to act as guides in localities unfamiliar to the militiamen, or to make assaults on single French soldiers lagging behind the main army.
All this transpired in the course of approximately five weeks, in October and November. Later, when the French army left the Smolensk province and entered White Russia, the peasantry, with little personal risk, captured many of the hungry, half-frozen French laggards. Most of them were immediately put to death.
This disorganized stalking by the peasantry bore little resemblance to that ruthless and indefatigable war which the Spanish people, on their own initiative, waged lor five years. This struggle had begun when Napoleon’s desire to conquer Spain was scarcely revealed, and it ended only when Napoleon finally renounced his ambition and ordered the last French soldiers to leave the Peninsula. In this conflict the Spanish peasants abandoned their villages for years at a time, organizing special detachments which attacked the French in irregular fashion and once forced an entire French army corps to surrender. They fought with such savagery that Napoleon’s men considered them demented. Saragossa had shown how cities defended themselves, and the French who had fought in Spain afterwards asserted that every village proved a miniature Saragossa.
It is clear that if the Spanish guerrilla warfare might justifiably be called a national war, it would be impossible to apply this term to any Russian movement in the War of 1812.
People began to regard even the burning of Smolensk and Moscow and the firing of villages as manifestations of “national war,” overlooking the fact that these were systematic acts of the Russian army in its retreat to Moscow. (From Bonaparte, by Tarlé, pages 302–3 – Emphasis mine – R.C.)
 
Why Falsification Is Necessary
How can one tally these two views of the War of 1812? It is simply that Tarlé, once in exile as an opponent of Stalinism, has made his peace with Stalin and has joined the school of falsifiers who have been consistently rewriting Russian history, both Czarist and revolutionary, with the aim of stressing the new nationalism and chauvinism. This fits in with the surrender of the socialist internationalist outlook on the part of the Soviet rulers and their complete reversion to the most vulgar “socialist” nationalism.
Tarlé ends his latest book with a warning that any contemporary invader will be met with the greatest resistance on the part of the Russian people (the book is reputed to have been written prior to the Russian involvement in the present war). Characteristically enough, in the present stage of Stalinism he finds the basis for this resistance in nothing but the old Czarist spirit of nationalism. To find historical precedent for this, Tarlé makes his own invasion of history and brings forth his “national war” of 1812.
In this way, we are given another chapter of Stalinist degeneration, for what else can the glorification of Peter the Great, the resurrection of the fighting spirit of the ancient Russian knights, the sanctification of the strong man (the dictator) and the bureaucracy which acts in behalf of the people (!) signify, but the total denigration of the October Revolution at the hands of Stalinism?
At the present time, Tarlé’s book is being utilized for the purpose of once more assuring the bourgeois allies of the Soviet Union that Stalin’s war with Hitler is similar in method and purpose to that waged by Czar Alexander against Napoleon, a war raised to “national” heights – a country fighting for national existence. But of the struggle for socialism, for the emancipation of all humanity from the yoke of imperialist and bourgeois oppression – well, the less said the better.
 



There is a strike on in Arizona. Involved is the long staple cotton crop used in the production of parachutes for the Army and Navy – yet there is hardly a word of denunciation in the press, no cries of sabotage and no demands for immediate government action to “shoot the organizers” or to draft the strikers into the Army. For this is a strike of big cotton growers who are refusing to pay the government minimum of 30 cents an hour for cotton pickers.
For years the large cotton growers in Arizona have recruited laborers from Mexico or from among the dust bowl victims, the “Okies,” and have paid them miserably low wages. The workers were completely at the mercy of their employers; because they lacked organization they had to accept whatever was offered them. The Senate Civil Liberties Committee has disclosed that the cotton growers spent in one year some $125,000 for this method of securing cheap labor, that this expenditure was more than compensated for by the extremely low wages paid.
This low wage policy was maintained through the Farm Labor Service, which is financed by Western Cotton Products Co., a subsidiary of Anderson, Clayton & Co., one of the biggest cotton firms in the world. Will Clayton, head of this outfit, is an assistant to Jesse Jones, Secretary of Commerce.
Because of the current labor shortage, the cotton growers have found it extremely difficult to get men to work their plantations. They have turned for assistance to the government, which has stipulated that while it is willing to get Mexican and other labor necessary for the cotton picking, and to pay their transportation to Arizona, the growers would have to pay a minimum of 30 cents an hour for this work, and supply men with decent living conditions.
The answer to this requirement, in itself more than modest, has been, first, a “slowdown” and then a strike organized and supported by the Farm Bureau Federation. The FBF president, himself a rich Alabama plantation owner, Edward A. O’Neal, has stated that these wages were “outrageous” and that the 30 cent minimum would “socialize agriculture.”
The government has made a number of overtures to the cotton growers, one of which was to raise the price of cotton. In spite of the fact that the increase in wages would thus be covered, the Federation is holding out against the principle of decent wages for 3,000,000 farm workers, stating further that the requirements of the government for decent living conditions, including toilets, baths, cold and hot water, was just a lot of “red tape stuff.”
A telegram sent by McNutt, of the War Manpower Commission, and Wickard, Secretary of Agriculture, calls upon the Arizona cotton growers “to accept the terms of the government contracts, or else the government will hold the growers responsible for saving the current crop of long staple cotton in that state.”
That is how the government gets tough when it deals with big business. There is no indication here of the Army or Navy stepping in and running the plantations, no threat of “work or fight” to the rich cotton growers, as would be the case had the cotton pickers struck for higher wages and decent living conditions.
The farm lobby in Washington has many powerful friends in Congress and in the Senate who are demanding that farm labor be frozen at whatever wages the employers want to pay. What is needed is not a counter-lobby, such as the National Farmers Union, composed of smaller farmers, is trying to establish, but an organization of farm workers, which will enforce its own minimum wage scales and decent living conditions through union strength and control.
 



The indictment by a federal grand jury of the United States Sugar Corp. and four of its employees on charges of peonage has thrown some light on the continued existence of virtual slavery in the South.
The same jury also brought in indictments against Charles A. Gaskin, owner of a Florida turpentine plantation for “arresting” James Johnson, a Negro workman, and holding him in servitude until he worked off an alleged debt of $22. At the same time, Sheriff Jeff Wiggins of Glades Country, Fla., was indicted for working county prisoners on his farm without pay.
In indicting the U.S. Sugar Corp., its personnel manager, M.E. Von Mach, and three camp superintendents, the grand jury charged that the defendants had violated the 13th amendment to the Constitution, which abolished slavery, and it listed at least twenty overt acts on the part of the company.
Since November 1, 1941, and for a “long time prior thereto and upon subsequent days thereafter” the company is accused of recruiting laborers for work in the fields by paying their fare. When the men arrived there they were told that they owed the company the railroad fare and that they would have to work off this debt before they could leave the plantation. Those who tried to leave were hunted down by the sheriff and returned to the fields by force.
In addition, the indictment reads that the company compelled the field hands, all of them Negroes, to remain at work against their wills by “force, threats and by divers other means of coercion and intimidation,” which included beating, striking and by imposing other forms of bodily punishment.
The Department of Agriculture has long been interested in the sugar corporation and has been granting it millions of dollars in subsidies over a period of years. Under the federal sugar act, certain conditions regarding wage scales, living and working conditions, were set up. These the company tried to escape by resorting to the practices for which they were indicted last week.
 
What They Were Paid
One has but to look at what the conditions set up by the Department of Agriculture were to understand the real heinousness of the crime. On November 5 of this year, the Department of Agriculture announced the new rates of pay for harvesting sugar. These are supposed to represent an increase of from 3 to 12 per cent of the stipulated pay for 1941, and the increases were granted, according to the Department, “because of increased sugar prices and higher government payments, and because of the rises in general farm wages and in the cost of living.” In other words, the increases represented no money out of the over-stuffed coffers of the corporation. The wage rates follow:
The highest paid jobs on the sugar plantation are cutting, topping and stripping of the sugar cane. For nine hours of hard, back-breaking work, adult male workers were awarded the grandiose wage of $2.45 per day; adult females $2.00 per day. Children between 14 and 16 doing the same work are to receive three-fourths of the rates established for the adult worker. These are only the top rates. For other work, such as tractor driving, truck driving, hoisting, piling, scrapping, the wages vary from $2.30 to $1.25 for a nine-hour day.
The above represent an increase of about 10 per cent over what the prevailing wage was SUPPOSED to have been since 1941 – an increase that is actually covered by government subsidies (indirectly by tax-payers), and by higher sugar prices – directly by consumers. Even these minimal conditions the sugar barons sought to avoid by the introduction of slave conditions in their fields.
The company of course denies these charges. Each defendant was set free on a $1,000 bond and the case is to be tried some time in 1943. The penalty, if and when there is a conviction, will most likely be a fine of several thousand dollars and the sugar company will be set to continue its old methods.
 



Strategy for Democracy
by J. Donald Kingsley and David W. Petegorsky
Longman, Green & Co., publishers. New York, N.Y. 342 pages, $3.00
Strategy for Democracy is advertised as a guide to democratic action and an outline of the policy which will guarantee the winning of the peace as well as the war. It purports to be a clarification of what our war aims should be, and how we should achieve these. According to the authors, neither Roosevelt’s eight-point program nor the Roosevelt-Churchill Atlantic Charter can be considered adequate.
This book, the authors state, is in a sense a by-product of the Antioch Conference held last year and contains contributions by a number of participants at this conference, the point of view of whom the authors do not necessarily endorse.
Kingsley and Petegorsky attempt to set the tone of the book by a discussion of the economic order of capitalism. I say attempt because, as will be shown later, the other contributors ignore what these two prove, namely, that the capitalist system is finished and should give way to another economic order.
The analysis of the capitalist orders made by these two authors, though very sketchy and inadequate, leads them at least to the following conclusions:

Capitalism has entered the stage of monopoly, and “free competition” has been replaced by “monopolistic competition”;
 
capital has become concentrated in the hands of relatively few monopolists and the relationship between the classes has become intensified;
 
capitalism has reached the stage where monopoly in the ownership of the means of production is a fetter upon production;
capitalist competition is the cause of war, and
 
monopoly capitalism and democracy are incompatible, as demonstrated by the rise of fascism.

All these factors make necessary a program of transition to a new economic society, collective democracy, so that capitalist chaos and waste can be eliminated and democracy be given a new lease on life. Kingsley and Petegorsky contend that the alternative is between fascism and collective democracy (why not socialism?). For elucidation of this point, they print a section by Mordecai Ezekiel financial expert in the Roosevelt Administration) who starts out on the assumption that the object of production, regardless of the form of the society, is consumption. He overlooks the fact that under capitalism it is the owners of capital who decide the object of production, and that is not consumption but the creation of profits. That is the nub of the whole problem. To produce for use today presupposes the abolition of private ownership of the means of production. Without collective ownership, planned economy is an impossibility.
 
New Order by Experts
Ezekiel proposes a system of planned economy based on capitalism in which the productive forces will be expanded, profits and payrolls will rise, and there will be no unemployment. Kingsley and Petegorsky do not indicate how they square that with their view that “the source of the world crisis is the widespread reactionary attempt to confine the progressive forces of industrialism within a bastille of archaic economic and social relations. So difficult is such confinement that it can be accomplished only by the most violent means and then for no more than a brief period of time. In the long run the bastille itself must be destroyed and its place taken either by a more repressive structure, as in the case of fascism, or by institutions which will liberate the potentials in the machine process. These are the real alternatives; not the preservation of the bastille.”
Another section of the book deals with the winning of the war. The authors contend that the war will not be won militarily alone, but that political weapons in terms of what victorious democracy will offer to the vanquished countries is necessary. “If democracy is to succeed in waging total war against totalitarianism, it must similarly present to the victims of fascism a body of ideas and a record of achievement that will create in those countries where fascism has triumphed an enormous fifth column for democracy. We must present them, in terms of peace aims, the vision of a world that will inspire them to revolt against the crushing yoke of tyranny.” Bravo!
We leave aside here the fact that the above is precisely what capitalist democracy has been unable to do in this war and we consider what this vision is that is to inspire the millions of oppressed in Europe, Asia and Africa to act as a fifth column for the United Nations. This section is covered by Pierre Cot, who as Minister of Air and Commerce for the Popular Front Government in France, knows from first-hand experience how to preserve and extend democracy!
It is Mr. Cot’s task to draw up a plan for international organization after the war. He rejects the old League of Nations. It failed in its purpose for a number of reasons, the most interesting of which is that the great democracies failed to support it adequately. In place of the League, Mr. Cot proposes another world organization, to be run more democratically than its predecessor and to be administered by the same great democracies which allowed the former organization to go to pot! The victims of fascism will certainly be inspired to know that the new set-up will create a police force because keeping order in Europe will be “primarily a military and police problem.”
As for the colonial peoples, Mr. Cot offers them the prospect of being administered by the international organization. “All colonial areas not immediately able to assume self-government would have to be governed either directly or through a system of mandates by the world organization.” Mr. Cot, of course, neglects to mention who will decide whether colonial and backward areas are capable of governing themselves.
The masses of India are today demonstrating how they feel about such promises, and to what extent they are willing to entrust their self-government to the judgment of the victorious democracies.
Max Werner, the so-called military expert, discusses the military machine and concludes that the only way of solving Europe’s military problems is by the “creation of an international military police power that has for its tasks the prevention of revenge on the part of the defeated fascist forces and the defense of democracy.” It is obvious that Mr, Werner does not have much faith in the ability of the “fifth column of democracy” to fulfill this task.
 
More Generalities for Sale
In conclusion, Petegorsky and Kingsley tell their readers how to achieve the new collective democracy – through the organization of a progressive movement which will embrace the Negroes, the poor farm population, the middle class, and will be based on the organized forces of labor, the trade unions. They say that in the United States there is no large, influential radical party capable of achieving this. A political differentiation based on class divisions has started to mature, and it is necessary to heighten it. This will be the job of the progressive movement. Everything is said about this movement – everything except what its program will be. Will it aim to plan economy on the basis of capitalism, will it aim to overthrow the “bastille” of capitalism? Of this there is no indication.
After all is said and done, we are no further ahead than we were at the beginning.
Kingsley and Petegorsky say that capitalism is the cause of war – and publish a program for peace based on the continued existence of capitalism. They want a program to inspire revolt in the fascist countries and offer precisely what the masses of these countries fear in the event of their defeat – namely, military and police domination by the victors. They want to enlist the support of the colonial peoples and offer them international administration and open door policy. They say capitalism produces only chaos and that the choice is between fascism and collective democracy, and present a program (via one of the contributors) of planned economy based on capitalism. They say capitalism is the cause of fascism and yet they propose a movement with no program other than “progressive,” which says nothing about combating capitalism. This movement supposedly is to usher in the new collective democracy, but we are left in the dark as to how this is to be achieved.
All this is called Strategy for Democracy. A better name would be Straddling for Democracy.
 



The state of Mississippi celebrated Columbus Day by lynching two 14-year-old Negro boys who had been accused of waylaying a 13-year-old white girl. This was followed by a third lynching several days later and brings the total number, of KNOWN lynchings this year up to five.
The story surrounding the lynchings is the usual one. Two youngsters, Charlie Lang and Ernest Green, both of Shubuta, Miss., had been placed for “safe-keeping” in the Quitman, Miss., jail following their arrest on a charge of attempted rape. Before they could be brought to trial, a mob of “indignant citizens, outraged at the alleged crime,” broke into the jail house, “overpowered” the sheriff, “robbed” him of his keys, removed the two boys from their cells, lynched them and left their bodies hanging from the bridge on which the attack on the girl was supposed to have occurred. The lynching party over, the sheriff came to, rushed to the scene and found the two dead boys.
 
Same Old Story
Everything about this lynching leads to the conclusion that it was all pre-arranged. The sheriff is left without adequate protection for his prisoners, he responds to a hammering at the door (an engaged mob could scarcely have tapped gently), and is “overpowered.” After the whole ghastly affair is over, he is recovered and sets out on a search for the bodies, which are found suspended from the bridge where no less than six previous lynchings had occurred.
Five days later, on October 17, another Negro, Howard Wash, convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment for the shooting of his employer, was dragged from his cell, and lynched near Laurel, Miss., some thirty miles from the scene of the Columbus Day atrocity.
As is usual, the perpetrators of these acts will most likely not be found and the cases will be closed as “murder by persons unknown.” The slate will be swept clean and ready for the next victim.
Even when the criminals are discovered, the press refuses to name them, as in the case of Cleo Wright, who was murdered in Southern Missouri. Those who dared name the lynchers were almost lynched themselves – and driven out of the community by a tar-and-feathers mob. Labor Action, defying such threats, and seeking to bring to justice those who lynched Cleo Wright, carried full and detailed information about the circumstances of the murder and named the persons guilty of the crime. The criminals are still at large.
 
Why the Lynchings?
This year America is setting all sorts of records, especially in production, as a result of the war. The new high rate of lynchings is part of this record. What is the connection between the two?
Wars cannot be fought by guns alone – they are fought by people, who are called upon to make all kinds of sacrifices. The working class has lost its right to strike, has had its wages frozen, is threatened with job freezing, has had high taxes imposed upon it, and is sending its sons to die in the front lines. These sacrifices cannot be gotten without some sort of promises about what victory will bring. Hence the speeches about the “new world,” “the people’s century,” the rights of man, the four freedoms – and Roosevelt’s exhortation that racial prejudices be forgotten.
Afraid that the Negroes will take seriously these lofty speeches and that they will seek to enforce them here, in the United States, the Southern rulers who are determined to perpetuate the rule of “white supremacy,” are resorting once again to lynchings as a method of keeping the Negro in his place. Five acknowledged lynchings in less than a year, is no accidental phenomenon; it is the answer of reaction to the attempt of the Negro to establish democracy for himself at home.
How hypocritical are the “patriotic” pratings about liberty, equality, freedom for all, when in eight stages millions of Negroes and poor whites are still disfranchised by the poll-tax!
 
Congress and the Poll-Tax
Congress, under a great deal of pressure from labor and liberal organizations, has finally passed the anti-poll-tax law. The bill is now before a Senate committee, which, is stalling in an attempt to make the law invalid. If it is not passed by January 1, the previous work done on it will have to be started over again. The poll-tax bloc knows that time is precious and it is seeking to kill the bill by wasting this precious element. In this it has the tacit support of those members of the Senate Judiciary Committee who are “uncommitted” on the bill.
Passage of the anti-poll-tax bill is only one small step in the direction of abolishing the system of Jim Crow. Next is needed an anti-lynch law which will make it a crime for any state or local peace officers to fail to protect their prisoners from mob violence, and which will seek out the lynchers and punish them. Such a bill has been before Congress for many years – each time defeated in its passage by Southern and reactionary representatives.
Labor – black and white – must unite in an effort to get this legislation passed and to see to it that it is carried out. That is the only way. Pious speeches on holidays won’t do the trick – nor will appeals by the President that racial prejudice be forgotten bring this about. United and determined action will.
Now is the time to act! Demand the passage of the anti-poll-tax bill by the Senate! Demand the immediate reintroduction and enactment of the anti-lynch bill!
 




The drive for 5,000 new subscribers and readers of Labor Action, which comes to such a successful conclusion on May 1, constitutes for us a very special event on this May Day. While extending our May Day greetings to all the toiling and struggling peoples of the world, I want in this column to greet our more than 5,000 new readers and to welcome them into the growing army of Labor Action enthusiasts.
When the members of the Workers Party were out during the last three months selling trial subscriptions to Labor Action, they were primarily interested in getting you to read our paper – and selling you a sub was our means of bringing you Labor Action each week. It is our hope that your acquaintance with Labor Action and the Workers Party has only BEGUN with your purchase of that sub, and that in the coming weeks you will find out more about what we stand for?
Labor Action and the Workers Party during the six years of their existence have fought consistently and steadfastly on the side of the working class against the capitalist class. On this point we have never hedged – we have never posed as “impartial” in this great struggle between the oppressed and the oppressor.
 
Our Program
But Labor Action and the Workers Party have done far more than express sympathy for one side as against the other. We have by means of the printed word and active participation in the building and strengthening of labor’s organization, put forward programs, policies and proposals which were best calculated to achieve victory of our class. In presenting these, we have at all times indicated that the successful struggle of the working class will lead to the victory of socialism – and that we of Labor Action and the Workers Party are revolutionary socialists.
These policies were not culled out of the air nor are they the result of contemplation by a group of armchair philosophers. They come right out of the actual class struggle in which the members of the Workers Party participate, and from our deep conviction that these are the policies which will permit the working class to achieve its aims – immediate and ultimate. We put forward these policies for the purpose of having them supported and adopted by the working class in general – and by you, the readers of Labor Action, in particular.
We do not expect you to accept our ideas on our say-so. We do not believe that just because something appears in print it must be accepted as gospel truth. That is a concept which the capitalist press tries to inculcate in our minds. Labor Action, on the contrary, urges its readers to examine what we have to say, to examine it critically, and to accept our point of view only on the basis of conviction. We want the opportunity to discuss with our readers THEIR ideas on how the working class can best wage its fight for a decent life, and we want you to express these ideas in the columns of Labor Action. We want you to feel that Labor Action is YOUR paper in every sense of the word – that you not only subscribe to it, read it and give it to your friends, but that you also utilize its columns for the purpose of discussing with us and other workers what you propose as the answer to the many problems which come up in the labor movement and the world generally.
 
An Eight-Pager
To make room for our readers’ contributions, your contributions, Labor Action is to be expanded to an eight-pager. In the added space there will be a section devoted to discussion with and among the readers and subscribers of Labor Action of the program and policies of the Workers Party and of other organizations. We especially invite our new readers to participate in this discussion and to feel free to express their views and impressions.
On this May Day, which is also the sixth anniversary of the founding of Labor Action, in renewing our pledge to carry on the fight against capitalist oppression and exploitation, we extend our best socialist greetings to the new readers of Labor Action in the hope that many will join us soon in the active fight for socialism, the hope of humanity.
 




The current Eight Page issue of Labor Action is but the forerunner of the new, enlarged weekly that is going to appear regularly beginning with the June 17th issue. Every reader can now see for himself why it is so urgent that Labor Action be expanded. There is no better argument for this than this week’s Labor Action.
Nor can there be any better time for obtaining subscriptions to Labor Action than the coming month which will close the three-month Subscription Drive. With the appearance of the regular Eight Pager, the subscription rates will necessarily be increased. A six-month sub will cost 50 cents and a yearly sub will be $1.00. Six-month subs obtained before the end of the drive are only 25 cents and will include at least four months of the new, enlarged Labor Action.
The Eight Pager deserves the expanded circulation which the Subscription Drive is aiming at. You can make your contribution to the Eight Pager by obtaining a sub for yourself right now – and three additional subs for your friends and fellow-workers by filling out the combination blank below and mailing together with $1.00 to the offices of Labor Action. Don’t put this paper down until you’ve filled out the combination sub blank! Don’t put this off until later! DO IT NOW! Support the Labor Action Subscription and Expansion Drives!
With only one month left to complete the three-month Subscription Drive, Labor Action needs some 1,700 subscriptions to reach the 5,000 goal. Every Branch of the Workers Party is going to devote the month of April to push the drive way over this goal. Those branches which have already gone above their quotas, or are nearing them, are now pledged to surpass them by large percentages. Chicago, for example, is out to get 500 subs by the first of May. Reading and San Francisco are scheduled to reach the top in the next week or so.
At a joint meeting of the Executive Committees of all the New York Branches, the subscription drive was the main point on the agenda. This body discussed the better organization of the activities of the branches in the drive and expressed genuine confidence that the New York Local will complete its quota of 2000 subs by May 1st.
A delegation of Workers Party members has been sent to the Atlantic City Convention of the United Auto Workers for the purpose of distributing the literature of the Workers Party and Labor Action. The early reports on the results of the first day’s distributions indicate that Labor Action is being enthusiastically greeted by many of the UAW delegates who recognize it as the fighting champion of the progressive forces in the union. The GM workers especially are grabbing up Labor Action because they know that it was on the picket lines with them, and that it gave wholehearted support to the full demands raised by the GM workers. Subscriptions for Labor Action from UAW delegates are coming in fast. Next week’s scoreboard will reflect the results.
Two more Labor Action SUNDAYS are scheduled – April 7 and April 21 – and on the basis of these the quotas of every Workers Party Branch should be fulfilled or surpassed. ALL OUT ON THESE DATES! PUT THE SUBSCRIPTION DRIVE ACROSS!
 



For trying to exercise their constitutional right to vote in the coming presidential elections, the Negroes of Brownsville, Tennessee, have been threatened and persecuted so much that nine of their families had to leave town and one Negro, Elbert Williams, was lynched by a mob headed by the city marshall, Tip Hunter.
Negroes in Brownsville, although they outnumber the white population three to one, have not been able to exercise their voting rights since 1884 because of poll taxes and threats of lynching. They had organized a local branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and on May 6, a number of them presented themselves at the proper place to register as voters: but were told by the white officials to stop such nonsense. They persisted nonetheless.
On June 20, the Dixie mob decided to teach the Negroes a lesson in constitutionalism. Headed by the Night City Marshall Tip Hunter, they called at the house of Elbert Williams and his wife, both laundry workers, and insisted upon seeing Williams, in spite of the fact that they were told that the Williamses were ready to go to bed. Williams was taken from his home and placed in a car. That was the last time his wife, Annie, saw him alive. Together with some of her neighbors, she followed the Hunter car, but found it empty in front of the City Hall. Elbert Williams was nowhere to be found.
 
Williams Found Dead!
After three days of tortured waiting, Mrs. Annie Williams went to the City Hall where she was told that her husband hadn’t been seen. She wanted to take some clothes to her husband, but the Sheriff informed her that he didn’t think that Williams would be in need of clothes. In two or three days, Williams finally turned up – turned up when he was fished from the Hatchie River. Mrs. Williams, interviewed by the Amsterdam News, New York Negro weekly, stated:
“They tried to keep me from seeing him. They reached there before I had, and the coroner had already issued the order to have the body buried as soon as possible. It was only because I insisted that they let me look at it. It was a terrible sight, but I recognized him. His head was swollen twice its normal size. There were two holes in his chest that looked like bullet holes, the skin on his arms, legs, buttocks was bruised and blistered. His arms and legs, I heard, had been tied with rope and his body weighted down by a heavy log tied around his neck.”
Mrs. Williams, who is now living near New York, went on to say:
“They had tried to scare us out of carrying out our plan to register and vote this year by threatening a few they considered the leaders in the NAACP branch which was organized about 18 months ago. When they found they couldn’t do that, they made an example of my husband. That is the only way they felt they could whip us into line.”
Although it is a known fact that it was the city marshall who led the lynch mob, and although Mrs. Williams has named several men whose voices she recognized as participants in this cold-blooded murder, the officials of Brownsville have done nothing to apprehend and punish the criminals. Instead, they have forced nine Negro families who had lived and worked all their lives in Brownsville to leave their town.
While both Republicans and Democrats rave and rant about the barbarisms of Hitler, they glibly pass over the violence and terror which rule in old Dixie. The anti-lynching bill which has been before Congress since 1922 and the anti-poll tax bill to abolish the poll tax in eight Southern states have still to be passed.
 



Today the S.Y.L. is the youth section of the W.P. and endorses its political program. It has consolidated its forces and is now in a position to challenge the existing youth organizations for the leadership of the toiling and student youth of the United States. In addition, it has connections with youth organizations of other countries through its affiliation to the International Bureau of Revolutionary Youth Organizations for the formation of the new revolutionary youth international.
Only under the leadership and guidance of a revolutionary party can the youth organization fulfill its tasks and serve as a true rallying center of exploited youth. Lacking such a party, the youth organization must fall under the influence and control of non-revolutionary and anti-working class organizations.
Today, however, there exists a party which is capable of leading the revolutionary youth, of guiding it politically and aiding it organizationally. There is every opportunity for the Spartacus Youth League to grow and develop and to fulfill the tasks of a youth organization. Its membership will become two, three – even ten times that of the Party. From its ranks will come trained revolutionists for the Workers Party. In the coming struggles, the S.Y.L. will be at the side of the W.P., leading the American working class and the youth. It will show that the theoretical conception of a fighting, militant youth organization has been turned into a reality.
The Workers Party has a great responsibility with regard to the youth movement. There is no other force in the country which can create a movement that will keep the youth from falling victim to fascist demagogy and militaristic jingoism.
In the ranks of the W.P. are many comrades who were the founders of the early revolutionary youth movement after the war. Many of them played leading parts in the life of the Y.C.L. and these comrades can be of invaluable assistance in guiding the S.Y.L. In those cities where S.Y.L. branches do not exist, it is the duty of these comrades to aid in the establishment of such branches and to give both political and organizational guidance to the young comrades of the S.Y.L. It is the duty of Party comrades to study and understand the needs of the youth organization and to participate in the solution of the problems which confront the League.
The joint work of the two organizations depends to a great extent on the relationships existing between them. Conscious attempts must be made to have the Spartacus Youth League function as an independent youth organization which is politically subordinate to the Workers Party. By exchange of representatives on committees, by a careful survey of the needs of the S.Y.L., by an active interest in its life, the Workers Party will demonstrate that it can build and lead the Spartacus Youth League and that it defends the immediate and ultimate interests of the working class youth.
 



A battle well fought and won such is the story of the struggle conducted by the United Negro Bus Strike Committee, hereafter to be known as the United Negro Bus Association. After four weeks of picketing Harlem bus stops, carrying such slogans as “Don’t ride the buses until you see Negro drivers” and “Walk so that Negro men may live,” militant, race-conscious Negroes under the direction of the committee, composed of the Harlem Labor Union, the National Negro Congress and the Greater New York Coordinating Committee, assisted by members of the Workers Party and the Young Peoples Socialist League, had the satisfaction of knowing that what they had pledged themselves to win was at last theirs.
Starting with a committee of five interested in obtaining jobs for Negroes from the Omnibus Corporation, the movement grew so that at the last mass meeting held about two weeks ago over 5,000 Negroes enthusiastically supported the drive. The battle came to a close when an agreement was signed between the representatives of the Transport Workers Union, the bus corporation and the United Negro Bus Association on Saturday, April 19.
I was at the Abyssinian Church talking with Joe Ford, untiring and efficient picket organizer, and awaiting final confirmation of the agreement, when word crone over the telephone that the contract was signed and the strike was over. Ford had just been in the midst of telling me that this strike was only a stepping stone to greater and more important struggles for jobs for Negroes.
To celebrate this victory, Harlem has declared a holiday for Saturday, April 26. All places of business are asked to suspend operations between the hours of 2 and 5 p.m. and all Harlem will march – churches, political clubs, trade unions, social groups and others. The participants will convene at 110th Street and Lennox Avenue at 1 p.m. Preceded by bands and picketers, under the leadership of Marshals John Parris, Joe Ford and Walter Roarks, the parade will march through the heart of Harlem to 148th Street and Bradhurst Avenue at Colonial Park.·At this spot there will be an open air meeting at 4 o’clock.
The three-party agreement calls for “the immediate employment as the need arises of 70 Negroes in the maintenance division and of 100 Negroes in the bus drivers division. No member of any other race can be employed until this 170 has been employed. After that there will be employment of one Negro for each white until 17 per cent of the working group is Negro (this is the same as the proportion of Negroes in the population of New York City. This means over 500 of the 3,000-odd employees of the bus company will eventually be Negro workers.
The co-chairmen of the drive issued the following statement:
“This is not the end, but merely the beginning in the historic struggle of the Negro people of the 20th century to assert their rights to dwell in the heart of this democracy of ours, rather than on the fringes. Our slogan as we march forward together is – let’s make our land safe for democracy. We are calling upon all lovers of democracy, white and black, to see that all members of this democracy, even though they are a minority, shall be free.”
Now that the bus strike has been won the committee which conducted it will continue as the United Negro Bus Association to represent the Negroes who obtain jobs with the bus company and to see to it that the provisions of the contract are carried through. However, each of the three organizations composing the original committee will return to its own activity. The Greater New York Coordinating Committee, which itself is composed of many organizations, has plans for extending this struggle.
An important place for such a campaign is in the war industries where there are many jobs available from which Negroes are barred in spite of the fact that many of them are well trained to fill these jobs. The Workers Party is ready to participate in such a campaign to obtain jobs for Negroes, in the same manner as we participated in the Negro Bus strike, in the capacity of pickets or in any other way which will advance the struggle for social, political and economic equality for the Negro masses.
ALL OUT TO THE VICTORY PARADE ON SATURDAY, APRIL 26.
 

