




Neil Davidson on how the current neoliberal project has been almost too successful as a ruling class strategy, creating a form of capitalism which endangers the long-term security of capital itself and edges society ever closer to barbarism.



*
Neoliberalism represents a paradox for capitalism. Its relative success as a ruling-class strategy, particularly in weakening the trade union movement and reducing the share of profits going to labour, has helped to disguise that some aspects of this mode of regulation are proving unintentionally detrimental to the system. Serving the interests of the rich is not the same – or at least, not always the same – as serving the interests of capital and may in certain circumstances be in contradiction to it. Simply doing what the rich want is unlikely to produce beneficial results for the system as a whole, although it may help increase the wealth of individual capitalists. For not only are capitalists generally uninterested in the broader social interest, which we might expect, but they are also generally incapable of correctly assessing their own overall collective class interests, which might seem more surprising – although it is a long-standing phenomenon, observed by many of the great social theorists from late eighteenth century onwards.
Capitalist states – or more precisely, their managers – have traditionally acted to make such an assessment; but in the developed West at least, neoliberal regimes are increasingly displaying an uncritical adherence to the short-term wishes of particular business interests. The self-destructive nature of neoliberal capitalism has nothing necessarily to do with the removal of restrictions on markets. Leaving aside the fact that capitalism was always capable of producing social atomisation, collective violence and environmental destruction, even in periods when the state was far more directly involved in the mechanisms of production and exchange than it is now, there are two problems with this position. First, rhetoric apart, capitalists no more favour untrammelled competition today than they did when monopolies and cartels first appeared as aspects of the emerging system in the sixteenth century. Second, one would have to be extraordinarily naïve to believe that the neoliberal project has been about establishing ‘free’ markets in the first place.
Regardless of their class origins, state managers and capitalists are drawn together into a series of mutually supportive relationships. The former need the resources provided by individual national capitals, principally through taxation and loans, in order to attend to the needs of the national capital as a whole; the latter need specific policy initiatives to strengthen the competitive position of their sector of the national capital within the global economy. There have nevertheless always been tensions, above the fear on the part of capitalists that states – which they regard as Weberian autonomous entities with their own interests – will either restrict or abolish their right to private property. What gives these fears plausibility is precisely the fact that state managers have both to facilitate the process of capital accumulation and ameliorate its effects on the population and environment – an early example of this can be found in the Factory Acts and capitalist responses to them described by Marx in Capital I.
It is not the nature of capitalist states themselves that has changed: they still need to perform the core functions described at the beginning of this post. There are no ‘neoliberal states’, but there are ‘neoliberal regimes’. In the case of the UK the regime began, not with Margaret Thatcher’s General Election victory in 1979, but around half-way through the preceding Labour Government of 1974–79 and it persists, with variations, to this day, whatever the bleating from Polly Toynbee and others on the liberal left about the supposedly fundamental differences between the two main parties.
What has changed is that the relationship between neoliberal regimes and capital has since the 1970s prevented states from acting effectively in the collective, long-term interest of capitalism. Neoliberal regimes have increasingly abandoned any attempt to arrive at an overarching understanding of what the conditions for growth might be, other than the supposed need for lowering taxation and regulation and raising labour flexibility. Apart from these, the interests of the total national capital is seen as an arithmetical aggregate of the interests of individual businesses, some of which, to be sure, have rather more influence with governments than others. In so far as there is a ‘strategic view’ it involves avoiding any policies which might incur corporate displeasure, however minor the inconveniences they might involve for the corporations, which of course includes regulation. The reason is not simply because of successful lobbying and PR on behalf of individual businesses or industries, pernicious and pervasive though these increasingly sophisticated activities undoubtedly are. But corporations have always done this: why are state managers now so predisposed to respond positively to their efforts? The answer is in the way in which neoliberalism has reconfigured politics. The necessary distance between the state and capital (or between state managers and capitalists) that Smith, Marx and Schumpeter – from their different political perspectives – all regarded as being essential for the health of the system, is being minimised. In particular, the regime adoption of timescales associated specifically with the profit-maximising drives of financial capital is important as it indicates the short-termism involved. Three factors are important in producing this tendency.
The first is the depoliticisation of the political wing of the state managers through the delegation of functions away from the government in office to ostensibly ‘non-political’ bodies, the introduction ostensibly of ‘objective’ assessments of the effectiveness of policy and imposition of binding ‘rules’ which restrict the range of actions which politicians can take. In relation to the latter in particular, each successive phase of the neoliberal experiment saw the incremental abandonment of the repertoire of measures through which governments had traditionally influenced economic activity. As a consequence of their heightened ‘managerial’ function, politicians have increasingly become a professional caste whose life-world is increasingly remote from any other form of activity, economic or otherwise, and therefore more autonomous, while simultaneously becoming more committed to capitalist conceptions of the national interest, with business as an exemplar.
The second factor, opposed to the depoliticisation of politicians, is the politicisation of the non-political wing of the state managers: the civil servants. As the political parties became less distinct from each other, the officials required to implement their increasingly similar policies are also required to turn themselves more completely into extensions of the parties themselves. In the UK, following hard on the heels of the United States as always, there has been since 1979, and especially since 1997, a more generalised influx of private-sector appointees into the civil service, to the point where it has been effectively subject to a corporate takeover. But even in relation to the permanent home civil service, the expectation that senior civil servants in particular will not attempt to point out the difficulties involved in governmental policies or even consider alternative ways of delivering policies, but simply present arguments to justify them, regardless of the empirical data.
The third and final factor in producing chronic short-termism in neoliberal regimes is the de-politicisation of the electorate. Except it is not so much de-politicisation as abstention by sections of the electorate who no longer have any parties for whom to vote. Many of those electors still involved in casting their vote do so – appropriately enough – on a consumer model of political choice, where participation is informed by media-driven perceptions of which result will be to their immediate personal benefit. Unsurprisingly, the numbers prepared to carry out even this minimal level of activity are declining. This can be reversed, as was demonstrated in the popular insurgency for a Yes vote during the 2014 Scottish independence referendum, where 97% of the population registered to vote and 85% actually did; but under ‘normal’ conditions, those who vote are more likely to belong to the middle-classes, who tend to have a more focused view of their material interests and deploy more interventionist strategies for maintaining them than those bearing the brunt of austerity.
Clearly, in situations of absolute, immediate crisis, short-term emergency measures would be introduced in the same way as the effective nationalisation of banks and other financial institutions that took place in both the US and UK during 2008. But these were minimal interventions to prevent outright collapse, to save the institutions (and the practices which brought them to the point of crisis in the first place) without using them for any coherent strategic end, let alone any broader social purpose; and of course on the basis that they would be re-privatised as soon as possible.
I am not suggesting that it should be the work of socialists to propose solutions to the crisis of capitalism. It is always necessary to argue for reforms, of course, but the idea that the application of Keynesian solutions would restore the Golden Age of the post-war welfare state is simply illusionary and underestimates the extent to which those years were the result of a unique set of circumstances. Booms will continue to occur, as they did between 1982 and 2007, but the beneficiaries will become fewer and fewer. Consequently, I am not predicting that developments discussed here mean that capitalism will simply collapse under the weight of its own internal contradictions either. Scenarios of this type, from those of Rosa Luxemburg onwards, have been proved false in the past and there is no reason to suppose that they will be any more accurate in the future. Indeed, a collapse not brought about by the conscious intervention of the oppressed and exploited would not be to their advantage in any case, but simply a step towards the barbarism to which Marxists from Engels onwards have seen as the consequence of failing to achieve a socialist society. And this is no mere slogan: the condition of central Africa and parts of the Middle East today indicates the presence of actually existing barbarism as the daily reality for millions. Events in the developed world are unlikely to take this form, at least until environmental catastrophe becomes irreversible, but rather involve a gradual and, all but the very poorest, almost imperceptible worsening and coarsening on their conditions of life.
What I am suggesting is that neoliberalism as a strategy has almost been too successful as a method of capitalist regulation. It has finally brought about the situation that Schumpeter feared, where creative destruction has no limits or boundaries. Both Engels and Walter Benjamin envisaged capitalism as a runaway train heading for destruction. It appeared, within less than a decade of the latter’s suicide in 1940, that forces within capitalism itself were capable of ‘pulling the hand break’; it now appears that his initial intuition was right and that revolution is all that stands in the way of the disaster that otherwise awaits.
 



Recent political shifts in Scotland present a real opening for socialists
The British general election in May told two different stories. The first concerns the United Kingdom as a whole. Despite last-minute conflicting polls and speculation about hung parliaments, minority governments, and new coalitions, the Conservatives received 37 percent of the vote (24 percent of those eligible to vote), meaning this government has been elected with one of the lowest voting shares in history.
While there certainly hasn’t been a massive swing to the dominant party of British capital, the vagaries of the UK electoral system mean the Conservatives can now extend the previous coalition’s savage austerity program. Over a third of the electorate did not vote, and perhaps the most striking feature of the election was the total failure of the Labour Party to convince them to do so.
The second story of the election concerns Scotland. The scale of the earthquake that has just occurred is demonstrated below. There are 59 Scottish seats in the British House of Commons (out of a total of 650).



 


  


2010


  


2015




Conservative and Unionist


  1


  1




Labour


41


  1




Liberal Democrat


11


  1




Scottish National Party


  6


56



This is not a misprint. From having only 6 seats 5 years ago, the Scottish National Party (SNP) now holds 56, with the other main parties reduced to 1 each. The SNP was supported by 50 percent of voters (36 percent of those eligible to vote).
The SNP’s current hegemony is not totally unprecedented. The Conservatives also achieved over 50 percent of the vote in 1955, although this only delivered them 36 out of what were then 71 Scottish seats. And, although Labour had taken over from the Conservatives as the party with the largest share of the vote by 1959, it took until 1987 to attain absolute electoral dominance – and even then with 6 fewer seats than the SNP has now.
What is unprecedented is the speed with which the SNP has achieved its position and the fact that it has been accompanied by a vast increase in membership, now numbering around 110,000 – something like 2 percent of the Scottish population.
Most of these new members are both working class and on the Left. The SNP trade union group had 800 members at a September 2014 referendum; nine months later, it has 16,000 – larger than the entire membership of the Scottish Labour Party. At the June 20 anti-austerity rally of around 5,000 in George Square, Glasgow was addressed by, among others, Kirsteen Fraser, the SNP Trade Union Group’s secretary, while Nicola Sturgeon, SNP leader and Scottish first minister, was herself addressing the group’s first congress in Stirling.
 
The Rise of the SNP
As these results suggest, the secular decline of the Scottish Labour Party has now reached crisis point. To be reduced from 41 seats to 1 seat is perhaps the greatest collapse in Scottish electoral history since the First Extinction of the Conservatives back in 1834 (the Second Extinction occurred in 1997, when the party lost all its seats). Needless to say, this has not been an overnight process.
Labour’s working-class membership base has been declining since the 1960s and especially since the mid-1980s, overtaken by members of the new middle class. There used to be a layer of Labour activists in most working-class communities – often quite right-wing activists – who would lobby the local council, organize petitions, and generally act as a focus for local community reformism. This layer is greatly diminished, and while these activities still get done, Labour members no longer initiate them as a matter of course.
Most of Labour’s working-class membership now comes from the affiliated trade unions, whose role is therefore decisively important. The structural link to the organized working class through affiliated trade unions and, more distantly, the Trade Union Congress and its subnational equivalents, acted as channels for the expression of organized working-class views within the Labour Party.
Although always heavily mediated by the bureaucracy, these views did influence Labour policy, a process that reached its peak around 1974. In theory, this could still take place, but in practice the union leaders have exercised a self-denying ordinance since the advent of New Labour that has led to the marginalization of working-class influence over the party. This process is now being taken still further by a leadership desperate to distance the party from organized labor – perceived to be unpopular with the “aspirational” middle-class voters whose support Labour seeks.
As this suggests, Labour has not done much for the working class lately. Historically, of course, it has a number of important achievements to its credit, but socialists tend to be quite dismissive of these, concentrating instead – for obvious and usually entirely justified reasons – on the record of Labour betrayal.
This approach makes it difficult to explain why anyone ever believed in or voted for Labour in the first place, but unfortunately Labour’s achievements are also all in the past – in some cases the very distant past. Its recent record includes backing the Iraq War, drumming up tabloid racism against migrants, and refusing to repeal anti–trade union legislation or reverse Tory (and New Labour) privatizations, all the while lecturing Scots on the evils of nationalism – except, of course, British nationalism.
Like similar organizations in Europe and Australasia, Labour has moved extraordinarily far to the right. Reformism remains the dominant form of consciousness within the working class, but there is no necessary connection between reformism in general and the specific form taken by Labourism.
The combination of Labour’s own behavior in office – above all its acceptance of neoliberalism – together with structural changes in the nature of the working class and the current diminution of trade union consciousness, means that for many working-class people, Labour appears fundamentally similar to other parties, simply providing “the least bad” choice on offer. In these circumstances, if new parties appear, offering reforms, sounding as if they actually believe in them, and invoking the social-democratic tradition, it is no mystery why working-class voters would support them.
All that I have described until now is true for Labour at a UK level, but there are specifically Scottish aspects of its decline. The SNP is not in the slightest like Syriza or Podemos in terms of its structures or politics, but it has grown for similar reasons at the Labour Party’s expense, in a way that no party is in a position to do in England.
Twelve years ago, perhaps even twelve months ago, even the most optimistic of the SNP’s tacticians would not have predicted capturing so much of Labour’s former support, even though this has been their goal for several decades now. The transformative element was the independence referendum campaign and the emergence in its latter stages of what was effectively a mass social movement comparable to those of Greece or Spain.
In previous eras a massive left-wing, overwhelmingly working-class, and mainly young movement would, potentially at least, have been a vast recruiting ground for Labour Party members and voters. In the present moment this outcome was impossible – not only because of Labour’s enthusiastic embrace of neoliberalism at home and imperialist war abroad, not only because the SNP had carefully positioned itself as the defender of the social-democratic tradition, but also because Labour activists were simply incapable of speaking to the tens of thousands mobilized by the Radical Independence Campaign (RIC) and the Yes campaign more generally.
But they were prepared to ally with the Conservatives for over two years in the Better Together campaign. For Labour, anyone who supported independence was, by definition, a “nationalist” and therefore worthy only of the unhinged sectarianism that it has always shown towards the SNP.
This uncomprehending blindness to the real nature of the Yes campaign has affected even the standard-bearers of the Labour left in Scotland: Neil Findlay, a former candidate for the leadership in Scotland, describes politics in Scotland as now being “post-rational” because of the failure of the working class to vote for his party. The sense of thwarted entitlement here is tragic: one wonders just how you begin to appeal to erstwhile supporters whom you regard as having gone collectively insane.
In fact electoral support for the SNP is perfectly rational. Two trends have brought the SNP closer to left-wing activists.
First, socialists and nationalists converged on the importance of key policies, including rejection of Trident and austerity, and support for universal benefits. The leadership’s transition from Alex Salmond to Nicola Sturgeon also allowed the SNP to jettison the toxic remainder of the “Celtic Tiger” bubble, the policy of turning Scotland into a low-corporation tax market utopia on the Irish model. Second, a majority of left-wing Scots outside the Labour Party now agree there is no “British road to socialism,” meaning that independence has become a programmatic demand.
Beyond the self-identified left, the SNP was also able to reach out to voters who had previously been suspicious of it, or who had perhaps only been prepared to vote for it at a Scottish parliamentary level, by opposing austerity and nuclear weapons and welcoming immigrants. Importantly, its success demolishes the claim that people will no longer vote for left policies – a lie currently being cultivated by all contenders for the British Labour leadership but the sole left candidate, Jeremy Corbyn.
 
A Left Opposition to the SNP
In the face of this enormous upheaval and the hope it awakens in the Scottish left – not unreasonably given the nightmare vista of untrammelled Conservative rule across the UK as a whole – the temptation to stand to one side and gaze admiringly at the SNP juggernaut, or even to join it, can be overwhelming. However, it should be resisted.
There are important differences between a socialist agenda and the SNP’s agenda, some of which were on display during Sturgeon’s recent triumphal visit to the United States. At one point she joked with Jon Stewart on The Daily Show about the US propensity for invading oil-producing countries, but at another she told the US Council on Foreign Relations: “Do not think that the SNP and the Scottish government takes a markedly different position from the UK government on the vast majority of international issues” and pledged to remain a “key ally” of the US if Scotland achieved independence. On Bloomberg TV she announced that Scotland was “open for business.”
Sturgeon has some room for maneuver. One reason why the SNP has been able to move left is because (unlike Catalonia) there is not a big independence-supporting bourgeoisie exercising pressure on it: there is no longer an indigenous Scottish capitalist class of any size – most large-scale capital in Scotland is externally owned and deeply opposed to Scotland gaining independence. Nevertheless, she and the rest of the SNP leadership have been perfectly honest in defining its current position as moderately social democratic: in effect it is on the extreme left of the social neoliberal spectrum.
It is only because politics has moved so far to the right over the last forty years that SNP could be mistaken for a party of radical leftists. It remains pro-monarchy, pro-NATO, and pro-Sterling. In the Scottish Parliament itself, where it has been in power for the last eight years, the SNP has piloted policies that clash with a socialist agenda, from college cuts to arming the police to criminalizing “sectarian” displays of Irish nationalism at football matches.
Above all, it has not resisted cuts in service provision at the local council level, except rhetorically. An independence movement dominated by the SNP will be forced to defend this legacy. This not only weakens the case for independence, it also sets a poor precedent for governing Scotland after independence is achieved.
There is therefore a contradiction at the heart of the SNP. Its new members think that it is considerably more left wing than it actually is. This has already begun to affect the inner life of the party branches, and may well find expression in motions to its national conference later this year.
Once these new members find out exactly how tightly controlled the party is (the May 2016 Manifesto for the Scottish parliamentary elections will be written by Sturgeon and her deputy John Swinney) and how far it is prepared to compromise with capital, at least some of them may realize that it is not the organization they had imagined it to be. But is there an alternative?
I wrote earlier that the temptation to go with the flow of the SNP surge is very strong. What is the point of trying to establish a political alternative when it exercises such dominance? There would certainly be none if it simply involved another party-building attempt to create “the” party out of the pure, elected few. But we have been part of one the greatest mass movements in Scottish history. Its energies have not all been absorbed by the SNP, and its new membership and support are still on a highly conditional basis.
The responsibility of socialists is therefore very great. If the SNP is to face an opposition from the Left – rather than the racist, xenophobic right – unity of purpose and organization will be required. The Scottish Left Project, which emerged out of the non-party activists involved in RIC, is seeking to create this unity; the Scottish Socialist Party has already agreed to take part with a view to standing together in the first-ever alliance in next May’s Scottish parliamentary elections.
It is understandable why even people unwilling to surrender their critical faculties in the face of the SNP behemoth might have their doubts about the possibility of building a credible left-wing alternative to both the SNP and Labour. The Left’s record hardly gives grounds for confidence. But the recent success of the RIC shows signs of a new maturity in the Scottish left – a recognition that unity and boldness in reaching out to working-class communities made a huge difference. And we would not be starting from a blank slate, but from one of the biggest popular mobilizations in decades. These are similar circumstances which led to the birth of Podemos in Spain.
Although the new formation will seek to win seats in the May elections and form part of a “left opposition” to the SNP along with the Greens, the movement cannot be focused solely, or even primarily, on electoral politics. It has to be an organizational project that seeks to engage with the working-class majority of the Scottish population. In doing so it should apply some of the lessons of the Yes campaign, above all that while it is important to reach out to people in the communities where they live, it is even more important to do so where they work.
The collapse of the Labour Party in Scotland would have been catastrophic for the Left if it had taken place on a right-wing basis, as it has in those parts of England where the UK Independence Party gathered support. That it has not means the radical left has a real opportunity to build a strong formation for a new politics.
Neil Davidson a lecturer in sociology at the University of Glasgow.
 






Neil Davidson analyses the historic election results in Scotland. If the SNP is to face an opposition from the left, rather the racist right, then unity of both purpose and organisation will be required.



1. Faced with a situation which is unmistakably a historic turning point, commentators can be tempted into an interpretative bidding war in which the significance of the events is exaggerated to the point of absurdity. It would be difficult to exaggerate the significance of the 2015 General Election results in Scotland; but merely yielding to the heady excitement of the new situation carries its own risks. For the left, the danger lies in forgetting those genuine insights which it has gained through decades of painful experience, not least about the limits of reformism and the contradictions of nationalism. To abandon this knowledge is to leave ourselves blindsided as we attempt to navigate a way through unmapped new terrain.




Photo: David Holt, flickr



2. The main landmarks are, however, clear enough. The Liberal Democrats, justly rewarded for their role in the Coalition, have been reduced, like the Tories before them, to a solitary outpost at the geographical periphery of the country. Their fate, however, pales before the electoral annihilation of the Scottish Labour Party, and the revelation of how utterly fragile the links between it and the people it claims to represent have become. In the end, Labour too could only muster one seat – not in the former heartlands of the West, but in South Edinburgh, where at any rate there are fewer working class voters to turn against it. Labour’s long-term decline is not, of course, a purely Scottish or even British phenomenon. Reformism, as type of consciousness, will exist as long as capitalism itself does; Social Democracy, as the organisational expression and reinforcement of that consciousness, seems unlikely to so, for reasons which are too complex to discuss here. The point, however, is that reformist politics, while still generated by the contradictory consciousness of the working class under capitalism, are becoming increasingly detached from the institutions and organisations in which they were originally embedded, opening up the possibility of reformism finding a focus in parties with quite different political trajectories, such the SNP. But before turning to the real challenges which this poses for the left, however, we must first dispense with the false three claims about election result, which, despite their nonsensical nature, have already achieved widespread currency, particularly in England and among the liberal left media.
 
Three myths of the 2015 general election
3. The first is that Scots who voted for the SNP are to blame for the Tory victory. As several commentators with differing political perspectives, but a common ability to do basic arithmetic, have noted, even if Labour had won every seat in Scotland it would still have been 41 seats short of equalling the Tory score. A secondary line of attack has been that the real fault of the SNP was that by simply existing, advocating moderately social democratic policies and gaining support for them, it fiendishly allowed the Tories and their supporters in the media to raise the spectre of Miliband having to rely on it in a hung parliament, thus scaring potential English Labour voters into the arms of Cameron. In fact, anyone ignorant or feeble-minded enough to be terrified by Nicola Sturgeon was unlikely to vote for Labour in the first place: for them, the prospect of a Labour-SNP alliance may have provided an excuse for voting Tory, but not a reason. So, rather than blaming the Scots for having the temerity to vote for their party of choice, perhaps the Labour Party members and supporters making this accusation should reflect on their own miserable failure to inspire a journey to the polling place by that third of the eligible population who declined to vote at all, most of whom belong to the working class.
4. Which brings us to the second claim: Labour lost because it was too left wing and failed to pay sufficient attention to the aspirational middle-classes – groups whose interests are, of course, entirely neglected by the British political class. This explanation is one which contenders for the party leadership are offering with increased stridency as they position themselves for the role of the New Blair. Now, it is true that Labour was too left-wing for the majority of people who habitually vote Tory; but anything Labour did or said would have been too left-wing for the denizens of Hampshire and Maidenhead, no matter how many concessions it made on austerity or migration. Only far-right parties like UKIP or actual fascists like the BNP can credibly outbid the Tories from the right. The real question is whether Labour was ‘too far left’ for the millions, to whom I have already referred, who did not vote. And in this respect Scotland provides the answer. From a socialist perspective, it is perfectly correct to draw attention to the limitations of the SNP’s own behaviour in office, just as it is to point out the difficulties the party will encounter in attempting to carry out even its relatively limited anti-austerity programme; in the context of this discussion, however, the relevant fact is what the Scottish electorate thought it was voting for. Unless the partisans of the ‘centre ground’ are seriously arguing that there is some fundamental difference between the populations of Scotland and England – a position which in most other circumstances they are anxious to deny – then they have to explain why, when the former were offered a left alternative they embraced it, and why they think that the latter would not have done the same. The problem in England was that no party, or at least large and credible enough to attract support, was articulating basic social democratic positions (let alone anything further to the left) for which the unrepresented masses could vote.
5. The third and final claim is that the Scots have become possessed by a divisive and sinister nationalism, which has led them to abandon their English brothers and sisters for a politics of ethnic grievance. It is not clear to me how Sturgeon’s offer to ally with left parties at Westminster in order to, for example, prevent the further privatisation of the NHS, can be interpreted in this way; but the level of sheer ignorance and incomprehension involved in this particular fantasy suggest that the people who hold it are impervious to anything so tedious as actual evidence. There is a sense in which the current upsurge of support for both independence as a goal and the SNP as a party has nothing to do with ‘nationalism’ at all: they are simply the streams into which the desire for social justice has flowed when others have become blocked. Neil MacCormick’s famous distinction between ‘existential’ and ‘utilitarian’ nationalism, cited by Sturgeon in a speech during 2012, is in fact less compelling than is often supposed. Nationalism is a form of identity, allied to a political project for the establishment or defence of a state based on that identity; but it is quite possible to see strategic reasons for establishing a state which are not identity-based at all: James Connolly was not a ‘utilitarian’ Irish nationalist, nor was John Maclean a ‘utilitarian’ Scottish nationalist. The test is whether the putative interests of ‘the Scots’ or ‘Scotland’ take precedence over the greater solidarities required in the struggle for socialism. Seeking to establish an independent Scottish state is not in itself a breach of solidarity with our English brothers and sisters (indeed, we can legitimately ask for their support in this); lining up with an emergent Scottish ruling class would be. But even if we accept, as I think we must, that some support for independence is inspired by actual nationalism, the point is of limited significance, since nationalisms are never pure expressions of identity, but always involve some social content. A favourite, if thoroughly preposterous trope of the Guardian-New Statesman liberal left commentariat is to equate support for Scottish independence (which is not the same as support for the SNP) with support for UKIP, with Labour caught in the crossfire of equivalently deranged Scottish and English nationalisms. Leaving aside the actual political differences involved (in relation to Trident, migration, the EU, austerity ...) the sleight-of-hand involved here is the invocation of English nationalism. This certainly exists, but in the case of Labour there is, of course, another nationalism involved, but it is British, not English. Like the Devil, British nationalism has a great trick, which is to convince everyone that it does not exist. For most of the period since 1707, and certainly since 1746, most Scots had been British nationalists; perhaps a majority still are. This should not surprise anyone. Nationalism is normal, it is the everyday form of consciousness under capitalism, the common-place assumption that social life can only be lived within the structures of a nation-state. But even if we accept that supporters of independence and the SNP (groups who overlap but who are by no means identical) are nationalists – an issue to which I will return – this does not mean that these Scots were previously untouched by national feeling, it means instead that they have switched their national allegiance from one nationalism to another, from Britain to Scotland.
6. It might be worth considering at this point why so many Scots have lost faith in the idea of Britain. Britishness in Scotland originally emerged from the field of tension between two opposing sets of values, both embedded in their own institutional structures: the imperialist racism of the British state and the social solidarity of the British labour movement. The conflict between these world views was expressed, not only in the programmes of rival political parties, but in contradictions within the consciousness of the working-class majority of the population. The end of Empire, post-1945, saw the removal of one of the two main pillars of British identity in Scotland. Nevertheless, the identity survived and became, if anything, even more entrenched during the same period, largely because of the two great achievements of the British labour movement, British imperialism’s main internal opponent. One was the institutional embodiment, however imperfectly and inadequately, of labour movement values in the Welfare State, above all in the NHS. The other was through the ability of the trade unions, organised at a UK level, to defend working class living standards and workplace conditions. Trade union membership reached a peak of over 13 million in 1979 following the insurgencies of that decade. This peak was followed by the neoliberal onslaught which has succeeded in reducing it to around 6.5 million – by no means a negligible figure, but one which is, in terms of density, heavily concentrated in the public sector and among older workers. The implications for the continued existence of British identity in Scotland are significant.
7. Younger workers are the least likely to be unionised, which does not mean that they would not join if given the opportunity, or that they are not engaged in other campaigns for social justice, simply that ‘the British labour movement’ means little or nothing to them as a reality. But equally, those areas which are most likely to be unionised, in the public sector, have also seen a diminution of UK-wide connections, as the trade unions concerned – PCS in the Scottish Government, Unison in the NHS – already have devolved structures and Scottish-level bargaining units. These are tendencies within the trade union movement, but the direction of travel is unmistakeable, and it is away from a sense of Britishness. That leaves the Welfare State. And it is in this context that Britishness is being most actively, if unintentionally, undermined. Ironically, the people most responsible are not Scottish nationalists; quite the contrary, the people most responsible are those committed to maintaining the British state: the adherents of that peculiarly Anglo-Saxon mix of neoconservatism and neoliberalism which has characterised, in different ways, all British governments, including Labour governments, since 1979. There is a sense therefore in which both the independence referendum and the General Election were about the outcomes most likely to retain in Scotland those institutions which have protected working-class people from capitalism’s otherwise unconstrained destructiveness. Ironically, most of those who voted for independence in 2014 and for the SNP in 2015 were asserting a belief that, under current conditions, these were the only ways in which the remaining positive aspects of Britishness could be preserved. But Labour has been the most vociferous party in defending the unity of Neoliberal Britain – far more so than the Tories, whose right-wing would are equally happy for Scotland and the rest of the EU to be, as they see it, cut adrift from the glory that is England. And this clinging to the decaying corpse of Britain is the immediate cause of Labour’s electoral disaster.
 
Labour’s suicide and the rise of the SNP
8. Twelve years ago, perhaps even 12 months ago, even the most optimistic of the SNP’s tacticians would not have predicted capturing so much of Labour’s former support, even though this has been their goal for several decades now. The transformative element was the referendum campaign and the emergence in its latter stages of what was effectively a mass social movement comparable to those of Greece or Spain. In previous eras a massive left-wing and overwhelmingly working class movement would, potentially at least, have been a vast recruiting ground for Labour Party members and voters. On this occasion such an outcome was impossible – not only because of Labour’s enthusiastic embrace of neoliberalism at home and imperialist war abroad, not only because the SNP had carefully positioned itself as the defender of the social democratic tradition, but also because Labour activists were simply incapable of speaking to the tens of thousands mobilised by RIC and the Yes campaign more generally. For Labour, anyone who supported independence was, by definition, a ‘nationalist’ and therefore worthy only of the unhinged sectarianism which it has always shown towards the SNP. This uncomprehending blindness to the real nature of the Yes campaign has affected even the standard-bearers of the Labour left in Scotland: Neil Finlay, a serious working class figure and former candidate for the leadership in Scotland, describes politics in Scotland as now being ‘post-rational’, because of the failure of the working class to vote for Labour. The sense of thwarted entitlement here is tragic: one wonders just how you begin to appeal to erstwhile supporters whom you regard as having gone collectively insane. The day after the election Herald columnist Ian Bell wrote about the ‘strange death’ of Scottish Labour. On this occasion his appropriation of George Dangerfield’s useful phrase was misplaced, for there was nothing remotely strange about the fate which has befallen Scottish Labour. On the contrary, to borrow the title of a book by a very different writer, Gabriel García Márquez, this was the chronicle of a death foretold.
9. There are precedents for the extent of the SNP’s subsequent hegemony. The Tories also achieved over 50% of the vote in 1955, although this only delivered them 36 out of what were then 71 Scottish seats. And, although Labour took over from the Tories as the party with the largest share of the vote by 1959, it took until 1987 to attain absolute electoral dominance, and even them with 6 fewer seats than the SNP has now. What is unprecedented is the speed with which the SNP has achieved its position and the fact that it has been accompanied by a vast increase in membership, now numbering around 110,000 – something like 2% of the Scottish population. In the face of this enormous upheaval and the hope it awakens in the Scottish left – not unreasonably given the nightmare vista of untrammelled Tory rule across the UK as a whole – the temptation to stand to one side and gaze admiringly at the SNP juggernaut, or even to join it, can be overwhelming; it should however be resisted. In any case, simply establishing a separate state will not resolve our problems, although it will allow the possibility of achieving reforms currently blocked at the UK level. But everything then depends on what the left and the movement actually do. There is a naïve nationalist view which ascribes all our woes to the cartoon villain, ‘Westmonster’, as if it was simply geographical location and the weight of its nefarious traditions from which we had to escape. In republican socialist versions of this argument it is the ‘crown powers’ which are fetishized as the source of all evil. The effect is to reinforce the disabling myth of British exceptionalism. Alas, all capitalist states have their own ways of curtailing democracy – because curtailing democracy is one of the key functions of the capitalist state and, unfortunately, this would also be the case in Scotland. Even if the SNP had the will to resist all the internal and external pressures pushing against the achievement of even quite modest reforms, are we really expecting it to succeed where previous social democratic governments – with far stronger social bases in working-class communities and institutions – have failed?
 
Conclusion
10. I wrote earlier that the temptation to go with flow of the SNP surge is very strong. What is the point of trying to establish a political alternative when it exercises such dominance? There would certainly be none if it simply involved another attempt to iteration of the pure, elected few. But we have been part of one the greatest mass movements in Scottish history, its energies have not all been absorbed by the SNP and its new membership and support are still on a highly conditional basis. The responsibility of socialists is therefore very great. If the SNP is to face an opposition from the left, rather the racist, xenophobic right, then unity of both purpose and organisation will be required. But if we can actually do this then the possibilities are as thrilling as they have been in my lifetime. “Run forward comrade, the old world is behind you”, went the French student slogan of 1968. On 7 May, we entered the new world: can we rise to the challenge it presents?
 






Neil Davidson continues analysis from last night’s debate and argues that the coming election is a question of whether Labour are going to be either totally annihilated or just completely crushed in Scotland.



* * *
I agree with Jonas [1] about the weaknesses in Sturgeon’s presentation over defence and the “economic” argument for migration, where she went into “stateswomen” mode. Other than that I think there were four notable things about last night.
1) It was interesting just how badly Farage went down with members of the audience, and how rattled he was when they responded positively to pro-migrant positions, even to the point of attacking them for left-wing bias! He got applauded at the very beginning, but after that, virtually nothing, In part his outburst reflects the way in which he has largely been spared exposure to criticism and to audiences who don’t agree with him. So apart from maybe consolidating its existing support, I don’t think this helped UKIP at all.
2) Miliband was useless. He sounds like he’s playing a part even when he’s saying what he actually thinks. That the conventional media apparently think he came out best in this encounter is only another indication of how these judgements are based on the ability of politicians to “professionally” present a case within the accepted parameters of neoliberal thought, rather than connect with an audience. The key moment, for me, was when the discussion turned to the Tories’ plan to sell of Housing Association stock. Bennett, Sturgeon and Wood all attacked the plan from a position of principle, but Miliband ... wanted to know where the money was going to come from. (No problem with the money for Trident, apparently.) His reasons for refusing to ally with the SNP (because the Scottish National Party is, er ... a nationalist party) allowed Sturgeon to make two a devastating points about a) how their differences were surely as nothing compared to the differences they both have with the Tories, and b) was he seriously going to allow the Tories back in by refusing to work with the SNP? No answer – except to vote a majority Labour Government, which no-one (including him) thinks is going to happen.
3) One effect of these debates is that the minority parties have pushed the idea of what is politically possible to the left. We know, of course, that 40 years ago, with the exception of the environment, their positions – including Wood’s very welcome argument for stronger trade unions – would have been mainstream within the centre left of Social Democracy. Its an indication of just how far neoliberalism has pushed politics to the right that these do not just seem radical: they are. Context is all. It was obvious from audience responses, but also from speaking to people at work after earlier debates, that there is a widespread sense of relief that its OK to publicly say this stuff – about Trident, about trade unions, about council housing – and not be treated as insane. This provides an opening for the more consistently left-wing arguments that revolutionaries are making.
4) Finally, back to the SNP. I’m not sure if comrades in England and Wales are aware of precisely what an earthquake is about to happen in Scotland. Labour became hegemonic in Scotland as a whole later than is often supposed (between the late 1950s and early 1980s of the last century), although in some areas in the West it goes back to the 1920s. That is now coming to an end: the SNP currently have 6 seats at Westminster; the smallest number of seats they are likely to have on 8 May is 42, the largest, 54. It’s a question of whether Labour are going to be either totally annihilated or just completely crushed in electoral terms. This is important enough for comrades in Scotland, but it is also going to impact on the rest of the UK. The SNP has over 110,000 members, 85,000 of whom joined since last September. It is the third biggest party in the UK and in terms of membership relative to the size of the population, it is the second-biggest party in the world, after the Chinese Communist Party. This is one reason why Sturgeon appears confident – she actually has a base. Furthermore, unlike the other major parties, the SNP actually “do” politics in a way that the other haven’t had to for decades. It is no accident, as we say, that the two most assured, most tactically astute bourgeois politicians of social neoliberal era in the UK – i.e. from the early 1990s – have been its last two leaders. Forget this “minority” party schtick, the SNP will almost certainly be the third-biggest party in the House of Commons. As Dan Swain rightly argued in a recent post, the ruling class will attempt to reimpose another Tory-dominated coalition, if they can possibly get away with it. If these circumstances, the immediate demand of the left across the UK as a whole would have to be for labour to form the government in alliance with the SNP, Plaid and the Greens – and that this is based on an acceptance of key elements of these parties programmes, above an end to austerity and the removal of Trident.
* * *
Note
1. Johnas Liston, #BBCdebate: win for the Nationalists and Greens, demolition for Miliband, rs21, 16 April 2015.
 



The Scottish National Party has been running to Labour’s left ahead of the May 7 elections.
How should we relate to it?



On May 7, the United Kingdom will pick its new prime minister. The preference for many? A resounding “none of the above.” Neither Labour nor the ruling Conservative Party is anticipated to win an outright majority.
Combined, a hotchpotch of minor parties will capture around a third of the vote. Some bright spots are to be expected, like an improved showing from the Green Party, but far too many of those votes are going in the direction of the far-right UK Independence Party (UKIP).
In Scotland, however, the Scottish National Party (SNP) may win a majority, occupying the social-democratic political space abandoned for decades by a rightward moving Labour Party. Last year’s independence referendum spearheaded by the SNP saw working-class districts and former Labour strongholds among the most energized by the party’s program.
With just a week to go before the elections, Jacobin editor Bhaskar Sunkara sat down with academic and activist Neil Davidson to discuss the situation in Scotland and elsewhere in Britain.



*
BKS: Last year, you joined many on the Left in Scotland and beyond in supporting a “yes” vote in the Scottish referendum. What did you see in the movement that made it worthy of support?
ND: One answer would be that you only need to look at the forces of world reaction lined up against Scottish independence – all of whom have a perfectly good understanding of their class interests – to understand why socialists should support it! But the reasons are more complex than this, so perhaps I should maybe begin by explaining my views before the referendum campaign began.
Prior to 2011 my position was that, if there ever was a referendum then I would vote “yes,” largely on the grounds that it would be impossible for socialists to vote for the continued existence of the British imperialist state and – in effect – to endorse British nationalism. I wasn’t particularly enthusiastic about the prospect though, for two reasons.
One was that there appeared to be very little possibility of a referendum actually being held. It would only happen if the Scottish National Party, for whom a referendum was a programmatic demand, became a majority government in the Scottish Parliament. There was, however, little prospect of that since the system of proportional representation adopted by the parliament was specifically designed to prevent any party from achieving a majority – in effect it was designed to produce permanent coalitions between the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats.
So, to fixate on the question of independence – as many on the Left, particularly in the Scottish Socialist Party (SSP), started to do from the late 1990s – seemed to me to be a mistake, particularly when there were infinitely more pressing issues requiring our involvement, such as the alter-globalization movement (from 1999) and the anti-war movements (from 2001–2). I was a member of the Socialist Workers Party at this point, and the party – rightly, in my view – regarded these as priorities.
The other was that some of the arguments used by sections of the Left to support independence effectively involved a capitulation to left nationalism. Many of these were based on what I regarded as extremely dubious historical claims: that the Scottish nation had existed since the time of William Wallace in the late thirteenth century; that Scotland had been and still was oppressed within the UK in the technical Marxist sense; that Scots had been and still were more radical, democratic, or socialist than the English.
This led to attempts to minimize Scottish participation in the British Empire and to transform every historical political struggle, from the Jacobite attempts at absolutist restoration in the eighteenth century to the anti–Poll Tax campaign in the 1980s as “national” in character, regardless of their class basis.
I rejected all this as a historian, but was also concerned that it involved a level of fantasy about Scottish radicalism that had anti-English implications – that English workers had supposedly accepted Thatcherism while we hadn’t – and so on.
However, the SNP gained a majority at Holyrood in the Scottish elections of 2011 – itself reflecting a major shift in Scottish politics given the institutional obstacles in the way of this happening. This meant that “the actuality of the referendum” could not be long delayed. Independence was therefore no longer simply an abstract possibility, and three things happened that made me realize that a “yes” vote had to be should be actively supported by the revolutionary left rather than passively (and grudgingly) endorsed.
The first was the way in which, over the decade, British politics became dominated by the imperialist wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, together with the attendant Islamophobia and increasingly right-wing conceptions of Britishness. (On reflection, I think I was too slow in working through what the practical implications of removing nuclear weapons from Scotland would mean – not just in the damage to NATO’s geopolitical strategy, but in the removal of the rest of the UK from the UN security council, etc.)
And to cap it all, of course, the referendum was to take place in the centenary year of the outbreak of World War I, when the level of official imperial nostalgia – not least in Scotland – was reaching fever pitch.
The second derived from my work on neoliberalism, particularly in the 2010 book I coedited, Neoliberal Scotland. We were, and remain, faced with the choice between some form of greater devolution and independence: no one seriously regards the status quo as an option. But devolution is now a neoliberal strategy of delegation “of the axe,” and therefore independence at least offers the possibility of greater control over the state against austerity, without any illusions in the ability of small states to break free from the global capitalist system.
However, the third and most important change was simply the nature of the campaign itself, at any rate in the last six months or so. By that point it had gone from being a ballot on a constitutional issue to a social movement comparable to the movement of the squares in Spain and Greece.
Tens, maybe hundreds of thousands of working-class people were drawn into political life in a way that they rarely had the opportunity to before. Even fairly dyed-in-the-wool bourgeois commentators noticed the changed character of the Yes campaign.
And this was clearly a movement of the Left, not one based on ethnic hostility or anything like that. Indeed, for many people it wasn’t about nationalism of any sort, but about how to realize various social goals: an end to austerity, the removal of nuclear weapons, defense of the National Health Service, and so on.
The ruling class was of course perfectly aware of this – hence their hysteria in the closing weeks of the campaign. In these circumstances, for the Left to have stood to one side claiming neutrality, or worse, supporting the Union, would have been a complete dereliction of duty, substituting a ridiculous formalism (“the unity of the British working class”) for the concrete analysis of a concrete situation.
Fortunately, most of the radical left rose to the challenge, although there were some in the Labour Party and the fragments of the Communist Party who behave as if we were still 1973.
BKS: What role did socialists have in the independence campaign?
ND: The decisive organization here was the Radical Independence Campaign (RIC), which – quite against historical experience – managed to unite most of the radical left in Scotland, and in doing so dramatically changed the entire dynamic of the campaign. RIC drove the entire discussion of independence to the left.
We went to working-class communities, particularly the poorest housing schemes – what you call “projects” in the States – and spoke about politics to people who are normally ignored by the mainstream parties. What drove the struggle for independence was actually opposition to neoliberalism, even though people didn’t necessarily use those terms. If we had talked about the Scottish nation I don’t think people would have been interested.
RIC’s efforts and those of many others mobilized an incredible number of people who took ownership over the struggle: people made their own posters and leaflets and participated in politics in ways they haven’t since the antiwar movement ten years ago, but to a far greater extent.
Perhaps the most important thing RIC did – even more than the rallies, the mass canvassing, and the innovative use of social media – was voter registration drives, a tactic borrowed from the quite different circumstances of the black civil rights struggle in the US South. This was one reason why, by the end, 97 percent of potential voters had registered to vote, and nearly 85 percent actually voted.
I don’t want to suggest that RIC was solely responsible for these mobilizations – given its relatively limited size compared to the overall numbers involved as a whole that would have been impossible – but it did galvanize the campaign and give it a left dynamic which would have otherwise have been much weaker.
Of course, no initiative is ever perfect, and I think one issue is that we need to think seriously about how we engage with working-class people at work. We were very successful in talking with workers in their communities; less so in their workplaces.
We should have reached out in particular to workplaces – particularly in finance, defense, and the universities, where people were told by both their bosses and, unfortunately, some of their unions that their jobs would go if Scotland became independent. That’s a lesson for next time.
BKS: What is the class composition and political orientation of the Scottish National Party, broadly speaking?
ND: The SNP is a bourgeois nationalist party and, like all nationalist parties, it is a cross-class alliance with the goal of establishing a new capitalist state. It is not, in other words, a classic social-democratic party like the Labour Party, the French Socialist party, or Pasok in Greece, with formal links to the trade union bureaucracy and so on. That’s the bad news.
However, it has certainly moved considerably to the left since it was founded in the 1930s (one of the constituent parts was a split from the Scottish Unionist – i.e. Conservative Party), when it was essentially a petty bourgeois formation.
One of the difficulties it has always faced is that the Scottish capitalist class – to the extent that distinct entity of that name can be said to have survived World War II – has had and continues to have very little interest in Scottish independence: with a handful of exceptions like Brian Souter of Stagecoach, it is Unionist to the core. If you look at the composition of the Yes-supporting Business for Scotland group during the referendum, for example, it largely consisted of people on the border line between the petty bourgeoisie proper and very small capitalists.
As a result, until the aftermath of the referendum, the SNP tended to be based in what is usually called the New Middle Class, specifically the public sector and cultural wings, which tend to be “left” on social issues.
I would say that the SNP was on the extreme left of what I call “social neoliberalism” – the dominant strain since around the early 1990s – which broadly accepts the neoliberal economic settlement, but not the racist, sexist, homophobic tendencies characteristic of Thatcher-Reagan vanguards.
In order to win over voters, however, it had positioned itself to occupy the political ground of social democracy (and both former leader Alex Salmond and current leader Nicola Sturgeon describe SNP politics in these terms), which has been vacated by the Labour Party. It would have been difficult to compete with New Labour from the right, after all. Austerity and the referendum changed matters again.
BKS: What about the post-referendum developments in the Scottish National Party? Is Sturgeon to the left of Alex Salmond?
ND: She is, but that’s not the most significant development. Over 75,000 people have joined the SNP since after the referendum eight months ago. It now has a membership of around 103,000 people, making it the third biggest party in the whole of Britain and, in relation to population, one of the biggest in the world: one in fifty Scots is a member.
This is probably unprecedented in postwar European history. No party can experience that level growth and not be transformed in several respects – especially since most of these new members are both working class and on the Left. It will probably take until the next SNP annual conference to see what effect this has had in terms of policy, but it has consolidated their shift to the left, and in economic terms, not just over social issues, above all in the rejection of austerity.
We need to be clear, though: the SNP as the government of an independent Scotland would be under exactly the same pressures to which every previous reformist government has been exposed. But the point is that it is being joined and supported because it is offering reforms, and this tells us something about the unreality of supposed “anti-politics” or public apathy.
Sturgeon has been central to the leftward shift. Like Salmond, she is an extremely able and tactically astute politician. She made a tremendously positive impression on English viewers of the televised leader’s debates, with people asking whether they could vote for the SNP and many comments about what a pity it was that Sturgeon wasn’t the leader of the Labour Party.
Amongst other things the SNP simply “does” politics in a way that the other mainstream parties have long since ceased to: its leading figures make clear statements of belief; they form open alliances with other parties (Plaid Cymru and the Greens); they’ve made it clear they’ll never support the Tories; and they’ve called for an anti-Tory bloc with Labour, which the latter party of course rejected.
BKS: What are people expecting to happen in the May 7 elections? Will the SNP sweep Scotland? Labour leader Ed Miliband says there will be no SNP ministers in his government, but what kind of concessions can they wring out of Labour if their support is needed to form a government?
ND: There are 650 seats at Westminster, of which 59 are Scottish. Of these, Labour currently has 41, the Liberal Democrats 11, the SNP 6, and the Conservatives 1. Polls vary, but the smallest number of seats the SNP are expected to take is 42, and the largest is 54 – I think it will be closer to the latter, but we’ll know soon enough. However, even if it’s nearer the lower figure the outcome will be unprecedented: the highest number of seats that the SNP have previously taken at Westminster was 11, back in October 1974.
To me this suggests a real shift in Scottish politics. Since 2007, when the first SNP government in Scotland was formed on a minority basis, an increasing number of Scots have been prepared to vote for the party, regardless of their attitude towards independence, because it has defended aspects of the welfare state that are under much more serious threat in England and Wales (the NHS, for example) and has proved perfectly competent at governing in the devolved parliament.
It was this that allowed the SNP to become the majority party in 2011. But to repeat this at Westminster is a historic achievement as great as when Labour finally replaced the Tories as the dominant party in Scotland between the late 1950s and early 1980s.
I very much doubt that Miliband will willingly make any concessions to the SNP at all. My sense is that he would much prefer to do a deal with the Liberal Democrats, although this may not be possible as they are likely to be as badly depleted in England as Labour is in Scotland.
On the basis that only the Tories or Labour can actually lead a government – that much of their propaganda is true – I think the Left should be prepared to demand, through demonstrations, petitions, etc., that Labour takes office in coalition with the SNP, Plaid Cymru, and the Greens on a program that involves the removal of Trident and the abandonment of austerity.
BKS: From afar and, especially given his political background and policies, many in the United States associate Ed Miliband with New Labour. But his stance on the NHS and other issues has placed him at odds with some Blairites. How would you politically situate Miliband within the party?
ND: I think that people – and not just in the US – exaggerate the extent to which the problem has been or continues to be New Labour. The real problem is the way in which Labour has been moving to the right since the mid-1970s in response to the rise of neoliberalism.
It is important not to romanticize Old Labour. There is a big tendency on some sections of the Left – particularly in England – to argue that we need to get back to the Golden Age of the post-1945 Labour governments. Although understandable, this is a mistake: the conditions which allowed the creation and extension of the welfare state after 1945 were quite exceptional and will not return.
On the other hand, the 1945–1951 Labour Government was also responsible for the partition of India, establishing the British nuclear program, sending troops into suppress strikes, a ferocious campaign against gays, and so on. In most respects it was deeply conservative government.
Blair and his New Labour cohort seized their opportunity in the early 1990s by presenting a strategy for electoral victory which involved winning over the middle classes disaffected with the Tories. But this masked the fact that Labour was moving rightwards anyway – just not at the speed and intensity with which New Labour did.
The Blairites are now in a small minority, and the specific features of New Labour – such as Blair’s willingness to engage in foreign wars at the behest of the US – have gone, but this doesn’t mean that Labour is any less the prisoner of capital. Whatever his personal views, Miliband is trapped by a logic which accepts that there is no alternative to neoliberalism, except at the margins.
Labour’s rhetoric has moved left in the latter stages of the current election campaign, but this is almost entirely because of pressure from the SNP.
BKS: There’s been a bit of talk in some quarters about a “grand coalition” between Labour and the Conservatives to keep the SNP out. Is this at all possible?
ND: I think this is highly unlikely, not because Labour and the Tories don’t share many of the same policies – they do, although they can’t admit it – but because it would irrevocably damage Labour in the eyes of its English and Welsh supporters, in the same way that its alliance with the Tories over the referendum did in the eyes of its Scottish supporters.
You can’t denounce the Tories for threatening to return us to the 1930s and then enter a coalition with them: even the most docile Labour supporter would find that impossible to take.
One effect of neoliberalism is that, as all the major parties have come to accept essentially the same economic program, their mock battles increase in intensity, almost in direct proportion to how similar they actually are. There are differences in terms of social policy of course, although even this is reducing, with the Tories now supporting gay marriage, for instance.
BKS: What should the Left in Scotland do now, given the hegemonic position of the SNP?
ND: The most important thing is, it has to stay organizationally and politically distinct from the SNP. Disillusionment with the SNP is bound to follow at some point, when the realities of trying to introduce reforms in the face of capitalist intransigence begins to become apparent.
We need a new socialist formation – by which I don’t mean yet another rejigging of the existing groups – to ensure that the SNP faces opposition from the Left, rather than the Right. The activist base of RIC and the Yes campaign more generally will be key to this.
The RIC conference last November drew 3,500 people. That’s a phenomenal number of people to a conference organized by the radical left in Scotland. If you got those numbers in London, you’d consider that a successful conference. But Scotland is a much smaller country with a population of a little over 5 million people. The equivalent size conference in London would have been something like 35,000 people.
That opens the possibility of establishing a new political formation, which can both stand in the forthcoming Scottish election of May 2016 and mobilize on the streets, communities, and in workplaces. Comrades in RIC have initiated the Scottish Left Project (SLP) to bring this about. We don’t want to set it up in advance and hand people a program and a structure from on high. Instead we are organizing local meetings throughout the country to find out what people want, what we can agree on, and what the principles at the center of the SLP should be.
If we are able to establish something, then there’s the possibility of alliances with the Greens. We’ll also have to enter into some complex arguments with those in the Scottish Socialist Party. But I think there is a lot of goodwill amongst all the Left that collaborated in RIC, so we have to seize this opportunity and get these local meetings off the ground.
An important task is to win over people in Scotland who voted “no,” many of whom now feel that they were fooled or bullied into doing so. We have to find ways to win these people over to independence. We must not give up the question of independence. Unless a revolutionary situation emerges in England – which would obviously change the entire situation – I think that the demand for Scottish independence has to be consistently maintained from now on in the platform of the Scottish radical left.
So we must persuade the “no” voters that their social interests and political goals would be achieved by supporting a political party that is actually committed to an independent Scotland. We have to show that independence will improve their situation immediately and protect existing social benefits. We need definite plans to pay for and expand the welfare state. We have to say that we’ll nationalize the oil industry to get the money to reverse the neoliberal attacks we’ve suffered over the last forty years.
We also have to be able to say that independence is not anti-English. It is not about breaking with trade unions or other forms of solidarity with people in England. For example, if there was an attempt to take the Trident missiles from Scotland and put them somewhere in England, we should obviously be in solidarity with people in England so they can reject them as well.
The Scottish Left Project does not have a Scottish nationalist agenda. We don’t blame English workers for what the British government and British ruling class, which includes Scottish capitalists, are doing. We want to build solidarity with English workers against the British state.
The main argument will be about whether the SLP becomes an actual party or remains a looser coalition. In my view we need a broad left party with a revolutionary current within it. We are not in a position in Scotland to immediately set up a revolutionary party, which at the moment would only involve a couple hundred people, and it would be ridiculous to set up yet another group claiming to be “the” party. We have to move beyond that model and try to build a broad party as the left alternative to the SNP.
However, I think there are all sorts of historical lessons from broad parties like Italy’s Rifondazione, France’s NPA (New Anticapitalist Party), and, above all, Syriza. These experiences show the challenges and pitfalls as well as the opportunities. But I can’t see any other way of getting people together except through a broader party.
In reality, most of the historic distinction between reformists, centrists, and revolutionaries are now understood only among Trotskyists and other revolutionaries. So when people come to the movement, they do not know what these distinctions mean. We have to find a way to be in a common party with them and go through experiences and arguments to win them over to a revolutionary viewpoint.
Neil Davidson a lecturer in sociology at the University of Glasgow.
Bhaskar Sunkara is the founding editor and publisher of Jacobin, and the author of The Socialist Manifest: The Case for Radical Politics in an Era of Extreme Inequality.
 






Neil Davidson discusses the disintegration of social democracy and the impasse of the revolutionary left, and asks what attitude revolutionaries should take towards social democratic parties.



*
In 1976, Perry Anderson, then editor of New Left Review, noted that a new situation was emerging in Europe:
For the great mass Communist Parties of Western Europe – in Italy, in France, in Spain – are now on the threshold of a historical experience without precedent for them: the commanding assumption of governmental office within the framework of bourgeois-democratic states, without the allegiance to a horizon of ‘proletarian dictatorship’ beyond them that was once the touchstone of the Third International. [1]
The anticipated breakthrough never occurred. Instead, between 1976 and 1981, it was the social democratic parties that experienced a final flowering, above all in those Southern European countries that were either only then emerging from various forms of dictatorship, like Portugal, Spain and Greece, or where social democracy had since been previously overshadowed by the local Stalinist organisation, as in France. Indeed, the French Parti Socialiste government of 1981–1986 may have been the last to attempt a traditional reformist strategy – and to have been prevented from achieving it in an equally traditional way. [2] Since then, social democracy has adapted, unevenly and with occasional backsliding, to the neoliberal order in its ‘social’ variant, a process initiated not in Western Europe at all, but by Labour Party governments first in Australia (1983) and then in New Zealand (1984). [3]
Nearly forty years since Anderson’s original speculations about the possibility of Communist parties forming or at least entering government, and thirty years since the last stand of social democracy in its classic form, we face a situation in which a new range of left parties are contending for office in Europe. The oldest of these, the Left Party in Germany and the Party of Communist Refoundation in Italy have, according to Charles Post “reproduced the social and political contradictions of classical, pre-First World War socialism”. In particular, Post notes: “Neither party has transcended the pre-1914 social democratic ‘twin pillars’ organizational norm where the party focussed on electoral politics and while union officialdom directed the day-to-day class struggle in the workplace and beyond.” [4] But newer formations, including the only one so far to have actually formed a government – Syriza in Greece – are harder to incorporate into this model.
A more plausible comparison might be with the movements in Latin America, which saw the election of governments of varying degrees of radicalism from the late 1990s through to the mid-2000s. With the partial exception of Argentina, however, these took place in states with problems characteristic of that region, which are quite different from those experienced by even the poorest countries of Western Europe, above all the oppression of the indigenous population and the existence of giant peripheral slums inhabited by the under- or unemployed. In general terms, the centre-left governments of Latin America have constructed ‘compensatory states’, where rents are collected from state-owned and multinational firms involved in the extraction of primary commodities – coal, oil and gas – and redistributed to the poorest sections of the population; but this uneasy relationship is not a challenge to the existence of state or private capital. [5] And, as Ashley Lavelle has pointed out in his obituary for social democracy, the state which has done most to raise the living standards of the Latin American working-class, Venezuela under Hugo Chavez, did so on the basis of appropriating oil revenues when the price of that commodity was high. Even leaving aside the problems that the fall in oil prices has caused for this strategy, it was never going to be a model for the revival of the left in Western Europe. [6]
For some commentators on the revolutionary left, there is a better comparison for the new parties of the European left, involving a model, one designed “for a left that has lost whatever confidence it had that a revolutionary party rooted in the working class is possible”:
On the one hand, as against a discredited reformism that no longer talks of an alternative to capitalism, it preserves a commitment to socialist aims and demands; on the other, it sees this commitment being fulfilled in the creation of a party that, while supporting and seeking a basis in mass action, sees the parliamentary framework as the route through which change comes. That, then, is a way to paint left reformism red. Is there a historical precedent for this? Actually, there is in the Eurocommunist project of the 1970s. This involved more than de-Stalinisation. It involved a theoretical shift: a repudiation of the Soviet model of power as no longer appropriate or operable in ‘democratic’ countries. Socialism was not a matter of ‘overthrowing the state’ but of using parliamentarism to create a mass force that would stop the state being used to block social advance.
On the basis of this analysis we are close to repeating the moment identified by Anderson in 1976: One descendent of Eurocommunism is Syriza, currently riding high in the Greek polls [this was written before the Greek election of January 2015 – ND]. Those who espouse the model embracing reform and revolution hold this party up as the party to follow. But the Eurocommunist road to socialism proved unable to deliver even modest reforms – and in a situation where the crisis of capitalism is now much deeper a new improved left reformism will fare no better. [7]
Syriza’s effective capitulation to the Troika on 19 February demonstrated that these parties are not immune to problems of reformism; but this does not mean they can simply be assimilated to Eurocommunism or social democracy as such. In many respects they represent new developments, where either – as in the case of Syriza itself – an existing formation was heavily influenced by the Movements of the Squares from 2011 or, like Podemos in Spain, one emerged directly out of these movements. As these connections suggest, unlike Eurocommunism these parties are on a leftward moving trajectory, are closely related to popular struggles and contain revolutionaries of various denominations. Furthermore, they are already displaying variations of internal structure and regime: although Syriza and Podemos are often spoken about in the same context, the former remains a coalition in a way that Podemos is not. Comparable formations are likely to follow – and not necessarily at the nation-state level: the conditions for something to emerge are clearly present in Scotland, for example.
What attitude should revolutionaries take towards these parties and the others which may follow, given that large numbers of working-class people are increasingly predisposed to support them? To simply conjugate the verb ‘to betray’ is obviously tempting (‘they are going to betray you; they are betraying you; they have betrayed you’); but if revolutionaries are to avoid being emotionally self-satisfied, but utterly irrelevant, then our response has to involve far closer attention to the type of strategic alternatives that we can offer, rather than simply repeating the need for revolution, or counterposing ‘the streets’ to parliament. It may be worth briefly restating why revolutionary socialists have argued that their goals can never be achieved by electing politicians.
 
The necessity for revolution was set out very early in the formation of historical materialism, in the notes that would eventually be published as The German Ideology. There are two reasons why “the revolution is necessary”, wrote Marx and Engels, “not only because the ruling class cannot be overthrown in any other way, but also because the class overthrowing it can only in a revolution succeed in ridding itself anew of all the muck of ages and become fitted to found society anew”. [8] In other words, assuming that the goal is indeed socialism, revolution is not a choice of method, but recognition of a necessity. This is what led Rosa Luxemburg to make her distinction between reform and revolution:
A social transformation and a legislative reform do not differ according to their duration but according to their content ... That is why people who pronounce themselves in favour of the method of legislative reform in place and in contradistinction to the conquest of political power and social revolution, do not really choose a more tranquil, calmer and slower road to the same goal, but a different goal. Instead of taking a stand for the establishment of a new society they take a stand for surface modifications of the old society. [9]
The distinction was put in a different way by the American Marxist Hal Draper in a celebrated essay that distinguished between socialism from above and socialism from below. Both social democracy and Stalinism are examples of the former: “What unites the many different forms of Socialism-from-Above is the conception that socialism (or a reasonable facsimile thereto) must be handed down to the grateful masses in some form or another, by a ruling elite which is not subject to their control in fact.” Draper’s point is that the result is not socialism at all. He contrasts it with “socialism from below”:
The heart of Socialism-from-below is its view that socialism can only be realised through the self-emancipation of activised masses ‘from below’ in a struggle to take charge of their own destiny, as actors (not merely subjects) on the stage of history. [10]
The most important recent developments in this respect have indeed occurred in Latin America, but not the activities of Chavez, Evo Morales, Rafael Correa or any other elected leader. Instead, they were in the new forms of collective organisation that emerged first in Argentina between 2000–1 in the form of the piqueteros (‘picketers’) and asambleas (‘assemblies’), and then in Bolivia between 2003–5 in the form of the neighbourhood assemblies and workers’ regional committees, which organised from the vast slum city of El Alto to blockade La Paz. The emergence of new organisational forms ‘from below’ in Argentina and Bolivia is of crucial importance for revolutionaries, since they present, if only in embryo, the possibility of an alternative to the bourgeois state, not merely the attempt to use it (‘from above’) for the benefit of the working class and the oppressed. Since 2011 Western Europe has seen massive gatherings and demonstrations, and – in Scotland at least – unprecedented levels of electoral participation; but not yet comparable forms of collective organisation. Revolutionaries clearly have a duty to help develop these forms when they appear, but they are not in our gift to magic them into existence – indeed, if our belief in the creativity of the working class has any validity we should expect them to emerge and take unexpected forms: the important thing is to recognise them when they do.
Most critics of ‘socialism from below’ are socialists are driven by a desire to defend one or other of the remaining state capitalist regimes – which for obvious reasons tends to be Cuba rather than, for example, North Korea – on the grounds, not merely of the supposed benefits that they bring to the working class, but because of the impossibility of a pure revolution from below:
What experience has shown, however, is that the pure form of such a state has proven to not yet be possible in any country where a successful anti-capitalist revolution has taken place, nor is it easy to anticipate a successful revolution where a pure form of this state would be possible under current circumstances. The only case where it is likely that the form of the state after a successful revolution is going to be one of a “pure” Paris Commune or Soviet type is that of nearly simultaneous revolutions in the main imperialist centres. [11]
There is an element of truth in this: “whoever expects a pure revolution will never live to see it” as Lenin famously argued. The socialist revolution is likely to be a prolonged process – not merely on a global scale, but within individual countries. At some point, in that process, each state will have to be destroyed, but before that moment is reached, revolutionaries may likely find themselves, perhaps in alliance with others, attempting to use the existing bourgeois state apparatus to introduce ‘reforms’ which will strengthen the position of the working class. What should they do in these circumstances?
I will return to this question, but first we need to consider why social democracy as it is currently constituted will be unlikely to play a role.
Even leaving aside future revolutionary developments, the main reason why these new formations have already acquired such significance is the decline of Social Democracy. Gregory Elliot argues that it evolved over three distinct periods: 1889–1945, 1945–1975, and 1975–the present. [12] As a movement, it has always been fundamentally supportive of capitalism in practice, but during the first period it was at least committed in rhetorical terms to abolishing it. In particular, from the split in the Second International and the Russian Revolution onwards, it was able to present an explicit reformist strategy for achieving socialism, as opposed to the revolutionary one advocated by the Communist Parties: using the bourgeois state rather than destroying it.
The second period coincided with the post-war boom and allowed the possibility of positive reforms for the working class without the need to transform the system, although these were also delivered by forces to the right of social democracy. During this period at least some ‘revisionist’ discussions argued that the system had already been self-transformed by Keynesianism and the Welfare State into something that no longer deserved the name of capitalism.
The crisis of the 1970s destroyed these illusions and saw the onset of the third period: once the possibility of reform seemed to be removed by the imposition of neoliberalism, all that remained, for the leaderships at any rate, was the commitment to capitalism and some residual rhetoric: do whatever was necessary to save capitalism, then we could maybe think about further reforms. Central to this process was the crisis of Keynesianism. In ideological terms, the collapse of the Stalinist regimes did not so much ‘prove’ as confirm the already widely held belief that any alternative form of economy to neoliberal capitalism was impossible. As Alan Sinfield has pointed out, by 1989, virtually no-one, especially not on the post-1968 revolutionary left, regarded the Stalinist regimes as ‘a model for socialism’. The real ideological shock, although one which was more slow-acting, had been the earlier revelation that Keynesianism and the Welfare State in its post-1945 form was incompatible with capitalism, at least as anything other than a short-term expedient. [13]
These periods embody tendencies: it is possible to find each of the dominant attitudes in periods before or after the periods with which they became associated. In particular, the left-wing of Social Democracy tended to be one step behind its overall trajectory: after 1945 they still argued for a reformist transformation of society, rather than merely for reforms; after 1975 – in the UK this occurred after the collapse of Bennism in the early 1980s – they still argued for reforms rather than for repairing capitalism.
Behind these ideological shifts, were changes in structure that acted to make the shift to the right permanent. Until very recently, revolutionaries tended to argue that working-class people should vote for social democracy in elections. The main reason held that the most politically advanced workers regarded the social democratic parties as different from the capitalist (or openly capitalist) parties and revolutionaries had to ‘stand alongside’ these workers in when elections took place, partly to show class solidarity, partly because, when the Labour (or whichever) Party inevitably betrayed worker’s hopes, it would be ‘exposed’ (“crucified on the cross of office”) and that this would lead voters to turn to the revolutionaries instead. Unfortunately, examples of this actually happening in the short-term, other than in the case of individuals, are virtually non-existent. There has been a cumulative, decades-long process of disillusionment with social democracy, but this is reflective of far greater shifts in capitalist society, not this or that ‘betrayal’, shifts which have seen precisely those characteristics which workers used to recognise as making social democracy different from other parliamentary parties fade. Using the Labour Party as an example – although in some respects it is quite dissimilar to the majority of social democratic parties – there seem to be three of these characteristics, all of which have been eroded during the neoliberal era.
The first is working-class membership. Originally, the membership of the Labour Party was predominantly working class, although it also had a strong component of the professional middle classes, typified by the Webbs, Attlee, Gaitskell, etc. It was this actual class basis that led Lenin to describe it as a “capitalist worker’s party”, consisting mainly of workers, but acting in the interests of the bourgeoisie. (Although it is worth noting that the Tory Party also had strong individual working class membership down to the 1950s – in Glasgow particularly, but also in Liverpool and other areas across the UK especially with strong Orange/Loyalist connections.) This class base has been declining since the 1960s, and especially since the mid-1980s, to the point where the individual membership is dominated by members of the new middle class. Most of Labour’s working class membership now comes from the affiliated trades unions, whose role is therefore decisively important.
The second – and usually the only one that is cited – is therefore a structural link to the organised working class. The affiliated trades unions and, more distantly, the TUC, STUC, etc., acted as channels for expressing organised working class views within the Labour Party. Although always heavily mediated through the bureaucracy, these views did influence Labour policy, a process which reached its peak around 1974. In theory, this could still take place, but in practice the bureaucracy have exercised a self-denying ordinance since the advent of New Labour that has led to the marginalisation of working class influence over the party. There is no doubt that in purely financial terms Labour would effectively cease to exist without the money it receives from the unions, now that its corporate sponsors have deserted it. It is, however, difficult to identify many policies which the unions have received in return: the minimum wage certainly, Gordon Brown’s covert increase in public sector jobs perhaps, but beyond these? In fact, the main fruits of the trade union link are mainly in the other direction: TU officials holding back struggle on the grounds that it will endanger Labour’s chances of re-election, even though, once re-elected Labour promise nothing but the same policies as the Tories in slow motion. It is no accident, as we say, that the unions that are the most politically radical – PCS, UCU – are not affiliated to Labour, and the rank and file tend to regard it with undisguised hostility.
The third is the promulgation of policies which are specifically designed to improve the condition of the working class (‘reforms’) rather than ‘the people’ or ‘the nation’ in general. Labour, historically, has a number of important achievements to its credit. We tend to be quite dismissive of these (as indeed was Miliband Senior), concentrating instead – for obvious and usually entirely justified reasons – on the record of Labour betrayal. The trouble with this approach is that it makes it difficult to explain why anyone ever believed in the Labour Party in the first place. But these achievements are all in the past – in some cases the very distant past. Increasingly, voting Labour on the basis that it will make any practical difference is more of a historical memory than a contemporary reality. And this is not just about programmes like Wheatley’s council house building in the 1920s, institutions like the NHS, or legislation like Equal Pay Act. There used to be a layer of Labour activists in most working-class communities – often quite right-wing activists – who would lobby the council, organise petitions, and generally act as focus for local community reformism. This layer is greatly diminished. These activities still get done, but it is no longer Labour members who initiate them as a matter of course.
Like similar organisations in Europe and Australasia, Labour has moved extraordinarily far to the right. Nevertheless, for what it’s worth, it will remain a social democratic party so long as it retains the link with the trade unions, which holds open the possibility of working class demands – in however bureaucratised a form – once again influencing what it actually does. Since reformism remains the dominant form of consciousness within the working class, it may appear that nothing much has changed and that this reformism will continue to find expression in the Labour Party, as it has for the last hundred years or so. But there is no necessary connection between reformism in general and the specific form taken by Labourism. A combination of Labour’s own behaviour in office and opposition – above all its acceptance of neoliberalism – together with structural changes in the nature of the working class and the current diminution of trade union consciousness, means that for many working class people, Labour does not appear to be fundamentally different from the other parties but is simply ‘the least worst’ of the choices on offer.
In these circumstances, if new parties appear, offering reforms, sounding as if they actually believe in them, and invoking the social democratic tradition, it is no mystery why working-class voters would support them: the changed fortunes of PASOK and Syriza in Greece are only the most extreme example of how this can occur to date. But although their formation and structures may be quite unlike those of social democracy their political, strategies may not be that different – they merely hark back to an earlier phase in its history. The current Greek Finance Minister, Yanis Varoufakis, for example, argued that the key goal for socialists, even Marxists, was ‘to arrest the freefall of European capitalism in order to buy the time we need to formulate its alternative’ – precisely the attitude which has frozen his party in the headlights of the Troika:
... with Europe’s elites deep in denial and disarray, the left must admit that we are just not ready to plug the chasm that a collapse of European capitalism would open up with a functioning socialist system. Our task should then be twofold. First, to put forward an analysis of the current state of play that non-Marxist, well meaning Europeans who have been lured by the sirens of neoliberalism, find insightful. Second, to follow this sound analysis up with proposals for stabilising Europe – for ending the downward spiral that, in the end, reinforces only the bigots. [14]
It is not always the case that parties of the radical left will fill the void: the Scottish National Party is not in the slightest like Syriza or Podemos in terms of its structures or politics, but it has grown for similar reasons at the Labour Party’s expense. The question – which has of course a wider application than Scotland – is whether the revolutionary left should involve itself in establishing a party that does resemble Syriza or Podemos in the sense of bringing together both revolutionary and reformist currents, and, if so, would it be possible to do so on a basis that did not merely set up a new set of reformist illusions. The question would be irrelevant if revolutionary party-building was sweeping all before it, but it is not.
 
For, unfortunately, it is not only reformist parties which have entered crisis: so too have those of the revolutionary left. By this I mean that nowhere has a revolutionary party, conceived on broadly Leninist lines, been able to grow, for any length of time, beyond a membership of the single-figure thousands. Why not?
One reason could be that the entire aim of building the revolutionary party was delusional: the working class will simply never attain revolutionary class consciousness, at least in sufficient numbers, to make the project viable. At best, revolutionaries can act as a pressure group, pushing reformists in the trade union movement and the social democratic parties further to the left than they would otherwise be prepared to go by standing fast to the ultimate, but unobtainable goal of total social transformation. At the time of his departure from the International Socialists in 1968, Alasdair MacIntyre invoked what he called the “law of diminishing socialist returns” whereby every political formation inevitably behaves further to the right than their formal political position would suggest. As a result, although “those with a revolutionary perspective” were unlikely to make a revolution, only they “are likely to promote genuine left wing reforms”. [15] If socialism was genuinely impossible, was just the ‘utopia’ that Trotsky was prepared to contemplate in the last months of his life, such a role would of course, still be essential. [16]
I, and I suspect most readers of this, do not accept this argument, although it is important to understand that many people on the left who do not believe in the possibility of a complete socialist transformation of society regard revolutionary groups as essential precisely because they play the role outlined by MacIntyre: this is why they are prepared to work with us. The experiences of the twentieth century surely put paid to any notion of the inevitability of socialism. Consequently, we do not and cannot know that working class will ultimately be triumphant – that is the ‘wager’ on revolution which many Marxist thinkers have invoked; but we still have good reasons to believe that it is possible and that our actions will be important in helping to bring that possibility about. [17] We should not succumb to despair.
But neither should we embrace an unwarranted triumphalism. It could be argued that a more plausible reason for the universal failure to build mass revolutionary parties is not working-class incapacity but that revolutionaries have faced a series of temporarily insurmountable objective conditions – not such as to make exponential growth an impossible goal, but to hold it within certain limits. There is obviously some truth in this. It was impossible to build revolutionary parties in the post-war boom, under conditions of which combined relative prosperity and the joint stranglehold of social democracy and Stalinism over working-class politics. With membership numbered in tens (as it was for the Socialist Review Group in the early 1950s), there was no alternative to what Trotsky once called “the primitive accumulation of cadres”. But from 1968, these conditions no longer pertained to anything like the same extent. The period beginning around 1975 (‘the downturn’) once again made growth extraordinarily difficult for the revolutionary left, but to argue that this can explain failure to build anywhere over the subsequent forty years is stretching credulity to breaking point: it is effectively to say that revolutionary parties can only be built in excellent conditions – in effect, in revolutionary conditions, but the entire case for revolutionary organisation from the German Revolution of 1918–19 onwards is that it has to be built before a revolutionary situation arises.
But the only genuinely mass revolutionary parties – those of the Communist International in its revolutionary period – were never been built by recruiting ones and twos in this way. There are four actual or potential mechanisms – which can also be combined: 1) merger with several organisations of a comparable size; 2) an influx of members following secession from a mass reformist organisations; 3) affiliation by militants organised in a trans-union rank and file organisation; or 4) collective adherence by elements of a campaign or social movement. None of these are likely to arise without a generalised move to the left. None will leave the host organisation unaffected, so that exponential growth almost invariably means the original revolutionary party acts as the nucleus of a new formation, rather than simply undergoes quantitative growth: the Communist Party of Britain (CPGB) was not simply an enlarged British Socialist Party; the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) was not merely an expanded Spartacus League. The route the most relevant to revolutionaries in the UK in recent years has been that involving a campaign or social movement, although never to the stage where mass membership was prepared to transfer directly to a revolutionary party without passage through an intermediate political formation.
In short, ‘building the party’ in the way that has been understood in the IS tradition has failed – and of all the post-Trotsky traditions its superior politics to the other traditions meant that it had the best chance of success. Unless it is seriously being proposed that we simply carry on doing the same thing and expect – in line with Einstein’s famous definition of madness – to achieve a different result, we have to find a new approach.
What conclusions can we draw from these developments – the disintegration of social democracy and the impasse of the revolutionary left? First, although the specific forms of social democracy are in an advanced state of collapse, reformism is not disappearing, nor will it: it is a form of consciousness produced by the contradictions of capitalism and one which will ultimately seek organisational expression, even if these expressions do not take the form previously taken by organisations such as the Labour Party.
Second, although the distinctions between reformism and revolution are still valid, widespread working class understanding of these distinctions has perhaps never been less clear. New activists may describe themselves as ‘on the left’ or even as ‘socialists’, but any finer distinctions have simply been lost; and this is an aspect of a deeper ideological and theoretical vacuum. Back in the early 1970s, Duncan Hallas wrote:
A new generation of capable and energetic workers exists but they are no longer part of a cohesive movement and they no longer work in a milieu where basic Marxist ideas are widespread. We are back at our starting point. Not only has the vanguard, in the real sense of a considerable layer of organised revolutionary workers and intellectuals, been destroyed. So too has the environment, the tradition, that gave it influence. In Britain that tradition was never so extensive and influential as in Germany or France but it was real enough in the early years of the Communist Party. [18]
That judgement was exaggerated then, but Hallas’s words are certainly apt to describe the current situation. People need to find out whether they are reformists, revolutionaries – or even vacillating centrists; it will take the combination of participation in struggle and prolonged argument to clarify matters.
Third, and more positively, because neoliberalism has moved ‘official’ politics so far to the right, many issues that in the era of the long boom would have been considered ‘reformist’ demands, or even elementary issues of human decency, are now resisted by the dominant institutions of capitalist society. The attitude of the Troika to the Greek arguments for the end of austerity has provided a striking demonstration of this. It is not merely that we need to fight for reforms in a revolutionary way, although that is still the case, it is that the reforms themselves have the potential to constitute revolutionary demands in a context where the system is unable to allow them, for fear of interrupting the restoration of profitability.
The difficulty is that working classes can respond to austerity by oscillating between explosions of anger taking the form of demonstrations and occupations (‘from below’), and simply relying on elected politicians to deliver for them (‘from above’) without there being any relationship between the two, let alone control of the latter by the former. The recent experience of the independence referendum in Scotland shows both processes: a massive level of mobilisation and local creativity, often involving people who had never been politically active before; then, without any institutional means of holding and channelling the energies released by the Yes campaign, much of it went in to membership of or support for the SNP. Not all though, and many people radicalised by the campaign are rightly suspicious of the SNP and now seek a political home. Serious revolutionaries should aim to provide them with one – not by offering their own organisations as ‘the’ revolutionary party, or by creating incoherent and momentary electoral lash-ups, but rather by establishing a broad socialist party, with a clearly defined revolutionary current, through which strategies can be tested and the necessary debates conducted.
The Scottish Left Project seems to be the best means for working towards this goal in Scotland itself, but this approach cannot be easily generalised. One of the effects of neoliberalism in its austerity phase has been to heighten the unevenness and increase fragmentation of political life internationally: revolutionaries have to argue for revolutionary politics, but the means, the forms through which they will have do so can no longer be assumed to have been settled in advance.
* * *
Notes
[1] Perry Anderson, The Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci, New Left Review I/100 (November 1976–January 1977), p. 6.
[2] Donald Sassoon, One Hundred Years of Socialism: the West European Left in the Twentieth Century (London: HarperCollins, 1997) pp. 534–571, 592–644.
[3] For the differences between ‘vanguard’ and ‘social’ neoliberalism, wíhich can be summed up as being those between Thatcher and Reagan on the one hand, and Clinton and Blair on the other, see Neil Davidson, What is Neoliberalism? in Neoliberal Scotland: Class and Society in a Stateless Nation, edited by Neil Davidson, Patricia McCafferty and David Miller (Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Press, 2010), pp. 31–54 and The Neoliberal Era in Britain: Historical Developments and Current Perspectives, International Socialism, second series, 139 (Summer 2013), pp. 182–198.
[4] Charles Post, What is Left of Leninism? New European Left Parties in Historical Perspective, The Socialist Register 2013: the Question of Strategy, edited by Leo Panitch, Greg Alba and Vivek Chibber (Pontypool: Merlin Press, 2012), p. 191.
[5] Jeffrey R. Webber, Crisis and Class, Advance and Retreat: the Political Economy of the New Latin American Left, in Polarising Development: Alternatives to Neoliberalism and the Crisis, edited by Lucia Pradella and Thomas Marois (London: Pluto Press, 2015), pp. 161–164. Webber draws the concept of the ‘compensatory state from the as yet untranslated work of the Uruguayan economist Eduardo Gudynas.
[6] Ashley Lavelle, The Death of Social Democracy: Political consequences in the 21st Century (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008), pp. 16–17.
[7] Kevin Orr and Gareth Jenkins, The Case of the Disappearing Lenin, International Socialism, second series, 144 (Autumn 2014), pp. 61–61.
[8] Karl Marx and Frederick Engels [1845–46], The German Ideology: Critique of Modern German Philosophy According to Its Representatives Feuerbach, B. Bauer and Stirner, and of German Socialism According to Its Various Prophets [download], in Collected Works, vol. 5 (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1975), pp. 52–53.
[9] Rosa Luxemburg (1899), Reform or Revolution, in Rosa Luxemburg Speaks, edited by Mary-Alice Waters (New York: Pathfinder Press, 1970), pp. 77–78.
[10] Hal Draper [1966], The Two Souls of Socialism, in Socialism from Below, edited by Ernest Haberkern (New Jersey: Humanities Press, 1992), p. 3.
[11] Joaquín Bustelo [2005], On the Two Souls of Socialism, The North Star (22 March, 2013).
[12] Gregory Elliot, Labourism and the English Genius the Strange Death of Labour England? (London: Verso, 1993), pp. 1–17.
[13] Alan Sinfield [1997], The Politics and Cultures of Discord, in Literature, Politics and Culture in Postwar Britain (Third edition, London: Continuum, 2004), pp. xxx–xxxiv.
[14] Yanis Varoufakis, How I became an Erratic Marxist, The Guardian (18 February 2015). These conclusions should not have come as any surprise to anyone familiar with the arguments Varoufakis had used as an academic, shortly before becoming a politician, which involved solving the global crisis through the ‘the formation of a national coalition of emerging countries’ or ‘for the West to have an epiphany and, at long last, embrace John Maynard Keynes’ suggestion of an International Currency Union’. Admittedly, even he regarded the possibility of the latter happening as ‘far-fetched’. See The Global Minotaur: America, the True Origins of the Financial Crisis and Future of the World Economy (London: Zed Books, 2011), p. 227.
[15] Alasdair MacIntyre, In Place of Harold Wilson?, Alasdair MacIntyre’s Engagement with Marxism: Selected Writings, 1953–1974, edited by Paul Blackledge and Neil Davidson (Leiden: Brill, 2008), p. 371.
[16] Leon Trotsky [1939], The USSR in War, In Defence of Marxism (Against the Petty Bourgeois Opposition) (London: New Park, 1971), p. 11.
[17] James Connolly [1915], >The Re-conquest of Ireland, Collected Works, vol. 1 (Dublin: New Books 1987), p. 263; Antonio Gramsci [1929–1935], Problems of Marxism, Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci, introduced and edited by Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1971), p. 438; Lucien Goldmann, The Hidden God: a Study of the Tragic Vision in the Pensées of Pascal and the Tragedies of Racine (London: Routledge, 1964), p. 90; Alasdair MacIntyre [1964], Pascal and Marx: on Lucien Goldmann’s Hidden God, Alasdair MacIntyre’s Engagement with Marxism, p. 314; Michael Lowy, Fire Alarm: on Reading Walter Benjamin’s On the Concept of History (London, Verso, 2005), p. 114.
[18] Duncan Hallas, The Way Forward, in World Crisis: Essays in Revolutionary Socialism, edited by Nigel Harris and John Palmer (London: Hutchison, 1971), p. 259.
 






We are pleased to reprint summaries of the debate between Foster and Davidson from the recent Class and Nation in Contemporary Scotland conference in Glasgow in September this year



John Foster argues we are at a crossroads after the referendum
The referendum transformed Scottish politics. It is, however, neither accurate nor politically useful to characterise it as a triumph of nation over class. It was precisely the combination of class sentiment and national identification which made the movement so powerful and which today defines its potential both for progressive change and also for populist reversal.
In the referendum, the slogans which won support from Scotland’s most impoverished communities were those which denounced austerity as an imposition of an external Westminster elite. Benefit cuts, sanctions and falling real wages were posed as a product of both class and national oppression.
The result was to add another 20% of principally working class supporters to the existing nationalist core vote – voters who as recently as the 2012 local elections had been overwhelmingly Labour. This process was carried even further in the general election. This growth in support for independence and the SNP cannot, therefore, be detached from a mass perception of class injustice resulting from existing constitutional arrangements.
Yet it was also a weak and unstructured perception. It failed to distinguish the slogans of the referendum from what was on offer. Sterling, NATO and the EU involved endorsing exactly the same neo-liberal, pro-big business framework that determined policies in Westminster. The manifest feeling of class injustice was not matched by an understanding of the class power that enforced these policies. Nor is this surprising. To a great degree it reflected more than two decades in which Labour retreated from any class analysis and endorsed exactly the same institutional framework as that called for by the SNP – and did so in a society where union density has fallen to near half its previous level.
In some ways there is some resemblance to the transformation of voting behaviour elsewhere in Europe. In Greece, Italy and Spain mass parties have emerged calling for the rejection of austerity while at the same time not seeking to challenge existing institutions.
In Scotland, this situation holds very considerable dangers. The SNP is both a populist and nationalist party which is in the privileged position of being able, for the next five years, to deflect blame for austerity to Westminster.
At the same time, it also seeks to remodel basic attitudes. It invites the Scottish union movement to endorse institutions of social partnership within a wider perspective of a European Union that defends working people and the associated prospect of developing a West German model of capitalism in Scotland that, according to Sturgeon combines ‘competitive markets with strong social protection and partnership’ (Scotsman, 13 June 2015).
This poses a significant challenge to the left in Scotland. Some sections seem disposed to ride on this populist tiger – in the hope that a future crisis will offer opportunities for a socialist challenge. More seriously, there are indications that sections of the union movement see immediate practical benefits in responding to the Scottish government’s partnership model.
In both cases the danger is that Scottish politics will become increasingly insulated from wider struggles at British level – struggles which have the potential, but so far only that, to expose the class character of the British state and to redevelop a class-based mass movement.
There are indeed some similarities between the mass base of the new Corbyn leadership of Labour Party and the populist movements on the continent. The 250,000 Corbyn supporters are, it would seem, largely individuals responding individually to the crisis of austerity. But there are also three major differences. First, Corbyn’s election programme – this contained at least some systemic challenges to the existing order. Second, close links to the union movement. Third, the depth of the Conservative government’s attack on both working people and the union movement itself, a level of class extremism that betrays significant over-confidence.
In some ways the 2014 referendum represented the first mass upsurge of rejection of neo-liberal austerity policies in Britain. That potential still exists. But it is currently being recalibrated in a nationalist direction. Scotland, it is argued, is different. Scottish capitalism will be different.
This is the danger we now face. In immediate practical terms there are the cuts that will be imposed on local government over the coming months. How far can the People’s Assembly and the union movement together develop a resistance, involving some class critique of the Scottish government, that links with similar movements elsewhere? How far can this redevelop a broader union and labour movement campaigning across communities, stressing the importance of organisational strength and class understanding?
The 2014 referendum did not mark the triumph of nation over class. However, its aftermath could – in terms of the triumph of populist nationalism. But the Scottish rejection of austerity could equally add strength to a movement that has the potential to redevelop class politics and expose the class character of the British state and of the European Union.
John Foster is a labour historian and a member of the Red Paper Collective
* * *
Neil Davidson asks questions whether ‘yes’ represented the triumph of nation over class
The overwhelmingly majority of the Scottish radical left supported ‘yes’ in the referendum and was right to do so. Socialist supporters of a ‘no’, centred around the remnants of the Labour left, had no way of relating to those newly radicalised by the ‘yes’ campaign, except to denounce their ‘nationalism’ and castigate the bourgeois nature of the SNP – something most of us were quite aware of. They have since paid the price.
One of the reasons why there has been no Scottish Labour ‘Corbyn bounce’ is the party so thoroughly alienated potential supporters that many migrated to the SNP, the Scottish Greens or RISE. Corbyn-mania is the English equivalent of radical independence but has come too late. Nevertheless, left arguments for ‘no’ still abound. In essence there are two.
The first is calling for independence automatically means ‘capitulating to nationalism’. Nationalism is about establishing new states and defending existing ones, so arguing for maintaining the United Kingdom is no less ‘nationalist’ than arguing for Scottish secession from it. These left opponents argue maintaining the unity of the British state is driven not by British nationalism but by class considerations. Why then do they find it so difficult to accept proponents of a Scottish state might have precisely the same distance from Scottish nationalism?
As a political ideology, nationalism involves two inescapable principles: the national group should have its own state, regardless of social consequences; and what unites the national group is more significant than what divides it like class. Neither of these principles animated ‘yes’ campaigners, who saw establishing a Scottish state, not as an eternal goal to be pursued in all circumstances, but as one which offered better opportunities for equality and social justice in the era of neo-liberal austerity –in other words as a way of conducting the class struggle, not denying its existence.
Voter registration drives in working-class communities were one aspect of this. Even unionist opinion-makers in London felt obliged to report the packed public meetings, debates in pubs and so on. For the ‘yes’ campaign marking the ballot paper was merely the final moment in months of debate and activity so that it needs to be seen as a social movement, not merely another political campaign. Its closest comparisons are therefore not to be found in Scottish history, but in contemporary Spain and Greece.
But there were weaknesses in the campaign. One was an inadequate focus on skilled and organised workers in their workplaces. Unorganised or precarious workers could be reached in their communities but where workers were faced with an alliance of employers and unions arguing for ‘no’ (as in defence-related industries) response was required to challenge this even if this had to be mounted from outside. Failure to reach, let alone convince, organised sections of workers at least contributed towards the ‘no’ victory.
The second argument was the referendum merely concerned constitutional issues, and whatever the result it would leave the situation of workers fundamentally unchanged, but potentially with a divided British working class. With claims of irrelevance, it’s usually good to examine the attitudes of the ruling class. Who stood behind ‘no’? The supposedly neutral institutions of the British state; most British capitalists; UKIP, BNP, Orange Order; the entire press bar the Sunday Herald; the US President; EU Commission; and rulers of nation-states with insurgent minority national movements like Spain. In short, Unionists were supported by the British and international capitalist class.
Keeping this company, the ‘no’ left should have asked itself whether this motley crew could have misunderstood its class interests for preserving the unity of the British labour movement is surely not one of them. And, for two weeks before 18 September 2014, the ‘yes’ campaign reduced the British ruling class to a panic unparalleled since the 1984–1985 miners’ strike. If the referendum was so irrelevant, why were they so concerned?
A ‘yes’ vote, achieved on the basis of a mass left-wing insurgency, would have immediately changed the balance of class forces and open up a new possibilities. In a capitalist society, all politics is by definition ‘bourgeois’ unless working-class interests are forced onto agendas which would otherwise exclude them.
What of the future? The main impetus for ‘yes’ was not nationalism but social change expressed through the demand for self-determination. The danger is it will now become nationalist if the movement becomes an SNP electoral support-group. Thousands of mainly working-class people who joined the SNP will change its inner dynamics, but not its overall character as mildly reformist on the left wing of the social neoliberal spectrum. This is why a left opposition to the SNP is of such importance. Deranged by its sectarian SNP hatred, Labour cannot simultaneously oppose the latter party and attempt to win over its new, and highly conditional membership, but the radical left can.
Meantime, whatever respective attitudes to independence, there are a whole range of issues –defending unions and welfare state, opposition to fracking and nuclear weapons – on which the ‘yes’ and ‘no’ left can and must unite.
Neil Davidson was an activist with RIC and is a founding member of RISE
 



Reason, Faith and Revolution
Terry Eagleton
Yale University Press; £18.99
In this very welcome contribution to the current debate on religion, Terry Eagleton has two central objectives. One is to dismantle the pretensions of leading figures among the New Atheists, above all Richard Dawkins and Christopher Hitchens, whom he conflates into a single entity called “Ditchkins”.
Eagleton highlights two main weaknesses in their arguments. First, by treating religion as if it were simply a flawed scientific explanation, or a pseudo-science, Ditchkins merely demonstrates his ignorance of what religion actually is, “rather like someone who thinks that a novel is a botched piece of sociology”.
Second, by positing a hyper-rationalist version of Enlightenment thought as an alternative, Ditchkins ignores or evades the enormous contradictions of the version of progress it involves: Hiroshima is as legitimate an offspring of the Enlightenment as penicillin.
His other objective is likely to be more controversial with readers of Socialist Review. Eagleton, rightly focusing on Christianity rather than Islam, argues that the genuine radicalism of original religion was abandoned (the relevant chapter is actually called The Revolution Betrayed) following its institutionalisation and subsequent accommodation to power – a process that he compares to the corruption of Marxism into Stalinism.
That Christianity was initially a revolutionary doctrine can be defended. The problem is whether its subsequent transformation was necessary or merely contingent. Eagleton seems to be suggesting the latter, but it is here that the comparison with Marxism breaks down.
Marxism was not fated to become Stalinism – that was the result of a series of political events which could have had other outcomes. But Christianity, if it was to survive as a religion, had to reflect the contradictions of being and consciousness, and consequently make some compromises with what St Paul called “the powers and principalities of this world”, even if not exactly the ones reached under the later Roman Empire.
The book is based on a series of lectures, which is both a strength and a weakness. The strength is that it reproduces Eagleton’s public speaking style, which is quite unlike that of most academic socialists.
The weakness is that it exacerbates Eagleton’s impressionistic style. He always talks and writes intelligently and wittily, but sometimes with less focus than the subject demands, especially in relation to the question with which he opens the final chapter: “Why are the most unlikely people, including myself, suddenly writing about God?”
Eagleton is clear as to why there has been a religious revival. At one point he writes, “The social devastation wreaked by economic liberalism means that besieged groups can feel secure only by clinging to an exclusivist identity or unbending doctrine.”
He is less clear on the reason for the upsurge in chest-beating atheism which Ditchkins represents. Eagleton is right, I think, to say that contemporary capitalism is essentially atheistic, but that does not explain the ferocity of the current attacks on religion.
In part the explanation must lie in the attempt by former radicals to posture as rebels, even though they have long since made their peace with the system. Religion is a safe target for this posturing. As Eagleton writes, “It is striking how avatars of liberal Enlightenment like Hitchens, Dawkins, Martin Amis, Salman Rushdie, and Ian McEwan have much less to say about the evils of global capitalism as opposed to the evils of radical Islam.”
However, the main reason is one he touches on in a discussion of what he calls a “supercivilised brand of cultural suprematism”: “Since branding others as inferior because of their race is no longer acceptable, relegating them to the outer darkness because of their religion may serve instead.” This is the essence of the matter: for many of the people Eagleton rightly criticises here – although not Dawkins – the attack on Christianity is necessary to justify the attack on Islam and the latter would lack all credibility without it.
Some reservations apart, however, this is an urgent, engaging polemic which makes a fine companion piece to Dan Hind’s The Threat to Reason, a book that Eagleton rightly cites with approval at several points in his own work.
 



The whole neoliberal, or free market, order that has dominated the world for over 30 years was called into question when the system plunged into economic crisis in the autumn of last year.
The recent financial collapse in Dubai reminds us that the crisis is still shaking capitalism’s foundations. Yet talk about “the twilight of neoliberalism” has unfortunately proved premature.
It is true that a modified form of neoliberalism is emerging. This retains its core aspects while making pragmatic adjustments out of economic necessity.
But these measures, such as the part-nationalisation of British and US banks, are seen as temporary. They are certainly not undertaken as a means of achieving social reform.
If anything is blamed for the present debacle it is the excesses of financial institutions rather than the capitalist system itself. “What we are experiencing is not a crisis of capitalism,” proclaimed a recent article in the Newsweek magazine. “It is a crisis of finance, of democracy, of globalisation and ultimately of ethics.”
Neoliberalism did not promote economic growth or reduce inflation, let alone restore companies’ profit rates, except on a temporary and very uneven basis. Why then is it still dominant?
Like the 19th century neoclassical economic school from which it takes much of its theory, neoliberalism is an ideology representing particular class interests.
Neoclassicism represented mainly the interests of a subset of the capitalist class. This was characterised by extreme individualism and focused on the consumption of goods rather than their production.
In some respects, neoliberalism reflects the way in which these attitudes have been generalised across the capitalist class. The Italian journalist Loretta Napoleoni even argues that we have entered a new “Gilded Age” where the ruling class has once again become a “leisure class”.
 
Farce
This goes too far. But it is true that neoliberalism has benefited individual capitalists by increasing their wealth at the expense of the poor and the working class. It is unsurprising, therefore, that no significant section of the international ruling class has abandoned its belief in neoliberal capitalism.
It appears that we have returned to the start of the crisis of the late 1970s. Almost 35 years later, the same solutions are being offered to the same problems, with the same intended victims.
At this point it is customary to quote Karl Marx on how “the great events and characters of world history” are repeated “the first time as tragedy, the second as farce”. But, if the ruling class does achieve its aim, the repetition is unlikely to be funny.
It will extend and deepen the original tragedy. But there are two differences from the late 1970s.
One is that the original practitioners of neoliberalism, particularly those associated with the vanguard regimes of Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan, shared key objectives and strategies.
Their successors no longer do so. Instead, they display a sense of panic and consequent incoherence. Yet they are agreed about one thing – that the cost will be borne by the people they rule over, rather than by themselves.
The other is that, for most people, economic life has become more uncertain, political life more meaningless, social life more fragmented and cultural life more degraded. Since human beings are not just greedy little bundles of appetite, they are rebelling against these assaults on their humanity.
Those who might have been persuaded to accept a supposedly temporary deterioration of their living conditions in order to restructure capitalism for the greater good are less likely to be fooled again.
They have seen how their years of sacrifice have only benefited those at the top of society, and failed to prevent a recession.
Also, the idea that Labour represents an alternative to the capitalist parties has suffered with its 12 years of “social neoliberal” government.
The experiences behind these developments have been terrible. But they represent potentially positive changes in consciousness, if the left can offer people an alternative.
 






Neil Davidson argues that it’s not money that got us into this mess – it was the myths we bought with it



Capitalism is a system of competitive accumulation based on wage labour. The transition to a monetary economy was not sufficient for its emergence, but it was necessary. Money became the general or universal equivalent, the special commodity which acted simultaneously as a measure of value, a medium of circulation and a means of payment. Yet, in the beginning, the bourgeoisie had an ambiguous attitude to money. It was necessary to enable accumulation to take place (which meant preventing any more than was absolutely necessary being diverted to labour); but as the Bible taught, the love of money was a sin, and virtue might be indicated by a conscious refusal to make possession of money an object of vulgar display.
But as capitalism ceased to be a revolutionary force, as the austere regimes required for primitive accumulation and primary industrialisation passed into history along with the cultural repression they engendered, money came into its own. This was reflected in bourgeois theory, as well as the personal behaviour of individual members of the bourgeoisie. At the end of the 18th century, Scottish political economy saw value as being produced by the labour of workers; by the end of the 19th century, Austrian neoclassical economics saw value as being determined by the expenditure of the consumer: however much you were prepared to pay for a commodity was the measure of its value, as it remains to this day. The decline in bourgeois thought marked by shift from the rigorous objectivity of the labour theory of value to the vapid subjectivity of the theory of marginal utility was also indicative of a wider retreat from reality. Marx, who preserved and extended everything which was scientific in the work of the Scots, identified three types of capital: productive, commodity and money. When a bank lends money-capital to a productive capitalist for investment it is returned with interest – ‘money breeding money’, as he put it. But money-capital disguises the reality of capitalist relations of production by appearing to grow, as it were, magically, when in fact the interest is part of the surplus value extracted from the workers employed by the productive capitalist. Where the disguise is mistaken for reality the results have been disastrous; but there is another aspect of money which has also been problematic for capitalism and consequently for us. As Marx discovered during the 1850s, and Keynes rediscovered during the 1930s, capitalists do not spend all their money either on immediate consumption or on investment in production, they also save or hoard it: they exercise ‘liquidity preference’, in Keynes’ jargon. A combination of these two aspects of money, the illusion of self-generating growth and the actuality of deferred spending and investment, lie behind the current crisis.



... asking people in a situation of already dire poverty to do with less for the sake of the planet or in pursuit of some higher, non-materialist morality is simply insulting.



From the 1970s onwards, profit rates failed to consistently reach what capitalists considered acceptable levels. The result was a fall in the proportion of surplus value being invested in production and a rise in the proportion being saved, to the point where the latter was greater than the former. Not for the first time in the history of the capitalist system (1870s, 1920s), the need to find profitable uses for surplus capital, where productive investment was insufficiently attractive, tended to draw industrial capitalists towards financial speculation. The Great Depression of the 1930s showed productive capital that accumulation could no longer depend on a largely unregulated system; financial capital came to no such conclusion. The point at which productive capital reverted to the views of financial capital in the 1970s signalled the opening of the neoliberal era, but this did not mean that the former had become subordinated to the latter, rather that their interests had converged. In April 2009, for example, the German luxury car manufacturer Porsche announced that it had made pre-tax profits of 7.3 billion Euros in the six months to 31 January at a time of collapsing car sales, an outcome due almost entirely to a windfall from share options which the company held in Volkswagen.
The new focus on finance had wider implications than the shifting focus of investment, which tend to be compressed into the term ‘financialisation’, which means more than the growth of the financial economy in relation to the productive economy. Above all it means an attempt by capital to transform every human transaction into an exchange of commodities, one of which is money. But among all the complexities of arbitrage, derivatives, hedge funds and the rest, there are two essential points about financialisation which need to be understood. One is that, financial speculation can increase the profits of some individual capitalists at the expense of others, but cannot create new value for the system as a whole. The other is that, in so far as profits were raised, one aspect of financialisation became more important than any other: the massive increase in consumer debt. Credit became crucially important in preventing the return to crisis after the post-1982 recovery had exhausted itself. The East Asian crisis of 1997 and the dotcom collapse of 2000/1 signalled an unprecedented expansion of credit. Why? Neoliberalism was based on a threefold strategy of allowing unemployment, disciplining labour and relocating production. These could never have been permanently effective in cowing resistance, but their effect was prolonged by the very nature of the neoliberal boom. Growth in the heartlands of the system was based on investment in services rather than manufacturing or other productive sectors of the economy; consequently, new jobs tended to be characterised by more insecure employment or underemployment, in occupations at the bottom of the pay scales: workers in personal service occupations, for example, earned on average £14,146 for the 2002/03 tax year. This suppression of real wage levels among the working class therefore encouraged – indeed, one might say, necessitated – a massive expansion in borrowing. At the same time debt also provided an alternative to struggle, in conditions where that was difficult or impossible.
Between 2000 and 2004 household debt in the USA increased by 39 per cent, but real disposable income did not, with workers relying on $675 billion of new borrowing rather than on salaries and wages, which only increased by $530 billion, to finance an overall $1.3 trillion increase in spending. The British figures are similar. While New Labour has been in office in the UK, total debt held by individuals rose from £570.0 billion to £1,511.7 billion, an increase of 165.2 per cent. During the same period the ratio of personal debt to disposable income rose from 101.6 per cent to 173.1 per cent – an increase of 71.5 per cent which exceeds even the increase of 49.8 per cent registered during the preceding period of Conservative government. But whether or not the expansion of credit constitutes a problem for capitalism depends on the relationship between it and expansion of the value in production, which ultimately forms the basis of working-class incomes. When the supply of new credit and the production of new value are roughly aligned, growth of the former need not be a concern; but when, as between 2000 and 2005, the rise of after-tax income was slightly greater than a third of the rise in house prices, the disparity proved unsustainable.
Neoliberalism may not have resolved the problems of the rate of profit, but it provided one major service to the capitalist class and the bourgeoisie more generally: the neoliberal programme benefited individual members of the capitalist class by increasing their personal wealth, at the expense of the living standards of the poor and the working class. In 1965, during the last full decade of the post-war boom, the ratio of Chief Executive Officer income to that of an average worker in the US was 35 : 1; by 1980, the opening of the first full decade of the neoliberal era, it had risen to 80 : 1 and by 2005 to 450 : 1. To express the gap in another way; between 1968 and 2005 the salary of the highest paid CEO in the USA went from 127 average workers and 239 minimum waged workers to 7,443 average workers and 23,282 minimum waged workers. In Britain, even after ten years of Thatcherism, the average CEO of one of the FTSE top one hundred companies in 1988 earned ‘only’ 17 times the wage of an average worker; by 2008 it had risen to 75.5 times. Like the neoclassical economics of the Gilded Age before it, neoliberalism is an ideology. Both represented, not disinterested theory, but the articulation of particular class interests. Neoclassicism represented mainly the interests of a rentier subset of the bourgeoisie described by radicals and Marxists before the First World War as being characterised by extreme individualism and focussed on the means of consumption rather than the means of production. Neoliberalism in some respects reflects the way in which these attitudes have been generalised across the bourgeoisie as a whole. It is unsurprising, therefore, that no significant section of the international ruling class has abandoned its belief in the fundamentals of neoliberal capitalism: they have too much to lose. But neoliberalism is also an ideology in a second sense; not only one which presents the perspective of a particular class as universal, but also one which seeks to explain or justify the discrepancy between theory and reality, between the promise of improved standards of living for all and the delivery of inequalities in which benefits are reserved for the rulers of society.
What should the attitude of the left be to the current dominance of money-capital? Two attitudes seem to be not simply useless, but actively harmful. The first would be to identify the activities of financial capital as the source of exploitation and oppression, rather than the system itself. Past experience suggests that, whether the opposition is supposedly between patriotic and cosmopolitan capital, competitive and monopoly capital, or – as in the current case – financial and industrial capital, the tendency is first to align, then to submerge the interests of labour beneath those of one (‘progressive’) section of the warring brotherhood. But however much they may fight among themselves, all sections of the capitalist class have benefited from the restraints which neoliberalism has imposed upon labour. And the ‘manufacturing and exporting’ wing of capital continues to do so, for one response to the crisis in Britain has certainly been cooperation between trade unions – or rather their bureaucracies – and employers; but this has been entirely to the advantage of the latter, involving workers accepting pay freezes, pay cuts, as in Honda, or in the most extreme case, periods of working for nothing, as in British Airways. The second would be to issue moralising homilies to working class people condemning them for acting as ‘consumers’ and unnecessarily adding to their possessions. The implication is that, although the irresponsibility of politicians and bankers may primarily be to blame for the current crisis, some of the responsibility must also lie with the individuals who took on the debt. In so far as better-off workers have spent borrowed money on commodities which are above the minimum needed to reproduce their labour, it is a response to their increased alienation under neoliberalism. But if the argument here is correct, the main reason for increased debt has been the need to maintain personal or familial income levels. There is a long and unedifying history of socialists, intoxicated on their own misunderstanding of Lenin and Gramsci, denouncing the workers for their ‘economism’. Seeing the way working-class people in the US have had their anger diverted into opposing abortion, or defending gun-ownership, one can only hope that they discover their vulgar material interests sooner rather than later. More generally though, asking people in a situation of already dire poverty to do with less for the sake of the planet or in pursuit of some higher, non-materialist morality is simply insulting. Worse, it echoes ruling class calls for sacrifice, such as the assertion that ‘we are all in this together’ uttered more than once by the millionaire George Osborne at the recent Conservative Party Annual Conference.
In fact, the attitude of the left should have two aspects, which at first sight may appear paradoxical. On the one hand, support every struggle to increase wages for workers and transfer payments for those people not in work. Of course trade unions must fight in defence of services and for political aims; but organisations which are unable to defend their members’ standard of living are unlikely to be able to fight successfully on any other front. On the other hand, we must oppose the commodification and marketisation of social life which makes access to money so necessary in the first place: free access to services provided from general taxation should be our demand over everything, from the NHS to libraries to public transport. The defence of Royal Mail combines both objectives: protecting the living standards of postal workers and preserving the post as a service rather than a business. The abolition of money will have to wait until we abolish the system that requires it; but we only have to imagine the response of the political class to these modest proposals to understand that reformist demands can have a radical charge, if people are prepared to fight for them.
 



The Illusion of Freedom
Tom Gallagher
Hurst and Company; £12.99
Tom Gallagher tells us that he voted for the Scottish National Party (SNP) as early as 1979 and as recently as 2007. He is not, in other words, a partisan for the Labour Party (whose own critique of the SNP is, unsurprisingly, utterly incoherent). In fact, one of his main criticisms of the SNP is precisely that it resembles New Labour too closely in its manipulative, top-down approach.
Gallagher provides a useful and refreshing account of devolution. He identifies the hostility of the SNP to popular sovereignty and claims that it is simply reproducing the rule by the elites that have dominated Scottish life since the Act of Union of 1707. This is fine insofar as it captures the deeply anti-democratic impulses which the SNP shares with all contemporary bourgeois parties.
The real problems begin when Gallagher lists the issues which make him suspicious of the SNP: its opposition to Western imperialism in the Balkans and the Middle East, to the nuclear arsenal on the Clyde and to nuclear power, and attempts by the government to reach out to the Muslim community. Gallagher obsesses about the potential for alliances with self-appointed Muslim leaders as if this was the greatest danger facing democracy today, and rejects the very existence of Islamophobia.
Gallagher is right to argue that the SNP leadership probably do not expect to win a referendum on independence. He believes that Alex Salmond hopes to provoke an anti-Scottish reaction in England that will help break up the UK from the Westminster end. I remain unconvinced.
It is not clear whether the SNP leaders any longer think independence is possible at all, and their strategy is actually to renegotiate the Union along the lines of Catalonia in Spain or Quebec in Canada – although this is not something which can yet be admitted to the party rank and file, for fear of accusations about betraying the sacred blood of William Wallace (etc.). Gallagher is on surer ground when he refers to the SNP leadership as “super-unionists” – not in relation to the Anglo-Scottish Union, but instead to the EU. As he points out, Scotland’s autonomy would be at least as restricted as a small nation in the EU as it currently is as a devolved region of the UK.
Although helpful as a guide to political events in Scotland over the last ten years, the problem with this book is that it misses the central contradiction within the SNP. This has less to do with the contest between the nationalist currents that Gallagher identifies, and far more to do with the fact that it seeks working class support by presenting itself as a social democratic organisation while adhering to neoliberal economics.
The fact that Scots actually want social democratic policies should be a source of encouragement, but Gallagher sees no alternative to the current party set-up. Thus his book ends on a depressed note. It is high time that the left in Scotland resumed the task of providing that alternative.
 




Neil Davidson says revolutionaries can learn from the way Margaret Thatcher led the ruling class to victory in the struggles of the 1980s
The 30th anniversary of the Tories coming to power in 1979 has provided few consolations, except for the fact of Thatcher’s imminent demise.
Her death will be greeted with outpourings of joy by most working class people, although her funeral will unfortunately involve lying in state at Westminster Abbey, rather than a crossroads burial at midnight with a stake through her heart.
Nevertheless, there is least one respect in which socialists can learn from Thatcher – the way she was prepared, starting from a minority position, to fight for what she thought was necessary for her class.
As the Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci pointed out in the 1930s, in times of crisis capitalism requires politicians who will decide on a particular strategy and fight for it with absolute conviction, if necessary against individual members of the capitalist class themselves.
By the late 1970s British capitalism required an entirely new political regime – one which did not reluctantly acquiesce to policies, as the Labour Party did, but which was fully committed to their implementation.
In that sense Thatcher was an “anti-Lenin”, part of a bourgeois vanguard that was prepared to take risks before which others would have retreated.
She was necessary to capitalism in Britain in a way that Ronald Reagan was not in the US. Reagan was a charismatic, but replaceable, front-man for the collective leadership of neoconservative ideologues and corporate representatives who actually directed White House policy.
In a partly-justified response to the notion of an all-conquering “Thatcherism” which so paralysed and disorientated the left during the 1980s, several writers have tried, from different standpoints, to play down the significance of Thatcher.
In his interesting history of the 1970s, When the Lights Went Out, Andy Beckett argues that James Callaghan could have called the general election for October 1978 and Labour would likely have won. But even if they had not, the Conservatives would then have had to deal with the Winter of Discontent – a contest for which they were unprepared and which Thatcher herself believed would have destroyed the government before it had begun.
The opposite view has been taken by the Scottish novelist James Kelman:
“If she hadn’t been around somebody else would have been chosen. The very notion of ‘Thatcherism’ suggests that what is happening in this country began with her and will therefore end with her.”
Beckett sees the period as involving a series of contingent events which could have had other outcomes. Kelman is deterministic, emphasising the conditions of crisis which would have ultimately brought forth the necessary political leadership in an attempt to resolve them in the interests of capital.
Both arguments have some validity, but both ultimately underestimate the role of leadership. The crisis in which British capitalism was engulfed would have forced whichever party was in office to move in neoliberal directions, albeit more slowly and with greater caution.
But neoliberalism could not have been introduced at the speed and intensity it was without Thatcher or a similar personality. Thatcher was in a minority among the leadership of her party, which had itself been elected by only a minority of voters.
She nevertheless had several advantages. One was the financial support provided by revenues from the export of North Sea oil. Another was that she faced a compromised and incoherent Labour Party.
Above all her real enemy the broader labour movement, was in ideological and organisational turmoil, disillusioned by the previous Labour government and weakened by unemployment.
Thatcher’s position only became unassailable through two victories. The first was over the Argentinean military in 1982. The “Falklands factor” did not have any lasting popular impact, although it was widely believed to have by writers around the then influential (if badly misnamed) journal Marxism Today.
The real impact was to consolidate Thatcher’s supremacy over the Conservative Party.
The war was a gamble. Not in the sense that there was ever much likelihood of the British forces losing – their relative weight compared to the Argentineans was far too one-sided for that to be plausible.
The real risk was that victory would come at the price of so many British casualties as to be publicly unacceptable. But it did not.
The second victory was over the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) in 1985, which finally consolidated the neoliberal regime in Britain. The alternative outcome could have resulted in a different future.
This was by no means the impossibility that tends to be argued by those who – openly or not – welcomed the actual outcome. There were crucial turning points at which the NUM could have achieved victory as late as six months into the strike.
Neoliberalism could have suffered a reverse in Britain, as it was later to do in France, with consequences we cannot know.
David Cameron is unlikely to play the same role as Thatcher. The vanguard regimes of Thatcher and Reagan in the US shared a small but clear set of key objectives and strategies.
Their successors no longer do so. Instead, they display an increasingly well-founded sense of panic and agree about only one thing – that ordinary people will pay for the crisis.
Faced with an enemy that is both vicious and disorientated, revolutionaries have to prove our collective capacity to lead our class as Thatcher individually did for hers.
Neil Davidson is a visiting research fellow at the University of Strathclyde and the author of Discovering the Scottish Revolution 1692–1746.
 



I’m not clear what “myth” Bob Fotheringham thinks he is challenging here. I agree that Thatcher was always deeply unpopular with most of the working class and was highly vulnerable down to the defeat of the Great Miners’ Strike – points in my original article. It is not helpful, however, to underestimate our enemies or refuse to recognise their achievements for the capitalist class, which in Thatcher’s case were considerable.
Above all, she presided over a massive increase in the rate of exploitation of labour which was achieved on the back of a very serious defeat of the movement from which we are only recovering now.
Thatcher was brought down by working class insurgency, but the trade unions were only minor players. This is indicative of her success in forcing the organised labour movement onto the defensive. It is also one of the reasons why the ruling class was prepared to ditch Thatcher’s tactics in favour of the “social neoliberal” ones of Blair and Brown.
Finally, the leadership I was calling for was not at the top of the Labour Party or the trade unions, but from within the working class itself – the need for which we are both agreed.
 



Naomi Klein
The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism
Allen Lane, 2007, £25
Authors with both talent and a theme of topical importance are still not guaranteed to seize the public imagination: they also require good timing. More precisely, they require a mass audience predisposed to sympathetically listen to what they have to say. This means that the writers concerned must be, if not exactly ahead of their potential audience, at least attuned to shifts in popular consciousness that are perhaps not yet fully formed. Several classics of socialist literature appeared too early to have an immediate impact. George Orwell’s 1938 work Homage to Catalonia, for example, is now rightly regarded as one of the outstanding autobiographical accounts of the Spanish Civil War and a merciless critique of the bankruptcy of the Popular Front strategy. But by the time of Orwell’s death in 1950 it had failed to sell even the initial print run of 1,500. [1] The very defeats which Stalinism had helped bring about meant that the majority of socialists were simply not open to the arguments it contained. Its popularity came later, in the wake of Orwell’s fame as the author of Nineteen Eighty-Four and the emergence of a New Left after 1956.
The Canadian radical journalist Naomi Klein has been rather more fortunate in her timing. Between 1995 and 1999 Klein worked to expose how giant multinational brands dominated the world economy. The resulting book, No Logo, appeared early in 2000, only months after the November 1999 demonstrations against the World Trade Organisation in Seattle signalled the coalescence of new forms of collective opposition to capitalist globalisation.
According to Klein’s own account, her book went to the printers as the protesters took to the streets: “I consider myself lucky that I happened to write a book just at a movement’s moment.” Klein herself did not fully appreciate the scale and extent of the movement – although, to be fair, no one else did either. Indeed, before starting the book she was only aware of “small-scale activism” such as “culture jamming” and “ad busting”, and saw these as having an important future only as “an act of faith”. [2] No Logo itself concludes by listing the fragmented groups which she hoped together might “wrest” globalisation “from the grasp of the multinationals”: “Ethical shareholders, culture jammers, street reclaimers, McUnion organisers, human-rights activists, school-logo fighters and internet watchdogs are at the early stages of demanding a citizen-centred alternative to the international rule of the brands”. [3] Nevertheless, No Logo caught a mood and, once a relatively cohesive movement did emerge, it rapidly achieved classic status, elevating Klein to a pre-eminent position in the movement. Contributors to International Socialism have disagreed with her support for decentralisation and opposition to the resolution of strategic differences through hard political argument. But there is no doubt that Klein has played a serious participatory role, refusing the temptation to become a mere radical celebrity offering detached commentary on events. [4]
 
From global brands to disaster capitalism
Seven years lie between No Logo and Klein’s latest book, The Shock Doctrine, during which time her only substantive publication has been a collection of journalism written between Seattle and 9/11. [5] The latter event and the various responses to it on the left seem to have been the catalyst for a change in her perspective. In particular, as she recently explained in conversation with the Marxist geographer Neil Smith, she was concerned about the way in which 9/11 divided what had, until then, been a movement finding its way towards opposing the system as a whole: into oppositions focused respectively on war and capitalism, without seeing the connections between the two. [6] What Klein is attempting in The Shock Doctrine is to integrate events like wars – not least the “Global War on Terror” – but also supposedly “natural” disasters, into an account of how contemporary capitalism works. The Shock Doctrine is in other respects a very different type of book from No Logo. Rather than a series of contemporary snapshots, the approach is historical, tracing the unfolding of the neoliberal era from the Chilean coup of 1973 onwards, occasionally moving further back in time to search for precedents. But the differences are not merely structural. A more sombre tone has replaced the vibrant optimism with which she first caught the movement’s attention. It is as if the longer perspective she adopts here has brought home the extent of the violence committed against humanity during a period which has now lasted nearly 40 years.
We now think of that period as one dominated by neoliberalism, although Klein tends to treat neoliberalism and neoconservatism as interchangeable terms for a particular way of organising capitalism, which she prefers to call “corporatism”, characterised by “huge transfers of public wealth to private hands, often accompanied by exploding debt, an ever-widening chasm between the dazzling rich and the disposable poor and an aggressive nationalism that justifies bottomless spending on security”. [7] Whatever terminology is employed for the current form of capitalist organisation (I will continue to refer to neoliberalism in what follows) Klein rightly distinguishes it from capitalism itself. [8] As we shall see, however, this avoids one error, only to open up the possibility of another – that “another capitalism is possible” shorn of the inhumanity of neoliberalism. I will return to this point below; but first, what is Klein’s argument?
She begins with the way in which theoretical support for free markets was kept alive by a small band of thinkers, above all Milton Friedman (who features as her main intellectual adversary here), after the tide began to turn against free market capitalism with the Great Crash of 1929:
During these dark days for laissez-faire, when Communism conquered the East, the welfare state was embraced by the West and economic nationalism took root in the postcolonial South, Friedman and his mentor, Friedrich Hayek, patiently protected the flame of a pure version of capitalism, untarnished by Keynesian attempts to pool collective wealth to build more just societies. [9]
But the coming to power of rulers either searching for economic answers or already committed to market solutions – initially the Chilean military, then the Thatcher and Reagan governments – provided the first opportunities for these ideas to be put into practice. Coincident with the preservation of neoliberal theory at Chicago University by Friedman and his acolytes, a form of Electro Convulsive Therapy (“electroshock treatment”) was being developed by Ewen Cameron at McGill University with CIA funding. Ostensibly to help psychiatric patients, this was in fact used by his paymasters to reduce prisoners to a vegetative state of blankness and receptivity. Klein claims that this form of psychological torture, “coercive interrogation”, although in actual use, most recently in the aftermath of 9/11, also acts as a metaphor for a broader social process: “Like the terrorised prisoner who gives up the names of his comrades and renounces his faith, shocked societies often give up things they would otherwise fiercely protect”. [10]
Social shock treatment and neoliberal economics have been linked, in the sense that the former has been used to pave the way for the introduction of the latter, in a conjoined process Klein calls “disaster capitalism”. She twice quotes Friedman’s statement that “only a crisis – actual or perceived – produces real change” and argues that neoliberalism is a “shock doctrine” which takes advantage of disaster to impose the idea of the new market order. [11] The notion of “shock” therefore works on three levels: first, “countries are shocked – by wars, coups d’état and natural disasters”; second, “they are shocked again – by corporations and politicians who exploit the fear and disorientation of this first shock to push through economic shock therapy”; and third, “people who resist are, if necessary, shocked again – by police, soldiers and prison interrogators”. [12]
Putting this argument to work, Klein is able to demonstrate that, contrary to the neoliberal claim that free markets and parliamentary democracy are mutually dependent systems, “this fundamentalist form of capitalism has consistently been midwifed by the most brutal forms of coercion, inflicted on the collective body politic as well as on countless individual bodies”. And not only the introduction but the maintenance of neoliberal regimes requires at the very least the severe curtailment of democracy, in all respects other than the most formal – the bare right to vote for virtually indistinguishable parties. As this suggests, Klein regards neoliberalism from the beginning as a project reliant on state power. Rather than markets being “freed” from the state as the ideology proclaims, we have instead witnessed the formation of a new, but equally close, relationship between the two:
In every country where Chicago School policies have been applied over the last three decades, what has emerged is a powerful ruling alliance between a few very large corporations and a class of mostly wealthy politicians – with hazy and ever shifting lines between the two groups. [13]
Klein supports her argument with a series of individual country by country case studies, which constitute the core of the book and which have an undeniable cumulative power.
The critique I want to offer here differs from the attacks by self-deluded liberals such as Will Hutton. [14] Whatever problems there are with Klein’s work, her position is infinitely more realistic about the workings of capitalism than the vacuous waffle about “civil society”, “democratic governance” and the like which Hutton has been promoting for decades. Above all, Klein is on the side of those who are fighting back against capitalism; Hutton is committed to defending the system against which they struggle, despite its “excesses”. Klein has also been criticised for her unsparing accounts of organisations such as Solidarity in Poland and the ANC in South Africa which once embodied popular aspirations but have since capitulated to neoliberalism. Ronald Suresh Roberts, for example, has accused Klein of condescension towards black South Africans who re-elected the ANC with ever bigger majorities until 2004. [15] To argue that criticism of post-colonial regimes is a refusal of solidarity, regardless of what these regimes have done or failed to do after taking power, is a piece of moral blackmail that has been used all too often in the past to whip Western liberals and even some would-be revolutionaries into line. It is to Klein’s credit that she refuses to bow to it, rightly understanding that the solidarity we owe is to the exploited and oppressed, not to parties or states which claim to represent them while betraying their interests at every turn.
 
The limitations of a metaphor 
The real problems with The Shock Doctrine lie elsewhere. The detail which Klein provides of how neoliberalism has become the dominant form of capitalist organisation is far more convincing than the organising metaphor within which it is presented. Klein presents neoliberalism as the manifestation of the inner logic of corporate capitalism (although perhaps not of capitalism itself) and “shock” as the means by which it can be realised. She therefore treats every geopolitical event (using that term in its broadest sense) since 1973 as one either consciously undertaken or opportunistically manipulated to impose neoliberalism, a fixation which inevitably produces unnecessarily conspiratorial undertones to her work. (As Joseph Stiglitz remarks, “There are no accidents in the world as seen by Naomi Klein”. [16]) There are three problems with the “shock” metaphor as an aid to understanding contemporary capitalism.
First, how necessary was “shock” to the introduction of neoliberalism? “There are huge Third World economies that have been ravaged by neoliberalism that haven’t endured ‘the shock doctrine’,” notes Alexander Cockburn. [17] He specifically mentions India in this context, but could just as easily have mentioned Mexico or Egypt. Klein does not discuss either of these countries, even though they are in the neoliberal vanguard of their respective regions and are at least as important in geopolitical and geoeconomic terms as Chile or Iraq, which receive detailed attention because they appear to confirm her thesis. [18] More damaging still is the absence of credible examples of “shock therapy” in the cases of the two states of the developed world where neoliberalism has taken deepest root: the UK and the US.
Klein identifies the Falklands War of 1982 as the decisive moment for Thatcher in implementing her programme in the UK: “The disorder and nationalist excitement resulting from the war allowed her to use tremendous force to crush the striking coal miners and to launch the first privatisation frenzy in a Western democracy”. [19] In fact, the popular impact of the Falklands victory was relatively short-lived and did not feature particularly prominently in Conservative electoral material during the 1983 campaign, although it certainly helped to consolidate Thatcher’s leadership over her party. [20] The Conservative victory that year had a far less epochal and far more conjunctural basis. In electoral terms, they faced a compromised and incoherent Labour Party, a section of whose voting base had shifted to the newly formed SDP-Liberal Alliance. But equally significant was the state of the working class – disillusioned with the previous Labour government, weakened by unemployment but offered some relief by the emergence of the economy from the depths of the 1981–2 slump.
Far from the Falklands being the shock that made Thatcher’s victory over the miners and everything that followed possible, the outcome of the subsequent miners’ strike was itself the turning point in establishing the neoliberal regime in Britain. The key to Thatcher’s triumph was the failure of other unions and the TUC to deliver effective solidarity with the National Union of Mineworkers. The British working class was temporarily defeated in a way that had serious consequences (from which it has yet to fully recover) but it was scarcely shocked into a condition of psychological collapse.
Klein’s account of the USA is even more implausible, focusing as it does on the aftermath of 9/11:
What happened in the period of mass disorientation after the attacks was, in retrospect, a domestic form of economic shock therapy. The Bush team, Friedmanite to the core, quickly moved to exploit the shock that gripped the nation to push through its radical vision of a hollow government in which everything from war fighting to disaster response was a for-profit venture. [21]
Reading this one might almost believe that the US had been spared the neoliberal onslaught until the fall of the Twin Towers. In fact it suffered, from the late 1970s, longer and more intensively than anywhere in the West apart from the UK. In the case of the US too the key was the weakening of the labour movement, a task made easier by the fact that the US labour movement did not even enjoy the collective successes of the British in the early 1970s. The retreat started much earlier than the American equivalent of the miners’ strike, the defeat of the Patco air traffic controllers in 1981. [22]
Second, was “shock” always applied for the purpose of introducing neoliberalism? In general Klein makes far too direct a link between economics and politics. [23] Take, for example, the two central events which dominate The Shock Doctrine, and which she explicitly links: the Chilean coup of 1973 and the invasion of Iraq in 2003. [24]
Klein is, of course, right to say that in Chile it was only in the aftermath of a violent seizure of power by the military that the neoliberal regime could have been put in place. But this was not the motivation for the coup, which was carried out to crush the political aspirations of the working class movement which had looked to Allende and which was by 1973 beginning to organise on its own behalf. In fact the generals initially had little idea what economic policies to introduce and in other circumstances might well have looked to the Catholic corporatist model applied by Franco in Spain after 1939, which had been followed more or less faithfully by previous Latin American dictatorships. In retrospect, the arrival of the “Chicago Boys” to oversee the implementation of Pinochet’s programme of privatisation and deregulation has a wider significance, but initially it appeared to have no resonance elsewhere and subsequent coups to that in Chile did not immediately adopt neoliberalism. Klein herself notes that the Argentinian dictatorship that came to power in 1976 did not follow its Chilean predecessor in privatising social security or natural resources: in fact these were achieved decades later under civilian governments. [25]
In relation to Iraq, Klein quotes Bush the Father at the head of one chapter denying accusations that Bush the Son “invaded Iraq to open up new markets for US companies”, a denial which she regards as self-evidently preposterous. [26] However, painful though it is to admit, the elder Bush is simply speaking the truth. The US did not invade and occupy Iraq in order to create profit opportunities for private security firms but for strategic reasons connected to Middle Eastern oil – not to guarantee price or even supply for American use, but to control the supply in relation to competitors, above all China. [27]
Third, even accepting that neoliberals have opportunistically intervened to take advantage of disaster situations in recent decades, why was it only at a certain stage in post-war history that crises were manipulated to produce these outcomes? Two examples will illustrate the problem.
One is from the core of the world system. At the end of the Second World War it quickly became apparent that Britain had unresolved economic problems. These were not helped by a massive rearmament programme that  began to erode the welfare state within years of it being initiated. When the Conservative Party was returned to office in 1951, some members of the new administration led by Rab Butler drafted a proposal to float the pound, which would have immediately led to it falling in value against the dollar. The central intention here was to put an end to balance of payments difficulties which were already characteristic of the British economy. Exports would be given a massive boost, while at the same time imports would fall; domestic prices would be high, but wages would have to be held down to avoid inflationary pressures, not least by allowing unemployment to rise. In effect, the government would be forced to cut funding of the welfare state, especially the housing programme, as well as its overseas military commitments.
The plan was dropped, largely as a result of Churchill’s nervousness over the likely consequences in electoral terms. [28] Historians have tended to treat this episode as a typical example of the consensual thinking which supposedly prevented deep-seated problems from being tackled before the advent of the Thatcher regime. [29] The point, however, is that an experiment of this sort would have been, in capitalist terms, both destructive and unnecessary at this time. Destructive because it was contrary to the type of economic structures being put in place in the advanced capitalist West – most obviously it would have destroyed the Bretton Woods agreement, the only components of which to have been put in place were fixed exchange rates. Unnecessary because from the end of the Korean War in 1953 the British economy began to take off in a boom which meant that any attempt to limit trade union power or redefine the limits of the welfare state could be postponed. British capitalism did indeed have serious underlying problems, but in conditions of generalised expansion few members of the British ruling class felt it was necessary to take action. Those who did argue for proto-Thatcherite solutions in the late 1950s, such as Enoch Powell, were marginalised.
My other example is from the developing world. The Indonesian coup of 1965 was a successful attempt by a section of the local ruling class, backed by the US and the UK, to destroy the power of the Communist Party and the left more generally, in what was at that point the most extreme use of counter-revolutionary violence since the Second World War. But neither internal nor external forces sought to impose what was then thought of as a neoclassical economic programme on the country. Klein draws parallels between the group of Indonesian economists trained at the University of California, the so-called “Berkeley Mafia” who advised the military both before and after the coup, with the “Chicago Boys” who played a similar post-coup role for the Chilean junta ten years later. She rather elides, however, the nature of the economic policies followed in the former case, which were quite different from the latter. [30] Indonesia under Suharto was regarded as a reliable ally of the West in the Cold War, but continued the strategy of state-led economic development initiated by the pre-coup regime. Its economic policies were similar to those of the other newly industrialising countries of East Asia, particularly Taiwan, Singapore and South Korea.
What these examples suggest is that neoliberalism was far from being the application of a doctrine which capitalists, state managers or politicians had been waiting to apply since the introduction of the New Deal in the 1930s or the creation of the post-war welfare states. In other words, if Klein’s thesis was correct, the policies we now associate with neoliberalism would have been introduced much earlier in the 20th century than they in fact were. Instead even the most ferociously counter-revolutionary regimes followed the dominant economic model of state intervention.
It is certainly the case that in the Global South the military repression of regimes reflecting the reformist aspirations of the working class and the oppressed opened up opportunities for multinational corporations to play a greater role but the latter have not themselves always pursued neoliberal policies, nor have they always demanded them from the states with which they have had to deal. Klein writes that “Friedman’s vision coincided with the interests of the large multinationals, which by nature hunger for vast new unregulated markets”. [31] But the interests of the multinationals have changed over time. During the long post-war boom there was general support for state intervention among the larger businesses and corporations, while small businesses retained their traditional hostility to it. These differences expressed the relative security of their positions within the market. Corporations were protected from the worst exigencies of price competition and were able to plan for longer-term investment and growth, and often in alliance with the state. Small businesses were much more vulnerable, and the state simply represented a source of demands for predatory taxation and bureaucratic regulation.
Neoliberal globalisation has changed the relative position of the corporations so that all but the largest transnational corporations are in a similar position in terms of size to the small businesses of the post-war period: “The process of globalisation has sharply increased the degree of competitive pressure faced by large corporations and banks, as competition has become a worldwide relationship.” Corporations still need a home state to act as a base, but they require it to behave differently. Increased competition “pushes them towards support for any means to reduce their tax burden and lift regulatory constraints, to free them to compete more effectively with their global rivals”. [32]
 
Explaining the neoliberal moment
In many respects Klein’s position is close to David Harvey’s. Although he is only mentioned once in the text (in a footnote about the introduction of neoliberalism to China after the Tiananmen Square massacre), Klein refers in her acknowledgements to him as one of “several thinkers and chroniclers of neoliberalism [who] have shaped my thinking”. [33] More recently she has said that her object, “using David Harvey’s parameters”, was to track “the counter-revolution against Keynesianism and developmentalism and the period from the 1930s through to the end of the 1960s, where there was a period when there was a response to another crisis which was the market crash of 1929”. [34] There is, however, one central problem with the concept of a neoliberal “counter-revolution” shared by Harvey and Klein: it perpetuates the neoliberal myth that socio-economic developments in the post-war period were fundamentally detrimental to capital. It is certainly true that a number of concessions were granted to the working class, and it is for this reason that the reputation of “the golden age” remains high, particularly in contrast to what Eric Hobsbawm calls “the landslide” that followed. This reputation rests on two main factors. [35] One was high, indeed for practical purposes full, employment. The other was the expansion of the “social wage” through the provision of education, health and social security, particularly unemployment benefits and pensions. [36]
Both of these were necessary to capital, to gain the support of the labour force, helping to ensure social stability and to aid increases in productivity, thus contributing to international competitiveness. As Hilde Nafstad and her colleagues write, “Welfare states should not be understood simply as a protective reaction against modern capitalism, but as varieties of modern capitalism”. [37] Consequently, these measures were not necessarily dependent for their introduction on social democratic or even liberal democratic governments. As Tony Judt has correctly noted:
Outside of Scandinavia – in Austria, Germany, France, Italy, Holland, and elsewhere – it was not socialists but Christian Democrats who played the greatest part in installing and administering the core institutions of the activist welfare state. Even in Britain, where the post-World War Two Labour government under Clement Attlee indeed inaugurated the welfare state as we knew it, it was the wartime government of Winston Churchill that commissioned and approved the report by William Beveridge (himself a Liberal) that established the principles of public welfare provision: principles – and practices – that were reaffirmed and underwritten by every Conservative government that followed until 1979. [38]
Klein rightly rejects the USSR and its satellites and imitators as a model for the contemporary radical left, but nevertheless considers them to be “post-capitalist” societies, which consequently required an entirely new capitalist class to be created after their demise. However, as this journal has argued since its inception, rather than view these societies as being fundamentally different from those of the West it is better to see them as existing on a continuum of state intervention, with two extremes – the US and the USSR – at opposite ends of the scale.
The real roots of neoliberalism are to be found in the end of the period of exceptional growth that followed the Second World War. The precise causes of the return to crisis after 1973 have been widely debated but some key features are highlighted by most analysts. Increased price competition from West Germany and Japan within the advanced world was made possible by intensive investment in technology and relatively low wages. This forced their hitherto dominant rivals, above all the US, to lower their own prices in a situation where production costs remained unchanged. American corporations were initially prepared to accept a reduced rate of profit in order to maintain market share but, ultimately, they too undertook a round of new investments, thus raising the capital-labour ratio and increasing the organic composition of capital, leading to consequent further pressure on the rate of profit. [39] As Al Campbell writes, neoliberalism was therefore a solution to “a structural crisis of capitalism” in which “policies, practices and institutions” that had hitherto served capital accumulation no longer did so: “More narrowly, one can say that capitalism abandoned the Keynesian compromise in the face of a falling rate of profit, under the belief that neoliberalism could improve its profit rate and accumulation performance.” [40]
But the inadequacy of Keynesian policies was itself the result of changes to the nature of the world economy which had taken place during the long boom – an unprecedented threefold expansion of international trade, the advent of cross-border production, the increase in large-scale foreign direct investment and the creation of “offshore” banking and flows of money capital unlimited by national boundaries – all of which made these policies increasingly difficult to apply with any possibility of success. States had not become completely powerless in the face of markets – that is the myth of globalisation assiduously cultivated by politicians seeking to shift responsibility for neoliberal policies onto what T.S. Eliot once called “great impersonal forces” over which they had no control. In that sense neoliberalism represented a choice, but it was a choice increasingly difficult to avoid so long as the goal was the preservation and expansion of capitalism at all costs.
The economic roots of neoliberalism were therefore decisive. The one condition that was universally required in order to impose the neoliberal regime was to eliminate or at least reduce the power of the organised working class. The real reason for the attack on the ability of unions to effectively defend their members was threefold. The first was to enable corporate restructuring, the closing of “unproductive” units and the imposition of “the right of managers to manage” within the workplace. The second was to ensure that wage costs fell and stayed down so that the share of profits going to capital was increased. This also extended to the social wage. The main source of funding for the post-war welfare states came from redistribution within the working class itself. However, to the extent that it was also a cost to capital, it was one that capitalists were only prepared to pay so long as the system was expanding. When it began to contract, as it did after 1973, these costs had to be reduced, either by attacking provisions directly in the hands of employers (pensions, health insurance) or by shifting the burden of taxation even more decisively onto the working class. The third, more long-term tactical consideration, was to assist social democracy as it adapted to neoliberalism by weakening the main source of countervailing pressure from the broader labour movement, thus ensuring that fiscal and other changes in favour of capital would not be reversed.
Only very rarely did these attacks involve destroying the trade union movement. The Chilean coup of 1973 is exceptional in this respect and it was only possible on a temporary basis. At the time, however, it was regarded as a tragic reversal of the reformist strategy adopted by Allende and Popular Unity, not as foreshadowing any new development. Latin America had, after all, experienced numerous coups in the 20th century, albeit few as violent as this. In the important case of China, the ruling class was fortunate in that there was no movement to be destroyed: the reality of this so-called “workers’ state” being an atomised labour force presided over by official trade unions that were an arm of the state. (Ironically, the emergence of a genuine labour movement in China has been in response to the regime’s neoliberal turn.) In most cases, apart from simply allowing mass unemployment to weaken worker confidence and combativity, the attack on trade union power involved two strategies.
One was to provoke a decisive confrontation between a state-backed employer and one or two important groups of unionised workers (air traffic controllers in the US in 1981, textile workers in India in 1982, miners in the UK in 1984–5), whose defeat would act as an example to the others, against a background of multiplying legal restraints and increasing employer intransigence. In these circumstances politicians gambled that most sections of the trade union bureaucracy would give priority to the continued existence of their organisations, however much reduced in power, rather than mount effective resistance. Looking back at the refusal of other unions or federations such as the AFL-CIO and the TUC to give effective support to unions under attack, the bet appears to have involved a limited amount of risk.
The other strategy was to establish new productive capacity, often virtually new industries in geographical areas with low or non-existent levels of unionisation, and to prevent the culture of membership from becoming established. The classic example of this strategy was the movement of productive capital from the old “rustbelt” industrial regions of the north east US to the southern “sunbelt”. [41] Actual geographical shifts within nation-states were more common and more damaging to trade union organisation than the threatened geographical shifts to locations in the Global South, which were often made by employers but far less frequently carried out, not least because of their lack of technological infrastructure and the cost in abandoning fixed capital which such relocations would involve. However, as Graham Turner notes, “it is the threat of relocation that proves just as powerful as the reality of a transfer somewhere cheaper”. [42]
The emergence of neoliberalism as a conscious ruling class strategy, rather than the esoteric ideological doctrine associated with Friedman & Co, therefore took place in response to the end of the post-war boom, but in changed conditions created by that boom. Politicians and state managers began to implement some of the policies long advocated by Hayek and Friedman, not because individual opportunities to do so which had previously been missing finally presented themselves, as Klein claims, but because the changed conditions of accumulation required changed strategies. Given the limited number of strategies available (assuming these were to be in the interests of capital), it is unsurprising that theory and practice began to overlap. The failure of Keynesianism and other forms of state capitalism predisposed many capitalists, state managers and politicians to embrace theories which they would have rejected earlier as eccentric, or even dangerously destabilising. But it is important to place the spread from economic to ideological crisis in the right order and, even then, to appreciate that the shifts which followed were as much pragmatic as ideological. As Andrew Gamble writes, neoliberalism as “a global ideology” was less significant than “the competitive pressures of capital accumulation in forcing the convergence of all capitalist models and all national economies towards neoliberal institutions and policies”. [43] Even then neoliberalism as a system only emerged in a piecemeal fashion.
 
Conclusion
Neoliberalism is mutating in response to the current crisis. The precise character of this new capitalist organisation is not yet settled. We can, however, be sure that in the absence of a boom comparable to that of the post-war period (which seems unlikely, to say the least) any new formation will prove to be no more beneficial to the working class than its predecessor. Understanding neoliberalism is therefore not a historical issue, but one of urgent practical concern. It has shaped the conditions under which the working class still has to fight, conditions which extend beyond economic structures, or even the immediate situation in the workplace, to the types of political representation and the forms of consciousness with which workers will enter the struggles to come. Yet despite the crucial importance of the issue there is no wholly satisfactory account of this most recent period in the history of capitalism. The book which comes nearest from a Marxist perspective is Harvey’s A Brief History of Neoliberalism, but theoretically it is highly eclectic and consequently misleading on several key points, several of which have already been discussed in International Socialism. [44] Furthermore, although it is markedly more readable than the average work of Marxist political economy (including most of Harvey’s earlier works), it presents a formidable challenge to anyone not already familiar with a series of complex theoretical debates.
For this reason alone, The Shock Doctrine is an important work. Although, as we have seen, it draws on Harvey in some respects, it presents an argument about neoliberalism in terms far more comprehensible to non-academic activists than the jargon of, say, “the spatial fix”. The very fact of its popularity does, however, place an onus on Klein’s fellow members of the radical left to draw friendly but critical attention to its weaknesses. In the end, these do not stem so much from the metaphor which provides Klein with her title and structure but from the understanding of capitalism which underlies it. Above all, Klein does not reject markets:
I am not arguing that all market systems are inherently violent. It is eminently possible to have a market-based economy that requires no such brutality and demands no such ideological purity. A free market in consumer products can coexist with free public health care, with public schools, with a large segment of the economy – like a national oil company – held in state hands ... Keynes proposed exactly that kind of mixed, regulated economy after the Great Depression, a revolution in public policy that created the New Deal and transformations like it around the world. [45]
But it was the propensity for a system run along the lines described here to enter crisis that opened up the very period her book describes. Indeed, economic crisis barely features in her account, unless as something consciously created by ruling classes to change economic structures to their advantage. The idea that capitalism enters into involuntary convulsions as a result of the internal mechanisms of the mode of production is almost entirely absent from The Shock Doctrine, yet paradoxically it is in this fact that hope actually lies.
If neoliberalism was indeed the essence of capitalism then we would expect the bourgeoisie to endlessly seek to reimpose that model, whenever conditions are apt. This is certainly what Klein expects based on her response to the outbreak of the current crisis:
During boom times it is profitable to preach laissez-faire because an absentee government allows speculative bubbles to inflate. When these bubbles burst, the ideology becomes a hindrance and goes dormant while government rides to the rescue. But rest assured: the ideology will come roaring back once the bail-outs are done. [46]
But if this is so, where does the impetus for her desired Keynesian welfare state come from? Surely not from capitalists since, according to Klein, they are merely waiting to reimpose free market conditions. But equally, how can the oppressed and exploited force a change on the capitalist class if the latter have been able to suppress the possibilities of democracy to the extent that her account reveals? Something of this dilemma is apparent in Klein’s final chapter, where she offers some tentative reasons for optimism, which (apart from the Lebanese general strike of 2006) mainly amount to small-scale attempts at post-disaster “community reconstruction”. [47] Her failure to understand the role of crisis, rather than some omnipresent capitalist urge towards free markets, as the motivation behind neoliberalism, also blinds her to the possibilities that a renewed period of crisis presents for both sides in the class struggle. Neoliberalism was founded on the weakening of the labour movement. If what replaces neoliberalism is to be in the interests of the exploited and oppressed, the labour movement must be rebuilt. That task will have to involve much more than projects of reconstructing what we had before the neoliberal catastrophe. We know, not least because Naomi Klein has shown us in this flawed but immensely valuable book, what our enemies are capable of if we fail.
* * *
Notes
1. Davison, 1998, p. 135.
2. Klein, 2008a.
3. Klein, 2000, pp. 445–446.
4. See, for example, Harman, 2000, pp. 53–56.
5. Klein, 2002.
6. Klein and Smith, 2008, pp. 589-590.
7. Klein, 2007, pp. 14–15. See also Klein, 2007, p. 253.
8. Neoconservatism is often wrongly regarded simply as a US foreign policy doctrine based on military intervention. In fact, it is the inescapable domestic complement to neoliberalism across the capitalist world, in the sense that the social division and fragmentation caused by marketisation, commodification, privatisation and the rest require massive increases in the repressive and surveillance apparatus of the state in the name of restoring social discipline. For that reason, although the two ideologies are inextricably linked, we should maintain an analytic distinction between them. For a longer discussion, see Davidson, 2009a.
9. Klein, 2007, p. 17.
10. Klein, 2007, p. 17.
11. Klein, 2007, pp. 6–7, 140–141.
12. Klein, 2007, pp. 24–25. See also Klein, 2007, p. 71.
13. Klein, 2007, p. 15.
14. Hutton, 2007.
15. Roberts, 2008, p. 7.
16. Stiglitz, 2007.
17. Cockburn, 2007.
18. India and Mexico receive one passing reference each, Egypt receives none. See Klein, 2007, pp. 399, 452.
19. Klein, 2007, p. 10. See also Klein, 2007, pp. 136–140.
20. See Sanders, Marsh and Ward, 1987.
21. Klein, 2007, p. 298.
22. Moody, 2007, pp. 106–114.
23. For a discussion of how the links might be made, without reducing one to the other or treating them as autonomous, see Davidson, 2009b.
24. Klein, 2007, pp. 7–8.
25. Klein, 2007, pp. 88, 165–168.
26. Klein, 2007, p. 308.
27. Brzezinsky, 1997, pp. 158–173; Callinicos, 2003, pp. 93–98; Harvey, 2003, pp. 18–25, 74–86.
28. Hennessey, 2006, pp. 199–217.
29. See, for example, Marr, 2007, p. 131.
30. Klein, 2007, pp. 67–70.
31. Klein, 2007, p. 57.
32. Kotz, 2001, p. 104.
33. Klein, 2007, pp. 190, 532.
34. Klein and Smith, 2008, p. 583.
35. Hobsbawm, 1994, pp. 403–416.
36. Although, as Perry Anderson rightly remarks, the period since 1973 has seen dramatic, if uneven, improvements in the living conditions of millions in the Global South who were excluded from the prosperity of the long boom. See Anderson, 2005, p. 301.
37. Nafstead and others, 2007, p. 314.
38. Judt, 2008, p. 10.
39. Harman, 1984, pp. 99–102; Brenner, 2006, pp. 99–101. Harman argues that an increase in the organic composition of capital (as a result of declining effectiveness of the permanent arms economy as a countervailing tendency) was the reason for the falling rate of profit. Brenner rejects this explanation (see Brenner, 2006, pp. 14–15, note 1), but both he and Harman agree that the latter process is central to the crisis.
40. Campbell, 2005, p. 189.
41. Moody, 2007, pp. 43–47.
42. Turner, 2008, p. 10.
43. Gamble, 2001, p. 133.
44. Harman, 2008, pp. 89–92, 100–104. See also Davidson, 2009a.
45. Klein, 2007, p. 20. Klein is, of course, not alone on the left in seeing Keynesian solutions as the only realistic alternative to neoliberalism, either from principle or because of the supposed impossibility of making more radical change under current conditions. Compare the liberal Stiglitz, 2002, pp. 249–250, with the Marxist Harvey, 2005, pp. 183–184,–206.
46. Klein, 2008b.
47. Klein, 2007, pp. 443–466.
* * *
References
Anderson, Perry, 2005, The Vanquished Left: Eric Hobsbawm, in Spectrum: From Right to Left in the World of Ideas (Verso).
Brenner, Robert, 2006, The Economics of Global Turbulence: the Advanced Capitalist Economies from Long Boom to Long Downturn, 1945–2005 (Verso).
Brzezinski, Zbigniew, 1997, The Grand Chessboard: American Primacy and its Geostrategic Imperatives (Basic).
Callinicos, Alex, 2003, The New Mandarins of American Power (Polity).
Campbell, Al, 2005, The Birth of Neoliberalism in the United States, in Alfredo Saad Filho and Deborah Johnston (eds.), Neoliberalism: A Critical Reader (Pluto).
Cockburn, Alexander, 2007, On Naomi Klein’s The Shock Doctrine, Counterpunch (22/23 September 2007), www.counterpunch.org/cockburn09222007.html.
Davidson, Neil, 2009a (forthcoming), Introduction: What was Neoliberalism? in Neil Davidson, Patricia McCafferty and David Miller (eds.), Neoliberal Scotland: Class and Society in a Stateless Nation (Cambridge Scholars).
Davidson, Neil, 2009b (forthcoming), Many Capitals, Many States: Contingency, Logic or Mediation?, in Alexander Anievas (ed.), Marxism and World Politics: Contesting Global Capitalism (Routledge).
Davison, Peter, 1998, editorial note to George Orwell, Homage to Catalonia, in Complete Works, volume two, Facing Unpleasant Facts, 1937–1939 (Secker and Warburg).
Gamble, Andrew, 2001, Neo-liberalism, Capital and Class 75 (autumn 2001).
Gowan, Peter, 2009, Crisis in the Heartland: Consequences of the New Wall Street System, New Left Review 55 (January/February 2009).
Harman, Chris, 1984, Explaining the Crisis: A Marxist Analysis (Bookmarks).
Harman, Chris, 2000, Anti-capitalism: Theory and Practice, International Socialism 88 (autumn 2000), http://pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj88/harman.htm.
Harman, Chris, 2008, Theorising Neoliberalism, International Socialism 117 (winter 2008), www.isj.org.uk/?id=399.
Harvey, David, 2003, The New Imperialism (Oxford University).
Harvey, David, 2005, A Brief History of Neoliberalism (Oxford University).
Hennessey, Peter, 2006, Having it So Good: Britain in the Fifties (Allen Lane).
Hobsbawm, Eric, 1994, Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century, 1914–1991 (Allen Lane).
Hutton, Will, 2007, Her Ranting Obscures Her Reasoning, Observerem>, 23 September 2007.
Judt, Tony, 2008, Introduction: The World We Have Lost, in Reappraisals: Reflections on the Forgotten Twentieth Century (William Heinemann).
Klein, Naomi, 2000, No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Bullies (Flamingo).
Klein, Naomi, 2002, Fences and Windows: Dispatches from the Front Lines of the Globalization Debate (Harper Perennial).
Klein, Naomi, 2007, The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism (Allen Lane).
Klein, Naomi, 2008a, This Much I Know, interview by Stephanie Morritt, Observer, 1 June 2008.
Klein, Naomi, 2008b, After A Week Of Turmoil, Has The World Changed?, interview by Emily Butsellaar, Guardian, 20 September 2008.
Klein, Naomi, and Neil Smith, 2008, The Shock Doctrine: A Discussion, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, volume 26, number 4.
Kotz, David, 2001, The State, Globalisation and Phases of Capitalist Development, in Robert Albritton, Makoto Itoh, Richard Westra and Alan Zuege (eds.), Phases of Capitalist Development: Booms, Crises and Globalisations (Palgrave).
Marr, Andrew, 2007, A History of Modern Britain (Macmillan).
Moody, Kim, 2007, US Labour in Trouble and Transition: The Failure of Reform from Above, the Promise of Revival from Below (Verso).
Nafstad, Hilde, and others, 2007, Ideology and Power: The Influence of Current Neo-Liberalism in Society, Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, volume 17, number 4.
Roberts, Ronald Suresh, 2008, Beware Electrocrats: Naomi Klein on South Africa, Radical Philosophy 150 (July/August 2008).
Sanders, David, David Marsh and Hugh Ward, 1987, Government Popularity and the Falklands War: A Reassessment, British Journal of Political Science, volume 17, number 3 (July 1987).
Stiglitz, Joseph, 2002, Globalization and Its Discontents (Penguin).
Stiglitz, Joseph, 2007, Bleakonomics, New York Times, 30 September 2007.
Turner, Graham, 2008, The Credit Crunch: Housing Bubbles, Globalisation and the Worldwide Economic Crisis (Pluto).
 



Chris Nineham’s article on Benjamin’s Emergency Marxism was less concerned with assessing the work under review, Esther Leslie’s book Walter Benjamin, than with assessing the work of her subject, Benjamin himself. [1] My purpose here is not to re-review the book, or to challenge all of the claims made by Chris, but Benjamin is a writer who has not been considered by International Socialism until now and it might therefore be worth discussing two further issues which seem to me to be of central importance. One is the question of how we read Benjamin, of what we read him as. There is no point in approaching his work, even his most political work, as if it was the Collected Speeches and Resolutions of the First Four Congresses of the Third International. To do so is to make what philosophers call a category mistake, leading to Benjamin being criticised on the basis of what he did not write rather than assessed on the basis of what he did write. The other point concerns the meaning of On the Concept of History and, in particular, whether Benjamin is guilty of the charge of “voluntarism” which Chris levels at this essay.
 
Was Benjamin a “Western Marxist”?
Chris claims that there is a “growing fascination” with Benjamin’s work, as part of which “the far left are making great claims” for him. [2] In fact, the peak of his fashionability has long since passed, as Leslie noted in an earlier book, Walter Benjamin: Overpowering Conformism. Much of the criticism now aimed at Benjamin is precisely because of his Marxism. But as Leslie also points out, hostility to Benjamin’s historical materialism is not a new phenomenon, reflecting the retreat from socialist commitment attendant on the fall of the Stalinist regimes; it merely brought into sharper focus the distrust that had always been shown towards it, even by erstwhile supporters such as Theodore Adorno, Max Horkheimer or Gershom Scholem. [3] This in turn suggests why we should be interested in him. What kind of Marxist was he?
Isaac Deutscher distinguished between what he called the “classical Marxist” tradition, “the body of thought developed by Marx, Engels, their contemporaries, and after them by Kautsky, Plekhanov, Lenin, Trotsky [and] Rosa Luxemburg”, and that of “vulgar Marxism”, “the pseudo-Marxism of the different varieties of European social democrats, reformists, Stalinists, Khrushchevites and their like”. [4] Perry Anderson later added a third variant, which he called “Western Marxism”, to signal the shifting geographical axis of Marxist thought, from Eastern and Central Europe to Western Europe, after the rise of Hitler and consolidation of Stalinism. This tradition, according to Anderson, was “a product of defeat”: it represented a version of Marxist theory which was divorced from the working class and had “migrated virtually completely into the universities”. The work of Western Marxism moved in the opposite direction to the classical tradition, “from economics and politics towards philosophy”, took the form of a “second-order…discourse” or “esoteric discipline”, and was characterised by “extreme difficulty of language”. [5]
Western Marxism is the category to which Benjamin’s work has the most obvious affinities, and Anderson certainly regards him as one of its representative figures, arguing that Benjamin shares their characteristic obscurity of language involving “a gnomic brevity and indirection”. Indeed, Anderson says that the famous passage from “On the Concept of History” invoking the Angel of History is expressed in language which would have been “virtually incomprehensible to Marx and Engels”. [6] Anderson is simply wrong on the last point. If anything, it was Marx’s own use of “sociological poetics” which may have provided Benjamin with one of the sources for his own style. When we consider some of the images which Marx employs – history as a theatrical performance, first tragic then comic; capital as a vampire, sucking the blood of living labour; the capitalist as a sorcerer, conjuring up forces from the nether world which then escape his control – the Angel of History does not seem so outlandish a concept as to present him with difficulties of comprehension. [7] As this suggests, Benjamin does not quite fit the mould of Western Marxism, for four reasons.
First, although he had ambitions to become an academic he was never successful in obtaining a permanent post with the result that he was forced to make a living through reviewing, public lecturing, translating and other forms of intellectual odd-jobbery. Benjamin did publish in scholarly journals when he could, of course, but his non-academic status meant he was always more of a classical “man of letters” than, for example, the German Western Marxists with whom he is most often associated such as Adorno, Horkheimer or Marcuse. Isaac Deutscher was another Marxist who had to survive in similar ways outside the academy, although his style could scarcely have been more different from that of Benjamin. Their type barely survived the Second World War and hardly exists today. Benjamin foresaw his own demise as a function of the heightening of class conflict in which unattached intellectuals would increasingly have to take sides:
Today it is official doctrine that subject matter, not form, decides the revolutionary or counter-revolutionary attitude of a work. Such doctrines cut the ground from under the writer’s feet just as irrevocably as the economy has done on the material plane. In this, Russia is ahead of Western developments – but not as far ahead as is believed. For sooner or later, with the middle classes who are being ground to pieces by the struggle between capital and labour, the “freelance” writer must also disappear. [8]
In fact the decline of the man of letters took place for quite different reasons. As Russell Jacoby tells the story for the US, the assimilation of the wider category of intellectual until it was virtually synonymous with that of the university-based academic was one of the main factors that destroyed this type of writer, along with the end of bohemia and the concomitant rise of the suburbs, which deprived them of a cultural environment, and the disappearance of the type of general publication in which they could publish, which deprived them of an audience. [9] Reference to the US example suggests the group to which I believe Benjamin has the greatest affinities: the left wing New York intellectuals of the 1930s and 1940s. There are many differences, of course. Their idiom was much clearer and more direct. And while many were, like him, Jewish, even prior to their radicalisation in the 1930s they tended to be secular and humanist. In so far as they were concerned with Judaism, it was mainly with defending distinctive aspects of the culture from assimilation. In other respects their outlook was cosmopolitan and the doctrines of Jewish mysticism, which play such a central role in Benjamin’s work, were always alien to them. [10] Similarly, although Benjamin was also interested in Trotsky’s work and there are several aspects of their writing that overlap, the New Yorkers tended to be closer to actual Trotskyist organisations. [11] Nevertheless, when allowances are made for their respective cultural particularities, it is clear that Benjamin and his New York contemporaries were the same type of intellectuals and that consideration of these affinities might be at least as productive as the attention which is endlessly paid to Benjamin’s links with the Frankfurt School. [12]
Second, and partly because of his position outside the academy, Benjamin developed a literary style that was quite distinct from the clotted, constipated prose of the professors. It is not without its difficulties, of course. Michael Löwy notes that Benjamin’s thought had three main sources: Jewish mysticism, German Romanticism and historical materialism. [13] Naturally these also inform his literary style, which can be an obstacle to understanding for contemporary readers familiar only with the last. Chris quotes Hannah Arendt and Theodore Adorno’s criticism of Benjamin for adopting the cinematic technique of montage (“an artistic method”) in The Arcades Project because “it does not add up to a method of analysing how society works or the role of culture within it”. [14] But there is a false assumption here. Benjamin was not concerned with anything so general as “analysing how society works or the role of culture within it”. Why should criticism confine itself to these enormous themes in any case? Benjamin’s concern was more specific: to capture an aspect of the experience of capitalist modernity, in microcosm, through a multiple perspective view on commodity culture in the city where it was most advanced. He evidently believed that the task of revealing the nature of an environment structured by the sale of commodities could not be undertaken in the same way as the task of critically assessing a novel, a poem or a film. Instead he employs the techniques of modernist novels, poems and films: “This work has to develop to the highest degree the art of citing without quotation marks. Its theory is intimately related to that of montage.” Or again: “Method of this project: literary montage. I needn’t say anything. Merely show”. [15] What this suggests to me, at any rate, is that we should treat The Arcades Project as Benjamin intended, as a work of art in its own right. That, in turn, suggests that we should read it as we would T.S. Eliot’s The Waste Land or William Burroughs’s The Naked Lunch, rather than as a failed attempt to write something comparable to Georg Lukács’s The Historical Novel or Trotsky’s Literature and Revolution.
Third, although Benjamin was interested in what we now regard as high culture – above all in his obsessive, life-long engagement with the poet Charles Baudelaire – he also opened up entirely new areas for Marxist analysis in relation to folk, popular and mass cultures. [16] Because the babble about culture is now never-ending, and usually utterly valueless, it is important to understand both how innovative Benjamin’s work was and how it differed from what followed. Although Benjamin was a modernist, his central emphasis was on the importance of new cultural forms that emerged after the ascendance of the bourgeoisie and that bore limited resemblance to the historical novel or the classical symphony. In particular he stressed the need to:
Rethink conceptions of literary forms or genres, in view of the technical factors affecting our present situation, if we are to identify the forms of expression that channel the literary energies of the present. There were not always novels in the past, and there will not always have to be; there have not always been tragedies and great epics. Not always were the forms of commentary, translation, indeed even so-called plagiarism, playthings in the margins of literature; they had a place in the literary writings of Arabia and China. [17]
Of his contemporaries only Antonio Gramsci among the classical Marxists and George Orwell among the wider socialist movement had comparable interests in wider culture issues. In this respect Benjamin took positions which were distinct from the Frankfurt School and the New York intellectuals, both of whom had considerably more pessimistic attitudes to contemporary culture. Benjamin shares some of these perspectives, albeit with interesting differences in emphasis, but his operational conclusions are quite different. Benjamin is pessimistic over the possibilities of the avant-garde being harnessed to a revolutionary project, mainly because of the immense difficulties it posed for the working class – or indeed anyone outside of the cultured elites of bourgeois society:
At no point in time, no matter how utopian, will anyone win the masses over to a higher art; they can be won over only by finding one nearer to them. And the difficulty consists precisely in finding a form for art, such that, with the best conscience in the world, one could hold that it is a higher art. This will never happen with what is propagated by the avant-garde of the bourgeoisie ... The masses positively require from a work of art (which, for them, has its place in the circle of consumer items) something that is warming. Here the flame that is most readily kindled is hatred.
The “avant-garde of the bourgeoisie” that Benjamin has in mind here either makes no concessions to the sensibilities of the audience or consciously intends to shock them. He is not, however, suggesting that art should not be challenging or require effort; simply that it cannot be deliberately inaccessible or repulsive. He is hostile to “kitsch”, which he describes as “nothing more than art with a 100 percent, absolute and instantaneous availability for consumption. Precisely within the consecrated forms of expression, therefore, kitsch and art stand irreconcilably opposed.” But he also sees it as containing possibilities: “But for developing, living forms, what matters is that they have within them something stirring, useful, ultimately heartening-that they take ‘kitsch’ dialectically up into themselves, and hence bring themselves nearer to the masses while yet surmounting the kitsch”. [18] The final point in this passage is part of his wider argument about new forms which could be used for both avant-garde and kitsch purposes, but which also had the potential to transcend the obscurity of the former and the vulgarity of the latter. The cinema and, to a lesser extent, photography were the most important for Benjamin, but the argument also applies to popular music from jazz onwards. What is crucial about these forms for Benjamin is that they involve “alienating the productive apparatus from the ruling class by improving it in ways serving the interests of socialism”. Authors, or artists more generally, have two functions in their role as producer: “first, to induce other producers to produce, and, second, to put an improved apparatus [of production] at their disposal”. We can judge whether an apparatus has been improved by “the more consumers it is able to turn into producers – that is, readers or spectators into collaborators”. [19] The possibilities of participation in, rather than passive consumption of, culture have yet to be fully absorbed by the Marxist tradition, let alone put into practice, although it is possible to identify works which embody the principles which Benjamin endorsed in artistic production.
The fourth area of difference with Western Marxism places him closest to the classical tradition: his commitment to the socialist revolution. For, unlike all Western Marxists, Benjamin never adapted to social democracy, Stalinism or any variation of socialism from above, nor did he lapse into political pessimism or despair. It is possible to interpret his suicide at the Franco-Spanish border in 1940 as an act of personal despair. But, as Paul Wood writes, “it was undoubtedly an act of great courage”. [20] It can also be interpreted as a final act of self-determination, by actively choosing death rather than surrender and so denying the Gestapo their victim. In any event, Benjamin retained to the end his belief in the possibility of socialist revolution on the basis of working class self-activity. His final substantial work before his suicide, On the Concept of History and its preparatory notes, is the greatest theoretical affirmation, in the face of inconceivable adversity, of the actuality of the revolution in the entire Marxist canon. The difference between this work and the outright renegacy of Horkheimer or even the evasiveness of Adorno could not be starker.
 
Revolution, history and tradition 
Chris sees Benjamin as alternating between determinism and voluntarism, particularly towards the end of his life. But this determinism is of a particularly pessimistic sort, the obverse of the optimistic determinism of social democracy, in which the development of the forces of production will inevitably deliver socialism without conscious human effort. Here is the passage in which Benjamin sets out the most developed version of his argument about technology:
If the natural use of productive forces is impeded by the property system, then the increase in technological means, in speed, in sources of energy will press towards an unnatural use. This is found in war, and the destruction caused by war furnishes proof that society was not mature enough to make technology its organ, that technology was not sufficiently developed to master the elemental forces of society. The most horrifying features of imperialist war are determined by the discrepancy between the enormous means of production and their inadequate use in the process of production (in other words, by unemployment and the lack of markets). Imperialist war is an uprising on the part of technology, which demands payment in “human material” for the natural material society has denied it. Instead of draining rivers, society directs a human stream into a bed of trenches; instead of dropping seeds from airplanes, it drops incendiary bombs over cities; and in gas warfare it has found a new means of abolishing the aura. [21]
If we were to take this literally, it might appear that Benjamin did not merely ascribe a logic of warfare to technology but imagined that the technology itself was turning on us, in the manner of Terminator 3: the Rise of the Machines. But what Benjamin means is rather that, in societies dominated by capitalist relations of production where technology is not used to meet human need but for accumulation, the conflicts which that society generates will lead to technology being used for destructive purposes in ever more complex and inventive ways, as an obscene parody of the creativity which socialism would bring. As a contemporary illustration, we only need to contrast the extraordinary achievement of the US military in constructing a city in the desert prior to the opening of the Third Gulf War with the lack of resources subsequently made available to the Iraqis for reconstruction following the occupation. In short, there is nothing remotely determinist about Benjamin’s attitude to technology; it simply describes the reality of imperialism.
A superficially more plausible accusation is that of voluntarism. Chris writes, “Sometimes [Benjamin] fell back on a catastrophe theory of consciousness: ‘Marx says that revolutions are the locomotives of history. But perhaps it is quite otherwise, perhaps revolutions are an attempt by passengers on this train – namely the human race – to activate the break.’ This is characteristically thought provoking, but it is also voluntaristic”. [22] Unfortunately, if Chris’s claim can be sustained, it is not just Benjamin who stands condemned but a large part of the Marxist tradition. We are in any case perhaps expecting too much from what is, after all, an author’s note to himself from a set of preparatory materials. Even so, it should be obvious that “humanity reaching for the emergency brake” is a not a political programme for how the socialist revolution will be achieved, but a metaphor for what the socialist revolution will be – the means of averting the disasters which capitalism is preparing for us and which will otherwise occur. Our recently acquired knowledge of the dangers and implications of environmental collapse gives this passage an even greater resonance now than when it was written. And many people, including myself, have found it invaluable in helping us conceptualise the meaning, rather than the mechanics of the socialist revolution. [23]
What then was Benjamin actually trying to convey in On the Concept of History and its preparatory materials? [24] It certainly contains several very difficult passages, and many academic careers have been built, not on clarifying its meaning for readers, but in rendering it even more obscure. At the risk of bending the stick too far in the other direction and oversimplifying, what Benjamin seems to be doing – among other things – is proposing three notions, two of which have been expressed elsewhere in the classical Marxist tradition and the third of which is an original contribution to that tradition.
The first is that of a “wager” on the possibility of revolution. The concept of the wager was first introduced into Western culture by the Catholic philosopher Blaise Pascal during the 17th century. Pascal’s argument was that, since we cannot know for certain whether God exists or not by way of our reason, we have to wager on his existence. Pascal argues that we have everything to gain from wagering on the existence of God, but everything to lose – ie eternal life – from wagering the other way. [25] The argument was secularised by Lucien Goldmann in his classic study of Pascal and Racine, The Hidden God (1964), in relation to the wager which Marxists make on the working class remaking the world: it is possible; it is not inevitable. [26] Although Benjamin makes several passing references to Pascal in his work, he does not explicitly discuss the wager. Nevertheless, Michael Löwy has plausibly suggested that On the Concept of History is also infused with the belief that “the Marxist utopia of an authentic human community is of the order of a Pascalian wager”. [27] The notion may not immediately appear compatible with classical Marxism, but it is surely embodied in Lenin’s practice between his arrival at the Finland Station and the fall of the Winter Palace in 1917. It resurfaces in Gramsci’s Prison Notebooks in the passages where he discusses the extent to which revolutionaries can “foresee” the consequence of their actions. [28] But perhaps it is best and most briefly summed up in a famous aphorism by James Connolly: “For the only true prophets are they who carve out the future which they announce”. [29] And like any wager, it is possible to lose. Trotsky was one of the very few Marxists prepared to look into the abyss which opens up once we acknowledge that socialism is not inevitable, which he did in relation to the fate of the Russian Revolution. [30] But the force of Trotsky’s argument today is in no way reliant on claims about the inability of the working class to take and retain power. We know that the working class has the innate structural capacity to achieve the socialist revolution, but whether it can be realised is another issue altogether, which involves questions of consciousness, leadership, strategy and the extent to which our enemies possess the same qualities. There is also the question of time: the working class may simply continue to be defeated, as it has been until now, until it is too late to prevent the planet becoming uninhabitable.
The second notion which haunts On the Concept of History is that of the “actuality of the revolution”. This first appears in Lukács’s Lenin: a Study in the Unity of his Thought (1924) where he writes that, to the vulgar Marxist, “the fighters on the barricades are madmen, the defeated revolution is a mistake, and the builders of socialism…are outright criminals”. Against this, revolutionaries, of whom Lenin was pre-eminent, work from the principle that “the actuality of the proletarian revolution is no longer only a world historical horizon arching above the working class, but that the revolution is already on the agenda”. It is not of course that the revolution “is readily realisable at any given moment” but its actuality is “a touchstone for evaluating all the questions of the day”: “Individual actions can only be considered revolutionary or counter-revolutionary when related to the central issue of revolution, which is only discovered by an accurate analysis of the socio-historic whole”. [31] The crucial passages on this theme in Benjamin are those which precede the famous metaphor of the emergency brake, in which Benjamin claims that Marxism is a secularised form of “messianism”:
In reality, there is not a moment that would not carry with it its revolutionary chance-provided only that it is defined in a specific way, namely as the chance for a completely new resolution of a completely new problem. For the revolutionary thinker, the peculiar revolutionary chance offered by every historical moment gets its warrant from the political situation. But it is equally grounded, for this thinker, in the right of entry which the historical moment enjoys vis-a-vis a quite distinct chamber of the past, one which up to that point has been closed and locked. The entrance into this chamber coincides in a strict sense with political action, and it is by means of such entry that political action, however destructive, reveals itself as messianic.
Whoever wishes to know what the situation of a “redeemed humanity” might actually be, what conditions are required for the development of such a situation, and when this development can be expected to occur, poses questions to which there are no answers… But classless society is not to be conceived as the endpoint of historical development. From this erroneous conception Marx’s epigones have derived (among other things) the notion of the “revolutionary situation” which, as we know, has always refused to arrive. A genuinely messianic face must be restored to the concept of classless society and, to be sure, in the interest of furthering the revolutionary politics of the proletariat itself. [32]
What both Lukacs and Benjamin are saying, in different ways, is not that revolutionaries should be declaring a state of permanent insurrection – which would indeed be voluntarism – but that they should behave in the knowledge that we are in the period where revolution is historically possible and necessary.
The third notion is the distinctiveness of the Marxist attitude towards history. This is the one most original to Benjamin and also the most difficult to grasp. “Of course, consciousness of history is an important factor in current struggles,” Chris reminds us. “One of the most important roles of the revolutionary party is to keep alive the memory of past struggles that the ruling class want to suppress, and to fight for their revolutionary interpretation.” But Benjamin “is asking too much of history”. “By itself, or even with the help of the finest historians, history cannot make people struggle”. [33] Benjamin certainly makes a number of apparently cryptic utterances about history: “The only historian capable of fanning the spark of hope in the past is the one who is firmly convinced that even the dead will not be safe from the enemy if he is victorious. And this enemy has never ceased to be victorious”. [34] This reads like poetry, and like poetry it is not meant to be taken literally. What Benjamin seems to mean is something closer to the party slogan Winston Smith is forced to repeat in George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty–Four: “Who controls the past controls the future: who controls the present controls the past”. [35] But where should we look for “the spark of hope”? Benjamin’s approach involves more than simply referring to a tradition of “past struggles” to inspire contemporary socialists: it questions the very nature of that tradition.
One aspect of the assumption of inevitable “progress” through successive modes of production, common to both social democracy and Stalinism, is an undialectical attitude towards the development of class society. According to this view, those social forces which brought the capitalist world into being, and the culture they created, are treated to uncritical celebration. As Benjamin points out, in one of the greatest passages in all of Marxism, this has certain ideological consequences:
With whom does the historian actually sympathise? The answer is inevitable: with the victors. And all rulers are the heirs of prior conquerors. Hence, empathising with the victor invariably benefits the current rulers. The historical materialist knows what this means. Whoever has emerged victorious participates to this day in the triumphal procession in which the current rulers step over those who are lying prostrate. According to traditional practice, the spoils are carried in the procession. They are called “cultural treasures”, and a historical materialist views them with cautious detachment. For in every case these treasures have a lineage which he cannot contemplate without horror. They owe their existence not only to the efforts of the great geniuses who created them, but also to the anonymous toil of others who lived in the same period. There is no document of culture which is not at the same time a document of barbarism. And just as such a document is never free of barbarism, so barbarism taints the manner in which it was transmitted from one hand to another. [36]
To simply remember the achievements of the bourgeois revolution and bourgeois culture – Oliver Cromwell on the one hand, John Milton on the other – without also holding in our minds the contradictions of the progress they represent is to forget the “anonymous toil” that made it possible: “It is more difficult to honour the memory of the anonymous than it is to honour the memory of the famous, the celebrated, not excluding poets and thinkers”. [37] To put this in concrete terms: the peasants who revolted against the English monarchy in 1381 and their yeoman descendants of the New Model Army who overthrew it in 1649 are not part of our tradition; they are the ancestors – in some cases quite distant ancestors – of the present capitalist class, of “the current rulers”.
Benjamin was, of course, perfectly aware that the ruling classes suppress aspects of their rise to power which have become inconvenient to them. But the answer to this is not to “claim” bourgeois revolutionaries for the socialist tradition: it is still possible to understand and celebrate their achievements and, in some cases, their heroism and self-sacrifice, without superimposing their struggles onto our own. Our tradition is what Benjamin calls “the tradition of the oppressed”, the tradition of those who did not benefit from the victories over the pre-capitalist order, even though they participated in the struggle against it, and who could not have benefited from it, given the impossibility of establishing the socialist order much earlier than Benjamin’s own lifetime. Only the achievement of the socialist revolution will finally allow us to incorporate previous revolutions into our tradition, but only the struggle to achieve this allows us to fully understand them. Outside of the future goal of a redeemed humanity the history of which they are part remains a heap of fragments, the pile of rubbish against which the Angel of History turns its wings: “Without some kind of assay of the classless society, there is only a historical accumulation of the past”. [38]
But if one aspect of Benjamin’s approach is to narrow down the range of our tradition, another is to blow it wide open, to explode the conception of what he calls “empty, homogenous time” and replace it with “messianic now-time”, so that every moment in history is potentially of use to revolutionaries. Let me try to illustrate what he means with an example from the bourgeois revolution. In a classic passage from The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Marx describes how the French revolutionaries of 1789, the “gladiators” of the bourgeois revolution, “found in the stern classical traditions of the Roman republic the ideals, art forms and self-deception they needed in order to hide from themselves the limited bourgeois content of their struggles and maintain the enthusiasm at the high level appropriate to great historical tragedy”. [39] This assessment is not in dispute, but Benjamin argues that something else is also going on, in addition to the heroic “self-deception” of which Marx writes:
To Robespierre ancient Rome was a past charged with now-time, a past which he blasted out of the continuum of history. The French Revolution viewed itself as Rome reincarnate. It cited ancient Rome the way a fashion cites a bygone mode of dress. Fashion has a nose for the topical, no matter where it stirs in the thickets of long ago; it is the tiger’s leap into the past. [40]
In other words, the characteristically austere qualities of republican Rome – civic patriotism, “republican virtue”, self-sacrifice, and so on – were actually relevant to the French revolutionaries in their struggle with the absolutist regime and were not, or were not only, a rhetorical ploy with which they sought to disguise their real objectives.
There are major structural differences between the bourgeois and socialist revolutions; above all in the fact that, unlike the bourgeoisie, the working class has to be fully conscious of what it is trying to achieve. [41] Does this mean that Benjamin’s demand that we ransack the whole of history for pasts “charged with now-time” is no longer relevant? I believe that it is still relevant, but in a different way. In the context of socialist politics, what Benjamin seems to be saying is that we do not and cannot know which aspects of our tradition will be of most use to us in coming struggles. We inherit some general, historically demonstrable conclusions about the limits of reformism, the dynamics of revolution, the role of the revolutionary party, and so on; but although every new situation is in some senses unique, for each there will be a moment or moments in history which help to illuminate them.
The point is these moments will not always be the ones we want or expect or have learned to give meetings on. Before the campaign against the poll tax began, I doubt that anyone thought the Glasgow Rent strikes during the First World War or the squatters’ campaigns after the Second would become models for action; but they, and not the struggle against the Industrial Relations Act or the miners’ strike, proved to be the more relevant. This is not simply a plea for a more comprehensive knowledge of our history, useful though that might be: it is for socialists to make the necessary leaps of the imagination to see what parts of the tradition are genuinely relevant to our current situation. If there is a “Benjaminian” contribution to socialist politics, rather than to cultural theory, this may be what it involves.
 
Conclusion
Benjamin’s central focus on culture and his absence from direct political engagement tend to exclude him from the front rank of the classical Marxist tradition, as is suggested by a comparison with the career of Gramsci, the classical figure with whom he shares the most interests. As we have seen, however, this does not mean that classical themes are completely absent from his work. It is true that Benjamin did not set himself the task of explaining, for example, how revolutionary class consciousness would be obtained. But then, why should he? There are texts which do so with which he was quite familiar. One is called What is to be Done? and another History and Class Consciousness. On the other hand, despite the very great achievements of classical Marxism, there are areas which the key figures did not discuss, or to which they devoted less attention than was necessary. Later figures, of which Benjamin was one of the first and most important, may not have had their universal range of interests and insights, but they can still add to our understanding of the world. In other words, we need to see Benjamin’s work, not in opposition to the classical tradition, but as a contribution which enriches it, by deepening our understanding of some key themes and addressing others which had hitherto been absent.
* * *
Notes
1. Nineham, 2008. Thanks to Alex Law for discussion of several of the points developed here.
>2. Nineham, 2008, pp. 111, 116.
>3. Leslie, 2000, pp. 225–227.
>4. Deutscher, 1971, p. 18.
>5. Anderson, 1976, pp. 42, 49–50.
>6. Anderson, 1976, pp. 54, 89–90.
>7. Marx, 1973a, p. 72; Marx, 1973b, pp. 147–149; Marx, 1976, p. 342.
>8. Benjamin, 1999a, p. 38.
>9. Jacoby, 1987. For a summary of his argument, see pp. 3–27.
>10. See Wald 1987, pp. 27–31, 42–45.
>11. For more on the affinities between Benjamin and Trotsky, see Eagleton, 1981, pp. 173–179, and Leslie, 2000, pp. 228–234.
>12. Balibar is right to say that, despite some formal similarities in approach, in relation to Adorno et al., Benjamin “was merely a reticent, little understood ‘fellow traveller’.” See Balibar, 2007, p. 86.
>13. Löwy, 2005, p. 4.
>14. Nineham, 2008, p. 116.
>15. Benjamin, 1999d, pp. 458, 460.
>16. For the benefit of any readers on “proletarian culture” lookout duty, it should be noted that Benjamin specifically endorsed the position taken by Trotsky on this question in Literature and Revolution. See Benjamin 1999b, p. 217.
>17. Benjamin, 1999c, p. 771.
>18. Benjamin, 1999d, p. 395.
>19. Benjamin, 1999c: pp. 774, 777.
>20. Wood, 1992, p. 124.
>21. Benjamin, 2003a, p. 270. Benjamin’s italics.
>22. Nineham, 2008, p. 118; Benjamin, 2003a, p. 402.
>23. Davidson, 2007, p. 118.
>24. In addition to the “Paralipomena”, many of the themes of On the Concept of History appear in Convolute N in The Arcades Project. See Benjamin, 1999d, pp. 456–488.
>25. Pascal 1966, pp. 121–126
>26. Goldmann, 1964, p. 90. For brilliant discussion and extension of the argument, see MacIntyre, 2008, p. 314.
>27. Löwy, 2005, p. 114.
>28. Gramsci, 1971, p. 438.
>29. Connolly, 1987, p. 263.
>30. Trotsky, 1971, p. 11.
>31. Lukács, 1970, pp. 12–13.
>32. Benjamin, 2003c, pp. 401–403.
>33. Nineham, 2008, pp. 117–118.
>34. Benjamin, 2003b, p. 391.
>35. Orwell, 1954, p. 199.
>36. Benjamin, 2003b, p. 392.
>37. Benjamin, 2003c, p. 406.
>38. Benjamin, 2003c, p. 407.
>39. Marx, 1973b, pp. 147, 148.
>40. Benjamin, 2003b, p. 395.
>41. Davidson, 2005, pp. 38–47.
* * *
References
Anderson, Perry, 1976, Considerations on Western Marxism (New Left Books).
Balibar, Etienne, 2007 [1995], The Philosophy of Marx (Verso).
Benjamin, Walter, 1999, Selected Writings, volume 2, part 1, 1927–1930, edited by Michael W. Jennings, Howard Eiland and Gary Smith (Belknap).
Benjamin, Walter, 1999a [1927], Moscow, in Benjamin, 1999.
Benjamin, Walter, 1999b [1929], Surrealism, in Benjamin, 1999.
Benjamin, Walter, 1999c, The Author as Producer, in Selected Writings, volume 2, part 2, 1931–1934, edited by Michael W. Jennings, Howard Eiland and Gary Smith (Belknap).
Benjamin, Walter, 1999d [1927–1940], The Arcades Project (Belknap).
Benjamin, Walter, 2003, Selected Writings, volume 4, 1938–1940, edited by Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings (Belknap).
Benjamin, Walter, 2003a [1939], The Work of Art in the Age of its Technological Reproducibility (third version), in Benjamin 2003.
Benjamin, Walter, 2003b [1940], On the Concept of History, in Benjamin 2003.
Benjamin, Walter, 2003c [1940], Paralipomena to On the Concept of History, in Benjamin 2003.
Connolly, James, 1987 [1915], The Reconquest of Ireland, in Collected Works, volume 1 (New Books), http://www.ucc.ie/celt/online/E900002-002/.
Davidson, Neil, 2005, How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions? (cont’d), Historical Materialism, volume 13, number 4 (2005).
Davidson, Neil, 2007, Is There a Scottish Road to Socialism?, in Gregor Gall (ed.), Is There a Scottish Road to Socialism? (Scottish Left Review Press).
Deutscher, Isaac, 1971 [1965], Marxism in Our Time, in Marxism in Our Time, edited by Tamara Deutscher (Ramparts).
Eagleton, Terry, 1981, Walter Benjamin or Towards a Revolutionary Criticism (Verso).
Goldmann, Lucien, 1964, The Hidden God: A Study of the Tragic Vision in the Pensées of Pascal and the Tragedies of Racine (Routledge).
Gramsci, Antonio, 1971 [1929–1935], Problems of Marxism, in Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci (Lawrence & Wishart).
Jacoby, Russell, 1987, The Last Intellectuals: American Culture in the Age of Academe (Basic Books).
Leslie, Esther, 2000, Walter Benjamin: Overpowering Conformism (Pluto).
Leslie, Esther, 2007, Walter Benjamin (Reaktion).
Löwy, Michael, 2005 [2001], Fire Alarm: On Reading Walter Benjamin’s On the Concept of History (Verso).
Lukács, Georg, 1970 [1924], Lenin: A Study in the Unity of his Thought (New Left Books)
MacIntyre, Alasdair, 2008 [1964], Pascal and Marx: on Lucien Goldmann’s Hidden God, in Alasdair MacIntyre’s Engagement with Marxism: Selected Writings, 1953–1974, edited by Paul Blackledge and Neil Davidson (Brill).
Marx, Karl, 1973a [1848], Manifesto of the Communist Party, in The Revolutions of 1848 (Penguin). An alternative translation is available at www.anu.edu.au/polsci/marx/classics/manifesto.html.
Marx, Karl, 1973b [1852], The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, in Surveys from Exile (Penguin). An alternative translation is available at www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1852/18th-brumaire/.
Marx, Karl, 1976 (1867), Capital, volume one (Penguin). An alternative translation is available at www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/.
Nineham, Chris, 2008, Benjamin’s Emergency Marxism, International Socialism 119 (summer 2008), www.isj.org.uk/?id=459.
Orwell, George, 1954 [1949], Nineteen Eighty–Four: a Novel (Penguin), http://gutenberg.net.au/ebooks01/0100021.txt.
Pascal, Blaise, 1966 [1662], Pensées (Penguin).
Trotsky, Leon, 1971 [1939], The USSR in War, in In Defence of Marxism (New Park), www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1939/09/ussr-war.htm
Wald, Alan, 1987, The New York Intellectuals: the Rise and Decline of the Anti–Stalinist Left from the 1930s to the 1980s (University of North Carolina).
Wood, Paul, 1992, Marxism and Modernism: an Exchange between Alex Callinicos and Paul Wood, Oxford Art Journal, volume 15, number 2 (1992).
 



The historian, poet and cultural critic Angus Calder has died in his adopted city of Edinburgh, at the tragically early age of 66.
Calder was in many ways a model of the type of engaged public intellectual that we more readily associate with New York in the 1930s and 1940s, rather than the Scottish capital, post-devolution.
Calder’s work was always scholarly, but never academic in the narrow sense. He disdained the kind of narrow caste incomprehensibility designed to ensure professional advancement rather than audience communication. For this reason his preferred literary mode – out of the many in which he was proficient – was the essay, a form distant equally from both the refereed academic paper and the journalistic opinion piece.
In a British context one thinks of Alasdair MacIntyre, Edward Thompson or Perry Anderson as masters of this form, and Calder belongs in this company, as demonstrated by his three collections Revolving Culture (1994), Scotlands of the Mind (2002) and Disasters and Heroes (2004). I recommend the first of these in particular to readers unfamiliar with his work.
Calder was also hostile to notions of academic “objectivity” – a much misused term which usually means that academics want to avoid choosing between opposing positions: “If we become ‘neutral’ we are in effect avoiding our own freedom to choose now.” And he argued that the reverse is also true: “The imagination which grasps the past must be nurtured by engagement with the present.”
Essays apart, Calder’s greatest contributions were his two major books, The People’s War (1969) and Revolutionary Empire (1981), both of which are required reading for any socialist. So accustomed have we become to “debunking” in recent years that it can be difficult to appreciate how radical the former work was at the time, in its revisionist dismantling of many cherished myths about Britain during the Second World War.
But demythologising apart, this is one of the great early examples of left wing social history and – unlike many subsequent works of this sort – it never pretends that the social can be considered separately from the political and economic, or that the working class experience can be isolated from that of the other social classes.
Calder was particularly conscious of the imperial dimension to the conflict, writing that, “when Britain ‘stood alone’ in 1940, she stood on the shoulders of several million Asians”. And without dismissing the suffering of British people in the war, he asked in the final sentence, in a reference to the Indian famine of 1943, “What had Jarrow been to Calcutta?”
The People’s War drew on a wide range of primary sources. Revolutionary Empire, by contrast, was a work of synthesis. Announced as the first volume of a trilogy about the rise and fall of the British Empire, it was never completed, like all too many of Calder’s projects. Nevertheless, the existing volume, which climaxes with the American Revolution, is an essential counterweight to more recent works by right wing apologists for empire like Niall Ferguson and Andrew Roberts.
The originality of the work is in the way Calder begins his history with internal expansion of England, treating the formation of the British state itself as an imperial project – again a position which at the time was not characteristic of imperial history. At the same time, he emphatically rejected the “pretence” that Scotland had been colonised by England, writing elsewhere that “the stark truth is that Scots were proud and eager collaborators in the colonisation and exploitation of lands overseas by the British Empire”.
Calder’s overall relationship to Marxism was agnostic, although some of his work would be unthinkable without it. In an early introduction to the work of Sir Walter Scott, co-written with his then wife Jenni, they analyse the author’s work from a perspective influenced by Georg Lukács (although with a rather more accurate grasp of Scottish history), but also show how aspects of Scott’s approach to history in his novels came to influence historical materialism:
“Only when we understand the difference between one style of life and another can we understand change; and only when we understand how life has changed in history can we understand how it might be changing in the present.”
Politically, Calder described himself as holding “a view of Scotland which is emphatically not ‘Unionist’, but isn’t ‘Nationalist’ either: I call myself a ‘socialist home ruler’.” As this suggests, he was not a revolutionary. Nevertheless, he ultimately despaired of the Labour Party and joined the SNP during the 1990s, before breaking to the left to join the Scottish Socialist Party and, finally, Solidarity.
Calder had a number of friends in the Socialist Workers Party and contributed several reviews to the International Socialism journal and a chapter to the Bookmarks collection, Scotland, Class and Nation (1999). He will be badly missed, not only on the Scottish literary scene, where he was an important figure for three decades, but in Africa and the Caribbean, where he did much to publicise and encourage writers like Ngugi Wa Thiong’o and Chinua Achebe when they were still unknown in the West.
 



Gordon Brown’s plans to make migrants “earn” their right to British citizenship are not only hypocritical and racist to the core – they threaten all working people, whether they were born in Britain or not.
Immigration minister Liam Byrne claims consultations show British people want newcomers to “pay their taxes like the rest of us”.
Why then did the government retreat in the face of business pressure from making millionaire “non-doms” do precisely that?
Why do they resist any attempt to make the rich pay their way?
Migrants who are likely to make more use of public services will be made to pay more to apply for citizenship.
However, those likely to make less use of them – the majority, since they tend to be young and healthy – will not have their contributions reduced. And why stop at migrants? If level of public service use is to be used as a criteria for setting fees, then why not use it to determine contributions from people already living in Britain?
If migrants have to demonstrate their willingness to “integrate” by working or doing voluntary work, how long before the long-term unemployed are treated in the same way?
Byrne says his consultations show that Britain is not “a nation of Alf Garnetts”, but this is exactly what the government thinks of us.
First we have a racist and xenophobic media playing on people’s ignorance and despair to create a storm of hatred and suspicion.
Then the government finds it convenient to “listen” to the people on this issue, in a way it never did over, say, the war in Iraq or the renationalisation of the railways.
We can best answer this by defending the rights of migrants and by supporting, not non-existent “British” values, but the international values of solidarity and anti-racism.



 


Neil Davidson
West Calder, Scotland






 



Benedict Anderson
Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism
Verso, 2006, £12.99
If there is one book on nationalism that every student is expected to read, one book that is certain to be included in any survey of the competing theories, it is Imagined Communities. It is, as Josep Llobera has written of the core conception, “as if people had been waiting for such an expression to be coined”. [1] The appearance of the third edition therefore gives us an opportunity to reassess this original and influential work, but also to identify some of the problems to which it gives rise, problems which are, in part, the very reason for its popularity. These are not all simply the result of inevitable misunderstandings that occur when a complex concept is seized upon to fill an explanatory gap. Some are the result of Benedict Anderson’s underlying theoretical assumptions. As he himself notes, “the book attempted to combine a kind of historical materialism with what later on came to be called discourse analysis. Marxist modernism married to post-modernism avant la letter”. [2]
It is the postmodern aspects of the work which have proved the most influential, all too often at the expense of Anderson’s Marxism. Nevertheless, it would be ungenerous not to begin by recognising his achievement. To understand why this book had such an impact, it is necessary first to review how nationalism had previously been dealt with in the Marxist tradition.
 
Strategies, definitions, explanations
Marx and Engels engaged with the issue of nationalism in the middle decades of the 19th century, in other words, during the period in which the bourgeois revolution was being completed across Western Europe, North America and Japan. They argued that the working class (and “the democracy” more generally) should support national movements and the formation of new nation-states where they would hasten the development of capitalism, and consequently the emergence of a working class, and where they would weaken the great reactionary powers of Europe, the most powerful of which was absolutist Russia. [3]
Self-determination was not necessarily the absolute priority. Marx and Engels rejected the view that every national group had the right to establish a state, the so-called “principle of nationality”, as it was then known. [4] On the contrary, for them it entirely depended on whether the success of the movement was likely to lead to a progressive outcome or not. Nor was their attitude to a particular movement determined by the class nature or political attitudes of its leadership. The Hungarian rising of 1848 was dominated by the nobility, the aristocracy led the Polish insurrection of 1863 and even the Irish Fenians – in many respects one of the more politically advanced non-socialist groups of the time – were heavily influenced by the Catholic church. None of these negative characteristics was decisive, however, compared with the positive objective consequences of opening up the possibilities for capitalist development or closing down the influence of the absolutist states. By contrast, Marx and Engels refused support to the Czechs and southern Slavs during the revolutions of 1848–9 because they were backed by Russian absolutism – the “gendarme of Europe” – for its own purposes. [5]
The specific situations with which these socialist strategies towards nationalism were intended to deal are now largely historical, but the method employed remains of enduring value. It was, however, arrived at without any real explanation of the emergence or nature of nations, whose existence Marx and Engels essentially took for granted. Marx and Engels do have much to teach us in relation to “nation theory”, but this has to be derived from their theory of ideology, and not some untheorised remarks about, for example, German tribes. They left the movement a correct strategic orientation on national movements together with an undeveloped theoretical position on the nature of nations, national consciousness, and so on.
The next generation of Marxists quite understandably concentrated, as a matter of practical necessity, on refining the approach of revolutionary socialists to national movements and national demands, under the changed conditions of the imperialist era. These discussions, which extended from the mid-1890s to the debates on “the national and colonial question” during the first four congresses of the Communist International (1919–1922), represent one of Marxism’s greatest contributions to the question of socialist strategy. [6] But although some participants, notably Karl Kautsky and Lenin, made attempts to explain how nations emerged, these were rarely central to the argument, and usually went no further than emphasising the need for capitalism to dominate a territorial home market and the role of language in unifying the inhabitants of that territory. [7]
The Austro-Marxist tendency, represented by Karl Renner and Otto Bauer, did focus on the question of national formation, above all in Bauer’s monumental The National Question and Social Democracy (1906). But the definition of a nation offered by Bauer was resolutely non-materialist: “The nation is the totality of human beings bound together by a community of fate into a community of character.” Bauer did see capitalism as playing a role in the development of national consciousness, but only in the sense that such consciousness can only be complete when it is aware of other nations and the difference between them, which occurs most fully under capitalist development. Bauer’s work has been hailed as the only serious Marxist attempt to deal with the national question, but mainly by people who welcome it precisely because of its distance from Marxism. (Indeed, even Bauer is too marked by “economism” and “class reductionism” for some of his present day admirers. [8])
Lenin claimed that Bauer’s theory was “basically psychological” and endorsed instead the “historico-economic” explanation associated with Kautsky and in his own writings [9], but failed to propose a comparably detailed alternative explanation for the emergence of nations or the nature of national consciousness. What was offered in direct opposition to Bauer was not a counter-explanation, but a counter-definition which is unfortunately still widely accepted by many on the left today. In 1913 Joseph Stalin wrote, under Lenin’s guidance, “A nation is a historically constituted, stable community of people, formed on the basis of a common language, territory, economic life, and psychological makeup manifested in a common culture.” [10] Typically, he also informs us that if a single one of these factors is missing, no nation exists. The trouble with definitions of this sort is that they give a false aura of scientific objectivity, which collapses as soon as you start to think of all the nations it would exclude – the United States of America, for one. And although Stalin dismissed the demand for cultural autonomy associated with Austro-Marxism, his definition actually draws heavily on that of Bauer, by retaining the catch-all categories of “community” and “psychological makeup”. [11]
With the triumph of Stalinism in the late 1920s, serious discussion of nationalism virtually ceased. The main source of discussion about the nation therefore passed to non-Marxist political and social scientists, including many who were to be the founding fathers of the academic discipline of International Relations, an orientation which suggests that their interests lay in the “state” side of the “nation-state” couplet. [12] Yet although they tended to see nationalism as a movement only emerging from the late 18th century, they also accepted that nations – at least the “old historic nations” such as Spain, England and France – long pre-existed this period.
 
The Andersonian moment: political and theoretical contexts
From the 1960s a “modernist” current emerged within the study of nationalism which took a much more foreshortened view of its history. Emphases varied. Of the initial “modernist texts”, Kedurie’s Nationalism (1960) privileged the Enlightenment and Gellner’s essay Nationalism (1964), the Industrial Revolution, as the sources on nationhood. But all “modernists”, as the name suggests, saw both nations and nationalism as relatively recent, “modern”, creations. [13] As one survey of the field says:
For modernists, national consciousness in the modern age has to be seen as qualitatively different from that in the Scotland of the Declaration of Arbroath or the England of Shakespeare or Elizabeth or Cromwell ... It is only with modernity that a sense of national identity comes to pervade all classes, or emerges as the overriding identity. [14]
The intellectual dominance of modernism only held sway for a relatively brief period, roughly from the late 1970s to the early 1990s, but included such key works as Nairn’s The Break-Up Of Britain (1977 and 1981), Breuilly’s Nationalism And The State (1982 and 1992), Gellner’s Nations And Nationalism (1983), Hobsbawm and Ranger’s The Invention Of Tradition (1983), Hobsbawm’s Nations And Nationalism Since 1780 (1990) and Nigel Harris’s National Liberation (1990). Of these writers, Nairn, Hobsbawm and Harris saw themselves as Marxists at the time of writing, as did Anderson.
Anderson is a specialist in East Asian politics. He went to Indonesia in 1962 to study that country’s experience during the Second World War, when Japanese occupation supplanted the Dutch colonial presence. The book which resulted from these researches, Java in a Time of Revolution (1972), dealt only in passing with the question of nationalism, but what it does say is interesting in the light of his later preoccupations. Anderson describes how at the second congress of the youth wing of the Indonesian National Party in 1928 “the youth took the historic oath of commitment to one people, the Indonesian people, one nation, the Indonesian nation, and one language, the Indonesian language”. Nationalism alone “made sense of the new life” on which young people drawn from many different places were “collectively embarked”. But the nationalism was limited at the time to “politically-minded youth” who were “profoundly isolated from the rest of their contemporaries”. It was not until the Japanese period that nationalism spread deeply into small-town and rural Java, and it did so then because of the new experiences encountered there, to which it gave coherent meaning.
Many of the themes rehearsed in this work – the initial growth of nationalism emerging from the collective experience of an elite group, the sense of nationalism as a means of understanding the world rather than a narrow set of political demands – were all to re-emerge in more fully developed form in Imagined Communities.
Anderson was expelled from Indonesia for displeasing the Suharto regime shortly after the book appeared. “Exile”, he later wrote, “had the advantage of pushing my inquiries back into the nineteenth century, and from everyday politics to the transformations of consciousness that made presently existing Indonesia thinkable”. There were, however, other factors which led him to write Imagined Communities.
In 1978 and 1979 wars had taken place between Vietnam, Cambodia and China, but “none of the belligerents had made more than the most perfunctory attempts to justify the bloodshed in terms of a recognisable Marxist theoretical perspective”. This said something about their character: “Since World War Two every successful revolution has defined itself in national terms ... and, in so doing, has grounded itself firmly in a territorial and social space inherited from the revolutionary past.” [15] But the idea that socialism, or even the transition to socialism, should perpetrate nation-state and nationalism was contrary to all previous Marxist positions. What implications did this have for the Marxist theory of nationalism?
There was already a perception that Marxism lacked an adequate theory of nationalism. In 1976 Tom Nairn had claimed that nationalism “represents Marxism’s greatest historical failure”. [16] Anderson claims that he intended Imagined Communities to offer critical support, but also to extend Nairn’s critique from Marxism to all other political traditions, which he saw as similarly lacking. [17] What then was his alternative?
 
Anderson’s argument
Anderson starts by arguing that nationalism is “a radically changed form of consciousness”. [18] To define it, he starts with the reason why the nation has to be imagined: “It is imagined because the members of even the smallest nation will never know most of their fellow-members, meet them, or even hear of them, yet in the minds of each lives the image of their community.” Anderson is insistent that “imagined” does not mean “false”, because all communities beyond the original gatherer-hunter groups have to conduct a similar act of imagining: “Communities are to be distinguished, not by their falsity/genuineness, but by the style in which they are imagined.” Anderson argues that there are three aspects to what is being imagined: limitation, because no nation can encompass the entire world and the boundaries of each are set by other nations; sovereignty, because nations came into existence at the time when the legitimacy once conferred by absolutist divine right was being replaced by that of the state; and community, because the horizontal solidarities of the nation were stronger than vertical oppositions, even those of class. [19]
Anderson identifies “the end of the 18th century” as the period which saw “the spontaneous distillation of a complex ‘crossing’ of discrete historical forces”, and once distilled it was no longer necessary for each potential new nation to have undergone the same experiences. They could be “transplanted, with varying degrees of self-consciousness, to a great variety of social terrains”. [20] But the origin of these forces goes much further back in time. Anderson argues that from the late medieval period onwards there was the collapse of three key conceptions of the world: the idea that belief systems expressed in particular script languages like those of Christianity and Islam (using respectively Latin and classical Arabic) offered privileged access to truth; the belief that society was naturally organised around and under monarchs who were persons apart from other human beings and who ruled by some form of divine dispensation; and an understanding of the past and present in terms of some creation myth. Such notions rooted human lives firmly in the very nature of things, giving certain meanings to the everyday fatalities of existence (above all death, loss and servitude) and offering, in various ways, redemption from them.
All these conceptions were subverted by economic change, discoveries, social and scientific, and the development of increasingly rapid communications: “No surprise then that the search was on, so to speak, for a new way of linking fraternity, power and time together”. [21]
For Anderson, the solution was provided by the emergence of “print capitalism”. [22] This created the possibility of a vast market beyond the tiny minority who could understand Latin. Print-languages “created unified fields of exchange and communication below Latin and above the spoken vernaculars”. They “gave a new fixity to language, which in the long run helped to build that image of antiquity so central to the subjective idea of the nation”. And they created “languages of power”, with certain dialects playing a dominant part in communication through printing. These were “largely unselfconscious processes resulting from the explosive interaction between capitalism, technology and human linguistic diversity”. [23]
The remainder of the book sets out how national consciousness spread and was transmuted into nationalism. He argues there were three main kinds of nationalism, arising in successive waves: “creole” nationalism associated with the revolt of the American colonies (“creole” in its Spanish use means a Latin American of European ancestry); “language” nationalism associated with western Europe; and “official” nationalism associated with central and eastern Europe, and with the Asian and African anti-colonial movements.
In what is perhaps his boldest innovation, Anderson argues that the “pioneers” of nationalism were the first of these, the colonial states of the Americas. He ascribes the rise of nationalism to the attempt by Madrid to impose greater control, the influence of Enlightenment ideas and the way in which the South American continent had been divided into particular, territorially delimited, administrative units:
In this respect they foreshadowed the new states of Africa and parts of Asia in the mid-20th century ... The original shaping of the American administrative units was to an extent arbitrary and fortuitous, marking the spatial limits of particular military conquests. But over time they developed a firmer reality under the influence of geographic, political and economic factors. [24]
Two necessary internal processes translated the brute fact of territoriality into national consciousness, according to Anderson. There was the self-identification of the descendants of settlers with the colonial territory, in distinction from their European-born equivalents. And there was the emergence of a particular manifestation of print capitalism: the newspaper which “brought together, on the same page, this marriage with that ship, this price with that bishop”, creating “quite naturally, and even apolitically ... an imagined community among a specific assemblage of fellow-readers, to whom these ships, brides, bishops and prices belonged. In time, of course, it was only to be expected that political elements would enter in”. [25]
Although vernacular language was critical to the original formation of national consciousness, once nationalism became available as a model, it was no longer necessary for new nations to have this as their basis. [26]
The emergence of nationalism was originally associated with the popular masses, but it became available for use for “conservative, not to say reactionary,” ends by the state bureaucracies of societies which had not experienced successful popular movements. [27]
Anderson argues that the anti-imperialist nationalism, which began to build new states after 1945, drew on both of these aspects. “That is why so often in the ‘nation-building’ policies of the new states one sees both a genuine, popular nationalist enthusiasm and a systematic, even Machiavellian, instilling of nationalist ideology through the mass media, the educational system, administrative regulations and so forth.” [28]
A brief exposition can only hint at the subtlety, complexity and sophistication of Anderson’s arguments. More than any previous writer, Anderson established that the phenomenon of nationalism was constructed and historical, not natural and eternal. Part of the charm of the book lies in the sheer range and novelty of the examples which Anderson musters to illustrate his argument, many of them drawn from areas such as Burma, Thailand and Indonesia, which do not normally feature in discussions of nationalism. And yet Imagined Communities is one of those books of great individual value, but which have ultimately exerted a negative influence on socialist thought.
 
Postmodernist appropriation and primordialist approbation
Imagined Communities made an immediate impact on publication, but perhaps not in the way that Anderson had hoped. Although other Marxists did find his work useful, it actually provided far greater support for emerging ideologies fixated on questions of identity, above all postmodernism.
One of Anderson’s more insightful critics, Anthony Smith, noted that, while Anderson’s project is not itself a postmodernist reading, “it is the idea of the nation as discourse to be interrogated and deconstructed, that has proved most influential”. [29] Anderson does not, of course, suggest that the nation is simply a discourse, but many of his critics have found it convenient to ascribe that view to him. The Scottish writer Murray Pittock, for example, writes, “The weakness of Anderson’s notion of the ‘imagined community’ is that it implies that one can imagine at will, and choose an identity as the postmodern consumer chooses a lifestyle product.” [30]
Smith is one of the main proponents of the ‘perennialist’ view of nations which sees them as rooted in much older ethnic identities. He considers it a problem that, for Anderson, “the nation possesses no reality independent of its images and representations. But such a perspective undermines the sociological reality of the nation, the bonds of allegiance and belonging which so many people feel, and obscures both the institutional, political and territorial constitution of nations, and of the powerful and popular cultural resources and traditions that underpin so many nations and endow them with a sense of tangible identity”. [31] Similarly Pittock wants to defend a conception of Scottish nationalism stretching back to early medieval times.
These criticisms demonstrate the revival of arguments that hold that nations are much older than “modernists” have claimed. As Pittock notes, “the idea that nations and nationalism cannot predate the French Revolution’ is increasingly on the defensive”. [32] The 1990s saw Greenfield’s Nationalism (1992), Llobera’s The God of Modernity (1994), Hutchinson’s Modern Nationalism (1994) and Hasting’s The Construction Of Nationhood (1997), although the final collapse into primordial essentialism was signalled by two works by Emmanuel Todd, L’illusion Economique (1998) and La Diversité du Monde (1999). Todd’s key thesis has been approvingly summarised by Tom Nairn to claim that “nationalism is constitutive of man’s social nature”. [33]
 
Re-imagining the history of the nation
Imagined Communities can still play a role in intellectually challenging both postmodernism and primordialism, but only if its themes are integrated into a more consistently materialist framework.
The book consists of a series of impressionistic studies on particular aspects of nationalism. But the connections between them are often difficult to establish. What is missing is any central dynamic linking them together, except for the concept of print capitalism. Yet the universality of contemporary nationalism suggests that it was originally produced and subsequently reproduced by a set of conditions wider and more fundamental than this.
The major contribution that Marxism might make here lies not in what Marx and Engels wrote about particular nations. Rather it lies in their more general observations on the historical conditions for the emergence of certain forms of consciousness, which could then be applied in the case of national consciousness, starting with their general relationship to social being:
The mode of production of material life conditions the general process of social, political and intellectual life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social existence that determines their consciousness. [34]
Certain forms of consciousness are only possible under particular conditions. The point was further developed by George Lukács, who attacked “the crudeness and conceptual nullity” of those forms of thought which obscure “the historical, transitory nature of capitalist society”: “Its determinants take on the appearance of timeless, eternal categories valid for all social formations”. [35] The “nation” is one of these historical categories which are only relevant to capitalist society. In making this particular error, anti-modernist writers simply follow bourgeois “normal science”.
Take, for example, the work of Adrian Hastings. Hastings has argued that “nation”, “the word and the idea”, existed in England at least since the 16th and probably since the 14th century. [36] But, as Alasdair MacIntyre has pointed out:
To understand a concept, to grasp the meaning of the words which express it, is always ... to grasp the role of the concept in language and social life ... Different forms of social life will provide different roles for concepts to play. [37]
In other words, just because people used the term “nation” in, say, the 14th century, it does not follow that they meant by it what we mean by it – indeed, if we take Marxism seriously then it is extremely unlikely that they could possibly have done so. It is not simply a matter of words, but the forms of consciousness that the words express. Any Marxist account of national consciousness must therefore explain the particular “forms of social life” that could allow this form of consciousness, these modes of expression, to come into existence.
 
The origins of capitalism and nationalism
Anderson’s argument about the coincidence of existential doubt and technological advance in print seems unconvincing as an explanation for something as all-pervasive as nationalism. A more convincing explanation might be the more general development of capitalism. But, like Otto Bauer, Anderson sees a purely contingent relationship between this and the rise of nationalism: “What made the new communities imaginable was a half-fortuitous, but explosive, interaction between a system of production and productive relations (capitalism), a technology of communications (print), and the fatality of human linguistic diversity.” [38] The connection between national consciousness and capitalism is, however, far more all-embracing than this suggests. In fact, national consciousness took as many centuries to become the dominant form of consciousness as the capitalist mode of production did to become the dominant mode of production, and it did so as a consequence of that. [39] Four main elements combined, reflecting to a greater or lesser extent the impact of capitalism on feudal society.
The first element was the formation of externally demarcated and internally connected areas of economic activity. Europe had emerged from the first crisis of feudalism by the later 15th century as a system of states which was still dominated by the feudal mode of production. It was a system, however, increasingly adapted to elements of capitalism. In this context, the importance of capitalist development was less in the domain of production than that of circulation, for it was in the creation of trade networks that merchant capital began to link up dispersed rural communities both with each other and with the urban centres to form an extensive home market.
Linked directly to this element was a second, the adoption of a common language by the communities that were being connected to each other at the economic level. The need to communicate for the purposes of market exchange began to break down the distinctiveness of local dialects, forging a language common, or at least comprehensible, to all. Language in this way began to set the boundaries of the economic networks referred to above, boundaries that did not necessarily coincide with those of medieval kingdoms. Such economic and linguistic unification was far easier in a small centralised kingdom such as England than in a territory such as the German Empire. Indeed, establishment of state frontiers often purely determined the boundary between a dialect of a particular language and another language. And of course Anderson is right that the formation of standard forms of language was immeasurably aided by the invention of printing and the possibilities it presented for the codification of language in mass-produced works. These would not have been produced unless an audience of the literate already existed which understood their contents, but their effect was to extend the size of that audience, since printers could not produce works in every local dialect, only in the one which had emerged as the standard form, or in those which were in competition to do so. The increasing standardisation of language then fed back into its original economic formation, as the merchants whose trading networks had originally defined the territorial reach of linguistic comprehensibility increasingly identified themselves with that territory, to the exclusion of rivals who spoke a different language. The rise of the vernacular was accompanied by the decline of Latin as a lingua franca, a process virtually complete by the mid-16th century and expressed in the new profession of interpreter, now necessary to make vernacular diplomatic exchanges mutually comprehensible.
The third element was the character of the new absolutist states. Absolutism was the form taken by the feudal state during the economic transition from feudalism to capitalism. Yet the absolutist states did not arise automatically. The replacement of the estates monarchy of the earlier feudal period by a more centralised apparatus was the political response of the feudal ruling class to the social and economic pressures – different in degree and combination throughout Europe – set in train by the first crisis of the feudal system and the greater significance of capitalist production in the economies which emerged from it. The local jurisdictions that characterised the classic epoch of military feudalism began to give way to greater concentration of state power, notably through the introduction of standing armies and, partly in order to pay for them, regular centralised taxation.
Death and taxes both involve bureaucracies that require a version of the local language, comprehensible across the state territory, thus strengthening the “linguistic” element. They also had two unintended effects. The introduction of regular taxation and the adoption of mercantilist policies reinforced the economic unity that had begun to emerge spontaneously from the activities of merchant capitalists. And the military rivalry that characterised the new system necessitated mobilising the active support of the bourgeois minority as a source of financial backing and administrative expertise. Despite these innovations it is nevertheless important not to mistake the role of absolutism in the birth of nationhood, which was that of a midwife, not that of a mother. The issue is often elided by reference to the influence of “the modern state” in the creation of nations, but this is to dissolve the difference between the absolutist state and its genuinely modern bourgeois successor. The arrival of nationhood coincided not with the establishment of the absolutist states but with their overthrow.
The fourth and final element is local manifestations of a global religious belief. The ideology of absolutism involved stressing the deeds of religious figures such as saints, who were associated with the territory of the realm, but it was the Reformation that made religion more than an ideologically pious enhancement to the image of the ruling dynasty. Wherever Protestantism became the dominant religion within a given territory after 1517 it contributed to the formation of national consciousness by allowing communities of belief to define themselves against the inter-territorial institutions of the Roman Catholic Church and the Holy Roman Empire. In part this was through the availability of the Bible in the vernacular, but this in turn depended on the existence of linguistic frameworks in which market transactions and state administration could be carried out. Protestantism acted as a stimulus to national consciousness only to the extent that the development of capitalism had provided it with the framework to do so.
Naturally the process went furthest in England, but even there it was not until after the death of Elizabeth in 1603 that Protestantism came to be separated from regnal solidarity with the monarch. It took longer for Catholicism to play the same role.
 
Nationalism and bourgeois revolution
There is therefore a problem with Anderson’s focus as on “creole” nationalism as the major formative experience of nationalism. Apart from anything else, he contradicts himself by describing it as drawn from an earlier model: “In effect, by the second decade of the 19th century, if not earlier, a ‘model’ of ‘the’ independent national state was available for pirating.” He describes this as “a complex composite of French and American elements”. [40] But incredibly, this is one of the first occasions that France is mentioned. To ignore the influence of the French Revolution in establishing the “model” seems particularly perverse. The problem here is that even France and the United States are not the first nations. The United Netherlands and England all have a stronger claim to priority. To argue that nations only appeared at some stage in the later 18th century would be as absurd as arguing that capitalism only appeared at the same period. While Anderson is right to draw attention to cumulative movements, he misses something else, which is the explosive effect of the revolutionary turning points which punctuate capitalist development, and their impact in coalescing hitherto inchoate ideological elements into a national identity. His account is, so to speak, all process and no events.
The success of groups with an emergent national consciousness in the Netherlands and England in elevating this new form of consciousness into political movements led others (first in North America, Ireland and France, then generally) to aspire to national status, even if their level of social development had not previously allowed national consciousness to arise. The bourgeois revolutions effected the final transformation of the term “nation” to one which stood for “the people” as a community – although one of the most divisive issues within all bourgeois revolutionary movements was precisely how “the people” should be defined. The struggle against absolutism required the mobilisation of at least a large minority of “the people” to achieve the expulsion or destruction of the royal dynasty. This could only be done by providing some form of identity which could embrace the often very different forms of opposition to the crown, regardless of whether the ruler in question was foreign (as in the case of Spanish Habsburg dynasty in the Netherlands) or native (as in the case of the Stuart dynasty in England). Nationalism provided this identity.
National consciousness could not flourish, or even take root, unless the conditions for capitalist development were present, and for it to be consolidated across Europe, even if only among the bourgeoisie, there had to be at least one case where it made the transition to nationalism and then became embodied in a nation-state. Only when there were concrete examples of nationhood could different groups know what they were conscious of, regardless of whether they then went on to develop nationalisms of their own or not.
The capitalist nation-state became a permanent feature of the international state system only towards the end of the hundred years between the end of the English Revolution in 1688 and the beginning of the French Revolution in 1789. Thereafter new nations could be manufactured regardless of whether the original elements were present or not – although an economic infrastructure and common language would, of necessity, have to be introduced at some point for a sense of national consciousness to be consolidated. The ideological dominance of nationalism over the population depended, however, on when a particular revolution occurred in the overall cycle of bourgeois revolutions. In the two states where bourgeois revolutions were successfully completed before or during 1688, the Dutch and the English, the existence of national consciousness was directly proportional to the extent that the post-revolutionary state developed a centralised apparatus, rather than a federal or confederal structure. In this respect English nationalism was as far in advance of its Dutch predecessors as it was of its American successor, which similarly remained an alliance of semi-autonomous states down to 1865.
After 1848 all ruling classes intent on creating states on the British or French models were forced to embrace nationalism, not because they were personally capitalists, but because all of them – Prussian Junkers, Japanese Samurai, Italian monarchists and, eventually, Stalinist bureaucrats – were engaged in building industrial societies dominated by the capitalist mode of production. The example of Italy is typical of how ruling classes were faced with the need to diffuse consciousness of being a nation down from elite level into the mass of the population, a large and growing proportion of whom were not the bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie who had originally formed the nation, but workers. The difficulties involved should not be underestimated: as late as the 1860s as many as a quarter of the inhabitants of the French state did not speak French.
 
Nationalism and the working class
Class is the great absent theme in Imagined Communities, yet no Marxist account can deal with the subject without exploring the role nationalism plays in class relations. [41] National consciousness begins to emerge in the social classes below the rulers of the new nation-states, partly as the result of deliberate indoctrination, but far more so as the by now inevitable pattern of life experience within societies shaped by the nation-state form. Among the working class the existence of reformist class consciousness provides the context within which national consciousness and nationalism develop. Reformist class consciousness was originally a historical product of the social conditions produced by the transition to capitalism or, more precisely, by the process of capitalist industrialisation, first in Britain and subsequently elsewhere.
Once the initial shock of industrialisation passed, workers came to accept that capitalism was not a passing aberration, but a new form of society which might have many years of vitality ahead of it. The apparent permanence of the system forced accommodation and adaptation, however grudgingly, from the new exploited class, whose horizons were anyway limited by the “dull compulsion” to work, raise families and recover from the savage exertions demanded by the factory system. Although these conditions provoked resistance, the fact that the new system generated its own defensive illusions made the possibility of a generalised revolutionary class consciousness emerging out of these resistance struggles less likely. Under early capitalism exploitation was accompanied by the economic discipline instilled by fear of the poverty which would result from being sacked. The actual process of exploitation, the fact that the worker produced more than that for which she or he was rewarded, was hidden from view. As a result, although workers were usually hostile to their own particular boss, this did not necessarily generalise into opposition to the system as a whole. Although trade unions grew out of worker resistance, the goal of these new organisations, whatever rhetoric was employed about the (invariably distant) overturning of the system, was improving the condition of the working class within the system itself. The resulting contradictory form of consciousness finds its most basic expression in an acceptance by workers of the wages system accompanied by a rejection of the particular level of wages which they are being offered, but it extends to all aspects of social life.
What then is the relationship of national consciousness to this reformist consciousness? National consciousness does not compete with revolutionary class consciousness directly for the allegiance of workers, but as a key element in reformist class consciousness. Indeed, one might say that workers remain nationalist to the extent that they remain reformist. And from the point of view of the capitalist class in individual nations it is absolutely necessary that they do so, or the danger is always that workers will identify, not with the “national” interest of the state in which they happen to be situated, but with that of the class to which they are condemned to belong, regardless of the accident of geographical location. Nationalism should not therefore be seen as something which only “happens” during separatist movements on the one hand, or during fascist and imperialist manifestations on the other. The capitalist system generates nationalism as a necessary everyday condition of its continued existence.
Mass nationalism was therefore initially a product of industrialisation, but not simply because it is functional for the ruling class in industrial capitalism. Industrialisation and urbanisation together produced the changes in human consciousness that made nationalism possible (for the subordinate classes), as well as creating societies that made nationalism necessary (for the dominant class). They developed new structural capacities, new modes of experience and new psychological needs in the people who had to work in the factories and live in the cities. It is the need for some collective sense of belonging with which to overcome the effects of alienation, the need for psychic compensation for the injuries sustained at the hands of capitalist society, that nationalism provides in the absence of revolutionary class consciousness, but in conjunction with reformist class consciousness.
The ideological role played by the ruling class in reinforcing nationalism is therefore only possible because nationalism already provides one possible means of meeting the psychic needs created by capitalism. Once a capitalist nation-state has been established, those who control the apparatus always seek to consolidate the hold of nationalism among the people who inhabit its territory. States need conscripts for their armies, citizens to pay taxes, workers to accept that they have more in common with those who exploit them at home than they do with their fellow-exploited abroad. This made it imperative that loyalty to a state be secured, and the nation was the means. Since the 18th century British workers have often been asked to accept rises in interest rates, cuts in wages and services, or participation in imperialist wars, but never for the benefit of British capitalism, always for the benefit of the British nation, for “the national interest”.
It is not only the state that makes such appeals. The organisations of the working class themselves reinforce reformist class consciousness within a national context. At the most elementary level this is because such organisations are unwilling to challenge the nationalism within which political discourse is conducted, for fear of being labelled unpatriotic. More importantly, however, it is because they seek either to influence or to determine policy within the confines of the existing nation-state. Typically, therefore, nationalism is invested with the contradictory character of the reformist worldview.
 
Conclusion
If nationalism is as intertwined with capitalism as the above argument suggests, then nationalism today can only ever be progressive in certain limited circumstances, most obviously in relation to movements against national oppression. Marxists cannot be nationalists, nor can they even support nationalisms as such, although they can support particular national demands or movements. This is not Anderson’s conclusion, as he hinted in Imagined Communities itself: “In an age when it is so common for progressive, cosmopolitan intellectuals (particularly in Europe?) to insist on the near-pathological character of nationalism, its roots in fear and hatred of the other, it is useful to remind ourselves that nations inspire love, often profoundly self-sacrificing love”. [42] He made the point more clearly in a lecture given in the Indonesian capital of Jakarta shortly after the overthrow of the Suharto regime, Anderson told his audience:
No one can be a true nationalist who is incapable of feeling “ashamed” if her state or government commits crimes, including those against her fellow citizens ... During the Vietnam War, a good part of the popular opposition came from just this good sense of shame among the American citizenry that “their government” was responsible for the violent deaths of three million people in Indochina, including uncounted numbers of women and children ... So they went to work in protest, not merely as advocates of universal human rights, but as Americans who loved the common American project. [43]
The distinction between true and false nationalists is dangerous in the extreme. Anderson’s important work, illuminating in so many ways, is ultimately a failure because he remains trapped within the ideological presuppositions of its subject. He has shown us that national consciousness and the nation-state are forms whose beginnings can be found in past history. But because he misunderstands the forces which brought them into being, he fails to recognise that future history may also see them brought to an end.
* * *
Notes
1. Llobera, 1994, p. 103.
2. That is, postmodernism before postmodernism was invented. Anderson, 2006, p. 227.
3. Marx and Engels, 1974, p. 389.
4. Engels, 1974, pp. 381–385.
5. The claim by Engels that these nations were intrinsically “non-historic” was a piece of Hegelian baggage quite unnecessary to their critique of Pan-Slavism. For the problems with the concept of non-historicity, and the extent to which Engels later abandoned it, largely as a result of his analysis of the Irish situation, see Davidson, 2001, pp. 290–292 and pp. 297–302.
6. Haupt, Lowy and Weill, 1974; Riddell, 1984, pp. 348–383; Riddell, 1991a, pp. 211–290; Riddell, 1991b, appendix 2, pp. 846–885; Riddell, 1993, pp. 137–171; Adler, 1983, pp. 328–331 and pp. 409–419.
7. Kautsky, in Luxemburg, 1976, pp. 126 and 129; Lenin, 1964, p. 396.
8. Nemni, 1991, p. 143 and pp. 181–184.
9. Lenin, 1964, p. 308.
10. Stalin, 1953, p. 307.
11. Ree, 1994, p. 228.
12. The classic works include Hayes, 1931; Kohn, 1944; Cobban, 1945; Carr, 1945; and Deutsch, 1953.
13. Kedurie, 1960; Gellner, 1964.
14. Spencer and Wollman, 2002, p. 33.
15. Anderson, 2006, pp. 1–2. See also p. xi, from the preface to the 1991 edition. The same conflicts are also discussed by Nairn in the second edition of The Break-Up of Britain. See Nairn, 1981, p. 371.
16. Nairn, 1977, p. 329.
17. Anderson, 2006, pp. 208–209.
18. Anderson, 2006, p. xiv.
19. Anderson, 2006, pp. 6–7.
20. Anderson, 2006, p. 4.
21. Anderson, 2006, p. 36. He is not making the absurd suggestion that religion had to decline in importance before nationalism could emerge, contrary to the claims of several of his critics like Ozkirilh, 2000, p. 153. The importance he ascribes to the Reformation proves them wrong.
22. Anderson, 2006, p. 36.
23. Anderson, 2006, pp. 44–45.
24. Anderson, 2006, p. 52.
25. Anderson, 2006, p. 62.
26. Anderson, 2006, p. 133 and p. 135.
27. Anderson, 2006, p. 110.
28. Anderson, 2006, pp. 113–114.
29. Smith, 1998, p. 142.
30. Pittock, 1999, p. 140.
31. Smith, 1998, p. 137.
32. Pittock, 1999, pp. 102–103.
33. Nairn, 2002, p. 156. Here Nairn follows Todd, 1998, but essentially as a theoretical justification for a position he had been moving towards for several years beforehand, See Davidson, 1999, pp. 110–111.
34. Marx, 1975, p. 425.
35. Lukács, 1971, p. 9.
36. Hastings, 1997, p. 19.
37. MacIntyre, 1967, p. 2 and p. 8.
38. Anderson, 2006, pp. 42–43.
39. For more on this see Harman, 1992.
40. Anderson, 2006, p. 81 and note 34.
41. I focus here on the working class. The relationship between nationalism and the bourgeoisie is discussed in Davidson, forthcoming in 2008.
42. Anderson, 2006, p. 141.
43. Anderson, 1999, p. 17. The final sentence has ominous echoes of Richard Rorty’s famous declaration that white American liberals should help oppressed blacks, not because the are “fellow human beings”, but because “it is much more persuasive, morally as well as politically, to describe them as our fellow Americans-to insist that it is outrageous that an American should live without hope”. See Rorty, 1989, p. 191.
* * *
References
Adler, Alan (ed.), 1983, Theses, Resolutions and Manifestos of the First Four Congresses of the Third International, translated by Alix Holt and Barbara Holland, introduced by Bertil Hessel (Pluto Press).
Anderson, Benedict, 1972, Java in a Time of Revolution: Occupation and Resistance, 1944–1946 (Cornell University).
Anderson, Benedict, 1999, Indonesian Nationalism Today and in the Future, New Left Review 235 (May/June 1999).
Anderson, Benedict, 2006 [1983], Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Rise and Spread of Nationalism, revised edition (Verso).
Bauer, Otto, 2000 [1907], The Question of Nationalities and Social Democracy (University of Minnesota).
Carr, Edward, 1945, Nationalism and After (Macmillan).
Cobban, Alfred, 1945, National Self-Determination (Oxford University).
Davidson, Neil, 1999, In Perspective: Tom Nairn, International Socialism 2 : 82 (Spring 1999), http://pubs.socialistreviewindex.org.uk/isj82/davidson.htm
Davidson, Neil, Neil, 2001, Marx and Engels on the Scottish Highlands, Science and Society, volume 65, number 3, (autumn 2001).
Davidson, Neil, forthcoming in 2008, Many Capitals, Many States: Logic, Contingency or Mediation?, Cambridge Review of International Affairs, volume 21, number 3 (September 2008).
Deutsch, Karl, 1953, Nationalism and Social Communication (MIT).
Engels, Frederick, 1974, What Have the Working Classes to Do with Poland?, in David Fernbach (ed.), The First International and After, volume 3 (Harmondsworth/New Left Review), www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1866/03/24.htm
Gellner, Ernest, 1964, Nationalism, in Thought and Change (Weidenfeld and Nicolson).
Harman, Chris, 1992, The Return of the National Question, International Socialism 2 : 56 (Autumn 1992), www.marxists.de/theory/harman/natquest.htm
Hastings, Adrian, 1997, The Construction of Nationhood: Ethnicity, Religion and Nationhood (Cambridge University).
Haupt, George, Michael LÃ¶wy and Claudie Weill, 1974, Les Marxists et la Question Nationale, 1848–1914: Etudes et Textes (Maspero).
Hayes, Carlton, 1931, The Historical Evolution of Modern Nationalism (Smith).
Kedurie, Edie, 1960, Nationalism (Hutchinson University Library).
Kohn, Hans, 1944, The Idea of Nationalism (Collier Macmillan).
Lenin, Vladimir, 1964a [1914], The Right of Nations to Self-Determination, in Collected Works, volume 20, December 1913–August 1914 (Lawrence and Wishart).
Lenin, Vladimir, 1964b [1916], The Socialist Revolution and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination, in Collected Works, volume 22 (Lawrence and Wishart).
Llobera, Josep, 1994, The God of Modernity: the Development of Nationalism in Western Europe (Berg).
Lukács, Georg, 1971 [1923], What is Orthodox Marxism?, in History and Class Consciousness: Studies in Marxist Dialectics (Merlin), www.marxists.org/archive/lukacs/works/history/orthodox.htm.
Luxemburg, Rosa, 1976 [1908-1909], The National Question and Autonomy, in The National Question: Selected Writings by Rosa Luxemburg (Monthly Review).
MacIntyre, Alasdair, 1967, A Short History of Ethics (Routledge and Kegan Paul).
Marx, Karl, 1975 [1859], Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, in Early Writings (Penguin/New Left Review), www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1859/critique-pol-economy/preface.htm
Marx, Karl, and Frederick Engels, 1974, For Poland, in David Fernbach (ed.), The First International and After: Political Writings, volume 3 (Harmondsworth/New Left Review).
Nairn, Tom, 1977, The Modern Janus, in The Break-Up of Britain: Crisis and Neo-Nationalism (New Left Books).
Nairn, Tom, 1981, Into Political Emergency: a Retrospect from the 1980s, in The Break-Up of Britain: Crisis and Neo-Nationalism, second, revised edition (Verso).
Nairn, Tom, 2002, Pariah: Misfortunes of the British Kingdom (Verso).
Nemni, Ephraim, 1991, Marxism and Nationalism: Theoretical Origins of a Political Crisis (Pluto).
Ozkirilh, Umut, 2000, Theories of Nationalism: a Critical Introduction (Macmillan).
Pittock, Murray, 1999, Celtic Identity and the British Image (Manchester University).
Ree, Eric van, 1994, Stalin and the National Question, Revolutionary Russia, volume 7, number 2 (April 1994).
Riddell, John (ed.), 1984, Lenin’s Struggle for a Revolutionary International: Documents: 1907–1916, the Preparatory Years (Monad Press).
Riddell, John, 1991a, Workers and Oppressed Peoples of the World, Unite! Proceedings and Documents of the Second Congress, 1920, volume 1 (Pathfinder).
Riddell, John, 1991b, Workers and Oppressed Peoples of the World, Unite! Proceedings and Documents of the Second Congress, 1920, volume 2 (Pathfinder).
Riddell, John, 1993, To See the Dawn: Baku, 1920 – First Congress of the Peoples of the East (Pathfinder).
Rorty, Richard, 1989, Contingency, Irony and Solidarity (Cambridge University).
Smith, Anthony, 1998, Nationalism and Modernism: A Critical Survey of Recent Theories of Nations and Nationalism (Routledge).
Spencer, Phillip and Howard Wollman, 2002, Nationalism: A Critical Introduction (Sage).
Stalin, Joseph, 1953 [1913], Marxism and the National Question, in Works, volume 2 (Foreign Languages Publishing House), www.marxists.org/reference/archive/stalin/works/1913/03.htm
Todd, Emmanuel, 1998, L’illusion Economique: Essai sur la Stagnation des Sociétés Développées (Gallimard).
 



A year has elapsed since the Scottish National Party (SNP) formed its first government in the devolved Scottish Parliament. The SNP took power at a time when neoliberal strategies all but completely dominated mainstream politics. [1] However, the SNP appears to have broken with the neoliberal consensus. To what extent does the SNP government contradict the thesis, propounded, in different ways, by sections of the radical left and the neoliberal political elite, that the path of reformism is now closed off?
Scotland is well integrated into the capitalist world economy. Britain was one of the first sites of neoliberal experimentation, and as part of the British state Scotland has experienced the effects of these policies, with only minor variations, since the establishment of devolved government in 1999.
At first sight, the SNP would not seem a strong contender to challenge neoliberal strategies since it is not a social democratic party, nor has it ever been one. Rather it is a party openly committed to making Scotland more successful in capitalist terms. Like many nationalist parties, the SNP has always contained a socialist minority, and this was particularly influential between 1974 and 1983. An attempt to take over the party by the explicitly socialist ‘79 Group was defeated by 1983, and the leadership of the group – including current leader and first minister Alex Salmond – was expelled, although this sentence was later commuted to temporary suspension. This experiment has not been repeated since.
In winning elections to the Scottish Parliament, the SNP took just one seat from Labour. Nonetheless, the SNP victory ended the Labour/Liberal Democrat regime that had been in office since devolution and dealt a blow to Labour’s hegemony in Scotland. Where did the increase in SNP support come from, if not Labour? Of the 20 seats the SNP gained in the election, 13 came from smaller, more radical forces, which were either greatly reduced in numbers (the Greens and independents) or eliminated from parliament altogether (the Scottish Socialist Party and Solidarity).
It could be argued that the SNP has simply managed to attract a majority of voters who support independence. But this presumes that independence is the most important issue for supporters of the Greens, the Scottish Socialist Party and Solidarity. As I have argued previously in this journal, support for the SNP can be separated from support for independence. [2] In fact, the SNP attracted votes from the most left wing sections of the electorate, for whom it was the only realistic choice if their intention was to punish the Labour/Liberal Democrat government by actually driving it from office.
The SNP was able to present itself as both anti-imperialist and, if not social democratic, at least the inheritor of social democratic policy. For instance, it opposed the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, and the replacement of the Trident nuclear weapons system. Being anti-war is a relatively cost free position, since the Scottish government has no control over Scottish troops. It is, however, in a position to make things difficult for the UK government over Trident, not least by invoking health and safety legislation to prevent weapons of mass destruction being transported across Scotland.
The SNP also committed itself to a series of social policies similar to those that Labour might once have proposed. The introduction to the SNP’s manifesto included promises to “keep vital health services local”, “scrap the Council Tax and introduce a fairer system based on ability to pay”, “increase by 50 percent the amount of free nursery education available for three and four year olds” and “dump student debt”. [3] After the election the SNP had perfect excuses for not delivering on its commitments: the lowest level of financial settlement from the Treasury since devolution and an alliance of the other major parties that initially looked as if it might act collectively to block bills. The SNP has, however, made attempts to implement most of them – above all, the Council Tax has been frozen.
In fact, reforms making conditions marginally superior to those in England pre-date the SNP government, most obviously the abolition of student fees and the free provision of personal care for the elderly. There are two reasons why reforms have been introduced in Scotland.
First, in Scotland the usual “first past the post” elections are supplemented with a “list” elected by proportional representation. The model employed was designed to favour the larger parties and to make a coalition between Labour and the Liberal Democrats virtually inevitable, thus allowing Labour to blame the Liberal Democrats for blocking the more radical policies it had supposedly wanted to introduce. A coalition was duly formed, but otherwise the plan failed to achieve the intended result. Not only did the Liberal Democrats instigate the reforms mentioned above, but the smaller, more radical parties were able to get elected. Unlike Westminster, where Labour retains a diminishing majority, the situation at Holyrood, where no one party has an absolute majority, allows the possibility for raising legislation outside the neoliberal consensus.
The second factor is the nature of the party struggle between Labour and the SNP. Following the May 1999 elections the SNP became the official opposition in the Scottish Parliament. This, more than any other factor, has driven subsequent Labour policy in Scotland. In order to outmanoeuvre the SNP, to make devolution rather than independence the last stage of constitutional change, the Scottish Parliament had to be seen to be pursuing its own policies, at least partly independent of Westminster. But, given the extent to which Tony Blair and Gordon Brown have moved Labour to the right, the policies that provided this independence have tended to be to the left.
Although the smaller parties are currently outside parliament (with the exception of the ex-SNP Independent Margo MacDonald and two Greens), the nature of the struggle between Labour and the SNP remains the same. Salmond is playing a long game in which he hopes to build the basis for a permanent majority, if not to achieve independence, then at least to renegotiate the Treaty of Union. [4] To do so the SNP has to distinguish itself from Scottish Labour to a far greater extent than Scottish Labour has to distinguish itself from the Labour Party at a British level. The SNP must still win support from Labour’s core working class voters. Without doing so it will never achieve the majority it seeks. It cannot do so simply with unbridled neoliberalism.
It is important not to exaggerate what the SNP has done or is likely to do. The SNP is as committed to the core economic principles of neoliberalism as the other parties. Even in the SNP’s first budget, announced on 14 November 2007 in the first bloom of reforming zeal, “money was spent on trying to ensure that the council tax does not go up while business rates actually go down. In contrast, downgraded or ditched were commitments to free former students from their debt, to give grants to first time house buyers and to cut class sizes. Meanwhile the public sector is to be put under strict financial discipline, making 2 percent ‘efficiency savings’ a year.” [5] The budget was eventually passed on 24 January with Tory support. The Tories backed it on the basis that it would speed up the abolition of business rates for 120,000 small businesses and their reduction for 30,000 more.
Nevertheless, the example of the SNP over the past year shows that, under certain conditions, even parties wedded to capitalism can make some reforms. Claims about the impossibility of reform are in fact a smokescreen for conscious choices – neoliberal choices. For socialists in Scotland, these reforms give the opportunity to argue for further and deeper breaches in the neoliberal orthodoxy. Elsewhere they raise the question of why reformist strategies are only implemented to benefit ailing capitalist enterprises such as Metronet or Northern Rock. Of course, reforms alone cannot surmount the logic of capital. But it is capitalism that presents us with the limits of reform – as it always has done – not neoliberalism.
* * *
Notes
1. By “neoliberal strategies” I mean what Chris Harman has called “the negative features of many government measures in the present phase of the system – the anti-reforms that have replaced the positive reforms it was possible to extract from capital without a great deal of struggle from the late 1940s to the mid-1970s”. See Harman, 2008, p. 118.
2. Davidson, 2007, pp. 36–37.
3. SNP, Manifesto 2007.
4. Davidson 2007, pp. 37–38.
5. John Curtice, Common Ground, Holyrood 180, 3 December 2007.


References
Davidson, Neil, 2007, Socialists and Scottish Independence, International Socialism 2 : 114 (Spring 2007), www.isj.org.uk/index.php4?id=302.
Harman, Chris, 2008, Theorising Neoliberalism, International Socialism 2 : 117 (Winter 2008), www.isj.org.uk/index.php4?id=399.
 



THERE IS a Jewish word and concept called “chutzpah,” the classic example of which is the boy who kills his parents, and then asks to be let off by the judge because he’s an orphan. It’s a kind of boldness and cheek. I suppose another good example would be somebody from the northeast of Scotland turning up in New York and telling an audience of Americans what to think about the two great founding moments in their national history. So please bear with me as I try to say something sensible on the subject. I’m sure most of you know the events of the Civil War, and far better than I do, so I’m not going to attempt to tell you what happened at Gettysburg, for example.
What I am going to try and tell you about is three things. First, I’m going to talk about what a bourgeois revolution is, how we define one, and the different kinds there have been. Secondly, I want to say something quite briefly about the American Revolution, that is, the events that generally get called the American Revolution: the War of Independence, the Revolutionary War – the various terms that we use to discuss the events of 1776–83 – and then finally discuss the Civil War itself. The main thing I want to talk about in that connection is the nature of the South, because this seems to me to be the crucial question in thinking about the Civil War as a bourgeois revolution.
So, taking the issues in that order, the first thing I want to do is make a distinction between two kinds of revolution. In the Marxist tradition we tend to talk about political revolutions and social revolutions. I think this is an important distinction to make, and one that’s going to come up in the comparison between the American Revolution and the Civil War. Political revolutions are very common in history, from ancient Egypt onwards and probably before: essentially they are revolutions that change the regime. Now, that could be something as simple as a military coup, but it could involve thousands of people, and it could involve mass movements as well. The Iranian Revolution in a sense was a political revolution of that sort. Iran was a capitalist country beforehand and it was a capitalist country afterwards, but there is definitely a change in the personnel who run the state. And there are a number of examples like this – 1848 in France would be another of them. So political revolutions are quite common, but they’re not something that fundamentally changes the nature of society or the nature of the state.
Social revolutions on the other hand are very rare; so rare that we only really know of one successful example. The transition from slavery to feudalism is essentially a socio-economic process, not a revolutionary one in any sense, except perhaps metaphorically. And the socialist revolution, as we are unfortunately all too aware, hasn’t happened yet. So we’re really left with one example, which is the bourgeois revolution: the bourgeois revolutions taken as a whole, from the Dutch Revolt through to the Chinese Revolution, or however one wants to define the boundaries.
Social revolutions are more than just changes of regime; they are fundamental restructurings of the state. They open up changes in society, or they consolidate changes in society. Clearly the relationship between political and social revolution is quite complex. Sometimes something that looks on the surface like a merely political revolution can be seen as part of a social transformation if you take it in the context of other things. For example, the Revolution of 1688 in England in and of itself is not a particularly important or earth-shattering event, but if you see it in the context of what had happened earlier in 1640–1660 – the establishment of the Republic, the trial and execution of King Charles, the dismantling of the absolutist state, the abolition of feudal tenures and so on – then you can see it as the concluding episode of a longer term process. Reversing the order of chronological significance, it is possible to see the events of America in 1776 and then 1861 as having that same kind of connection.
You can also have something that potentially could be a social revolution but ends up merely being a political one because it fails. There are lots of attempted socialist revolutions – Germany in 1918 and Iran in 1978, for example – which could potentially have been socialist and social, but end up merely being political because the workers don’t win, and another section of the capitalist class takes over. So there is a complicated set of relationships between these types of revolution, but these are the basic boundaries.
Bourgeois revolutions, then, are social revolutions: what does that mean, how do we define it? The first question is, what kind of methodology do you use here? There’s one which Marx and Engels use when talking about capitalism, in which they take the most developed example of it to explain or talk about it. So Marx takes England as the most developed form of capitalism and uses that to explore the fundamental laws of capitalism. And in another way, Engels talks about France before 1789 as being the classic model of absolutism, as exemplifying its inner developmental tendencies.
Some people take the same approach to bourgeois revolutions and highlight the French Revolution as the model, the classic, most developed form. The trouble with this is that the French Revolution was an exceptional event. In fact, only the English Revolution, and possibly the Dutch Revolt (1566–1609), resemble it in terms of popular involvement, and in terms of the actual forms of the struggle. The French Revolution is very important, but it’s much more important as a comparison with other kinds of revolutions that involve mass mobilizations – the Russian Revolution, the Iranian Revolution, the current Egyptian Revolution – than with bourgeois revolutions in general. So that’s not a good way of approaching the problem.
We have to decide what is essential and what is inessential in the nature of bourgeois revolutions. Here I want to say, first of all, that there is a difficulty with the way in which people sometimes talk about bourgeois revolutions, because they hyphenate it to the word “democracy” – the bourgeois-democratic revolution. That term was initially used by Lenin and the Bolsheviks before the 1905 Revolution in Russia, and it was quite a sensible approach at the time because you were going to have a bourgeois revolution – and everyone except Trotsky thought that the Russian Revolution would be bourgeois – you would also try and establish democracy, because the workers need democracy to develop their organizations, to mature politically. Thus the Russian revolution would be bourgeois and it would also be democratic.
What subsequently happened under Stalinism was these two things got hyphenated together and read back into time, so you get the bourgeois-democratic revolution in England, the bourgeois-democratic revolution in France – though none of these revolutions, let alone those that happened later in Germany or Italy, were very democratic. There were democratic moments within them, but they certainly didn’t – with the partial exception of France – end up with democracy as an end goal. It took decades, even centuries in some cases, for democracy to be achieved.
The problem is, if you take democracy as a defining characteristic of bourgeois revolution then there are some countries, perhaps most countries, where it still hasn’t been completed even yet. When would the American Revolution be completed on that basis? Presumably in the 1960s when Black voting rights were established in the South. It’s an insane kind of category in that sense; there has to be something else.
Neither is it the absolute elimination of every single bit of feudalism, or every single aspect of feudal relations, that characterizes bourgeois revolution. In certain countries – Scotland after 1746, Prussia after 1806 – you have feudal social relations being used to begin accumulating capital and to begin establishing capitalist relations. That can’t be decisive either; there must be something certainly more fundamental here.
What we have to approach this is sometimes called “turning point” analysis in social sciences: it’s a kind of fancy way of talking about Hegel’s Owl of Minerva, which as we know flies only after dusk; you only know something’s happened after it’s over. When something has been established, you can see what the end point is. So what is the end point? And here I want to refer to an important essay Alex Callinicos wrote back in 1982, in a review of Michael Lowy’s book, The Politics of Combined and Uneven Development. The context of the discussion doesn’t particularly matter, but in it Alex said that surely a sensible definition of bourgeois revolution is neither of the things I’ve just talked about, but the establishment of an independent center of capital accumulation, or ICCA, if you want to use that as an acronym.
I think that’s a useful definition. It’s a minimal one, but I think it’s quite helpful because it focuses on what is actually the decisive outcome – establishing a center of capital accumulation, and consequently transforming the state so it is geared toward this end. That I think is the most useful way of approaching the question. It’s not a very heroic definition, it doesn’t necessarily involve running up the tricolor or executing kings, but nevertheless it seems to me to be the more fundamental one, and helps guide us towards what we’re thinking of here.
There are two other thinkers that I want to invoke at this point, concerning the question of not having to totally eliminate all feudal relations. One is Geoffrey de Ste Croix. In his great book, The Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World, he makes the important point that how you define the class nature of a society isn’t necessarily based on how many people are doing a particular type of labor; it is the number of people who are producing surplus value for the ruling class. So, ancient Rome was a slave society, not because most of the oppressed or exploited were slaves, but because slaves were the people who produced the wealth for the slave owners, the ruling class in that society. The significance for our discussion is that the surplus appropriated by the ruling class could be extracted from workers – in other words through capitalist exploitation – even though there were still peasants involved in quasi-feudal social relations or engaged in small commodity production, or whatever.
The second point is one made by Jairus Banaji, the Indian Marxist. He argues that if you’re defining what a society is, you have to identify what Marx called its laws of motion. Are they capitalist laws of motion, or feudal laws of motion? If it’s capitalist, you can have people who are slaves, you can have people who are peasants working in small commodity production, but if it’s dominated by capitalist laws of motion, that’s the decisive thing. This may appear to be quite abstract, but in fact it cuts right to the core of the problem of the American Revolution and of slavery, and of how we define the North and the South.
A few more fundamental points here: history – and this is one of the rare occasions where I do agree with Robert Brenner, Ellen Wood, and their followers – is not a succession of rising and falling classes. Clearly, slaves did not inherit and triumph and become the next ruling class after slavery was abolished. In terms of feudalism, peasants, by and large, did not become the class that succeeded the feudal lords – or at least only a small minority did so. It was the bourgeoisie that did, and although they were oppressed, they were also an exploiting class themselves. In other words, you have to make a distinction between conflicts within a society, such as those between peasants and lords, and conflicts between two different kinds of society, which can lead to one of them winning out in the end, such as the bourgeois revolution.
Bourgeois revolutions in general fall into roughly two waves. Those in the Netherlands, England, and France were very much driven from below by the petty bourgeoisie, in mass movements against absolutism. France is slightly different because it was less developed in capitalist terms than England or Holland, but nevertheless falls into the same kind of category. The problem is – and this is where the French Revolution is decisive, because of what happened after 1789, and particularly after 1792 – the huge upheavals, the slaughter of various members of the ruling classes, including capitalists themselves, instilled terror and fear into the bourgeoisies of Europe to the extent that they were not prepared to wage that kind of struggle ever again, or to unleash it in the same kind of way.
This can sometimes be exaggerated; some bourgeoisies were still capable of starting revolutions, and indeed did so at various points in the 1820s right up to, and famously, 1848–49, but never to the same extent. The second wave of bourgeois revolution was generally carried out from above. In Germany, the people who carried it out were led by Otto von Bismarck and a section of the Prussian feudal Junker class. Similarly, in Italy Count Cavour used the conventional military power of the Kingdom of Piedmont to push through unification. In Japan, leadership was provided by a section of the samurai under the slogan “revere the emperor, expel the barbarian.”
These are not forces advancing progressive democratic slogans. But they are a group of people who see that they have to develop capitalism – they have to construct a state that will allow capitalism to develop from the top down, often for reasons of geopolitical competition, in order to not be overtaken by Britain and France. But if you want armaments, you’ve got to develop arms factories, and then you have wage labor relationships, and so on. So you begin to develop capitalism, even though this may not have been your principal motivation.
There are two exceptions, which don’t fall exactly into either of these camps. One of them is Scotland and the other is America. In particular, I’m going to argue for the exceptionalism of the bourgeois revolution in the US, in terms of when it happens and the actual forms that it took. There are some respects in which the American Civil War is similar to events in Germany and Italy – it’s about unification or, more precisely, about reunification. In other respects it’s quite different in terms of who wages it, and who conducts the struggle.
I’ll make occasional references to Scotland, but focus on America. If you read the literature, then you find, even before the Civil War had actually begun, that people refer to the coming conflict as a Second American Revolution – the first one being the revolution of 1776.
So let’s start with the Revolutionary War of 1776–83. How do we assess these events? If it were a bourgeois revolution, you would expect that once the British were expelled and you colonials established your own nation-state, the road to capitalist development would have been opened up. To some extent, that happens in the North; but it also opens up the development of slavery to a greater extent than had happened before. Now there is nothing necessarily incompatible between capitalism and slavery, but I’ll argue that, in the particular conditions of the South, there is ultimately an incompatibility, at least by the time you get to the middle of the nineteenth century.
In the early bourgeois revolutions there are two things going on. There’s a struggle to establish a capitalist state and free up capitalist relations, but there’s also a struggle about “liberty” or – to use a less ambiguous term – democracy and, although this struggle overlaps with the first, it involves different issues and different social forces. Above all, these struggles for liberty or democracy are often directed as much against capitalists as against the old feudal regimes. There were, in other words, quite complicated things going on in the Netherlands, England, and France. In the American Revolution of 1776, you’ve clearly got the same kind of struggle from below for liberty and democracy, and socialist historians have quite rightly emphasized the role of workers, peasants, farmers, and minority groups.
But whether this makes the War of Independence the first act in the bourgeois revolution is another matter. After all, against whom was the war being waged? Britain, which, at this point, was the most capitalist nation on earth. Britain blocked certain things from happening in America, but did not do what it did in India, which was initially to absolutely smash any possible capitalist development and make the economy totally subordinate to that of the British. In other words, they’re fighting against the capitalist state, a constitutional monarchy; it’s not the same as fighting against an absolutist state, which is essentially trying to maintain feudal relations.
There were some attempts to claim that Britain was imposing feudal relations in the colonies. John Adams in particular wrote endless articles in Boston about how feudalism must be overthrown; but when you pin down what he meant by feudalism, it really involved a few hangovers that still existed to some extent in England and Scotland, and were transplanted to North America by colonists, and not some serious form of feudal surplus extraction.
So we come to the real turning point: the Civil War. I’m sure comrades have read some of Marx’s writings on this, which were first collected and published in the 1930s by the US Communist Party. What’s interesting about them is that if you also read what other people were saying, both in the South and in the North, it’s quite similar to what Marx says. Unusually for bourgeois revolutions, the actual nature of the conflict was well known to a lot of people on both sides from quite early on. In the writings of a southern writer like William Drayton in the 1830s, for example, he says that if the abolitionists get their way it will be like the French Revolution, like the Haitian revolution, the negroes will be unleashed on our southern gentle folk, and then it’ll be like England under Cromwell, they’ll all be running around slaughtering us. And once they give votes to Black people, the next thing they’ll want is to give votes to women, which Drayton clearly regards as insane. So from this deeply conservative perspective, it was quite clear what the historical parallels were.
Similarly, if you read the debates in Congress and the Senate, at least some of the pro-Union politicians make statements to the effect that they were fighting against a class of people defined by owning a particular kind of property seeking to transform economic power into political power – one Senator Morrill from Maine actually used these terms – and we have to destroy them before they destroy us. Now that’s quite similar to what Marx was writing. It was one of the very few times in his career that his writings were fairly well in tune with what bourgeois politicians were saying.
There is a very interesting book called The Slave Power (1862) by John Cairnes, an Irish follower of Ricardo. It is one of the most famous books written outside the US about slavery in the South. Early in the first chapter he wrote: All political events are determined by economic causes. This war is determined by the fact that there are two different economic systems. It’s not about tariffs, it’s not about state’s rights; it’s about slavery. And that was a commonly accepted position.
But if there was a systemic struggle going on between two different kinds of societies, what were they? Clearly the North was a capitalist region. It was industrializing, and capitalist relations were dominant. But what was the South? It was clearly not a feudal state or a feudal economy in the European sense, but it did have some affinities with them.
There have been five real slave societies: the Greek city states, the Roman Republic Empire down to about the second, maybe third century A.D., and then the slave South, Cuba, and Brazil. Slavery has existed in all sorts of other places, but these are the only societies that have been built around slavery as an absolutely fundamental element of the economy. Cuba and Brazil had bigger slave populations than the South, at around 40 percent; slaves were maybe 34–35 percent of the population in the South. But nevertheless, the South is far more focused on slavery than Brazil or Cuba were.
Why does slavery exist? In the modern period it’s essentially about the problem of labor for ruling classes – of ensuring a labor supply in situations where it would otherwise be scarce. It’s the problem that, for example, confronted the Prussian Junkers and other Eastern European landowners during the sixteenth century when they re-enserfed peasants in order to keep people tied to the land. So slavery is only one solution to this problem: there are other forms of unfree labor, but all solutions attempt to solve the problem of scarce labor in very difficult conditions where people would not work without being forced, without some sort of compulsion to make them do it.
The South was far more integrated into the world economy than, say, the Eastern European countries of the sixteenth and seventeenth century were. For one thing, the South bought machinery from Europe. Moreover, as I said before, there’s not an essential contradiction between slavery and capitalism; slavery can coexist within capitalism.
What else would make the South a different kind of society then? One argument, made by Banaji and, in a slightly different way, by Eugene Genovese, is that the South was basically stuck in the merchant capitalist phase of capitalist development, involving simple reproduction and the production of absolute surplus value through forcing the slaves to work longer and harder. I think that’s true, but I don’t think it’s absolutely decisive. It seems to me that there’s a more important point. If slavery had been dispersed across the whole of America, then its existence necessarily would have posed a problem for capitalist development; it could have been done away with gradually in the same way that other forms of unfree labor were done away with in Europe and other parts of the world. But it couldn’t, because the entire society in the South was based on slavery. And after 1861 a state was established based on slavery – the Confederate States of America. Now that’s quite different, and the reason is because slavery was absolutely racialized.
In Cuba, former slaves who had been given manumission could themselves own slaves. In Brazil, Black people were members of the militia – a situation unthinkable in the southern states of America. So elsewhere in the Americas slavery is not completely racialized. Furthermore, in these other countries, even before the final abolition of slavery in the 1880s, you begin to get shifts to other forms of unfree labor, transitions from slavery to unfree labor, often involving Chinese indentured laborers, as well as the Black population who had formerly been slaves.
None of this happens in the South. This has to do, to some extent, with class relations among the white population. The big slave owners were a very small minority; below them were a larger class of yeoman farmers who also owned slaves, but in quite small numbers. Nevertheless these two groups were bonded together by the fact that they were slave owners. Below them were the mass of poor whites, the mass of the farmers who were not slave owners and didn’t really think they were going to become slave owners.
Potentially, these poor whites could have united with a Black population that was no longer enslaved. There was therefore a threat hanging over the southern ruling classes of this kind of unity emerging between the poorest members of society. The way to avoid that was through an absolutely racialized slavery, to make sure that the whites have something in common with each other that’s different than the way in which the Blacks are treated, and they can never begin to change that.
The Prussian Junkers could begin to do away with the kinds of unfree labor that existed east of the Elbe because they knew there wasn’t an absolute distinction between the peasants and everybody else. That wasn’t true in the South. And having in a sense taken that decision, there was a problem, because the South was committed to a kind of economy which was not a capitalist economy based on intensive expansion and development of capital. They were pushed for a number of reasons into the territorial expansion that I mentioned earlier.
The first was that’s the only way that they were going to increase profits. But there’s another reason, and that was cotton, the absolutely dominant crop in the South. Individually slave owners wanted to increase cotton production to increase their income; but collectively they had an interest in restricting production, otherwise the price would fall and their profits will decrease. So they had to diversify, to produce crops other than cotton and the only way they devised of doing that was by taking territory outside of the South itself, first in Mexico and Nicaragua, but above all in Latin America and in the Caribbean, attempting to incorporate them into territory controlled by the southern states. And of course, when these plans were first formulated, the slave owners assumed they were going to dominate the US as a whole – a plausible assumption at least until the formation of the Republican Party in the 1850s.
The slave owners were pushed into an expansionist strategy by the class structure of southern society, in which their position could only be maintained by pushing out both into the North American West, and into other national territories in Latin America. And again if you read the statements by the slave owners, and supporters of slavery, like the southern Congressman Albert Gallatin Brown, they defended the idea of taking other people’s land, because, after all, they had already taken the land of the Choctaws and the Sioux, so what moral difference was there in taking it from the Mexicans or the Nicaraguans? And you’ve got to admit there’s a kind of logic to that; the southern ruling class saw themselves as continuing the conquering if not actually exterminatory drive that conquered North America in the first place. So, it’s the South that’s the expansionist power, that’s pushing, that’s challenging. The politicians and industrialists in the North were prepared to compromise – indeed they were prepared to compromise right into the middle of the Civil War itself. But the South was not prepared to compromise. This is the foundation of the Civil War.
If you think about somewhere like Jamaica, there were slaves, but it was not a slave society – slavery was peripheral. The British Empire could do away with slavery in Jamaica partly because of uncertainties about how profitable it was, and partly because the slaves kept rebelling, especially in 1831. Consequently it wasn’t worth the effort maintaining slavery in that colony. But it didn’t matter, because the world wasn’t going to end for the British capitalist class if they abandoned slavery in Jamaica. But abandoning slavery in the South would have been the end for the southern ruling class, because the South was the metropolitan power. Slavery wasn’t in a peripheral area; it was the center of the system that was being challenged.
So how do we define the South? To start with we need to return to the position I mentioned earlier, which sees the South as preserving a very early stage of transition to capitalism internally, in which forms of merchant capital and slavery predominated – things that you characteristically associate with the very early stages of capitalist development. The South was frozen, if you will, in a stage of arrested development, because of the kind of class relations I’ve described, but then – and this is the crucial thing – these relations are then embodied in a separate territorially defined state.
This is not something that happens anywhere else, and the South is therefore not entirely comparable to other societies. Certainly, in the ideology of the South they looked to feudal relations in a highly romanticized sort of way, particularly in the works of Sir Walter Scott. And if you read the letters of Confederate soldiers, these young farmers, you find them writing of how they’ve read Sir Walter Scott and feel enthused about defending their society in the same way as the Highlanders defended theirs. The trouble is, although Sir Walter Scott was a ferocious conservative, he also was an intellectual who embodied the traditions of social theory developed by the Scottish Enlightenment, of which he is in some senses the last significant figure. If you read his novels, it quickly becomes clear that he was not romanticizing the Highlands – on the contrary, he’s showing that, no matter how admirable, how heroic Highland society might have been, it was inevitably going to be destroyed by the advance of capitalism. He even wrote quite specifically about the destruction of feudalism in Redgauntlet, a novel, not coincidentally, much admired by Marx.
When you read these letters by Confederate soldiers you recognize a kind of tragic misunderstanding of Scott, which helped lead them to their destruction. Mark Twain argued in Life on the Mississippi that Scott was responsible for the American Civil War – a slight exaggeration on his part, I think; but it is true that southerners definitely saw affinities between the Confederacy and the pre-capitalist society whose death-agony he described.
Once the Civil War began we see an interesting example of dual power, the kind of conflict that Lenin and Trotsky began to theorize in 1917, in response to the emergence of the Soviets as an alternative form of government to the Russian state apparatus. Trotsky in his History of the Russian Revolution discovered earlier examples in the history of the English and French revolutions, where he wrote about dual power being geographically situated in different areas in both of those struggles and wars. And in a sense that’s obviously what you’ve got in America too; a situation of dual power enshrined in two different state powers facing each other across the social and territorial divide between North and South.
The remaining question I want to briefly address is why the northern ruling class was ultimately prepared to wage a revolutionary war against the South, particularly at the point when they enlisted former slaves into regiments to fight. The answer is twofold.
One is because they did not fear the working class in the same way as, say, the German revolutionaries of 1848. Mike Davis and, in a slightly different way Charlie Post, both argue that this was because of the deep racial divisions within the northern working class. That’s certainly true and an important point, but I don’t think it’s the only factor. It is certainly the case that the American working class in the mid-nineteenth century was not in a position to challenge for power. It was not in a situation of permanent revolution; it was neither developed nor unified enough, partly because of the racial divisions within it, as demonstrated for example by the New York draft riots in 1863. So the northern ruling class could act with a certain amount of impunity, and they were the only bourgeois revolutionary force at the time able to do so. The only other class that had been in a similar situation was the alliance that established capitalism in Scotland after 1746 – the alliance of former feudal lords turned capitalist landlords, Enlightenment intellectuals, and improving tenants. They too did not have to worry about the working class, but for a different reason: the working class didn’t exist in Scotland at that point, and so they were free to recreate the world in the way they wanted to. And for different reasons, that was true for the ruling class in the North: the working class was absent as a serious existential threat. There were strikes, of course, but that’s not the same thing.
The second reason has to do with territoriality. Because the northern ruling class was in charge of a state, they could use their military power to crush the southern insurgency without involving mass upheavals and insurgencies from below. This is why it was actual industrial capitalists who to a very large extent provided leadership – certainly in Philadelphia and New York – who mobilized, who got people recruited, who proselytized for Lincoln, and who ultimately insisted in the complete smashing of the southern state. This type of role is very rare in history. Edward Thompson used to joke about how bankers and industrialists are not famous for personally rushing to the barricades with bandoliers over their shoulders and neither were these people; but they were in favor of paying for other people to wage war on the South in a fairly decisive way, until the southern state was broken.
These two things: the lack of fear of the working class and the spatial element, the territorial element, where the power of an already existing state could be used against the enemy, allowed the northern bourgeoisie to play a quite exceptionally revolutionary role, to openly talk about different classes being opposed to each other on the basis of different forms of property and socioeconomic organization in a way that you don’t ever get again. The honesty of what went on here vanished in bourgeois discussions afterwards.
I think it’s important to say, therefore, that we probably should date the period of revolution all the way up to the end of Reconstruction. I don’t think it finishes in 1965. The bourgeois dating pantheon prevents us from seeing that the revolution, as opposed to the Civil War as such, extends until the failure of Reconstruction. Often people talk about the revolution as being unfinished, about it being a betrayal of the Black population by the Republicans. I don’t think these terms are appropriate. The northern ruling class got what it wanted out of the war, which was the destruction of southern expansionism, the destruction of an alternative type of economy, and the transformation of the West on a capitalist rather than slave basis. Why then would they care what happened to the Black population? Some of them did, some of the Radical Republicans were obviously concerned politically with establishing freedom for Blacks; but most of them weren’t. They’d got what they wanted, and a lot of them were racists anyway. It was a necessity for them to do certain things, but once they’d achieved it, why were they bothered? They weren’t. It is not unusual in bourgeois revolutions for the process to stop, if you like, at the point before complete liberation is achieved even in formal bourgeois terms. In that sense the Civil War and Reconstruction were completely in line with what previously happened in England and Scotland and France, and was then happening in Italy and Germany and Japan.
That leaves us with two conclusions. One of them reflects a change of mind on my part. In Discovering the Scottish Revolution I wrote that even if Gettysburg had gone the other way and the South had won, it probably wouldn’t have mattered in the long run, because the North would have risen again or the South would ultimately have adopted capitalist relations of production. And so unlike, for example, the Battle of Culloden in 1746, which resulted in the final and total defeat of the Scottish feudal classes, Gettysburg was less decisive. The late Chris Harman held a similar position to this.
Now I think that was probably a rather overly sanguine view of events. As James McPherson and John Ashworth have pointed out, most of the world in 1865 was still dominated by unfree labor of one sort or another; totally free labor capitalist relations were so rare outside of Western Europe and the North of America. In parts of Latin America and in Eastern Europe, for example, there were still various forms of debt peonage.
There are very good reasons for avoiding speculative history, mostly because most people who have perpetrated it are very right wing. Nevertheless, we have to consider that if the South had won and expanded into Latin America and into the West, you would have had a real shift in the balance of class forces on a global level, which might have made the necessity for capitalist transformation in Europe less compelling, because ruling classes there would have seen the domination in the American continent of this more backward form of economic development.
Even with the failure of Reconstruction, the outcome of the Civil War was more decisive than perhaps Marxists have been willing to concede: a Southern victory would not simply have delayed inevitable developments.
The second conclusion returns us to the issue of democracy and all other questions left unresolved in the period 1861–1877, considered as a bourgeois revolution. There is no reason why this bourgeois revolution should have resolved them: after all, neither did any other bourgeois revolution. The establishment of substantive democracy, the end of racism, and other forms of oppression – all these things are really the objectives of the real “second” American Revolution, which of course can only be the socialist revolution.
 



Foreword
ERIC HOBSBAWM died on October 1, 2012, a little over a week after the review article of How to Change the World which follows first appeared in the Mumbai Economic and Political Weekly. It was obvious – as I rather tactlessly suggested in the first paragraph – that this book was likely to be his last (another volume of essays is in fact scheduled to appear in 2013). Some of his right-wing critics, like Michael Burleigh, argue in their obituaries of Hobsbawm that his historical work must be rejected because of his support for the USSR and the other Stalinist states. [1*] Others, like Niall Ferguson, are aware that books such as The Age of Empire cannot simply be dismissed on a priori political grounds, but nevertheless treat his work as quite unrelated to his Marxist theory of history: from this perspective Hobsbawm may have held dangerous and objectionable views, but as a professional historian he did not, at least until his final works, allow these to seriously influence his analysis. [2*]
Hobsbawm himself always argued that his historiography was inseparable from his Marxism and, indeed, only made possible by it. I argue below that he was essentially right in this judgment. For those of us on the anti-Stalinist left, Hobsbawm’s orthodox communism meant that his political judgements – his extraordinarily narrow conception of the working class, for example, or his belief that nationalism could be harnessed for progressive ends – had to be treated with deep suspicion; but much of his historical writing has to be afforded a great deal more respect. Now that his life is over and his body of work complete, it is only fair to Hobsbawm that his critical admirers take time to assess his output as a whole, free from the demands of instant assessment required by obituaries. I am confident, however, that relatively little of his serious historical output is irredeemably tainted by the political tradition to which he belonged; most of is a lasting contribution, not only to the culture of the Left, but far beyond it. And can those critics of the Right who endlessly demanded that he recant the views which informed his entire life and work point to any historians with their beliefs who entered the public consciousness to anything like the same degree?



 


Neil Davidson
October 31, 2012



* * *
Notes
1*. Michael Burleigh, Eric Hobsbawm: a Believer in the Red Utopia to the Very End.
2*. Niall Ferguson, A Truly Great Historian.
* * * * *
How to Change the World: Tales of Marx and Marxism
Eric Hobsbawm
Yale University Press, 2012, 480 pages, $22.00
ERIC HOBSBAWM is now the only survivor of an entire generation of British Marxist historians born in the second and third decades of the 20th century. The roll-call of those who have predeceased him gives some indication of the extraordinary range of talent involved: George Rudé and Edward Thompson (both died in 1993), Geoffrey de Ste Croix (2000), Rodney Hilton (2002), Christopher Hill (2003), Brian Manning (2004), Victor Kiernan and John Saville (both 2009). [1] Yet, remarkably for someone born in the same year as the Russian Revolution, Hobsbawm has only recently given up public speaking and he is still regularly sought out by the British media for commentary on current affairs, most recently on the Arab Spring. [2] Nevertheless, it is likely that his latest collection, boldly entitled How to Change the World, will be his last. Appropriately enough it deals with the subject of Marxism itself and provides us with the opportunity to assess his own relationship to it, which has been far from straightforward.
For Hobsbawm, as for Hill, Hilton, Kiernan, Saville, and Thompson, the roles of Communist Party militant and Marxist intellectual were originally inseparable. Unlike these contemporaries, they remained so: he retained his membership of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) almost until the organization dissolved itself following the collapse of the Stalinist regimes in 1989–91. Hobsbawm has written that his Marxism “was, and to some extent still remains, that acquired from the only texts then easily available outside university libraries, the systematically distributed works and selections of ‘the classics’ published (and translated in heavily subsidized local editions) under the auspices of Marx-Engels Institute in Moscow.” [3]
Despite this declaration, Hobsbawm’s Marxism, at least as expressed in his historical works, has never been con- fined by the mechanical formulae of Stalinist orthodoxy. This may explain why – as he has noted with evident pique more than once – his historical works were not translated into Russian nor, Hungarian and Slovenian apart, into the majority of the other Eastern European languages until after the fall of the Berlin Wall. [4] Hobsbawm has argued that for several reasons the general approach of the Historians’ Group of the CPGB was not as marked by “dogmatism” as it might have been. Outside of contemporary political issues which potentially conflicted with the views of the party leadership there were genuine attempts to explore historical issues. In the case of British history there was in any case no particular line and Group members specifically attempted to connect their work as Marxists with analysis of earlier radical traditions. [5] Nevertheless, he candidly acknowledged the personal constraints imposed on his own work:
I myself became essentially a nineteenth century historian, because I soon discovered – actually in the course of an aborted project of the CP Historians’ Group to write a history of the British labour movement – that, given the strong official Party and Soviet views about the twentieth century, one could not write about anything later than 1917 without the likelihood of being denounced as a political heretic. I was ready to write about the century in a political or public capacity, but not as a professional historian. My history finished at Sarajevo in June 1914. [6]
 
Treating capitalism as a totality
Yet in two of his most substantial late works, Age of Extremes (1994) and now this new collection, Hobsbawm has become precisely what he once denied himself from being – a historian of the twentieth century. But as the evasions and refusals of these texts reveal, there remain limits to Hobsbawm’s capacity to deal with certain historical periods and problems which were not simply the result of bureaucratic fiat, but his own personal political beliefs.
Before turning to these issues it may be worth reminding ourselves of the methodological strengths of Hobsbawm’s Marxism, for it is one of the paradoxes of his career that, the legacy of Stalinism notwithstanding, Hobsbawm has remained more aligned with the classical Marxist tradition than comparably famous historians like Hill and Thompson who shared his formative communist background. It is sometimes argued that his classicism is primarily demonstrated by his adherence to the base-superstructure metaphor. [7] It would be more accurate to say that Hobsbawm accepts that the relationship between the social organization of production and other aspects of human life which is encapsulated in the metaphor is the necessary starting point for understanding history; he has never regarded it as a substitute for doing so. [8]
What distinguishes Hobsbawm as a Marxist historian is his insistence – usually implicit, since he rarely engages in theoretical muscle-flexing in his substantive works – that capitalism forms a totality which is ever present no matter how microscopic the aspect which the historian may subject to scrutiny.
This insistence has manifested itself in his work in two particularly important ways. One is that since capitalism emerged as a system, which for Hobsbawm was signalled by the crisis of the seventeenth century, it has been international in character. [9] The other is that lives of the exploited and oppressed cannot be understood in isolation from those of the people who are exploiting and oppressing them. This may seem obvious, but even though Hobsbawm is rightly regarded with Rudé as one of the founders of “history from below” his work has never involved the kind of social history which is concerned simply with exploring the texture of everyday experience. Endless repetition of Thompson’s expressed desire to “rescue the poor stockinger, the Luddite cropper, the ‘obsolete’ handloom weaver, the ‘utopian’ artisan, and even the deluded follower of Joanna Southcott from the enormous condescension of history” has obscured the fact that, in hands other than those of Thompson or similarly committed writers, there is nothing specifically Marxist or even necessarily left-wing about this approach. [10] Indeed, it can often simply involve a kind of microscopic antiquarianism about what Thomas Gray memorably called “the short and simple annals of the poor.” [11] Hobsbawm has never been interested in this kind of history from below, but has focused instead on actual movements – no matter how apparently eccentric or removed from the mainstream of labour history – such as the millenarian sects and social bandits he investigated in the 1950s and 1960s. [12] And he never regarded these movements in isolation, but in relation to the social forces to which they were opposed: for Hobsbawm totality necessarily involves history from above, as much as from below, even if it is the subjects of the latter which claim our retrospective sympathy or solidarity.
We turn to How to Change the World then to find some insight into the Marxism which has inspired his achievements as a historian. The book is highly uneven in terms of both style and quality, as is likely to be the case with any collection spanning fifty-three years (the earliest piece dates from 1957, the latest from 2010) and drawn from quite disparate sources. The sixteen chapters break down as follows: six contributions to the Italian book series Storia del Marxismo – only three of which have previously appeared in English – and a previously unpublished further chapter (Marxism in Recession, 1983–2000) apparently conceived as a coda to these; three introductions to works by Marx and/or Engels; five selections from journals or edited collections; and one lecture. But contrary to the book’s subtitle, these are very much tales of Marx (and Engels) rather than of Marxism. The second part of the book, devoted to the latter subject, deals with it in very general terms indeed and, as Hobsbawm himself notes: “The only post-Marx/ Engels Marxist specifically discussed in this book is Antonio Gramsci”. [13] The problems with the second half of the book, at least in the sections dealing with the period after 1914, are not however simply their lack of specificity, nor are they a result of the unevenness typical of essay collections, but of the conflict between Hobsbawm’s historical materialism and his Stalinism.
 
Do not segment Marx
The first part of How to Change the World, on Marx and Engels is by far the stronger. The greatest and longest essay reproduced here as Chapter 7, and which alone would justify the appearance of this collection, is Hobsbawm’s introduction to extracts from the Grundrisse (Pre-capitalist Economic Formations) first published in 1964–65. Here, he not only delineates the trajectory of Marxist theory, but also makes his own contribution to it. The notoriously elliptical form of Marx’s notebooks has given rise to multiple and often mutually inconsistent interpretations; but Hobsbawm’s, perhaps the earliest to appear in English, remains one of the most convincing. Hobsbawm writes of “Marx’s refusal to separate the different academic disciplines”, noting that:
... such mechanical divisions are misleading, and entirely contrary to Marx’s method. It was the bourgeois academic economists who attempted to draw a sharp line between static and dynamic analysis, hoping to transform the one into the other by injecting some ‘dynamising’ element into the static system, just as it is the academic economists who still work out a neat model of ‘economic growth’, preferably expressible in equations, and relegate all that does not fit into the province of the ‘sociologists’. The academic sociologists make similar distinctions on a rather lower level of scientific interest, the historians on an even humbler one. But this is not Marx’s way. The social relations of production (i.e., social organisation in its broadest sense) and the material forces of production, to which they correspond, cannot be divorced.
The warning that “Marx must not be divided up into segments according to the academic specializations of our time” is well made. [14] The fact that it is regularly ignored by Marxist intellectuals is at least partly due to the fact that, as Hobsbawm notes in another essay reproduced here, since the Second World War they – or perhaps I should say, we – have operated largely in an academic context where identification with a specific discipline is virtually a condition of employment, ritual genuflections towards multi- or interdisciplinarity notwithstanding. [15]
More substantively, Hobsbawm in the same chapter deals sensibly with the claim that Marx believed in a universal succession of more advanced societies, each based on a more complex mode of production, as supposedly outlined in the 1857 Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. In fact, as Hobsbawm points out:
The statement that the Asiatic, ancient, feudal and bourgeois formations are ‘progressive’ does not ... imply any simple unilinear view of history, nor a simple view that all history is progress. It merely states that each of these systems is in crucial respects further removed from the primitive state of man. [16]
Seen in this way, the only universal transition is from primitive communism to the various forms of pre-capitalist class society:
Feudalism appears to be an alternative evolution out of primitive communism, under conditions in which no cities develop, because the density of population over a large region is too low. [17]
But feudalism was the only mode of production whose own internal contradictions, as opposed to external pressures, has led to the emergence of capitalism. That there would be a further universal transition, namely, from capitalism to socialism, would have been axiomatic for Hobsbawm in the mid–1960s; as we shall see, this is no longer the case. Hobsbawm’s admiration for the Grundrisse does not lead him to claim that Marxism remained an incomplete project until the notebooks were written, or even later. In a chapter originally published as an introduction to the Manifesto of the Communist Party he points out that, in economic terms at least, “Marx wrote the Manifesto less as a Marxian economist than as a communist Ricardian”. But, contrary to the position upheld in different ways by both Althusserians and Political Marxists, he argues that in most other respects historical materialism was essentially established as an explanation for transformative social change by 1848:
Unlike Marxian economics, the ‘materialist conception of history’ which underlay this analysis had already found its mature formulation in the middle 1840s. It remained substantially unchanged in later years. In this respect the Manifesto already was a defining document of Marxism. It embodied the historical vision, though its general outline remained to be filled in by fuller analysis. [18]
 
On Gramsci
The study devoted to Gramsci, also has many thought-provoking passages. As with Marx, Hobsbawm restores to sanity discussions which had quite unnecessarily confused. In particular, his assessment that Gramsci did not propose a “war of position” for societies in the West as opposed to a “war of manoeuvre” in the East seems to me to be soundly based:
... he did not in fact commit himself in principle to any particular outcome of the lengthy ‘war of position’ which he predicted and recommended. It might lead directly into a transition to socialism, or into another phase of the war of manoeuvre and attack, or to some other strategic phase. What would happen must depend on the changes in the concrete situation ... In short, the ‘war of position’ had to be systematically thought through as a fighting strategy rather than simply as something for revolutionaries to do when there was no prospect of building barricades. [19]
Hobsbawm treats Gramsci as someone whose thought can still inform the strategic decisions which socialists are required to make today; the founders of historical materialism much less so. In the chapters on Marx and Engels, he (Hobsbawm) is rightly concerned to historicise his subjects and to refuse any sense that we can treat them as contemporaries from whom “lessons” can be learned about appropriate political action. In this connection Hobsbawm claims, correctly in my view, that it is “virtually impossible to derive from the classic writings anything like a manual of strategic and tactical instructions, dangerous even to use them as a set of precedents, though they have nevertheless so been used. What could be learned from Marx was his method of facing the tasks of analysis and action rather than ready-made lessons to be derived from classic texts”. [20] Yet at several points he takes this position so far that the reader might doubt whether Marx and Engels had any fixed or definitive political views at all, other than supporting the formation of working class parties committed to socialism. Indeed, Hobsbawm explicitly argues against any attempts to establish a Marxist tradition involving policies as opposed to methods:
It is ... vain to seek in Marx for the anticipation of such later controversies as those between ‘reformists’ and ‘revolutionaries’, or to read his writings in the light of the subsequent debates between right and left in the Marxist movement ... The issue for Marx was not whether labour parties were reformist or revolutionary, or even what these terms implied. He recognised no conflict in principle between the everyday struggle of the workers for the improvement of their conditions under capitalism and the formation of a political consciousness which envisaged the replacement of capitalist by socialist society, or the actions which led to this end ... It is an anachronism to identify Marx with either a ‘right’ or a ‘left’, ‘moderate’ or ‘radical wing of the international or any other labour movement. Hence the irrelevance as well as the absurdity of arguments about whether Marx at any point ceased to be a revolutionary and became a gradualist. [21]
 
Heirs to Marx
In another chapter Hobsbawm effectively turns this position on its head (although the end result is the same) by refusing to distinguish between any of Marx’s successors on the grounds that all can claim an equally legitimate lineage:
... we should ... reject the idea that there is a sharp difference between a ‘correct’ and an ‘incorrect’ Marxism. His mode of enquiry could produce different results and political perspectives. Indeed it did so with Marx himself, who envisaged a possible peaceful transition to power in Britain and the Netherlands, and the possible evolution of the Russian village community into socialism. Kautsky and even Bernstein were heirs to Marx as much (or, if you like, as little) as Plekhanov or Lenin. [22]
This is intended to be provocative, but it is in one major respect simply wrong. Earlier I agreed with Hobsbawm that in most respects other than the economic (the dual nature of the commodity, the distinction between labor and labour power) historical materialism was a finished doctrine by 1847–48. There is however one very important exception to this: the nature of the state and specifically that of the capitalist state. In 1848, Marx and Engels argued for the proletariat to seize control of the existing state and “wrest, by degrees, all capital from the bourgeoisie ... centralize all production in the hands of the state, i.e., of the proletariat organized as a ruling class” and only in the future (“in the course of development”) after a period in which, having “swept away the conditions for the existence of class antagonisms and of classes generally”, will we have “an association, in which the free development of each is the condition of the free development of all”. [23]
Their position changed again after the experience of the revolutions of 1848–49; but as Hal Draper writes of Class Struggles in France, 1848–1850, where this change is first registered: “This summary look into the future includes the abolition of classes but does not specifically mention elimination of the state”. [24] The change in attitude to the state indicated by the Paris Commune – “the political form at last discovered under which to work out the economical emancipation of labour” – is decisive here. [25] As Engels was later to confirm: “One thing was proved by the Commune, viz., that ‘the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machinery, and wield it for its own purposes’.” [26]
Yet Hobsbawm passes over the Paris Commune in a handful of pages without giving any sense of how fundamental the experience was in reshaping Marx’ and Engels’s attitude to the state. [27] Insofar as Marx did believe that a peaceful transition was possible in countries like Britain and the Netherlands, it reflected a failure to consistently apply his own theoretical discovery concerning the nature of the capitalist state, not a retreat from it. In any case, over one hundred years of experience in Britain, the Netherlands, and indeed everywhere else has surely demonstrated the impossibility of peaceful transitions to power. The point is that the attitude towards the state adopted by post-Marx Marxists is broadly indicative of their fidelity to his views in other respects. In this crucial respect Lenin is an heir to Marx in a way that Bernstein and the later Kautsky and Plekhanov are not. [28]
 
Post-revolutionary society
One suspects that Hobsbawm’s vagueness over the nature of post-revolutionary forms of working-class rule (“whatever its precise form”) is informed by the vast chasm between the character of the Paris Commune and the Russian workers’ councils of 1905 and 1917 on the one hand, and the Stalinist states on the other. He obliquely alludes to the latter in a passing reference to the danger of post-revolutionary state entrenchment, but down to the early 1980s at any rate still seems to have regarded them as genuine socialist institutions. [29] It is in this context that we can see the theoretical damage which Stalinism has inflicted on his work as a historian of the twentieth century. I noted earlier that Hobsbawm treats capitalism as a totality. In relation to what he takes to be socialism, however, he abandons this position. At the end of his reflections on Gramsci, Hobsbawm lamented the way in which the Stalinist states had concentrated on economic transformation at the expense of developing “political and legal institutions, and processes”:
Quite apart from the other disadvantages of this neglect of politics, how can we expect to transform human life, to create socialist society (as opposed to a socially owned and managed economy), when the mass of the people are excluded from the political process, and may even be allowed to drift into depoliticisation and apathy about public matters? [30]
How indeed? Seven years later, the “serious weaknesses” identified by Hobsbawm saw the mass of the people either participate in revolutions against the states from which they had been excluded or at least refuse to defend them. The echoes of Althusser are very strong here, particularly his claims that “a revolution in the structure does not ipso facto modify the existing superstructures and particularly the ideologies at one blow (as it would if the economic was the sole determinant factor), for they have sufficient of their own consistency to survive beyond their immediate life context, even to recreate, to ‘secrete’ substitute conditions of existence temporarily”. [31] I am not accusing Hobsbawm of sympathy for Althusser, a thinker for whom he has always displayed a healthy scepticism. [32] The point is rather that anyone who wishes to argue that the Stalinist states were based on a socialist economic base while simultaneously criticizing their lack of democracy is effectively forced to retreat into a non-Marxist pluralism in which any sense of mediated totality has been abandoned. Gramsci made the point in general terms in his prison notebooks:
Between the economic structure and the state with its legislation and its coercion stands civil society, and it is this latter which has to be radically transformed, in concrete terms and not just as it appears in statutes and learned books. The state is the instrument for bringing civil society into line with the economic structure, but the state has to ‘want’ to do that, i.e., the representatives of the change that has already come about have to be in control of the state. [33]
By the late 1920s in the case of Russia and from the very beginning in the case of the other Stalinist regimes, the “representatives of the change that has come about” had brought civil society in line with the economic structure: lack of democracy was not an aberration or a residue, it was the necessary condition for accumulation and industrialization to take place under conditions of bureaucratic state capitalism. There have been times when Hobsbawm has come close to accepting this. Interviewed in the immediate aftermath of the fall of the Berlin Wall, he said of the Soviet Union that it “obviously wasn’t a workers’ state ... nobody in the Soviet Union ever believed it was a workers’ state, and the workers knew it wasn’t a workers’ state”. [34] In one of the most recent essays reproduced here he notes of state planning and ownership that: “There is nothing exclusively socialist about this”. [35] Yet this acknowledgement has not affected the sense of loss which Hobsbawm has expressed on several occasions for the collapse of the self-same non-worker’s state. How to explain this disjunction?
 
Assessment of the popular front
The answer, I think, lies not in what Hobsbawm thinks the Soviet Union was, but rather in what he believes that it did, above all to contribute to the victory over fascism. “It is an elementary observation of Marxism that thinkers do not invent their ideas in the abstract”, he writes in one of the essays reproduced here, “but can only be understood in the historical and political context of their times”. [36] This comment, made of Gramsci, is equally applicable to its author. Hobsbawm’s own historical and political context was the Popular Front against Fascism and War – broadly, 1935–39, then 1941–45 – and adherence to the politics of the Popular Front has been a constant in his politics ever since. [37] It is difficult for those born afterwards to fully appreciate, for many of those becoming socialists at that time, just how deeply the Stalinist tactics of the period became a touchstone for politics as such, almost a form of Gramscian “common sense”. For this reason, Hobsbawm has always had a problem in dealing with the Popular Front as a historian. [38] What we get instead is a recycling of Stalinist propaganda, mercifully minus the accusation that contemporary dissenters were actual fascist agents. Here, this approach is represented in a truly dreadful chapter, In the Era of Anti-fascism, 1929–1945, central to which is the Spanish Civil War:
What sacrifices ought revolutionaries to make in the necessary cause of rolling fascism back? Was it not conceivable that victory over fascism could be won – but at the cost of postponing the revolution, or even reinforcing non-fascist capitalism? ... the radical element took the utopian road of denying any contradiction between anti-fascism and immediate proletarian revolution. Even those who did not reject the broad anti-fascist front altogether as an unnecessary betrayal of revolution (as Trotsky did, misled by his hostility to the Stalinist Comintern which was the main advocate of such a front), called for its conversion into insurrection at any suitable moment ... at the time these utopian arguments carried little weight. They may even account for the isolation and lack of influence of those who propounded them, such as the Trotskyite and other dissident Marxist groups. People who fought with their backs to the wall against the encroaching forces of fascism gave priority to the immediate struggle. If it was lost then the revolution of tomorrow – even,in Spain, the revolution of today – had no chance.
“What alternative to the communist policy of fighting the Spanish Civil War was there? Then as now the answer must be: none.” [39] In fact, given that communist policy led to total defeat in the Spanish Civil War, the only way that Hobsbawm can ascribe any success to the popular front is to stretch the category to include the second world war after the entry of the Soviet Union and the establishment of the People’s Democracies in eastern Europe and the Balkans after 1943. [40] Hobsbawm’s discussion of Spain shows all too clearly the destructive influence of his politics on his historiography. First, it was not the case in Spain that the war was taking place and well-meaning but mistaken ultra-lefts were arguing for a policy of revolution which would have inadvertently obstructed or sabotaged the Republican military effort – the revolution had already begun, with the popular seizure of land and factories, collectivization from below, and so on; the great historic crime of the Spanish communists and their Russian advisers was to reverse it, often though violent repression. Those who argued that the war could only be won by deepening the revolution did at any rate have one fairly important historical example on their side, that of Russia itself:
We must recall once again that if the October Revolution was able to triumph in a war of three years duration over countless enemies, including the expeditionary forces of the mightiest imperialist powers, it was only because this victory was assured above all by the fact that during the war the peasants had gained possession of the land while the workers held the mills and factories. [41]
This was how Trotsky put it, after Franco’s victory in 1939; but there is no need to rely on Trotsky (who Hobsbawm frequently criticizes, but never quotes), or his supporters, or even eyewitnesses or participants like George Orwell or Franz Borkenau. The point has been made by figures much closer to Hobsbawm’s own politics. Hobsbawm is aware of the work of the Spanish communist Fernando Claudin, whom he cites in another connection. [42] But Claudin, a leader of the Spanish Communist Youth at the time of the civil war and subsequently a member of the PCE’s Central Committee and Political Bureau until his expulsion in 1965, also conducted his own research into the role of Russia in the civil war. His conclusion? “Stalin helped the Spanish Republic in order that it might prolong its existence and arrive at a compromise solution acceptable to the ‘Western democracies’, within the framework of a system of anti-Hitlerite alliances, and not in order that it might win.” Claudin argues that this conclusion was “forced” on him by an analysis of the facts, even though he accepts that, at the time most anti-fascists would have regarded it as a “monstrous calumny”:
“Subsequent events showed, nevertheless, clearly enough, that Stalin was not one to hesitate in sacrificing to raison d’etat not merely the possibility of revolution but an actual revolution, even when this occurred close to the Soviet frontier and there were no ‘technical’ difficulties in the way of supplying the aid needed to oppose imperialist intervention.” [43]
 
Social-democratic liberalism
Perhaps it is expecting too much of Hobsbawm to change his assessment of the Popular Front at this stage in his life: it seems to be an integral part of his – in my view, admirable – refusal to renege on his communist beliefs in the face of neoliberal demands for recantation such as those regularly issued by the likes of Niall Ferguson. [44] His desire to establish a world of free and equal human beings is separable from his ambiguities concerning the Russian experience; but the nature of that experience cannot simply be written off as sui generis, as an experiment doomed to failure about which nothing can be said. Strangely perhaps, the problem emerges most acutely, not in Hobsbawm’s historical discussion, but in his reflections on the future:
Since the 1980s it has been evident that the socialists, Marxist or otherwise, were left without their traditional alternative to capitalism, at least unless or until they re-thought what they meant by ‘socialism’ and abandoned the presumption that the (manual) class would necessarily be the chief agent of social transformation. But the believers in the 1973–2008 reductio ad absurdum of market society are also left helpless ... Paradoxically, both sides have an interest in returning to a critique of both capitalism and the economists who failed to recognize where capitalist globalization would lead, as predicted by him in 1848 ... Once again the time has come to take Marx seriously. [45]
The difficulty here is that the supposed symmetry of failure between Stalinist state capitalism and neoliberal market capitalism is liable to two interpretations. One is for a return to the type of social democratic compromise typical of the advanced West during Hobsbawm’s Golden Age between 1945 and 1973. Unfortunately this position has been taken by virulent enemies of Marxism and the socialist Left more generally. In 2006, Tony Judt wrote “that moribund, system-building explanations of the Left may indeed be due for a revival – if only as a counterpoint to the irritating over confidence of contemporary free-marketeers of the Right”. The twenty-first century is thus characterized by two fantasies. One is the “smug, irenic insistence” of the neo-liberal “policy consensus”:
The second fantasy is the belief that Marxism has an intellectual and political future: not merely in spite of Communism’s collapse but because of it. Hitherto found only at the international ‘periphery’ and in the margins of academia, this renewed faith in Marxism – at least as an analytical tool if not as a political prognostication – is now once again, largely for want of competition, the common currency of international protest movements.
Both fantasies, according to Judt, result from “a common failure to learn from the past”. With a classically liberal even-handedness, Judt denounces both those who celebrate “the triumph of the market and the retreat of the state” and “those who dream of rerunning the Marxist tape, digitally remastered and free of irritating Communist scratches”, who “would be well advised to ask sooner rather than later just what it is about all-embracing ‘systems’ of thought that leads inexorably to all-embracing ‘systems’ of rule”. [46] In a generally warm and respectful obituary article, Hobsbawm noted both Judt’s personal attacks on his own work and his “essentially social democratic liberalism”, but fails to grasp the essential if unwelcome point of similarity with his own position. [47]
The other interpretation would involve not synthesis of two failed models of capitalist development – failed from the perspective of the majority, that is, not that of the ruling classes – but transcendence: a resumption of the revolutionary project that so concerned Judt in his final years. Whether Hobsbawm thinks this is possible is unclear. The title of his uneven, infuriating and sporadically brilliant book is a statement: how to change the world, but in fact it is better understood as a question, which he leaves his readers to answer.
* * *
Notes
1. All references are to works by Eric J. Hobsbawm unless otherwise stated. Of these historians, only Manning and Ste. Croix were never members of the Communist Party of Great Britain, although the former was involved with its Historians Group through the journal Past and Present.
2. He announced that he would no longer be appearing in public at the launch of this book for the Socialist History Society at Bishopsgate Library, London on 25 February 2011. For an example of a recent appearance in the British media see Andrew Whitehead, Eric Hobsbawm on the Arab Spring: ‘It Reminds me of 1848 ...’, BBC News Magazine, 23 December 2011.
3. Interesting Times: A Twentieth-Century Life (London: Allen Lane), 2002, p. 96.
4. Ibid., p. 200, footnote; Preface in On History (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson), 1997, p. ix.
5. The Historian’s Group of the Communist Party in Rebels and Their Causes: Essays in Honour of A.L. Morton, edited by Maurice Cornforth (London: Lawrence and Wishart), 1978, pp. 31–32.
6. Interesting Times, p. 291.
7. See, for example, Harvey J. Kaye, The British Marxist Historians: An Introductory Analysis (Cambridge: Polity Press), 1984, pp. 132, 153–56.
8. See, for example, Marx and History in On History, pp. 160–65.
9. The Crisis of the Seventeenth Century (1954) in Crisis in Europe, 1560–1660: Essays from Past and Present, edited by Trevor Ashton (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1965), pp. 5–6.
10. Edward P. Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class (1963) (second edition, Harmondsworth: Penguin), 1980, p. 12.
11. Thomas Gray, Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard (1751) in The Faber Book of Political Verse, edited by Tom Paulin (London: Faber and Faber), 1986, p. 195.
12. Primitive Rebels: Studies in Archaic Forms of Social Movement in the 19th and 20th Centuries (1959) (Manchester: Manchester University Press), 1971; Bandits (Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1969).
13. Foreword in How to Change the World: Tales of Marx and Marxism (London: Little, Brown), 2011, p. vii.
14. Marx on Pre-capitalist Formations (1964) in How to Change the World, pp. 134, 135. For a similar position by a Marxist nominally operating within the discipline of Geography, see David Harvey, On Countering the Marxian Myth – Chicago Style (1978) in Spaces of Capital: Towards a Critical Geography (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press), 2001, pp. 75, 78. For a more polemical statement of the same position by a writer unclassifiable in disciplinary terms see John Berger, Where Are We? in Hold Everything Dear: Dispatches on Survival and Resistance (London: Verso), 2007, p. 38.
15. The Influence of Marxism, 1945–83 (1982) in How to Change the World, pp. 364–66.
16. Marx on Pre-capitalist Formations, pp. 152 and 147–52 more generally.
17. Ibid., pp. 143–44.
18. On the Communist Manifesto (1998) in How to Change the World, pp. 109–10.
19. Gramsci (1982) in How to Change the World, pp. 326–27.
20. Ibid., p. 87.
21. Marx, Engels and Politics (1982) in How to Change the World, pp. 61–62.
22. Marx Today (2006) in How to Change the World, p. 13.
23. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels (1848), Manifesto of the Communist Party in The Revolutions of 1848, Vol. 1 of Political Writings, edited by David Fernbach (Harmondsworth: Penguin/ New Left Review), 1973, pp. 86–87.
24. Hal Draper, The Death of the State in Marx and Engels, The Socialist Register 1970, edited by Ralph Miliband and John Saville (London: Merlin Press), 1970, pp. 286 and 285–89 more generally.
25. Karl Marx (1871), The Civil War in France in The First International and After, Vol. 3 of Political Writings, edited by David Fernbach (Harmondsworth: Penguin/New Left Review), 1973, p. 212.
26. Friedrich Engels (1872), Preface to the German Edition of 1872 in Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto (Harmondsworth: Penguin), 2002, p. 194.
27. Hobsbawm, Marx, Engels and Politics, pp. 56–57. Compare the discussion in Hal Draper, Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, Vol. 3, The ‘Dictatorship of the Proletariat’ (New York: Monthly Review Press), 1986, pp. 269–74, 315–17.
28. Vladimir I. Lenin, The State and Revolution: The Marxist Theory of the State and the Tasks of the Proletariat in the Revolution in Collected Works, Vol. 25, June–September 1917 (Moscow: Progress Publishers), 1964, pp. 418–37.
29. Hobsbawm, Marx, Engels and Politics, p. 57.
30. Hobsbawm, Gramsci, p. 332
31. Louis Althusser, Contradiction and Overdetermination: Notes for an Investigation (1962) in For Marx (London: Verso), 2005, pp. 115–16.
32. See, for example, The Reception of Gramsci (1995) in How to Change the World, p. 339: “Who now expects another vogue for Althusser, any more than for Spengler?” Hobsbawm’s scepticism about Althusser reaches all the way back to the French publication of For Marx and Reading Capital. See The Structure of Capital (1966) in Revolutionaries: Contemporary Essays (London: Quartet Books, 1977), pp. 145–52.
33. Antonio Gramsci, The Nature and History of Economic Science: 4. Brief Notes on Economics [1] The Concept of ‘Homo Oeconomicus’ in Further Selections from the Prison Notebooks, edited by David Boothman (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press), 1995, p. 167, Q10II§15.
34. Waking from History’s Great Dream, interview with Paul Barker, Independent on Sunday (4 February 1990).
35. Marx Today, p. 9.
36. Ibid., p. 316.
37. See, for example, The Retreat into Extremism [1985], in Politics for a Rational Left: Political Writings, 1977–1988 (London: Verso), 1989, pp. 92–94. For his own assessment of the influence of the Popular Front on his politics, see Interesting Times, esp. chapter 8, Against Fascism and War and pp. 322–24.
38. Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century, 1914–91 (London: Michael Joseph), 1994, Chapter 4, Against the Common Enemy.
39. Eric J. Hobsbawm (1982), In the Era of Antifascism, 1929–45 in How to Change the World, pp. 273–74, 308.
40. Ibid., pp. 307–11.
41. Leon D. Trotsky, Once Again on the Causes of the Defeat in Spain (1939) in The Spanish Revolution (1931–39), edited by Naomi Allen and George Breitman (New York: Pathfinder Press), 1973, p. 339.
42. Ibid., p. 310, note 72 (text on p. 448).
43. Fernando Claudin, The Communist Movement: from Comintern to Cominform (Harmondsworth: Penguin), 1975, p. 242 and see pp. 210–42 more generally.
44. Niall Ferguson, What a Swell Party It Was ... for Him, The Daily Telegraph (22 September 2002).
45. Marx and Labour: The Long Century (2010/2010) in How to Change the World, pp. 418–19.
46. Tony Judt, Goodbye to All That? Leszek Kolakowski and the Marxist Legacy (2006) in Reappraisals: Reflections on the Forgotten Twentieth Century (London: William Heinemann), 2008, pp. 142–43.
47. Eric J. Hobsbawm, After the Cold War, London Review of Books, Vol. 34, No. 8 (26 April 2012), p. 14.
 



On Evil
Terry Eagleton
Yale University Press, £18.99
On Evil is the latest in a series of works by the literary critic Terry Eagleton in which he addresses some of the great philosophical questions fellow Marxists have tended to avoid.
In the case of evil this avoidance is because Marxists have denied its existence, although they accept that there can be evil acts (such as the Holocaust) which humans have the capacity to perform. Eagleton wants to go beyond both this – and a related liberal-humanist “community worker” position which mistrusts the concept of evil because of the ways in which it has been used as a means of demonising the deprived or oppressed. The first, Eagleton claims, confuses “morality with moralism” and the second “works better if you are thinking of unemployed council-estate heroin addicts than the serial killers of the Nazi SS”.
Instead, he argues, evil is a real aspect of human existence, “a condition of being, as well as a quality of behaviour”, identifiable by two characteristic attitudes. One involves “the mechanistic view for which every act exists only for the sake of some other act” – which leads to treating other people purely as the objectified means of self-gratification. The other is “a refusal to accept our mortality as natural, material beings”, which can lead, as in the case of the Nazis, to the treatment of others in a way that is not merely instrumental, but annihilatory – a species of what Eagleton, following Jacques Lacan, calls “obscene enjoyment”.
But evil itself is not functional other than in the sense of satisfying human appetites. It is ultimately meaningless, because it regards existence itself as meaningless, while simultaneously trying to prolong it. At least, this is what I think Eagleton is saying. His discursive, conversational style is always entertaining, but in the case of a subject as unavoidably metaphysical as this it occasionally obscures his argument.
Nevertheless, he argues that evil as he defines it – “radical evil” – is relatively rare and that the term is often used to obscure debate. The spectacle of bourgeois politicians denying the possibility of a rational explanation for the actions of the people they label terrorists, preferring to denounce their actions as incomprehensible acts of “evil”, is a case in point. Yet, as Eagleton rightly says, to understand something is not necessarily to commend it. Beyond any ideology, the destruction of the Twin Towers “also took the Arab world’s sense of anger and humiliation”.
His conclusion rightly returns us to our contemporary political dilemmas: “The result of defining terrorism as evil is to exacerbate the problem; and to make the problem worse is to be complicit, however unwittingly, in the very barbarism you condemn.”
 



In 1896, the London Congress of the Second International passed a resolution declaring that it stood ‘for the complete right of all nations to self-determination’. Over a hundred and twenty years later, can socialists still make the same confident declaration?
Support for national self-determination should be relatively uncontentious. It does not mean socialists supporting secession by every national group who demands it, but rather supporting them in making an unimpeded decision about their constitutional status, which is simply a question of democracy. Socialists need not necessarily support a particular decision and may argue against it, depending on what they see as being in the interests of the working class and the struggle for socialism more generally.
But clearly, there are some cases in which even recognizing the ‘right to decide’ is always going to be against the interests of the working class, notably where a particular group is aligned with one imperialist power or another. In these examples, socialists could legitimately point to the way in which national demands were directed towards reactionary ends, but this implicitly means abandoning the notion of a ‘right’, since by definition these are universal and cannot be restricted to those with whom we politically agree. An alternative strategy would be to deny that groups with which we disagree are nations at all, but this involves returning to some variant of the discredited Stalinist ‘checklist’ method of definition, in which one sets the criteria to get the result one desires: in this case the notion of a ‘right’ can be retained, but only by denying the existence of certain nations.
It might be more helpful to abandon ‘rights’ talk altogether. Who or what, after all, could confer a ‘right to self-determination’? Assuming it is not an unalienable right granted by the Creator, such as those listed in the American Declaration of Independence, it could perhaps be one recognized in international law; but as the Palestinians have long since found out, motions passed by the United Nations do not have the force of law, unless they are supported by the US and its allies. It is not, of course, that all rights are completely intangible; they can and have been won, including, most obviously, the right to vote; but these are outcomes of class and other social struggles within the territories of individual nation-states, subsequently enshrined in their laws.
One need not accept Rosa Luxemburg’s belief in the ultimate pointlessness of national self-determination under capitalism to recognize the truth of her assessment: “A ‘right of nations’ which is valid for all countries and all times is nothing more than a metaphysical cliché of the type of ‘rights of man’ and ‘rights of the citizen’.”
There are, of course, national movements whose struggle for statehood socialists are obliged to support. Perhaps Lenin’s most important contribution to debates on the national question was to highlight the distinction was between ‘oppressed’ and ‘oppressor’ nations, as a basis for deciding which national movements should be supported and which opposed by socialists. The former were those nationalities held against their collective will within the remaining absolutist or tributary empires of the Hapsburgs, Romanovs and Ottomans, or the colonies and semi-colonies of the Great Powers in Africa, Asia, Latin America and, of course, Ireland. These national movements had to be supported, whatever the exact nature of their politics, which were in most cases uninformed by socialist aspirations. On the other hand, there were the ‘oppressor’ nations (and the absolutist and tributary empires) which prevented the oppressed from achieving independent statehood. The nationalisms of these oppressor states had to be opposed, above all by the working class within them.
The distinction between oppressor and oppressed was never an entirely adequate device for establishing the attitude of Marxists towards national movements. It had nothing to say about the attitude of socialists to nations which may have had legitimate grounds for claiming that they were oppressed – as Serbia did in 1914, for example – but which were part of a wider inter-imperialist struggle in which their situation was manipulated by one side. Nor did it provide guidance in a situation in which a socialist revolution in a multi-national empire – like Russia in 1917 – might result in some of the formerly oppressed nations seeking to secede from a workers’ state, as for example Ukraine attempted to do during the early stages of the Russian Revolution. My argument here is not that the positions adopted by Lenin and the Bolsheviks in these cases were wrong, quite the contrary, but rather that they were based on a wider set of political considerations than simply the oppressor/oppressed distinction. However, it could be legitimately argued that these were exceptional cases and that as a broad distinction the categories of oppressor and oppressed generally allowed socialists to arrive at correct operational conclusions.
Lenin tended to see the question of national self-determination as an intrinsic part of the bourgeois revolution. In other words, it was not one which would remain eternally valid until the global triumph of the socialist revolution, but rather one relevant to a situation in which three remaining absolutist or tributary empires (Austria-Hungary, Russia and Turkey) and eight capitalist powers (UK, Netherlands, Belgium, France, Germany, Spain, Portugal, USA and Japan), had between them reduced the rest of the world outside Europe, North America and Australasia to colonial or semi-colonial status.
The world remains deeply uneven and unequal in terms of power and influence, but it is now one divided into a system of nation-states. The historic formation of this system was accomplished during the sixty years between the opening of the First World War and the end of the post-war boom. The three major national questions still unresolved from the era of decolonization are the reunification of Ireland, and the plight of the Palestinians and the Kurds. The latter are both exceptional in different respects: the former because the Palestinians no longer possess a territory in which to exercise self-determination, having been effectively expelled from it by the Zionist colonial-settler regime; the Kurds because they are spread across the territories of five different nation-states and have different relations with each. The Kurdish example also illustrates the difficulty of simply attempting to apply the oppressor/oppressed distinction, given the quite different political trajectories taken by the Turkish, Iraqi and Syrian Kurds in relation to US imperialism, the internal regimes in the territories they control, and much else besides.
However, the biggest problems for Marxists in deciding what attitude to take to national movements has not been these long-standing struggles for self-determination, but two relatively recent phenomena. One is where former nation-states have entered a process of complete disintegration, as in Yugoslavia during the 1990s and in several states in Central Africa and the Middle East more recently, above all in Syria. What attitude should the left take in these cases, where economic collapse, civil war, invasion, or failed revolutions have left different religious, tribal or ‘ethnic’ groups struggling against each other to seize territory and resources? It is completely futile for the left to assume there must necessarily be a ‘progressive’ side in these situations. One can and must oppose Western intervention on behalf of one side or the other without having any illusions that, for example, Assad represents a more progressive option. When Karl Liebknecht raised the slogan ‘the main enemy is at home’ he did not mean to imply that the only enemy was at home.
The other, more relevant to Scotland, is the emergence, or in some cases the re-emergence of ‘stateless nations’ seeking autonomy or independence in the long-established capitalist states of the West. In some cases these had an earlier history of oppression, in others not; but by the 1980s differences between Catalonia and Quebec on the one hand and Scotland on the other were marginal, compared to what faces the Palestinians and Kurds. No nation-state recognizes a constitutional ‘right’ to secede from it. Some, like the UK, do not refer to the issue at all, leaving politicians and state managers to deal with national issues on an ad hoc basis as they emerge, rather than tying their hands in advance with legal constraints. Others, among which the Spanish state is pre-eminent, explicitly exclude the possibility. But simply rejecting Scottish or Catalan demands for self-determination on the grounds that they are not oppressed is to embrace a stultifying formalism which takes no account of the exigencies of the class struggle or the dangers of inadvertently supporting the existing constitutional structures of the leading capitalist nation-states.
For socialists, the question of support for particular national demands (not for particular nationalisms) is determined by their relationship to the struggle for socialism, regardless of whether the nation concerned is oppressed or not. Lenin’s response to Rosa Luxemburg is relevant here. He argued that withholding support from national movements seeking to escape great empires, as her native Poland was from Russia, had two detrimental effects: one was to hand over leadership to the bourgeois nationalists in the former; the other was to implicitly endorse the continued rule of the latter. Support for national demands should of course be openly undertaken with the purpose of weakening the support of workers for nationalism, and in this context several questions have to be asked. Does support strengthen or weaken the capitalist or imperialist state? Does it strengthen or weaken the class consciousness and organization of the working class? Does it strengthen or weaken the tolerance of people of different nations or ‘races’ for each other?
Depending on the answers, and without any illusions in the ability of small states to resist the pressures of the world capitalist system, deciding to secede can be seen as both a progressive and democratic option which need not involve nationalism at all. In each case, however, constructing an argument for why a particular group should determine their own future has to be done on the basis of a political argument, rather than the application of a formula.
Neil Davidson is a lecturer in sociology in the School of Social and Political Sciences at the University of Glasgow. He is author of Nation-States: Consciousness and Competition; We Cannot Escape History: States and Revolutions; Holding Fast to an Image of the Past: Explorations on Marxism and History; and How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions? (all Haymarket Books).
 



Neil Davidson warns of dangers past, present and future for Corbyn, Labour and socialists
For over 200 years after 1688 political governance in England, then Britain, was a relatively simple matter for British capitalism. Two parties representing different wings of the ruling class, Tories and Whigs, would alternate in office, with different emphasis reflecting their respective agricultural and industrial bases, but united in exercising hegemony over the emerging working class. The crisis of the Liberals and emergence of Labour at the beginning of the twentieth century complicated the picture, in two ways.
First, although Labour in office has always been committed to maintaining capitalism, albeit in a more humane form (above all between 1945 and 1951), it has also always contained a left, with historically varying degrees of strength and coherence, which has sought to transcend capitalism rather than ameliorate its worst effects. Second, the links between Labour and the unions and wider labour movement means that there were limits to how far Labour governments could go in responding to capitalist demands: the neoliberal era began in the mid-1970s, but the Wilson-Callaghan government of 1974–79, anti-working class though it undoubtedly was, could not have imposed the new order; for that Thatcher and the Tories were required.
Consequently, Labour governments, usually from the moment of taking office, have been subjected to disciplinary actions, from business itself (particularly in the form of investment strikes and capital flight), international markets (‘runs on the pound’), the state apparatus (notably the Treasury but, in extremis, the security services), geopolitical pressure from the USA and attacks in the predominantly right-wing press. The advent of ‘new’ Labour made it seem as if these tactics would no longer be necessary; such was Blair and Brown’s willingness to appease capital it appeared that a modern alternative to the old Tory/Whig alternative government might have been established.
The ascendancy of Corbyn and Labour’s massive membership growth, overwhelmingly from the left, has put paid to that particular illusion, but Labour has been brought to heel many times before the advent of ‘new’ Labour; what is different on this occasion is the extent of the Tory crisis.  
David Cameron hoped to sideline UKIP and the Tories’ Europhobes by calling a referendum – which he assumed ‘remain’ would win. To an even greater extent than the Scottish Independence referendum, this was a gamble. The majority of British capitalists do not want to leave the EU, but are now saddled with Brexit because of the ineptitude of the politicians who are supposed to represent them. In other words, the Tories, main political representative of British capital for over 300 years is, temporarily at least, no longer capable of playing that role, not least because of unresolvable internal divisions and the incompetence of its leading figures.
It is precisely at moments like this that a suitably disciplined Labour Party would be expected to step into the breach and restore some kind of order ‘in the [British] national interest’. The leadership and mass membership of Corbyn’s Labour are obviously unwilling to play this role, and many of the usual pressures will be brought to bear, yet there are four specific dangers facing a potential left Labour government, all stemming from weaknesses in party’s own political positions.
First, attempts to remove Corbyn himself following the smears about his entirely imaginary anti-Semite. While this may well have been assisted by elements in the British (and Israeli) security services, the main driver has been an alliance of Zionists wanting to make fundamental criticism of Israel effectively illegal and Labour right-wingers prepared to do make any accusation to get rid of Corbyn, such is their horror at an actual left winger coming to power with mass support inside the party. Corbyn and Momentum’s capitulation over the IHRA definition of anti-semitism will come back to haunt them in future, given, for example, any Israeli repression of a future Palestinian uprising. But this is essentially aimed at Corbyn himself. The biggest threats to his programme lie elsewhere.
Second, while a calculated ambiguity over Brexit may have allowed Labour to avoid alienating ‘leave’ voters in particular, capitulating over the issue of freedom of movement, accepting that migration is a problem is to concede the right-wing populist case and make it more difficult to resist. Third, what has been remarkable about the response of the CBI, and those sections of the media where the ruling class conduct serious exchanges of views (Financial Times not Daily Mail), is how prepared they are to take seriously Corbyn and McDonnell’s economic proposals. The danger here is that the novelty of this situation will lead a government trying to avoid economic dislocation to compromise with a business sector looking for a realistic alternative to the Tories.
Finally, Labour’s refusal to take the national question seriously in either Scotland or Ireland (at a time when unification is beginning to look like a feasible option) is to needlessly deprive itself of allies. Scottish Labour’s unhinged sectarian hatred of the SNP is partly to blame here, but no-one expects Labout to necessarily support Scottish Independence or Irish Unification – just that the Scots and the Irish should be able to take that decision. Here, as always, democracy would be an aid to radicalism.
Neil Davidson lectures in sociology at the University of Glasgow and is the author of numerous books like Nation-States: Consciousness and Competition (2016); We Cannot Escape History: States and Revolution (2015); and Holding Fast to an Image of the Past: Explorations on Marxism and History (2014).
 






Leon Trotsky’s History of the Russian Revolution remains a singular work of Marxist historiography
As this series of articles commemorating the Russian Revolution draws to its close, we should consider the single most compelling account of that moment. Written by one of its leading participants, Leon Trotsky’s
The History of the Russian Revolution was completed in 1930, with Trotsky recently exiled from Russia and living in Turkey.



*
Despite its length – the 1977 edition from which I quote runs to nearly 1,300 pages – the work is tightly focused on the months between February and October 1917. With the exception of six initial chapters that explain the book’s theoretical framework and historical context and six appendices challenging Stalinist claims, each volume deals with only a matter of months. Volume one runs from February to June, volume two from July to September, and volume three spans October itself, concluding in the immediate aftermath of the Bolsheviks’ seizure of power.
No other historical work on the subject has involved this level of detail. Unsurprisingly, volume one immediately faced criticism for its “prolixity,” to which Trotsky responded in the Introduction to Volumes Two and Three:
You can present a photograph of a hand on one page, but it requires a volume to present the results of a microscopic investigation of its tissues. The author has no illusion as to the fullness or finishedness of his investigation. But nevertheless in many cases he was obliged to employ methods closer to the microscope than the camera.
History takes a narrative form, but Trotsky uses his “microscope” to conduct close analysis, occasionally pausing the story to address problems that have since emerged. Typically, he devotes entire chapters to these issues, which include questions of agency (“Who Led the February Insurrection?”), possible alternative outcomes (“Could the Bolsheviks have Seized the Power in July?”), new situations (“Dual Power”), outstanding issues (“The Problem of Nationalities”), and the very act of taking state power (“The Art of Insurrection”). These do not interrupt or divert from the flow of history, but rather enrich our understanding of the events before returning to the narrative.
A distinct theoretical framework supports these analyses. Indeed, few works of Marxist historiography have as resolutely a theoretical edge as the History. Fewer still begin by introducing a new theoretical concept, as Trotsky does in the first chapter.
If Trotsky’s main strategic contribution to Marxism is his distinct version of “permanent revolution,” then his major theoretical contribution is “uneven and combined development.” Through developing the latter, he simply wanted to explain the conditions under which permanent revolution could take place, first in Russia, then other countries in which similar conditions prevailed, starting with China.
Twenty-five years earlier Trotsky had argued that, though capitalist relations of production had been established in Russia and were perhaps even becoming dominant, the bourgeois revolution – in the sense of the establishment of a capitalist state – had yet to take place. The existence of a militant working class made the bourgeoisie unwilling to launch a revolution on their own behalf, for fear that they would quickly lose control.
But the working class could accomplish the revolution against the pre-capitalist state and, at least in Trotsky’s version of permanent revolution, move directly to constructing socialism, as long as the events unfolded as part of a successful international revolutionary movement.
In the History, he set out to explore capitalism’s uneven progress in Russia. Military competition from the Western powers had forced the tsars to partially modernize. As Trotsky noted in a lecture, “the Great War, the result of the contradictions of world imperialism, drew into its maelstrom countries of different stages of development, but made the same claims on all the participants.” The Russian state generated combined development in hopes of overcoming its backwardness – that is, its uneven development. But as Trotsky wrote in an essay about the Chinese Revolution:
Historical backwardness does not imply a simple reproduction of the development of advanced countries, England or France, with a delay of one, two, or three centuries. It engenders an entirely new “combined” social formation in which the latest conquests of capitalist technique and structure root themselves into relations of feudal or pre-feudal barbarism, transforming and subjecting them and creating peculiar relations of classes.
The stability typical of feudal or tributary societies crumbles with the arrival of capitalist industrialization and all that it brings in its wake: rapid population growth, uncoordinated urban expansion, dramatic ideological shifts. Combined development meant that backward areas could only make sectional advances in specific areas, not reproduce the overall experience of advanced economies. In History, Trotsky emphasizes the partial nature of these adoptions:
Russia was so far behind the other countries that she was compelled, at least in certain spheres, to outstrip them… The absence of firmly established social forms and traditions makes the backward country – at least within certain limits – extremely hospitable to the last word in international technique and international thought. Backwardness does not, however, for this reason cease to be backwardness. [Emphasis added]
But within these limits, backward societies could attain higher levels of development than in their established rivals. Trotsky goes on:
At the same time that peasant land-cultivation as a whole remained, right up to the revolution, at the level of the seventeenth century, Russian industry in its technique and capitalist structure stood at the level of the advanced countries, and in certain respects even outstripped them. [Emphasis added]
These adoptions did not necessarily undermine the state, since “The [backward] nation … not infrequently debases the achievements borrowed from outside in the process of adapting them to its own more primitive culture.” Indeed, at least initially, “debased adaptation” helped preserve Russia’s pre-capitalist state.
Beginning in 1861, tsarism needed to produce arms in order to defend feudal absolutism, so it established factories using the techniques characteristic of monopoly capitalism. But the workers needed to fuel this production threatened the state. The industrial laborers constituted a more skilled and more politically conscious group than any previous absolutist or early capitalist state had faced.
Uneven and combined development created a Russian working class that possessed exceptional levels of revolutionary militancy, even if it was only a minority of the population. The undemocratic state, which this “debased adaptation” of capitalism was supposed to preserve, provoked the working class into destroying it.
Thus, for Trotsky, uneven and combined development potentially enhanced workers’ political and industrial organization, their theoretical understanding, and their revolutionary activity. This did not guarantee victory – that required a revolutionary party with strategic intelligence and a global context in which revolutions in more advanced countries could offer aid to the materially backward Russia – but it was the necessary starting point for both the revolution and Trotsky’s account of it.
 
The First Marxist Historian
Any appreciation of the History that follows the tour-de-force opening chapter has to begin with how original, indeed how unprecedented, it is within the Marxist tradition, precisely because it’s a work of history. It’s odd, given that the most common synonym for Marxism is historical materialism, just how few works of Marxist historiography had actually been written before 1930.
Marx and Engels’s early 1850s writings – The Class Struggles in France, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, and Marx’s later defense of the Paris Commune (The Civil War in France) – are often cited as launching the tradition to which Trotsky then contributed. But these are not historiographies; they are brilliant journalistic assessments written in the immediate aftermath of events. Of Trotsky’s works, 1905 (1907) perhaps most closely resembles them, standing as it does in comparable chronological closeness to its subject and written as it was in similar conditions of defeat and exile.
Of course, Marxism’s founders were formulating a theory of historical development and always drew on historical examples to illustrate and substantiate their arguments, but, of all their works, only Engels’s The Peasant War in Germany (1850) can seriously be considered a work of history – and it deals with an episode in the relatively distant past which is explicitly treated as a cautionary tale about the dangers of attempting to take power before conditions were ripe.
The situation didn’t change dramatically with the advent of the Second International in 1889. Part of the problem was that, in the absence of anything resembling a proletarian revolution between the 1871 Paris Commune and the 1905 Russian Revolution, bourgeois revolutions became the main historical subjects for Marxists. Such studies tended to either establish lineages for contemporary socialist thought in, for example, the English Revolution, or to discover examples of communism in the earlier millenarian movements.
Histories of the French Revolution, the most important of the bourgeois revolutions with regard to mass participation, had existed for over a hundred years – the initial works by François Mignet and Adolphe Theirs appeared in the 1820s – but it took until the dawn of the twentieth century for the first socialist, if not exactly Marxist, account to arrive in Jean Jaurès’s Socialist History of the French Revolution.
In short, Trotsky had few Marxist models on which to draw. At least formally, then, the History looks most like work by his nineteenth-century bourgeois predecessors. In particular, Thomas Babington Macaulay’s History of England from the Accession of James VII to the Revolution (1848–1853) bears a startling structural resemblance to it. Both begin with a sweeping summary of national development to the eve of revolution before narrowing their focus to an almost day-by-day account; both display the same depth of characterization of historical actors; both authors infuse their works with a distinct theory of history – indeed, Macaulay’s Whiggism is as important an organizing principle as Trotsky’s Marxism.
Marx himself did not have a particularly high opinion of Macaulay, calling him “a systematic falsifier of history,” and Trotsky was only marginally more generous (“sometimes interesting but always superficial”). But the parallels between their histories are there all the same.
Stylistically, Trotsky recalls another Victorian Scot, though one rather different from Macaulay. In the third volume of his classic biography, Isaac Deutscher follows A.L. Rowse in comparing Trotsky to Thomas Carlyle.
Outlandish as this may first appear, Deutscher has identified a real commonality between the two men: both sharply draw out historical irony, both reject the flat register of academic history for language appropriate to the events they describe, and both express collective shifts in consciousness. Compare these passages.
Here is Carlyle on the Parisian masses’ radical turn during July 1789, the day before the storming of the Bastille:
What a Paris when the darkness fell! A European metropolitan city hurled suddenly forth from its old combinations and arrangements; to crash tumultuously together, seeking new. Use and wont will no longer direct any man; each man, with what originality he has, must begin thinking; or following those who think. Seven hundred thousand individuals, on the sudden, find all their old paths, old ways of acting and deciding, vanish from under their feet.… On Monday the huge City has awoke, not to its week-day industry: to what a different one! The working man has become a fighting man; has only one want only: that of arms.
And here is Trotsky on the first and second days of the February Revolution:
A mass of women, not all of them workers, flocked to the municipal duma demanding bread. It was like demanding milk from a he-goat. Red banners appeared in different parts of the city, and inscriptions on them showed that the workers wanted bread, but neither autocracy nor war. Woman’s Day passed successfully, with enthusiasm and without victims. But what it concealed in itself, no one had guessed even by nightfall. On the following day the movement not only fails to diminish, but doubles. About one-half of the industrial workers of Petrograd are on strike on the 24th of February. The workers come to the factories in the morning; instead of going to work they hold meetings; then begin processions toward the centre. New districts and new groups of the population are drawn into the movement. The slogan “Bread!” is crowded out or obscured by louder slogans: “Down with autocracy!” “Down with the war!”
Trotsky’s style remains readable in a way that Carlyle’s baroque stylings do not. Even so, the two men clearly have the same approach to historical writing, one vastly different from the work of those Carlyle called the “Professors Dryasdust,” who were already coming to dominate the historical profession in his lifetime.
Perry Anderson rightly describes Trotsky as “the first great Marxist historian” and notes that “for a long time The History of the Russian Revolution remained unique in literature of historical materialism.”
 
In the Third Person
More than that: it remains exceptional in the canon of Marxist historiography. Why? Mostly because of the role Trotsky played in the process he describes.
Political figures from earlier eras often left memoirs of their involvement in revolutionary events – think of Alexis de Tocqueville’s account of the French Revolution of 1848–49. But one consequence of the defeat of socialist revolutions since 1917 – albeit one less significant than the continuation of exploitation, oppression, and imperialist war – is that there have been very few participant-historians to record them. Trotsky has no successors because his subject remains singular.
There were, of course, many memoirs of the events in and around 1917. By the time Trotsky wrote his book, he could access the firsthand accounts from Menshevik opponents like Nikolai Sukhanov, Bolshevik comrades like Alexander Shlyapnikov, and external supporters who had been present in Petrograd like John Reed. The latter was particularly useful for Trotsky’s purposes given that Lenin endorsed it, the communist movement had widely read it, and it highlighted Trotsky’s role at a time when the Stalinist bureaucracy was attempting to deny it. But these works, and the many others that Trotsky cites, mainly concern their authors’ personal experiences or observations: they do not attempt to reconstruct the process as a whole.
Perhaps the only work that bears any resemblance to the History in this respect is Prosper-Olivier Lissagaray’s History of the Paris Commune (1876), written by someone who fought on the barricades and had to go into exile as a result. But, in Lissagaray’s case, he was admittedly “neither member, nor officer, nor functionary of the commune.”
Trotsky, in contrast, belonged to the Bolshevik Central Committee, served as president of the Petrograd Soviet, and was mainly responsible for ensuring that the latter’s Military Revolutionary Committee actually launched the insurrection.
Nevertheless, their works are similar in another respect as well. Lissagaray described himself as someone who “for five years has sifted the evidence; who has not ventured upon a single assertion without accumulated proofs.” He did this research partly to prevent his work from being dismissed on the basis of individual errors but mainly because the working class needs and deserves the truth: “He who tells the people revolutionary legends, he who amuses them with sensational stories, is as criminal as the geographer who would draw up false charts for navigators.”
Even though Trotsky was present at decisive turning points in the Russian Revolution, he effectively took the same approach, refusing to base his account on his own memories and impressions:
This work will not rely in any degree upon personal recollections. The circumstance that the author was a participant in the events does not free him from the obligation to base his exposition upon historically verified documents. The author speaks of himself, in so far as that is demanded by the course of events, in the third person. And that is not a mere literary form: the subjective tone, inevitable in autobiographies or memoirs, is not permissible in a work of history. However, the fact that the author did participate in the struggle naturally makes easier his understanding, not only of the psychology of the forces in action, both individual and collective, but also of the inner connection of events.
Referring to himself in the third person distinguishes Trotsky’s role as author from his role as actor, an effect that marks the text as not only modern but as a work of literary modernism, as are the Manifesto of the Communist Party, History and Class Consciousness, and On the Concept of History.
But we shouldn’t take Trotsky entirely at his word. He quotes from his own Recollections of Lenin (1924), which are, precisely, “personal recollections,” their status unchanged by being cited as evidence. And, occasionally, the reader has to wonder at the powers of recall that can apparently reproduce contributions to discussions or even speeches without obvious reference to a printed record. History< has no formal scholarly apparatus, but Trotsky generally lists his sources in the text: in the rare instances where he does not, one suspects that he is indeed relying on his own memory.
Nevertheless, he generally cites printed or unpublished documents. In this context, it’s worth contrasting Trotsky with one of the other authors to whom Deutscher compared him: Winston Churchill, specifically in relation to his history of World War II.
The comparison is valid in that Churchill also played an important political role in the events he discusses and was possessed of a distinct – if very different – worldview. But Churchill quite explicitly bases his account on his own perspective and frequently describes events without any supporting evidence, notably the infamous episode in which he and Stalin determine how their respective states will exercise influence in Eastern Europe and the Balkans after the war.
The point isn’t that this episode is inaccurately reported – in fact, it reads like exactly the kind of undemocratic carve-up to which these two villains would have agreed while inadvertently revealing Churchill’s illusions about the extent of postwar British power – but it does take a quite different approach than Trotsky, who adheres far more closely to scholarly norms concerning the use of evidence.
Critics have pointed out that Trotsky will quote from a source that he elsewhere criticizes for inaccuracy or misapprehension. But Trotsky usually explains why he is or is not relying on a particular author.
For example, he follows Reed’s account of how Lenin began his report to the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets: “We shall now proceed to construct the socialist order.” But he also explains that there are no surviving minutes from the Congress and only “tendential” newspaper reports: “That initial statement which John Reed puts in the mouth of Lenin does not appear in any of the newspaper accounts. But it is wholly in the spirit of the orator. Reed could not have made it up.” Later, he explains how Reed could invent a wholly imaginary “second historic conference” on October 21:
Reed was an extraordinarily keen observer, able to transcribe upon the pages of his book the feelings and passions of the deciding days of the revolution ... But work done in the heat of events, notes made in corridors, on the streets, beside campfires, conversations and fragmentary phrases caught on the wing, and that too with the need of a translator – all these things made particular mistakes unavoidable.
Even if Trotsky can cite his sources and discriminate between them, that doesn’t mean he uses them reliably. The book is the work of a partisan in two respects.
First, and most obviously, Trotsky belonged to the revolutionary movement that he helped lead. In fact, he explicitly rejects what Max Weber had already begun to promote as “value-free” social science. As Trotsky points out, his obvious partiality does not deprive his work of scientific value:
The serious and critical reader will not want a treacherous impartiality ... but a scientific conscientiousness, which for its sympathies and antipathies – open and undisguised – seeks support in an honest study of the facts, a determination of their real connections, an exposure of the causal laws of their movement.
Trotsky draws a distinction between neutrality, an impossibility for anyone not completely devoid of political belief, and objectivity, a necessity for everyone not content to play the role of propagandist.
But Trotsky is partisan in another sense. He had a particular interpretation of how the revolution triumphed, which social groups and individual participants were responsible, and the relationship between them. Here, he aimed to discredit the claims of the Stalinist regime, which saw the past as raw material to be shaped and reshaped to meet the present’s political requirements. As he wrote, “[t]he functionary-historian,” tasked with composing the “legends of the bureaucracy,” “makes over history, repairs biographies, creates reputations. It was necessary to bureaucratize the revolution before Stalin could become its crown.”
It would be wrong to pretend that Trotsky’s partisanship in this second sense did not produce distortions. His need to set the record straight occasionally led him to exaggerate the differences between Lenin and virtually everyone else in the Bolshevik Party, above all Stalin.
The difficulty here is not his emphasis on Lenin’s decisive role. In two crucial chapters (Rearming the Party and Lenin Summons the Insurrection), Trotsky argues that without Lenin’s arrival in April 1917 and his insistence on taking power throughout September the October Revolution would not have taken place:
Without Lenin the crisis, which the opportunistic leadership was inevitably bound to produce, would have assumed an extraordinarily sharp and protracted character. The conditions of war and revolution, however, would not allow the party a long period for fulfilling its mission. Thus it is by no means excluded that a disorientated and split party might have let slip the revolutionary opportunity for many years.
Trotsky is not saying that the Bolsheviks would never have arrived at the correct strategy without Lenin, or that the revolutionary opportunity would have never come again. He simply means that time is of the essence in revolutionary situations and that, without Lenin, the party would have allowed it to pass.
Trotsky’s discussion of individual figures aligns with classical Marxist tenets about people making history in conditions not of their own choosing, while also showing that the extent to which they can change history is the outcome of a historical process.
Take one of the characters whose dilemmas recur throughout the early chapters of the History: Tsar Nicholas II, the final representative of a doomed system:
In a horizontal section of the historic monarchy, Nicholas is the last link in a dynastic chain. His nearest ancestors, who also in their day were merged in family, caste and bureaucratic collectivity – only a broader one – tried out various measures and methods of government in order to protect the old social regime against the fate advancing upon it. But nevertheless they passed on to Nicholas a chaotic empire already carrying the matured revolution in its womb. If he had any choice left, it was only between different roads to ruin.
Lenin had more room to maneuver, representing a class that could take power rather than watch helplessly as it slipped away. But Lenin, too, was shaped by Russian development:
[T]he external envelope of circumstance – make easy in this case a mechanical contrasting of the person, the hero, the genius, against the objective conditions, the mass, the party. In reality, such a contrast is completely one-sided. Lenin was not an accidental element in the historic development, but a product of the whole past of Russian history. He was embedded in it with deepest roots. Along with the vanguard of the workers, he had lived through their struggle in the course of the preceding quarter century.
There is a problem with Trotsky’s argument concerning Lenin, however: at several points, Trotsky argues that the Bolshevik Party was essential for the success of the revolution and that interventionist revolutionary parties are a necessary condition for all future revolutions. However, his own account of the Bolsheviks – or at least their leadership – shows them repeatedly failing to understand the situation, maintaining existing but irrelevant schemas, and being pulled to their right.
Trotsky argues that this would have posed less of a problem had Lenin not been forced into exile:
His divergence from the ruling circles of the Bolsheviks meant the struggle of the future of the party against its past. If Lenin had not been artificially separated from the party by the conditions of emigration and war, the external mechanics of the crisis would not have been so dramatic, and would not have overshadowed to such a degree the inner continuity of the party’s development.
This amounts to saying that the party would still have made mistakes, but Lenin could have corrected them more easily. Elsewhere Trotsky credits “the pressure of the workers from below” in addition to “Lenin’s criticism from above” for correcting Bolshevik errors. A party requiring regular correction is clearly not a “vanguard” in any meaningful sense. This represents one of the rare occasions where Trotsky’s desire to weaken specific Stalinist mythologies actually undermines his own arguments about the role of the revolutionary party.
Despite the fact that the History is a politically engaged work, recent research supports most, if not all, of Trotsky’s assessments and interpretations. Even deeply unsympathetic biographers like Robert Service have to acknowledge that “he has seldom been faulted for inaccuracy.” Ian Thatcher, another recent biographer who cannot be accused of sympathy toward either Trotskyism or Marxism more generally, has gone further, suggesting that History more than held its own in the face of recent research and has even continued to suggest new areas for investigation:
Trotsky’s summary of the factors he had to highlight to account for 1917 still forms our research agenda of the Russian Revolution.… Measured against The History of the Russian Revolution most “modern” research does not look so “modern” after all.
This is a remarkable judgment for a book written eighty-five years ago: people tend to read Macaulay’s History of England or Carlyle’s The French Revolution for their literary qualities or for what they reveal about their authors’ ideological assumptions, not because they help us understand 1688 or 1789. We can read Trotsky’s History in those ways too, but it also retains an important place in any serious bibliography of 1917.
We certainly know more about the Russian Revolution than anyone could in 1930 – not least because of the valuable work of its “revisionist” social historians from the late 1960s onward. But these have supplemented rather than replaced Trotsky’s book. Sharing the revisionists’ concern with history from below, he recognizes the need to balance it with history from above. Equally intent on explaining the structures of Russian society, he situates them within a global system that impacts and shapes their forms.
This latter aspect returns us to Trotsky’s – and our – starting point: uneven and combined development.
 
Living History
On the very first page of the History, Trotsky explains one of his guiding assumptions:
The most indubitable feature of a revolution is the direct interference of the masses in historic events ... The history of a revolution is for us first of all a history of the forcible entrance of the masses into the realm of rulership over their own destiny.
As a general characterization of revolutions this will not do: most of the bourgeois revolutions which took place after 1848 were conducted from above precisely in order to forestall “the entrance of the masses.” It is, however, an excellent characterization of socialist revolution, and one that we urgently need to reassert.
Our commemorations of 1917 cannot avoid our knowledge of what followed, the full horror of which was still not apparent when Trotsky wrote his History. The Stalinist counterrevolution of 1928 and the regimes that subsequently took that as their model are at least partly responsible for the suspicion toward the idea of socialism from those who have most to gain from it.
There are many reasons for encouraging a wide readership of the History, but perhaps the most important is that it describes working-class creativity and power as the real basis of socialism. Hopefully, by the bicentenary, Trotsky’s book will no longer occupy such a lonely place on our bookshelves because 1917 will have been joined by other socialist revolutions that require their own historians.
Neil Davidson a lecturer in sociology at the University of Glasgow.
 






Niall Ferguson presented the first episode of his television series The War of the World this week. His apology for imperialism must be robustly challenged, writes Neil Davidson



Historian Niall Ferguson is perhaps the best known of the new generation of media dons. Where his nearest rival, Simon Schama, exudes a vague left liberalism and is apologetic over the British empire, Ferguson is ferociously and unashamedly neo-conservative.
A right wing perspective does not, of course, automatically preclude historical value.
But in his most recent work any insights have been submerged into an ideologically driven agenda which, if he were a Marxist, would lead to his books being dismissed out of hand rather than applauded.
Empire (2002) argues that the British empire was a force for good in the world, despite what he describes as unfortunate omissions and unintended consequences. Colossus (2004) argues that the US should consciously take up the imperial baton, even at the cost of doing away with what remains of its social security system.
Now The War of the World (2006) claims that one reason for the 20th century being the most murderous in history is not – as Marxists have argued – because of inter-imperialist wars, but because of the disintegration of these empires.
Channel 4 has obligingly provided him with a TV series to publicise each of his books.
His ideas have been gratefully adopted by the political representatives of the Anglo-American ruling class. In January last year Gordon Brown declared, at a press conference in Tanzania of all places, that “the days of Britain having to apologise for its colonial history are over. We should celebrate much of our past rather than apologise for it.”
Although expressed in the pious verbiage of which Brown is a master, the theme is pure Ferguson – a point which those deluded souls who think that a Brown-led Labour Party will move to the left might do well to ponder.
Ferguson’s ideas therefore need to be challenged, particularly at the moment, when every conceivable argument will be marshalled to justify an attack on Iran. But how?
We should obviously highlight his unsustainable claims. For example, Ferguson claims that Britain was unique among empires in encouraging democratic government in the colonies.
Why then – with the one exception of India – are the most democratic and economically developed ex-colonies to be found, not in the once-British areas of Africa and Asia, but in the territories ruled by the more backward states of Spain and Portugal in Latin America?
There are similar problems with his claims for the economic benefits of empire for its subjects. Ferguson argues that investment flowed from the metropolitan centres to the colonies. In fact, most British investment flowed to other advanced countries, to white settler dominions like Australia or to semi-dependencies like Argentina.
Rather than contributing to capitalist development, in many areas the British consciously acted to reinforce – or even introduce – feudal social relations in order to maintain their control. Iraq in the 1920s is only the most obvious example of this manoeuvre.
 
Divisions
Finally, there is the issue on which Ferguson lays so much emphasis in his new book – ethnic divisions. “The peak of violent death (as opposed to death by starvation) in modern India was of course in 1947, as the British withdrew and Hindu and Muslims slaughtered one another,” Ferguson writes.
Some tribal and religious divisions existed before British rule. But the British quite consciously pursued a policy of divide and rule by making these worse – often by giving privileges to one group within colonial society.
In other areas, the British either introduced (Ireland) or encouraged (Palestine) ethnically distinct colonial-settler groups to act as spearheads for imperial rule.
In this respect, the US today is following in British footsteps, as it seeks to control Iraq through enforcing divisions between Sunni, Shia, Kurd and Turkoman. These divisions have historically had virtually no political significance for the inhabitants of that ravaged country.
Ferguson’s easy acceptance of ethnic divisions can be traced back to attitudes to “race”. He seems to be one of the few people outside the openly fascist right who is prepared to use the term without quotation marks. Ferguson writes, “Human beings do seem predisposed to trust members of their own race as traditionally defined.”
In a debate with the Independent columnist Johann Hari, Ferguson has argued that there is a big difference between the horrors of empire and the crimes of Hitler and the Nazis.
According to Ferguson, the British in India, for example, merely displayed “incompetence, negligence and indifference”. The key for Ferguson is intentionality – Hitler meant to kill Jewish people while the British Lords Lytton and Curzon did not intend to kill Indian peasants.
 
Connections
The first thing to say here is that Hitler himself saw a number of connections between the British empire and the “Thousand Year Reich”, a fact which has been brought to our attention in the writings of – Niall Ferguson!
“Adolf Hitler repeatedly expressed his admiration for British imperialism. ‘The wealth of Great Britain’, Hitler declared, ‘is the result ... of the capitalist exploitation of the 350 million Indian slaves.’ That was precisely what Hitler most admired – the effective oppression of an inferior race.”
Does Ferguson think that Hitler was correct in this assessment? He tactfully avoids telling us.
Against Ferguson’s attempt to absolve the British empire from blame, it is necessary to point out that droughts did not tend to turn into famines under the Mughal Empire, nor under the post-colonial Indian state. They did under late British rule because the empire had destroyed the economic system which had previously sustained the peasantry. It then subjected them to the rigours of free market capitalism which rejected any serious attempt to “relieve” the starving.
The British rulers of India could have done more, but the real guilt lies with the economic system which they oversaw, and whose effects were not restricted to India. Exactly the same catastrophe had occurred in Ireland during the 1840s, when over a million more victims were offered up to the gods of economic orthodoxy.
This points to another way in which we must go beyond simply a liberal critique of Ferguson. Opposing the excesses of empire, or even the empire as a whole, without also opposing British capitalism, implies that the latter could have evolved without any exploitation of the less developed world.
Because Ferguson sees nothing beyond capitalism, he has to justify the imperial system on which it rested. And in doing so he can always defeat his liberal critics by asking what their alternative would have been.
As he writes in Empire, “The question is not whether British imperialism was without a blemish. It was not. The question is whether there could have been a less bloody path to modernity. Perhaps in theory there could have been. But in practice?” Liberals have no answer to this, but Marxists do.
 
History
We look at history through the eyes of the oppressed and exploited, whose experience Ferguson completely ignores. To read Ferguson, you would think that the British empire came to an end simply because of financial exhaustion after the Second World War. The revolt of the colonial peoples is passed over in virtual silence. I think that one reason for this is connected with contemporary politics.
In Colossus, Ferguson writes:
“I believe the world needs an effective liberal empire and that the United States is the best candidate for the job. Economic globalisation is working but needs to be underwritten politically, as it was a century ago.”
In fact, there is virtually no chance of the US realising Ferguson’s dream of a new colonial empire. There are internal reasons for this in the economic inability of the US to maintain such an empire. But it is also the case that no people will now accept foreign domination in the way that pre-capitalist societies were forced to. If nothing else, surely Iraq demonstrates this.
Ferguson shows us what our rulers would like to do, if they were unconstrained by economic reality or popular resistance. But the impossibility of restoring a colonial empire should not blind us to the destruction our rulers will unleash as an alternative.
Neil Davidson is chair of Livingston branch of the Scottish Socialist Party and secretary of Edinburgh Central branch of the PCS union. He is the author of The Origins of Scottish Nationhood (2000) and Discovering the Scottish Revolution (2003).
 






With debate growing over whether Scotland should leave the UK, the left should not get sucked in by half-formed arguments, writes Neil Davidson







(Illustration: Tim Sanders)



Elections for the Scottish Parliament take place next May. Recent opinion polls suggest that 51 percent of Scots support independence and that 36 percent of them would vote for the Scottish National Party (SNP) against 29 percent for Labour.
It is tempting for socialists to uncritically welcome these figures as a blow against the Empire – given that “Britishness” is currently being used as an ideological weapon against Muslims, and Britain is currently using actual weapons against Afghans and Iraqis.
But more analysis is needed. Socialists support Scots being able to choose whether or not they want to be part of Britain (the “right of self-determination”). There is, however, only one serious reason why socialists should support, or at any rate not oppose, independence being that choice.
Britain is an imperialist state at war, and likely to remain so for the foreseeable future.
A referendum in these circumstances would effectively be a judgement on Britain’s role in the New World Order, and New Labour’s record more generally.
In this context, there would be a strong case for refusing to vote for the continued existence of the British state. But note that this is quite different from actively supporting the dissolution of Britain on a nationalist basis.
In the intoxicated rhetoric of much of the Scottish left, secession is seen as inherently progressive, but a degree of sobriety would be helpful here.
When Gordon Brown extols the joys of Britishness, he is not expressing the economic needs of the British ruling class so much as the electoral needs of the Labour Party, whose re-election at Westminster depends on its Scottish MPs.
The British bourgeoisie (capitalist class) is by no means as obsessed with the constitutional form of the existing nation state as the pro-independence wing of the Scottish left. The former are interested in maintaining their class power – the national context through which they do so is less important to them.
And they might be prepared to accept independence. Why?
First, independence might contribute to stability. The prospect of the debate on the Scottish national question becoming a permanently destabilising feature of British politics might make independence attractive to settle the issue.
Second, it would not constitute a major problem for them. Claims that globalisation is reducing the autonomy of states are undoubtedly exaggerated, but not completely false.
And in this respect globalisation simply intensifies the pressures that world markets have always exercised over even moderate reforming regimes.
Third, some bourgeois ideologues see advantages in independence. The Economist has been repeating for years that, in capitalist terms, “standing on its own two feet” would be an exemplary experience for Scotland.
The ex-Tory, now SNP-supporting, historian Michael Fry has recently restated the case in Prospect magazine.
Scottish independence is something that the British capitalist class could easily live with. Which small country is Scotland supposed to emulate?
The Scandinavian states where social democracy is in meltdown and racism on the rise? Ireland with an economy built on luxuriant tax breaks for the corporations and crippling indirect taxation for the working class?
But, the argument goes, if Scotland seceded on a left wing basis, say with a majority of Solidarity, Scottish Socialist Party, Green and Labour left MSPs in the government, would this not pose a challenge to capital? Here we reach the crux of the argument.
For some socialists the demand for independence reflects an absolute pessimism – of the sort that became quite common during the 1980s – about the possibility of the working class movement reviving across Britain.
But if we effectively write off the English working class, then grand sounding declarations about the “destruction of the British state” lead, at the very least, to encouraging dangerous illusions in a Scottish reformist road to socialism.
Even if a majority of MSPs were socialists, an independent Scottish Parliament will no more be able to introduce socialism than the Westminster parliament – and it has had over a hundred years of failure behind it.
I suspect that what is involved here is the belief that Scottish secession will leave us with a new “socialist” state apparatus. It will not. The state would not be destroyed simply by transferring its functions from London to Edinburgh, any more than it was destroyed after these functions transferred from London to Dublin in 1922.
Grandiose comparisons with Latin America are irrelevant. The point about Venezuela and Bolivia is not that they are “independent”, but that the level of class struggle there is rather higher than is currently the case in Scotland and that this has been expressed electorally.
Consequently, to even raise the scenario of a left wing breakaway is to reveal its unreality. It would only happen in conditions of massively heightened class struggle, but in what possible circumstances would this take place in Scotland and not the rest of Britain?
And if the main reason why Scots are attracted to independence is precisely because it promises a road to socialism supposedly blocked in England and Wales, why would they embrace it at the very point when this appeared to be happening across Britain as a whole?
The only conditions under which the scenario is possible are the same ones that would render it irrelevant.
Neil Davidson is a member of Solidarity: Scotland’s Socialist Movement, and the SWP. He writes in a personal capacity.
 






What sort of political changes are possible when workers are a minority of the population? Neil Davidson looks at a question which has absorbed Marxists for over 100 years.



At the beginning of the last century a series of revolutions in Russia (1905), Turkey (1906), Persia (1909), Mexico (1910), China (1911) and Ireland (1916) announced that the inhabitants of the colonial world were not prepared to be passive spectators of the historical process. Yet beyond freeing themselves from the direct or indirect control of the great powers, the goals of these revolutionary movements were ambiguous, even contradictory. Were they to enable the newly liberated states to enter the world capitalist system? Or were they to achieve a more fundamental freedom for the mass of their populations – in other words, were they to bring about socialism?
At the time most people, including most Marxists, believed that only the former was possible. Socialism would have to wait until colonial and pre-capitalist domination had been overthrown. However, Leon Trotsky began to develop two concepts which suggested that socialism might be a more immediate prospect.
One was the theory of “uneven and combined development”. Unevenness means that societies reach particular stages of development at different historical times. Combination means that, under certain conditions, societies can leap over aspects of one or more of these stages to create new hybrid formations. Starting from the imperialist stage of capitalism, which opened during the last third of the 19th century, advanced forms of capitalist production were introduced into otherwise pre-capitalist societies, causing new tensions.
In particular, capitalist industrialisation gave rise to working class movements that, because of the intensity with which they were formed, had the potential to rise to higher levels of theoretical understanding and industrial militancy than those in the dominant imperialist countries. These new working class movements often found themselves in conflict with state machines that were much weaker than those of the older capitalist countries.
The other was the strategy of permanent revolution – made possible by uneven and combined development. The working classes in the developing world, although a minority of the population, have a social weight greater than their numbers. This, Trotsky argued, made them potentially capable of leading the other oppressed classes directly towards socialism.
This strategy only gained majority support within the working class movement during the Russian Revolution of 1917. In every other situation where it has been applicable, alternative strategies have been followed which have led, at worst, to total defeat (China in the 1920s) or, at best, to partial victories which gained considerably less than was possible (South Africa in the 1990s). A crucial factor in these failures has been the absence of a sizeable revolutionary party capable of successfully arguing for permanent revolution.
Colonial rule had not yet achieved its full geographical extent in 1917 and pre-capitalist regimes still existed. Most of these have long since ended, swept away by a series of revolutions.
In China in 1949, Cuba in 1959 and a host of other countries the transformations masqueraded as communist in content, but in effect acted as the handmaidens of state capitalist development. Indeed, the Chinese state is now one of the most dynamic sectors in the global capitalist economy. The working class in the Third World has risen time and time again during the same period, but nowhere succeeded in taking power on its own behalf. Does this mean that Trotsky’s claims for its revolutionary role have been proved wrong?
 
Does the Third World still exist?
The first thing we need to establish is that the Third World – in the sense of a group of countries sharing a common position of underdevelopment within the capitalist world system – still exists. Many people, on both sides of the globalisation debate, claim that it does not. They give three main reasons for this.
First, there is the increasingly differentiated pattern of socio-economic development across these countries. What possible comparison can there be between a “failed state” like Haiti and economic and military giants like India? Second, there is increasing homogenisation across the world.
Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri argue in their book Empire that, “The spatial divisions of the three Worlds (First, Second and Third) have been scrambled so that we continually find the First World in the Third, the Third in the First, and the Second almost nowhere at all.” Third, there is a reluctance among anti-capitalists to differentiate between regions of the world, not least because globalisation from above is increasingly binding all populations to the same exploitative machine.
Nevertheless, it is still possible to characterise the Third World as having some or all of the following features. First, the majority of the population tends to be poor in absolute rather than relative terms. Second, the state is often unstable and consequently prone to both internal police repression and external military adventures.
Third, the economies of the majority of the less developed states will continue to be heavily influenced by imperialism as a system. Fourth, the main source of hope for overcoming these obstacles, the working class, is still a minority, albeit a growing minority, of the population.
This is true even in China, the biggest and most rapidly industrialising of all the less developed countries. The existence of large numbers of peasants, independent producers and small businesses means that the working class has insufficient social weight to take and exercise power alone. Class alliances of some sort therefore remain necessary.
Whether the working class is now a majority of the population in the developing world is difficult to judge and in one sense irrelevant. The main point is that it is huge, and vastly bigger than in Trotsky’s day. Increasingly, the majority of workers in the Third World are of the industrial type. There are time lags in the availability of the data, but if we include the former Communist countries, then the number of industrial workers in the Global South rose from 285 million in 1980 to 407 million in 1994, at a time when the number of workers employed in industry was 500 million.
Many of those who dismiss the idea of the working class making a revolution in the Third World celebrate the electoral successes of Hugo Chavez in Venezuela and Evo Morales in Bolivia as an alternative strategy. But again this is to miss the point.
Welcome though the success of these leaders is, they were only elected and sustained in office because of mass mobilisations at the heart of which were working class movements. In Bolivia, for example, the previous government’s plans to sell off natural gas supplies were met with months of blockades and occupations in the countryside that helped feed a growing revolt among workers in the towns and cities. Ultimately the privatisation plan was defeated.
But the unevenness in uneven and combined development does not only work in a positive direction. In some cases, entire areas, most of which are in Africa, have been abandoned by capital in any economic sense. There the working class is not growing, but shrinking and increasingly atomised as scarcity drives societies into territorial wars and ethnic fragmentation. It would be absurd to say that only the working class can solve the crises in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Afghanistan or Haiti, if by this we mean the individual working classes of those countries. It is here that the international aspects of permanent revolution are still decisive – the solution cannot be internal, but depends on the actions of the working class in the surrounding countries.
But even in those countries where there are strong labour movements, there is an important new social development which is as yet politically undetermined. In its original formulation, permanent revolution involved the working class leading other oppressed groups, the largest of which was the peasantry. The peasantry has not vanished, but its importance is diminishing because of the emergence and expansion of massive urban slum areas on the peripheries of the great Third World cities.
These vast, improvised repositories of semi-surplus population, described in horrifying detail by Mike Davis in Planet of Slums, are explosively volatile. Involved in work mainly through what is politely referred to as the informal sector, the relationship of these populations to organised labour tends to be minimal. Yet potentially, they could be an extraordinary revolutionary force (we have seen the possibilities of this in Bolivia) – or the foot soldiers of right wing demagoguery. The question of leadership remains essential.
For nearly 50 years Stalinism and varieties of secular nationalism dominated the politics of the Third World, using organised labour as a stage army when popular mobilisation was required. The pretensions of both have been exploded, above all in the Middle East. The space vacated by the collapse of Stalinism and secular nationalism means that millions of people who want to be part of a movement against both imperialism and poverty are looking for ideas that can take the struggle further than simply the establishment of bourgeois democratic regimes.
This brings me to the final point. We can be sure that the working class will continue to fight to improve its conditions – by which I mean increasing democracy as much as improving living standards – as we have seen in Iran, Egypt and China over the last year. What is still open is whether it can go beyond this to challenge for state power.
Neil Davidson was the joint winner of the Isaac Deutscher Memorial Prize in 2003 and is a contributor to 100 Years of Permanent Revolution – eds. Bill Dunn & Hugo Radice, published by Pluto and available from Bookmarks.
 






Neil Davidson writes on how the 1926 General Strike was much more militant than Anne Perkins’s new book A Very British Strike suggests



Over recent weeks Socialist Worker has discussed the contrast between the victorious campaign against the CPE labour law in France and the capitulation by the trade union leaders over pensions rights in Britain.
The one-day action over pensions on 28 March has been described as the biggest in Britain since the General Strike of 1926. The 80th anniversary of the latter event reminds us that the eagerness of British trade union officials to call off action, even when they are in a position of strength, is not a new problem.
In her new book, A Very British Strike, Guardian journalist Anne Perkins argues that the General Strike demonstrates the deep-seated reasonableness and respect for the constitution at the heart of British society. She says, “On the whole, Britain conducted itself as it always had, with studied moderation.”
According to Perkins, the emergence of New Labour is a final recognition of the realities of British political life as demonstrated by the General Strike and subsequent – apparently inexplicable – outbursts of trade union militancy:
“Most voters, and most trade unionists, were inherently conservative. Only a party that recognised socialism’s limited appeal – and acknowledged the limitations of socialism – could triumph at the ballot box.”
At one level the book is a competent enough account of what happened in 1926. Unfortunately many issues, such as the politics of the Communist Party of Great Britain and its relationship to the movement and the Soviet Union, the struggle between left and right within the unions, the social basis of the trade union bureaucracy and the nature of the state, are incomprehensible to Perkins.
This lack of understanding allows her to draw conclusions which may be comforting for Guardian columnists, but bear little relation to reality.
The General Strike ended a 16-year period of intense industrial militancy on the part of the British working class, which began with the Great Unrest of 1910–14 and continued through the engineering struggles during the First World War.
This reached its climax in the mass strikes of 1919, the point of maximum danger for the British ruling class and its European counterparts more generally. The events of 1926 were less threatening, because they were far more defensive on the part of the unions.
In July 1925 the mine owners announced that they were tearing up all existing national agreements, increasing the working day and cutting wages.
They took the miners on first, in what was the beginning of a general offensive by the employers in order to restore profit levels.
 
Condition
The Trades Union Congress (TUC) ordered an embargo on the movement of all coal. Stocks were low. On 31 July 1925 – christened “Red Friday” by the Daily Herald – the government intervened to subsidise the mine owners for nine months until a commission under Sir Herbert Samuels could report on the condition of the industry.
During the next nine months the miners continued to dig the coal that was being stockpiled in case of a strike. The government organised, dividing the country into ten administrative districts and arresting the leadership of the Communist Party.
As Winston Churchill, who was chancellor of the exchequer during the strike, said later, “We decided to postpone the crisis in the hope of averting it, or if not averting it, of coping effectively with it when the time comes.” The ruling class was preparing for war.
The TUC was not preparing for anything. In February 1926 the TUC decided to do nothing until the Samuels Commission reported.
The report, as could have been predicted, called for wage cuts, but with vague references to reorganising the industry at some unspecified point in the future. In April, the subsidy ran out and the employers declared that they would begin a lock-out from 16 April unless the wage cuts were accepted.
For the next two weeks, the TUC tried to reach an agreement with the government. But Tory prime minister Stanley Baldwin used an incident at the Daily Mail – printers had refused to print a particularly inflammatory lead article – as an excuse to break off negotiations.
The TUC called what it titled a “national strike” in support of the miners, which began on 3 May.
Perkins claims:
“Britain’s General Strike was an almost accidental byproduct of the fear of revolution – in a calmer atmosphere, there might have been no catalyst, no spark to ignite the unstable mixture of declining industries and burgeoning ideas about the political uses of industrial strength.”
For her the problem was caused by a minority of extremists on both sides.
None of this is true. The government wanted a strike – or a surrender without a fight – and it planned to win.
The leaders of the TUC did not want a strike. They only ordered it because they could not be seen to abandon the miners and possibly hand the initiative over to revolutionaries.
It is fairly clear that they were preparing to sell out from the beginning.
The intermediate social position of trade union officials between workers and employers, means that they have an interest in maintaining the system as it is. This does not rule out struggling for better conditions, but it does rule out overturning the capitalist system from which their position derives.
This was a more important influence than trying to protect Labour from electoral defeat, which was not an issue in 1926.
Jimmy Thomas, leader of the railwaymen and a Labour MP, said:
“The state must win on an issue like this… I feel it is a desperate state. Our love of country and our anxiety for the future of our country, not our politics, is the driving force, the impelling motive, that makes us plead.”
Given attitudes like this it is unsurprising that the government felt confident enough to provoke a strike.
One issue is rightly highlighted by Perkins – the declaration by Sir John Simon during day three of the strike that it was in breach of the 1906 Trades Dispute Act and consequently illegal.
Individual union members and union funds were vulnerable. This, rather than the slur on their law-abiding respectability which Perkins stresses, was a key concern for the officials.
The other consideration was the militancy of the working class. British workers wanted a strike. The enthusiastic response to the strike call took the union leadership by surprise, and the actions of workers were far from peaceful.
As Perkins records:
“An attempt to run trams in Camberwell in south east London was abandoned because of threatening crowds:
“In Hammersmith, Poplar and Canning Town other violent attempts were made to stop buses. A handful did operate, but only with a policeman sitting beside the driver and with netting over the windows.”
Even the episode most often used to demonstrate the moderation of the British working class conceals a different picture. Many readers will have heard of the famous football match at Plymouth Home Park on Saturday 8 May between strikers and the police – the strikers won 2–1, incidentally.
While the match was going on 4,000 strikers and supporters were battling scabs and police with sticks and rocks to prevent trams moving from Drake Circus in the town centre.
 
Threats
As Charles Dukes of the GMWU union complained:
“Every day that the strike proceeded the control and the authority of that dispute [were] passing out of the hands of responsible executives into the hands of men who had no authority, no control, and [were] wrecking the movement from one end to the other.”
Councils of action were set up, often under Communist leadership, to organise picketing, food distribution and information. Naturally, these “were frowned on by the TUC as threats to their own central control”.
Churchill edited the ferociously class conscious British Gazette for the government. In response, the TUC produced the tepid British Worker, which was censored by apparatchiks to prevent inflammatory material appearing.
British workers wanted to fight, but their leaders did their best to stop them doing so effectively. In the end, after nine days, the TUC abandoned the miners for the figleaf of a non-binding agreement, which included wage cuts.
At the time the surrender came, there were more people on strike than when it began. Indeed, 100,000 more came out after the announcement.
The British state took the Communist Party (CP) very seriously indeed. Although relatively small, the CP was a serious organisation with influence far beyond its membership.
But it adopted a policy that was to cripple its ability to effectively intervene. The CP had raised the slogan of “All Power to the General Council [of the TUC]”. This made sense in so far as it was important for the general council to overcome sectionalism or rebuff attempts to withdraw from action.
But two other conditions needed to apply. One was that the general council itself could be relied upon to act decisively in workers’ interests. The other that there were forces on the ground which could carry out action from below, such as the councils of action.
Neither of these applied. The CP and its supporters expected the “left” officials and general secretaries to keep the TUC in line. They did not devote the necessary time to building the movement from below that could have intervened when the betrayal came.
The bulk of the responsibility for this failure lies with the increasingly Stalinised Communist International which encouraged illusions in the left officials to aid the Soviet Union’s foreign policy. Perkins’ book contains the material that undermines her own thesis. There are two important lessons for today from the General Strike.
The first is that the British state treats with utmost seriousness any challenge to its authority and that our side must be equally serious in response.
The second is that there is nothing inherently peaceful or constitutional about the British working class. In order for its militancy to find a focus it has to find a way not to be held back by trade union leaders.
That means that the left today has to build a political rank and file movement that will work with left wing trade union leaders but not rely on them in the way that led to disaster in 1926.
Neil Davidson is an activist in the Scottish Socialist Party and the PCS union. He is the author of the Deutscher prize winning Discovering the Scottish Revolution.
 



The intellectual movement of the 17th and 18th century that became known as the Enlightenment helped a new class to come to power in Europe. Neil Davidson asks why the more advanced civilisations of the Islamic world did not develop a similar movement of their own.
In the current Western controversy over Islam, one theme recurs with increasing predictability. Many writers are prepared to acknowledge Muslim cultural and scientific achievements, but always with the caveat that Islamic civilisation never experienced an equivalent to the Enlightenment.
“Islam never had to go through a prolonged period of critically examining the validity of its spiritual vision, as the West did during the 18th century,” writes the historian Louis Dupré. “Islamic culture has, of course, known its own crisis ... yet it was never forced to question its traditional worldview.”
The same view has also been expressed by individuals who were originally from Muslim backgrounds but have subsequently abandoned their religious beliefs. Salman Rushdie has recently argued that Islam requires “not so much a reformation ... as an Enlightenment”.
Muslims have responded in different ways to the claim that their religion has never produced an Enlightenment. Ziauddin Sardar has criticised it in the New Statesman on two grounds. On the one hand, “It assumes that ‘Islam’ and ‘Enlightenment’ have nothing to do with each other – as if the European Enlightenment emerged out of nothing, without appropriating Islamic thought and learning.” On the other, “It betrays an ignorance of postmodern critique that has exposed Enlightenment thought as Eurocentric hot air.” So Islamic thought was responsible for the Enlightenment but the Enlightenment was intellectually worthless. This is not, perhaps, the most effective way of highlighting the positive qualities of Islamic thought. Sardar’s incoherence is possibly the result of his own critical attitude towards Islamism. More mainstream Muslim thinkers generally take one of two more positions.
The first is that Islam did not require the Enlightenment, because unlike Christianity its tenets do not involve the same conflict between religion and science. As the Egyptian scholar A.O. Altwaijri has written, “Western enlightenment was completely opposed to religion and it still adopts the same attitude. Islamic enlightenment, on the contrary, combines belief and science, religion and reason, in a reasonable equilibrium between these components.” Islam is certainly less dependent than Christianity on miracles or what Tom Paine called “improbable happenings”, but ultimately, because it counterposes reason to revelation, Enlightenment thought casts doubt on all religions – Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Hinduism and Buddhism alike.
The second position is that, although the Enlightenment represented progress for the West, it was a means of oppressing the Muslim world. A. Hussain asks, “Given that our people have been victims of these developments, then why should we appreciate them?” It is also true that both the Islamic world and Muslims in the West have suffered and continue to suffer from imperialism and racism. But this is not the fault of the Enlightenment as such. Rather, it is an outcome of the failure of Enlightenment ideals to find their realisation in socialism, and the way they have been harnessed instead to the needs of capitalist expansion. In the hands of a resurgent movement of the working class and the oppressed, these ideas can be turned against the warmongers and Islamophobes who falsely claim them as their own.
The history of the Islamic world shows that it also raised many of the themes which later became associated with the Enlightenment, and did so earlier in time. The issue is therefore why the Enlightenment became dominant in the West and not in the Islamic world – or indeed in those other parts of the world, like China, which had previously been materially more advanced than the West.
The comparative basis for the critique of Islam is the Enlightenment that occurred in Europe and North America between the mid-17th and early 19th centuries, but the terms of the argument are changed in relation to Islam. No one refers to a “Christian Enlightenment”. If the Enlightenment is given any specificity at all, it is in relation to individual nations. Why then is territoriality the basis for discussion of the Enlightenment for the West, but religion for the East?
 
A Christian Enlightenment?
The assumption is that the Enlightenment, like the Renaissance and Reformation before it, emerged out of what is usually called the “Judeo-Christian tradition”. In other words, Christianity was intellectually open and tolerant enough to allow critical thought to emerge, with the result that religion could gradually be superseded, and the separation of church and state brought about. The implication of course is that Islam has been incapable of allowing the same process to take place. The fate of Bruno (who was burned at the stake by the Holy Inquisition) or Galileo (who was threatened with the same fate) for daring to question the doctrines of the Catholic church casts some doubt on the claim that Christianity is intrinsically open to scientific rationality.
At this point the argument usually shifts from Christianity in general to the role of Protestantism in particular or, more narrowly still, that of Calvinism. But this is no more convincing. Writers as politically different as Antonio Gramsci and Hugh Trevor-Roper have explained that Protestant thought was in many respects a retreat from the intellectual sophistication of late medieval Catholic thought, as characterised by, for example, Erasmus. Certainly 16th century Geneva and 17th century Edinburgh were not places in which rational speculation was encouraged. The intellectually progressive role of Protestantism lies in the way in which some versions of the faith encouraged congregations to seek the truth in their individual reading of the Bible, rather than from received authority – an approach which could be carried over into other areas of life. But the teachings themselves did not point in this direction. Justification by faith is an enormously powerful doctrine but not a rational one, since it rests on the claim that the ways of god are unknowable to man. Edinburgh did later become the centre of perhaps the greatest of all national Enlightenments, but in order to do so it had first to abandon the “theocratic fantasies” of the Church of Scotland. And this was true across Europe and in North America. Whatever the specific religious beliefs of individual Enlightenment thinkers, and however coded some of their arguments, the movement as a whole was at war with the Judeo-Christian tradition. It represents not the continuity of Western culture but a profound break within it. Far from being the apotheosis of Western values, the Enlightenment rejected the values which had previously been dominant.
Enlightenment thinkers also took a far more complex attitude to Islam than their present day admirers would have us believe. As Jonathan Israel recounts in his important history, Radical Enlightenment, “On the one hand, Islam is viewed positively, even enthusiastically, as a purified form of revealed religion, stripped of the many imperfections of Judaism and Christianity, and hence reassuringly akin to deism. On the other, Islam is more often regarded with hostility and contempt as a primitive, grossly superstitious religion like Judaism and Christianity, and one no less, or still more, adapted to promoting despotism.” Edward Gibbon wrote in a remarkably balanced way about Mohammed and the foundation of Islam in The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, particularly given his generally critical attitude to Christianity. In general, then, the Enlightenment did not regard Islam as being any better or any worse than Christianity.
Perhaps we should therefore consider the possibility that the decisive factor in both the emergence of Enlightenment in the West and its failure to do so in the East may not be religion as such, but the kind of societies in which their respective religions took root, and which these religions helped to preserve. We will in any case have to qualify the claim that Islam knew no form of scientific rationality. After all, it was Muslim scholars who translated and preserved the philosophy and science of Greece and Persia, which would otherwise have been lost. It was they who transmitted it to their equivalents in Europe, who came to be educated by Muslim hands in Spain and Sicily.
But Muslim achievements in scientific thought were not simply archival. The 13th century Syrian scholar and physician Ibn al-Nafis was first to discover the pulmonary circulation of the blood. In doing so he had to reject the views of one of his predecessors, Avicenna – himself an important medical thinker who, among other things, identified that disease could be spread by drinking water. Ibn al-Nafis died in his bed at an advanced age (he is thought to have been around 80). Compare his fate to that of the second person to propose the theory of circulation, the Spaniard Michael Servetus. In 1553 he was arrested by the Protestant authorities of Geneva on charges of blasphemy, and was burned for heresy at the insistence of Calvin after refusing to recant.
The Islamic world did not only produce scientific theory, but its philosophers also considered the social role of religion. According to the Marxist historian Maxine Rodinson, the Persian philosopher and physician, Rhazes, held the view “that religion was the cause of wars and was hostile to philosophy and science. He believed in the progress of science, and he considered Plato, Aristotle, Hippocrates much greater than the holy books.” No comparable figure in, say, 10th century Normandy in the same era could have openly expounded these views and expected to live. In some Muslim states comparable positions were even held at the highest level of the state. In India the Mughul Emperor Akbar (1556–1605) emphasised “the path of reason” rather than “reliance on tradition”, and devoted much consideration to the basis of religious identity and non-denominational rule in India. His conclusions were published in Agra in 1591–2, shortly before Bruno was burned at the stake in Rome. Akbar’s minister and spokesman, Abu’l Fazl, included several exasperated passages in his book A’in-i Akbari bemoaning the constraints imposed on scientific endeavour by religious obscurantism:
“From time immemorial, the exercise of inquiry has been restricted, and questioning and investigation have been regarded as precursors of infidelity. Whatever has been received from father, kindred and teacher is considered as a deposit under divine sanction, and a malcontent is reproached with impiety or irreligion. Although a few among the intelligent of their generation admit the imbecility of this procedure in others, yet they will not stir one step in this direction themselves.”
Clearly, then, there is nothing intrinsic to Islamic society which prevented Muslims from rational or scientific thought. Yet these intimations of Enlightenment, which occurred at an earlier historical stage than in the West, never emerged into a similar full-blown movement capable of contributing to the transformation of society. Ibn al-Nafis was untroubled by authority, but his ideas had no influence on medicine in the Islamic world. In the West, where similar ideas were initially punished by death, they were rediscovered and within 150 years were part of mainstream medical thought. Ideas, however brilliant, are by themselves incapable of changing the world – they must first find embodiment in some material social force. But what was this social force in the West, and why was this missing in Islamic and other countries?
 
The nature of Islamic society
Clearly there were great transformations in Islamic society between the death of the Prophet in 632 and the fall of Constantinople in 1453, but some underlying characteristics remained throughout. The Islamic world rested on a series of wealthy cities ranging from Baghdad in modern Iraq, through Cairo in modern Egypt, to Cordoba in modern Spain. Connecting these urban centres was a system of highly developed desert and sea trade routes, along which caravans and ships brought luxury goods like spices and manufactured goods like pottery. The richness and the opulence of this civilisation stood in stark contrast to impoverished, backward Europe.
But what was the basis of the underlying economy – the “mode of production”? Feudalism, the mode which dominated in Western Europe and Japan, was of minor importance in the states of the Muslim world, with the major exception of Persia (modern day Iran) and parts of India. Instead, the dominant mode was what some Marxists, including the present writer, call the tributary mode. In Europe the feudal estate monarchies presided over weak, decentralised states. Power was devolved to local lords based in the countryside, and it was here, in their local jurisdictions, that exploitation was carried out through the extraction of rent and labour services. But precisely because of this fragmented structure it was possible for capitalist production to begin between these different areas of parcellised sovereignty. The towns varied in size and power, but some at least were free from lordly or monarchical domination, and provided spaces where new approaches to production could develop.
Attempts have been made to present the Enlightenment as a pure expression of scientific rationality which coincidentally appeared in the epoch of the transition from feudalism and the bourgeois revolutions. But it must rather be understood as the theoretical accompaniment of these economic and political processes – though in many complex and mediated ways.
The conditions which allowed capitalist development, and hence the Enlightenment, did not exist to the same extent in the Muslim world. In the Ottoman Empire, which lay at its heart, there was no private property in land, no local lordship, and therefore little space for new approaches to production and exploitation to arise. The state was the main exploiter and its officials displayed a quite conscious hostility to potential alternative sources of power, hence the bias it displayed towards small-scale commerce and the hostility it displayed towards large mercantile capital. Consequently, merchants tended to be from external “nations” – Jews, Greeks or Armenians – not from the native Arab or Turkish populations. There is nothing inherently stagnant about Islamic societies, but they stand as the best example of how ruling classes are consciously able to use state power, the “superstructure”, to prevent new and threatening classes from forming, with all that implies about the thwarting of intellectual developments. “Asking why the scientific revolution did not occur in Islam”, writes Pervez Hoobdhoy, exaggerating only slightly, “is practically equivalent to asking why Islam did not produce a powerful bourgeois class.”
This lack of the development of a new, more advanced economic class meant that Islamic theorists had no material examples to look to. Take the Tunisian writer Ibn el Khaldun (1332–1402), author of the Kitab Al-Ilbar or Book of Examples (usually referred to in English as The Muqaddimah or Introduction to History). His sociological insights identified the continuing struggle between civilisations based, on the one hand, on towns and traders (hadarah) and, on the other, on tribes and holy men (badawah), the two endlessly alternating as the dominant forces within the Muslim world. Adam Smith and his colleagues in the Historical School of the Scottish Enlightenment could develop a theory that saw societies develop and progress upwards from one “mode of subsistence” to another because they had seen this movement in England, and wished to see it reproduced in Scotland. Ibn el Khaldun saw only cyclical repetition in the history of Islamic society, and could not envisage any way to break the cycle. His work could not transcend the society it sought to theorise.
In the face of this, the doctrines and organisation of Islam are difficult to separate. In Christian Europe, church and state were allied in defence of the existing order. In the Islamic world they were fused – there was no separate church organisation. There were of course differences between branches of Islam – Shias favoured rule by charismatic imams, Sunnis a consensus among believers – but in neither was there an overarching church organisation comparable to that of Christianity. Instead a federal structure arose which adapted to the individual states. It is difficult, therefore, to dissociate reasons of state from reasons of religion. A belief in predestination implied that it was impious or even impossible to attempt to predict future events. A belief in utilitarianism focused intellectual investigation or borrowing only on what was immediately useful. Finally, as the boundaries of the Islamic world began to run up against the expanding European powers from the 16th century on, the idea of drawing on their methods and discoveries became all the more painful to contemplate for ruling elites accustomed to their own sense of superiority. As the Western threat grew, the control over what was taught became even more extreme.
 
Partial reform
The example of China also tends to support the view that the key issue is not religion but the nature of the economy and the “corresponding form of the state”. Like Islamic societies, China encompassed a great civilisation with important scientific and technical accomplishments, surpassing those of Europe. But here too there was a bureaucratic tributary state acting to suppress emergent class forces and their dangerous ideas. Reading the work of one leading intellectual in 17th century China, Wang Fu-Chih (1619–92), it is difficult not to see him as a predecessor to Adam Smith in Scotland or the Abbé Sieyes in France, but unlike them his thoughts led to no immediate results. In China, as in the House of Islam, the state acted to control the spread of dangerous thoughts. But China was not an Islamic country – the similarities lie not in religion, but in economy and state, and it was these that led them to a common fate.
So was it possible that Enlightenment ideas could be forced onto these societies from without? The temporary conquest of the Ottoman province of Egypt by French revolutionary armies in 1798 led to an attempt, first in Egypt and Turkey, to adapt at least some of the technical, scientific and military aspects of scientific rational thought. Many of the aspects of Islam which are ignorantly supposed to be “medieval” traditions are products of this period of partial reform. As one historian notes, “The burqa was actually a modern dress that allowed women to come out of the seclusion of their homes and participate to a limited degree in public and commercial affairs”. Another points out, “The office of ayatollah is a creation of the 19th century, the rule of Khomeini and of his successor as ‘supreme Jurist’ an innovation of the 20th.” The imperial division and occupation of the Middle East after the First World War froze, and in some cases even reversed, the process. It should not be forgotten, in the endless babble about Western superiority, that feudal social relationships – against which the Enlightenment had raged – were introduced into Iraq by the British occupiers after 1920 to provide a social basis for the regime.
The subsequent history has been told in remorseless detail by Robert Fisk in The Great War for Civilisation and cannot even be attempted here. The question is, after over 100 years of imperialist intervention, does the Islamic world today have to reproduce the experience of the West, from Renaissance to Reformation to Enlightenment? In 1959 one Afghan intellectual, Najim oud-Din Bammat wrote, “Islam today has to go through a number of revolutions at once: a religious revolution like the Reformation; an intellectual and moral revolution like the 18th century Enlightenment; an economic and social revolution like the European industrial revolution of the 19th century.” History, however, does not do repeats. Leon Trotsky’s theories of uneven and combined development and permanent revolution argue that these revolutions do not have to follow each other, but can interlock and be compressed in time. Christian Europe, after all, was incomparably less developed than Arab or Persian civilisation in the 10th or 11th centuries. But its very backwardness allowed it to incubate a far higher form of class society – capitalism – and hence to “catch up and overtake” its former superiors and in the process fragment, occupy and destroy them.
When the Enlightenment ideas came to the masses of the Islamic world, they came not as a recapitulation of the European experience of the 17th and 18th centuries, but in the form of Marxism – the radical inheritor of that experience. Unfortunately the theoretical and organisational forms in which Marxism made its impact were Stalinist and consequently carried within them the seeds of disaster – most spectacularly in Iraq during the 1950s and in Iran during the 1970s, but more insidiously almost everywhere else. It is because of the catastrophic record of Stalinism, and more broadly of secular nationalism, that people who would once have been drawn to socialism see Islamism as an alternative path to liberation today.
What future, then, for Islam and the Enlightenment? We should remember the experience of the West. Our Enlightenment occurred when Christianity was older than Islam is now and did not occur all at once. People did not simply become “rational” and abandon their previous views because they heard the wise words of Spinoza or Voltaire. It happened over time, and because the experience of social change and struggle made people more open to new ideas that began to explain the world in a way that religion no longer did.
Socialists in the West today have to begin with the actual context of institutional racism and military intervention with which Muslims are faced every day. The absolute obligation on socialists is first to defend Muslims, both in the West and in the developing world, and to develop the historic alliance at the heart of the anti-war movement. To say to that they, or people of any faith, must abandon their beliefs before we will deign to speak to them is not only arrogant but displays all the worst aspects of the Enlightenment – “Here is the Truth, bow down before it!” Why should Muslims listen to people whose self-importance is so great they make agreement with them a precondition of even having a conversation? Enlightenment cannot be imposed by legal fiat or at the point of a gun. The real precondition of debate is unity in action, where discussion can take place secure in the knowledge that participants with different beliefs nevertheless share goals as a common starting point. It is, I suspect, more than a coincidence that those who are most insistent on the need for Islamic Enlightenment are the voices crying loudest for war. The original Enlightenment will never recur. However, we may be seeing the first signs of a New Enlightenment, not in these voices but in the actions of those – Muslim and non-Muslim alike – who have taken to the streets to oppose them.
Neil Davidson was the joint winner of the Isaac Deutscher Memorial Prize in 2003.
 



The Enlightenment was an intellectual and social movement which, like the Renaissance and the Reformation before it, characterised a specific historical period, in this case beginning in the middle decades of the 17th century and ending over 200 years ago, at the end of the 18th century. Yet it remains at the heart of current concerns in a way that, for example, Reformation debates over predestination do not. The Enlightenment remains a contemporary issue and not merely a historical one.
This is because the movement produced a set of scientific methods, social theories and personal values which overturned many previous attitudes to the world. It had its impact on virtually every area of knowledge through the work of philosophers from Spinoza to the young Hegel; scientists like Priestley and Black; polemicists against mysticism and obscurantism like Voltaire and Diderot; social theorists like Rousseau and Ferguson; playwrights like Beaumarchais and Schiller; musicians like Mozart and Beethoven, painters like Goya and David; reformers like Condorcet, historians like Gibbon and Hume; founders of modern political economy like Quesnay and Smith. And it inspired many of the activists in the American and French revolutions, like Paine, Jefferson or Robespierre. Through the influence of these and many others it shapes many of the ways in which people see the world today. Hence the continuing debate over its legacy – a debate in which socialists must intervene.
For the Enlightenment heritage is now under attack on two fronts. On the one side it is confronted by a partial reversion to pre-Enlightenment ideas. Defying all predictions of imminent secularisation, religious belief is resurgent on a global scale, encompassing Christianity and Hinduism as much as Islam. On the other side, sections of the left have embraced ideas which claim to go beyond the Enlightenment, with a series of relativist and irrationalist positions which are usually lumped together under the name of ‘postmodernism’, an academic fashion which is rapidly ceasing to be fashionable, but has left a legacy of confusion for new generations of activists.
Who then defends the Enlightenment? Right on cue, members of the liberal left have reinvented themselves as partisans for capitalist globalisation, Western imperialism and institutional racism in the guise of upholders of Reason, Democracy and the Freedom of Speech. The obscene spectacle of highly-paid journalists attacking the beliefs of one of the most oppressed groups in British society, while draping themselves in the banner of Jefferson and Voltaire, can only help persuade radicals – Muslim and non-Muslim alike – that the Enlightenment is indeed a Eurocentric conspiracy to defend the existing global order.
 
The central ideas
At the heart of the Enlightenment approach were three central claims.
The first was that the natural and social worlds can be explained, and consequently acted upon, through the application of reason, without recourse to religion or other mystical beliefs. This represented a radical break with most 16th and early 17th century thought which gave a privileged place to religious interpretations of reality. Baruch Spinoza, in many ways the most radical figure of the early Enlightenment, attacked the ‘dogma’ of organised religion in 1670 for ‘degrading rational man to a beast, completely inhibiting man’s free judgement and his capacity to distinguish true from false ... Men who utterly despise reason, who reject and turn away from the intellect as naturally corrupt ... are believed to possess the divine light!’ [1] Spinoza and those who followed him in the next century were primarily attacking the dominant Christian church within their own societies rather than Islam, Buddhism or other religions mainly practised outside Europe; indeed, the Enlightenment had a far more complex view of Islam than most of the people who currently claim to stand in its tradition. [2] Free speech was invoked in order to attack not the weak and powerless, but the mighty combination of church and state, which could bring to bear the Holy Inquisition, censorship, jail, mutilation and even death. Spinoza wrote in the post-revolutionary United Netherlands, probably the most tolerant society in Europe, but still came under sustained attack for his views, while James Aikenhead was hanged for blasphemy in Calvinist Edinburgh in 1695 and Voltaire was twice imprisoned in the Bastille. Reason, however, was desirable for more than the strength it provided to opponents of organised religion. It was seen as providing a means for people to act to change the circumstances in which they found themselves. As Immanuel Kant wrote in 1783, in one of the first self-conscious attempts to define the meaning of the Enlightenment project, ‘Once ... man’s inclination and vocation to think freely has developed ... it generally reacts upon the mentality of the people, who thus become increasingly able to act freely.’ [3]
The second claim was that human history moves in a particular direction, characterised by progression rather than, as had previously been believed, by regression, stagnation or recurrence. The Enlightenment saw progress as occurring through successive stages of development, characterised by what French and especially Scottish thinkers called ‘modes of subsistence.’ As Adam Smith explained to his students in 1762, these were ‘first, the Age of Hunters; secondly, the Age of Shepherds; thirdly, the Age of Agriculture; and fourthly, the Age of Commerce.’ [4] And, as Smith’s colleague Lord Kames observed in 1758, ‘these progressive changes ... may be traced in all societies.’ [5] Therefore, although not all societies progressed at the same speed, all could potentially reach the same level of development.
The third claim was that human beings are possessed of universal rights, which are theirs simply by virtue of their being human, and not because they are members of a particular social estate or religious denomination. This at the very least implies that society is currently insufficiently rational and that progress may not take place automatically. If, as Smith and Kames suggest, all societies advance through certain stages of development, then the human beings who make up those societies must all share the same faculties, reason above all.
 
The contradictions
There were two great contradictions in much of the Enlightenment talk about ‘universality.’
Universality implied equal legal rights, but the rights were usually restricted along class lines. Antonio Negri and Michael Hardt have argued that we need to return to Enlightenment conceptions of democracy on the grounds that in this period the concept was still uncorrupted: ‘The 18th century revolutionaries did not call democracy either the rule of a vanguard party or the rule of elected officials who are occasionally and in limited ways accountable to the multitude.’ [6] True, but neither did 18th century revolutionaries or their predecessors believe that democracy ‘requires the rule of everyone by everyone.’ Take, for example, their hero Spinoza. He certainly wrote several passages extolling democracy as the most effective method of government. He did not, however, believe that everyone was capable of democracy. He wrote that ‘the masses can no more be freed from their superstition than from their fears ... they are not guided by reason.’ There was no point, therefore, in the common people reading his work, since they would not understand it. [7] Voltaire wrote in a letter of 1768, ‘We have never intended to enlighten shoemakers and servants – this is up to apostles.’ [8] As Paul Siegel astutely remarks, Voltaire’s attitude to the dissemination of Enlightenment ideas to the masses lies behind one of his best-known slogans: ‘If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him.’ [9] Religion was ‘necessary’ for the common people, who might otherwise seek to apply reason to areas quite as uncomfortable to denizens of the coffee shops of Paris as habitués of the Palace of Versailles. Voltaire was a brilliant and courageous man, but there is no need to deceive ourselves, as the righteous Islamophobes who invoke his name constantly do, that he saw the Enlightenment extending much beyond his own class – even if his attitude was partly motivated by fear of reactionary forces being able to mobilise popular feeling against religious or agrarian reforms. [10]
There were similar problems with applying universality to different human groups, or ‘races.’ Enlightenment thinkers were deeply divided on this issue. One trend, expressed by Hume, Montesquieu and Kant, doubted whether people with black skins could even be regarded as fully human. In 1748 Montesquieu declared, ‘It is impossible for us to suppose these creatures to be men.’ [11] In his Lectures on the Philosophy of History from the early 1830s Hegel noted that Africa was ‘the land of childhood’ and that this required the historian to ‘disregard the category of universality.’ [12] However, another tendency, represented by Diderot, John Millar and Johann Gottfried von Herder, challenged the racist ideology that was being developed to justify the conquest of Native Americans and enslavement of Africans. Herder was opposed to notions of European superiority and the ‘intolerable pride’ it produced: ‘What is a measure of all peoples by the measure of us Europeans supposed to be at all? Where is the means of comparison?’ [13] This trend in the Enlightenment inspired Les Amis des Noirs whose ideas led Robespierre to abolish slavery in 1793, at the height of the revolutions in France and Haiti. [14]
The complexities of the doctrine of universality are best expressed in the American Declaration of Independence. Along with the French Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen, this is one of the most famous political expressions of Enlightenment thought. In the immortal words of the second paragraph, ‘We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.’ [15] Anyone wanting to raise a laugh at the supposedly fraudulent claims of Enlightenment universalism need only quote the opening passage and then point out everyone it excludes: all women, Native Americans, slaves, and so on. From this, some people conclude that the oppression is endemic to the Enlightenment itself. Michael Berube points out,
‘Poststructuralism tends to argue that the emancipatory narratives of the Enlightenment are in fact predicated on – and compromised by – their historical and social origins in 18th century racism and sexism’, and ‘the social violence of the last two centuries of American society is not something to be corrected by a return to the Enlightenment rhetoric of rights but is, rather, a fulfilment of the symbolic violence constitutive of the Enlightenment itself .’ [16] Is it true that universality is ‘tainted’ in this way? In fact, as Terry Eagleton remarks, it is ‘one the greatest emancipatory ideas in world history ... not least because middle class society could now be challenged by those it suppressed, according to its own logic, caught out in a performative contradiction between what it said and what it did.’ [17]
 
The Enlightenment and capitalism
The source of these tensions within the Enlightenment lies in its relationship to capitalism as a historical system. Critics of the Enlightenment have no doubts that there is a connection, although they are less certain what it is. For Michel Foucault the regime of truth ‘was not merely ideological or superstructural; it was a condition of the formation and development of capitalism.’ [18] If Foucault credits the Enlightenment with giving rise to capitalism, the Indian ‘post-colonial’ intellectual Partha Chatterjee sees the Enlightenment as dependent upon it: ‘For ever since the Age of Enlightenment, reason, in its universalising mission, has been parasitic upon a much less lofty, much more mundane, palpably material and singularly invidious force, namely the universalist urge of capital.’ [19]
Faced with reductive arguments of this sort, it is tempting to deny that any connection exists. This is the strategy pursued by Ellen Meiksins Wood, who writes of such criticisms, ‘We are being invited to jettison all that is best in the Enlightenment project – especially its commitment to a universal human emancipation – and to blame these values for destructive effects we should be ascribing to capitalism.’ [20] In fact, the Enlightenment was both a product of capitalist development and a contributor to its further expansion. Mikulas Teich describes it as following the Renaissance and the Reformation as third in a series of ‘historically demarcated sequences’ encompassed by ‘the long drawn out transition from feudalism to capitalism.’ The transition displayed marked geographical and temporal unevenness between initiation and completion across or even within the nations, but each of these cultural and ideological sequences tended to manifest themselves simultaneously, or after only brief delays, on the international scene. As a result, their class content and social meaning differed depending on whether the nation in question was nearer to the beginning or the end of the process:
The promoters of the Enlightenment were socially a heterogeneous group, and from that point of view, the Enlightenment was a mixed ‘aristocratic-bourgeois’ movement. Insofar as it is possible to ascribe to it a common programme it was reformist. Insofar as it was undermining the reigning feudal order it was revolutionary. [21]
Albert Hirschman has demonstrated that many of the arguments used in favour of capitalism by Enlightenment thinkers in Scotland and France were based, not on any admiration of capitalism itself, but on the political and social benefits which economic development would supposedly bring:
Ever since the end of the Middle Ages, and particularly as a result of the increasing frequency of war and civil war in the 17th and 18th centuries, the search was on ... for new rules of conduct and devices that would impose much needed discipline and constraints on both rulers and ruled, and the expansion of commerce and industry was thought to hold much promise in this regard.
But the effects of capitalism were anything but peaceful and conducive to order, and the arguments raised at the time have been ‘not only forgotten but actively repressed.’ For Hirschman, this is necessary for the legitimacy of the capitalist order, since the ‘social order’ ‘was adopted with the firm expectation that it would solve certain problems and that it clearly and abysmally fails to do so.’ [22]
 
The double-edged heritage
The triumphant system had to suppress the radicalism of the Enlightenment, or at least transfer it from the social to the natural world. Daniel Gordon writes that there was already a tension within ‘much Enlightenment thought’ and it ‘was designed not merely to convince people to regard commercial society as the best regime, but also to dramatise the personal qualities of courage, patriotism, and refinement that one should cultivate in opposition to the very same regime.’ In this ‘doubleedged mentality ... we should see the dialectic as a process internal to the Enlightenment – a process in which a certain degree of historical optimism immediately produced doubts about the completeness of the society desired.’ [23] From these doubts came the radicalised Enlightenment at the heart of Marxism. [24]
In the Manifesto of the Communist Party (1848) Marx and Engels summarised the role of the Enlightenment in the bourgeois revolution: ‘When Christian ideas succumbed in the 18th century to rationalist ideas, feudal society fought its death battle with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie.’ Capitalism needed to free the power of rational thought, but reason is not the possession of single class, and once it became apparent that human beings had the power to transform their world along capitalist lines, the question inevitably arose of a further transformation: ‘The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to the ground are now turned against the bourgeoisie itself .’ [25]
By the time this was written the bourgeoisie were concerned to limit the application of Enlightenment doctrines, particularly by claiming that it was simply a mistake, a dangerous illusion, to imagine that there could be anything beyond capital. ‘It was henceforth no longer a question whether this or that theorem was true, but whether it was useful to capital or harmful, expedient or inexpedient, in accordance with police regulations or contrary to them.’ [26] The working class would therefore have to maintain the traditions which the bourgeoisie had abandoned. Engels wrote, ‘The German working class movement is the heir of German classical philosophy.’ [27] More generally, Lenin described Marxism as ‘the legitimate successor to the best that man produced in the 19th century, as represented by German philosophy, English [sic] political economy and French socialism.’ [28] Shortly after the Russian Revolution, Trotsky summarised the view of three generations of Marxists:
[Marxist] theory was formed entirely on the basis of bourgeois culture, both scientific and political, though it declared a fight to the finish upon that culture. Under the pressure of capitalist contradictions, the universalising thought of the bourgeois democracy, of its boldest, most honest, and farsighted representatives, rises to the heights of a marvellous renunciation, armed with all the critical weapons of bourgeois science. [29]
There are still attempts by liberals and social democrats to restore the sundered whole of the original Enlightenment. Gareth Stedman Jones, for example, has argued that ‘contemporary social democracy should ... revisit its original birthplace and resume the ambition of the late and democratic Enlightenment to combine the benefits of individual freedom and commercial society with the republican ideal of greater equality, inclusive citizenship and the public good.’ [30]
This is literally utopian: we cannot return to the world of 1776 or 1789. For Marx, political emancipation was progress: ‘It may not be the last form of general human emancipation, but it is the last form of general human emancipation within the prevailing scheme of things.’ [31] But it was not the same as human emancipation. ‘We know today that this idealised realm of reason was nothing more than the idealised realm of the bourgeoisie,’ wrote Engels in 1880. ‘The great thinkers of the 18th century could, no more than their predecessors, go beyond the limits imposed upon them by their epoch.’ [32] To be of their epoch was both their tragedy and the source of their greatness.
 
The contemporary debate
I wrote earlier that the issue of predestination was no longer at the heart of our contemporary concerns, but there are certainly people in the Anglo-Saxon world – currently sponsoring City Academies in England and running School Boards in the US – who would like to see it restored to that position. How seriously should we take this threat? Let us take one recent assessment from an impeccably establishment source, Lord May of Oxford who has at various times been a professor of zoology at Imperial College, the Chief Scientific Adviser to the UK government, the head of the Office of Science and Technology, and is currently a member of the House of Lords. He is not, in other words, someone who can be easily suspected of secretly plotting the downfall of Western civilisation.
In an address to mark the end of his presidency of the Royal Society, May illustrated the danger of what he called ‘the darkness of fundamentalist unreason’ by highlighting three ‘global’ problems – ‘climate change, the loss of biological diversity, new and re-emerging diseases.’ Scientists were attempting to find solutions to these, May said, but in each case were facing impediments from ‘campaigns waged by those whose belief systems or commercial interests impel them to deny, or even misrepresent, the scientific facts.’ Attempts to stop the spread of HIV/AIDS in Africa, for example, were being undermined by opposition to strategies based on condom use coming from the Catholic church on the one hand and by the US government, under pressure from fundamentalist Protestantism, on the other. May concluded that ‘the Enlightenment’s core values ... free, open, unprejudiced, uninhibited questioning and enquiry; individual liberty; separation of church and state ... are under serious threat from resurgent fundamentalism, West and East.’ [33]
In the West, it is in the US that the threat has assumed the most menacing proportions. Given the attention paid to the supposed irrationality of Islam, it is worth emphasising the extent to which the US is also increasingly home to pre-Enlightenment views, with millions of Americans cleaving to precisely the type of religiosity that the Enlightenment sought to challenge. One survey found that 80 percent of Americans believe in an afterlife of some sort; 76 percent believe in Heaven (and 64 percent that they will go there); 71 percent believe in Hell and, while very few believe that they will go there, 32 percent believe that it is ‘an actual place of torment and suffering.’ Eighteen percent believe in reincarnation, including 10 percent of born-again Christians, which suggests an uncertain grasp of their own belief system. [34] President George W. Bush himself has declared, ‘The jury is still out on evolution.’ [35] As John Gray has pointed out, ‘Nowhere else are there movements to expel Darwinism from public schools. In truth, the US is a less secular regime than Turkey.’ [36]
The explanation for this may lie in the way in which the US has always had the most unrestrained form of capitalism and the American people have been the least protected by collective provision. The relatively brief period of welfare capitalism (roughly between the 1930s and the 1970s) was followed by a ferocious reversion to a situation where families and communities were ripped apart by exposure to naked market relations. The psychic wounds caused to individuals by such devastation invite the healing touch of faith. As Barbara Ehrenreich writes of the middle class job seekers she studied at first hand, certain kinds of religion not only cure alienated souls, they compliment the individualist philosophy which wounded them in the first place: ‘If you can achieve anything through your own mental efforts – just by praying or concentrating hard enough – there is no need to confront the social and economic forces shaping your life.’ [37] Theodore Adorno once put the point in more theoretical terms, referring specifically to beliefs in astrology: ‘People even of supposedly “normal” mind are prepared to accept systems of delusions for the simple reason that it is too difficult to distinguish such systems from the equally inexorable and equally opaque one under which they actually have to live their lives.’ [38]
The neo-liberal onslaught experienced by the Americans is now the form of capitalism which is being exported everywhere. A recent survey of the rise of religious fundamentalism noted that modernity, ‘the very force that was once expected to render religion obsolete, was in fact causing it to mutate and gather strength.’ The University of Helsinki estimates that 2 million Chinese every year are converting to evangelical Christianity and that the number of new converts may reach 300 million – a fifth of the current population. [39] However, it is not ‘modernity’ as such which has produced these effects, but the specific form taken by capitalist modernity in its current multinational incarnation. ‘The combination of ... two dimensions – socioeconomic anomie together with political and ideological anomie – has inevitably led people to fall back on other factors of social solidarity such as religion, family, and fatherland.’ [40]
There is, however, an important difference between resurgent religion in the US and in the developing world. The fundamentalism of, for example, the Iranian president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, contributes to the oppression of Iranians; the fundamentalism of the US president, George W. Bush, contributes to the oppression not only of Americans, but of peoples across the world. They may be equal in the irrationality of their views, but not in the extent of their powers.
The problem remains of how to deal with the irrational beliefs that a section of the ruling class tries to manipulate. One typical approach is that of Richard Dawkins in a recent television series in which he attacked all religions for, among other things, their irrationality, refusal of scientific evidence, encouragement of intolerance and for conducting what he termed ‘child abuse’, by deliberately subjecting young minds to beliefs which darken their world view at an impressionable age. [41] But Dawkins’s accusations show no understanding of or interest in why people might be predisposed to believe such things. Enlightenment thought on organised religion, which Dawkins essentially reproduces, assumes that it continues to exist because the majority of people are incapable of resisting indoctrination by their priests, presbyters, rabbis or imams.
But adherents of any religion are unlikely to respond positively to a critique which casts doubt on their intelligence and ridicules their beliefs. Post-Enlightenment thinkers, notably Marx and Freud, who saw themselves as building on what the Enlightenment had achieved, sought to explain the social and psychological needs that make people require religion, and therefore suggest alternative courses of action, rather than simply denouncing believers for their irrationality. Thus Marx famously wrote, ‘The criticism of religion is therefore in embryo the criticism of that vale of tears of which religion is the halo.’ [42] The implications were drawn out independently by Freud [43]:
It is certainly senseless to begin by trying to do away with religion by force and at a single blow. The believer will not let his belief be torn from him, either by arguments or prohibitions. And even if this did succeed with some it would be cruelty. A man who has been taking sleeping drafts for tens of years is naturally unable to sleep if his sleeping draft is taken away from him. [44]
Dawkins himself inadvertently provides an example of the very approach Freud is criticising:
Michael Shermer, editor of Sceptic magazine, tells a salutary story of an occasion when he publicly debunked a famous television spiritualist. The man was doing ordinary conjuring tricks and duping people into thinking he was communicating with dead spirits. But instead of being hostile to the now unmasked charlatan, the audience turned on the debunker and supported a woman who accused him of ‘inappropriate’ behaviour because he destroyed people’s illusions.
‘You’d think she’d have been grateful for having the wool pulled off her eyes,’ complains Dawkins, for whom the human race has always been something of a disappointment, ‘but apparently she preferred it firmly over them.’ [45] Dawkins’s approach is simply unable to convince anyone not already predisposed to believe what he is saying. [46] What might change the views of someone with religious or other ‘irrational’ views?
The Chilean writer Ariel Dorfman provides us with an example. As a young student in the late 1960s trying to help the poor and migrant workers, he was involved in a ‘crusade against the industrial products of fiction’ such as ‘comics, soap opera, westerns, radio and TV sitcoms, love songs, films of violence.’ One woman, a consumer of romantic fiction, approached him while he was digging a ditch in a local shanty town and asked him ‘if it was true that I thought people shouldn’t read photo novels.’ He answered, ‘I thought that photo novels were a hazard to her health and her future.’ ‘Don’t do that to us, companerito,’ she said in a familiar, almost tender way. ‘Don’t take my dreams away from me.’ Several years later Dorfman met the same woman again, at the time of the radicalisation associated with Salvador Allende’s government:
She came up to me, just like that, and announced that I was right, that she didn’t read ‘trash’ any more. Then she added a phrase which still haunts me. ‘Now, companero, we are dreaming reality’ ... She had outdistanced her old self, and was no longer entertained by those images which had been her own true love. [47]
That woman’s aspirations for liberation came to an end in the ‘First 9/11’ of the Chilean coup. But the lesson remains for those people who imagine that the way to convince others of the need to ‘dream reality’ is to insult, bully and hector them from a position of assumed superiority.
 
Enlightenment’s false friends
The task of holding aloft the banner of the Enlightenment has been appropriated by a rightward-moving section of the liberal left, typically based in the media rather than the academy. This campaign is not, of course, one waged only by a handful of newspaper columnists. The law to ban the wearing of the hijab in French schools and colleges was supported by many French teachers, much of the left and even the Trotskyist organisation Lutte Ouvrière. Nevertheless, it is among media commentators that arguments about the need to protect the secular heritage of the Enlightenment have gained the greatest currency.
The most striking thing about these arguments is their lop-sidedness. The main targets are not, for example, the campaign to introduce creationism into the science curriculum of American schools, or the refusal by the US government to take global warming seriously. Rather, it is the supposed threat to Western civilisation from Islamic fundamentalism. Especially since 9/11 the slogan of ‘defending the Enlightenment’ has been raised to justify support for what Robert Fisk calls ‘the great war for civilisation’ abroad and the repression of the Muslim population at home. [48]
Christopher Hitchens, one of the most vociferous media supporters of the ‘war on terror’, gave a series of interviews explaining why someone long associated with the left had now aligned himself so decisively with the neo-conservative agenda for the Middle East. Hitchens said that since 9/11 he had been possessed by a mission ‘to defend the Enlightenment, to defend and extend the benefits of rationalism, by all and any means necessary.’ [49] Hitchens argued in the immediate aftermath of the attacks on the US:
The bombers of Manhattan represent fascism with an Islamic face, and there’s no point in any euphemism about it. What they abominate about ‘the West’, to put it in a phrase, is not what Western liberals don’t like and can’t defend about their own system, but what they do like about it and must defend: its emancipated women, its scientific inquiry, its separation of religion from the state. [50]
Iraq was not, of course, involved in 9/11. Nor, the occasional opportunistic genuflection in the direction of Mecca aside, had the Ba’athist regime been anything other than a secular modernising dictatorship. No matter, it too was an abomination to Enlightenment values and could be included under the general heading of ‘fascism’, a term which has no scientific value in this context, but which is extremely useful for dragooning the liberal left behind the imperial war effort – for who could possibly argue against what Hitchens called ‘the forces of reaction’? [51]
For former left supporters of the war on terror, the threat to the Enlightenment is not only from Islamic or Arabic ‘fascism’, but from a left which has supposedly capitulated to it. According to Nick Cohen, one of the British-based B52 liberals, ‘For the first time since the Enlightenment, a section of the left is allied with religious fanaticism and, for the first time since the Hitler-Stalin pact, a section of the left has gone soft on fascism.’ [52] Why has the left behaved in this way? Because ‘when confronted with a movement of contemporary imperialism – Islamism wants an empire from the Philippines to Gibraltar – and which is tyrannical, homophobic, misogynist, racist and homicidal to boot, they feel it is valid because it is against Western culture.’ [53] An empire is certainly being constructed ‘from the Philippines to Gibraltar’, not by Muslims, but by the very American state whose military apparatus Cohen is constantly exhorting to invade still more countries. Against this reality, one is tempted to quote a great passage from one of the founders of modern conservatism, Edmund Burke: ‘You are terrifying yourself with ghosts and apparitions, while your house is the haunt of robbers.’ [54]
Some supporters of the New Enlightenment realise that that it is highly implausible to attack only Islamic fundamentalism without also attacking the Western variants. In one of the more readable and intelligent examples of the genre Francis Wheen begins by noting the coincidence of the return of Ayatollah Khomeini to Iran and the election of Margaret Thatcher as prime minister of Great Britain in the first half of 1979, both linked by their adherence to ‘two powerful messianic creeds’ – Islamic fundamentalism and neo-liberalism. However, despite this apparent even-handedness, Wheen comes down on the side of the US, as the Enlightenment’s ‘most flourishing offshoot, the country damned by Islamists as the great Satan but exalted by Tom Paine as “the cause of all mankind”.’ [55] He does not even consider whether America’s role in the world might have changed since the days of Lexington and Concord. And so it goes. Nick Cohen describes George W. Bush as ‘a Bible-bashing know-nothing whose strings were pulled by Big Pharma, Big Oil and the Big Guy in the Sky.’ [56] Might this have anything to do with his plans for US dominance of the Middle East? The issue simply vanishes from the diatribes against the left which follow. To Muslims, no mercy; to the established order, endless indulgence. The philosopher Onora O’Neill has written, ‘Contemporary liberal readings of the right to free speech often assume that we can safely accord the same freedoms of expression to the powerless and the powerful,’ and this is certainly the case for the writers quoted here. [57] Starting from an abstract, decontextualised idea of rationality, they claim to be attacking irrationality without fear or favour wherever they find it. It just so happens that the irrationality of the powerful tends to receive rather less attention than that of the powerless.
Why have so many one-time Marxists collapsed back into this highly selective version of the Enlightenment? Martin Kettle, for whom ‘the failure of socialism’ is apparently the great lesson of the 20th century, claims, ‘Too many haters of capitalism and the United States still cram everything into the frame of untruth and self-deception that says my enemy’s enemy is still my friend because, even if he blows up my family on the tube, murders my colleagues on the bus or threatens to behead me for publishing a drawing, he is still at war with Bush, Blair and Berlusconi.’ [58] This is crude innuendo. Does Kettle actually know anyone who takes this position? It is a classic example of Stalinist tactics retained by repentant Stalinists. Behind it lies the heavy stench of defeat, of thwarted hopes and the rescaling of political ambitions to more modest proportions, of a world not transformed, but at least made safe for Guardian columnists. To invoke the Enlightenment, with its great Promethean insistence that human beings can transform their world, in defence of this retreat is pitiable, and in some cases tragic. The talk is of rationality, but underneath lies the suggestion that human beings are prone to commit evil, and therefore have to be controlled.
 
The left and the heritage
However, there is one aspect of the New Enlightenment argument of the liberals which carries some plausibility, and this is the attack on the absurdities of postmodernism. Fred Halliday, one of the B52 liberals, is able to score points off the postmodernist left when he argues:
If you are languishing in the jails of the Islamic guards in Iran, forced to wear medieval clothes on the streets of Tehran, being shot for your commitment to secularism in Egypt or Algeria, being driven from your home and possibly killed in Bombay or having your land stolen by people who claim it was given them by god, then it is little comfort as you protest in the name of universal values to be told you are ethnocentric or not postmodernistically playful enough or that, sorry, after all, we cannot be sure that the rights you ask to be defended are properly founded. [59]
There can be few people on the left who do not oppose such things. But there is nevertheless sometimes a reluctance to come to the defence of the Enlightenment legacy.
This was not an issue for more than a hundred years after the Enlightenment. If the working class and the oppressed inherited a material interest in transforming the world that the bourgeoisie no longer had, they also inherited from the Enlightenment the power of reason as a means of affecting that transformation. In Robert Burns’s A Man’s a Man for a’ That (1795), it is ‘the man o’ independent mind’ who ‘looks and laughs’ at the pretensions of the aristocracy. [60] In his poem For Toussaint L’Ouverture (1802) William Wordsworth wrote of the leader of the slave revolution in San Domingo, that among his ‘great allies’ was ‘man’s unconquerable mind’. [61] And these views were carried over into the working class movement proper. The words of L’Internationale (1870) by the French socialist Eugene Pottier invoke ‘reason in revolt’ and enjoin the ‘servile masses’ to dispense ‘with all your superstitions.’ These traditions are still alive. American journalist Barbara Ehrenreich has recently recalled her parents in these terms:
My family was originally blue collar poor, but intensely committed to rationality, in a very positivistic and what I see now as limited way. But they were militant about these things. And I came to respect this rationality as part of what gave them some dignity as against the bosses ... I always thought about rationality not that it was something the oppressor had and my people didn’t have but that it was something you were more likely to encounter among the oppressed than among those who were busily trying to justify their position in society, regardless of truth. [62]
There had always been those on the left, from William Blake through to George Sorel, who had opposed reason, or certain kinds of reason, as a snare of bourgeois society. But given the enemies which the Enlightenment legacy gathered in first half of the 20th century, this was always a minority position. ‘The year 1789 is hereby erased from history,’ remarked Joseph Goebbels, the newly appointed Nazi minister for popular enlightenment and propaganda, in a radio broadcast of 1 April 1933. [63] By ‘1789’, he meant not only the French Revolution but the entire tradition of Enlightenment thought that had contributed to it. In the face of this, Trotsky affirmed the Enlightenment tradition in the same way as Marx and Engels themselves, in The History of the Russian Revolution (written in 1930): ‘The historical assent of humanity, taken as a whole, may be summarised as a succession of victories of consciousness over blind forces – in nature, in society, in man himself.’ [64] The optimism expressed here – in conditions of extraordinary difficulty – flows from the belief that that Marxism inherited from the Enlightenment, that human beings have the capacity to remake the world.
The subsequent history of the 20th century undermined such optimism. The Holocaust produced the first serious intellectual critique of the Enlightenment from the left. Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer wrote, ‘For the Enlightenment, whatever does not conform to the rule of computation and utility is suspect.’ Or, more simply, ‘Enlightenment is totalitarian.’ [65] Then in the 1950s with the Cold War, the H-bomb and the persistence of alienation even amid the ‘affluent’ capitalism of the United States, there developed the subculture of the Beats which counterposed imagination to reason – a mood which found a much wider audience in the 1960s, as reflected in some of Bob Dylan’s lyrics (‘she knows too much to argue or to judge’ [66]) and the mysticism of the hippy ‘flower power’ boom of 1967.
The defeat of the movements for human liberation that we associate with the year 1968 brought to the surface the incipient irrationalism which the counter culture incubated. ‘What could be more reassuring,’ writes Alex Callinicos, ‘for a generation, drawn first towards and then away from Marxism by political ups and downs of the past two decades, than to be told – in style decked out with the apparent profundity and genuine obscurity of the sub-Modernist rhetoric cultivated by “68 thought” – that there is nothing they can do to change the world?’ [67] Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont also identify ‘political discouragement’ with the rise of the new social movements and point out that where the real sources of power and wealth are apparently unreachable, ‘science’ can be attacked as a convenient substitute. [68]
In the postmodern melange, and the broader currents of irrationality which circle round it, the problem with Enlightenment goals is apparently not that they remain incomplete but, on the contrary, that they have been all too perfectly realised. ‘The “Enlightenment”, which discovered the liberties’, wrote Michel Foucault in 1975, ‘also invented the disciplines.’ [69] Reason was now the source of oppression. Goya, artistic conscience of the tragedy of the Spanish Enlightenment, called one of his etchings, The Sleep of Reason Produces Monsters. Not so, claimed Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari in 1977. ‘It is not the slumber of reason that engenders monsters, but vigilant and insomniac rationality.’ [70] The American philosopher Richard Rorty writes, ‘We have reached a time when we can finally get rid of the conviction that there just must be large theoretical ways of finding out how to end injustice.’ Above all, Rorty argues, we must avoid attempting to find a ‘successor to Marxism’. [71] Sandra Harding expresses her scepticism that ‘there is one world, one “truth” about it, and one and only one science that can, in principle, accurately represent that “truth”.’ It is time, Harding believes that we faced up to the truth about science: ‘Maldevelopment and dedevelopment for the majority of the world’s peoples have tended to be the now-obvious effects of the introduction of scientifically rational agriculture, manufacturing, health care, and so forth into the already economically and politically disadvantaged societies of the Third World.’ [72] Health care?
The arguments for local particularity and traditional belief against universalism and rationality, advanced for example by Edmund Burke in Reflections on the Revolution in France and Joseph de Maistre in Study on Sovereignty, are repeated today by some on the left in apparent ignorance of their origin in these founding texts of modern conservative political theory. Others are perfectly aware of where their ideas originate. Chantal Mouffe, for example, acknowledges, ‘One of the chief emphases of conservative thought does indeed lie in its critique of the Enlightenment’s rationalism and universalism, a critique it shares with postmodern thought.’ Both are ‘predicated upon human finitude, imperfection and limits.’ She then goes on to praise the British Conservative philosopher Michael Oakeshott. [73]
The collapse of Stalinism in 1989 supposedly confirmed this wisdom. ‘Marxism, the last shoot stemming from both the Enlightenment and Christianity, seems to have lost all of its critical power,’ wrote Lyotard. [74] For Vaclav Havel, ‘The fall of Communism can be regarded as a sign that modern thought – based on the premise that the world is objectively knowable, and that the knowledge so obtained can be absolutely generalised – has come to a final crisis.’ [75] As John Sambonmatsu recounts:
Like a virus travelling through the body of critical thought, postmodernism has succeeded by commanding the disciplinary apparatus nearest to account ... Postmodernism calved a new generation of postcolonial theorists on the Indian subcontinent, provided solace to dispirited activists in Latin America, attracted academic activists disenchanted with Marxism, and struck the fancy of Islamic fundamentalists in Iran ... No theory of recent vintage has travelled as fast, or as far, as postmodernism has. [76]
Several generations of radicals or would-be radicals have now been educated in the conventional pieties of post-structuralism and postmodernism. Many of them view the Enlightenment with intense suspicion, as an instrument for the domination of the oppressed and the subjugation of nature, and as little else. Consequently, they are either unwilling or unable to defend it. Roger Burbach, an active supporter of the anti-globalisation movement, criticises ‘virtually all political parties, including those on the left’, as ‘heirs of the Enlightenment project’. [77] Similar themes are present in the introduction to a widely-read anthology of the movement:
For the time of single ideologies and grand narratives was over. People were sick of sacrificing themselves for the sake of gigantic game plans which didn’t take account of their individual needs, their humanity, their culture, their creativity. [78]
But, as Larry Laudan points out, ‘to the extent – and it is considerable – that the new left subscribe to strong forms of relativism, it has lost all theoretical rationale for such activity.’ [79] And, as Elizabeth Wilson writes, since ‘we are given no reasons why we should believe in one thing rather than another, we might as well go in for Erhardt Seminar training as radical politics; Buddhism is as good as Bolshevism (or better); therapy replaces collective action; astrology is the name of the game.’ [80]
 
Conclusion
What attitude then should socialists take to the heritage of the Enlightenment, in the face of these genuine enemies and false friends? Let us return to the three areas with which I defined earlier as the central ideas of the Enlightenment: universalism, progress and reason.
Take universalism first. As the postmodernists discourse endlessly on the wonders of difference and particularity, fascist and other extreme right wing politicians are perfectly aware of how useful anti-universalism is for their ends. As Richard Wolin reports of developments in France during the 1990s:
... representatives of the European New Right such as Alain de Benoist began employing the claims of ‘differential racism’ to justify cultural separatism – as epitomised by Le Pen’s cynical claim, ‘I love North Africans but their place is in the Maghreb’ – and discriminatory legislation. At this point the vacuity of ‘difference’ as an ethical paradigm became painfully apparent. [81]
Sometimes, however, the racism takes very traditional forms. Take, for example, a recent message from peace campaigner Cindy Sheehan to her supporters, which has been reproduced on several websites. In it, Sheehan recollects the following episode:
I got a hate email from a ‘patriotic American’ once who told me that when we see the mothers and fathers of Iraq screaming because their babies have been killed, that they ‘are just acting for the cameras. They are animals who don’t care about their children because they know they can produce another.’
As Sheehan points out, ‘This wicked rhetoric ... dehumanises us all.’ [82] And that seems to me to be the right response, the enlightened response, so to speak. One reason (among many others) for trying to stop our governments killing Iraqi children and subjecting their parents to the pain of loss is precisely because ‘they’ are the same as ‘us’, with the same relationships and the same emotions. In the face of the racism displayed by Sheehan’s correspondent, invoking the ‘irreducibility of difference’ or the other shibboleths of cultural relativism is actually worse than useless, because it goes halfway towards accepting the racist argument. If the Iraqis, the Chinese, the !Kung San, or whoever are all fundamentally different in some way, then the logic of this position, should one wish to follow it, is that it is permissible to treat them differently.
If socialists need to reassert the claims of universalism, they need to subject the second key idea, that of progress, to question. Let us define progress simply in terms of society’s increasing ability of keep the world’s population alive and capable of living a fully human life. Capitalism gave us, over a hundred years ago, the technology, skills, techniques and productive levels with which socialism could have been established. Since it has not, these have continued to grow, notwithstanding the terrible crises with which the system is regularly afflicted. In the absence of socialism millions have suffered and died needlessly; but at the same time, if and when we do achieve it we will do so on the basis of developments which earlier generations of Marxists could only have imagined. Supporters of the system like Julian Simon claim that we can overcome scarcity on the basis of the existing economic order:
We now possess knowledge about resource locations and materials processing that allows us to satisfy our physical needs and desires for food, drink, heat, light, clothing, longevity, transportation, and the recording and transmission of information and entertainment. We can perform these tasks sufficiently well that the additional knowledge on these subjects will not revolutionise humanity. It still remains to us to reorganise our institutions, economies, and societies in such fashion that the benefits of this knowledge are available to the vast majority rather than a minority of all people.
But there are threats to this imminent nirvana. And, Reader, we are responsible: ‘On the other hand, with greater progress comes greater freedom from pressing survival needs, which in turn enables people to indulge themselves in foolish, irrational and counter-productive thinking, and can lead to mass movements that impede progress.’ [83] Capitalism made possible improvements to living conditions, provided people were prepared to struggle for them; but what capitalism gives, or least allows, it can also take away. As Thomas Pogge notes:
The consequences of such extreme poverty are foreseeable and extensively documented: 14 percent of the world’s population (826 million) are undernourished, 16 percent (968 million) lack access to safe drinking water, 40 percent (2,4000 million) lack access to basic sanitation, and 854 million adults are illiterate. Of all human beings 15 percent (more than 880 million) lack access to health services, 17 percent (approximately 1,000 million) have no adequate shelter, and 33 percent (2,000 million) no electricity.
And as Pogge carefully explains, even these grim figures may give an over-positive impression: ‘By focusing on human beings alive at any given time, all these statistics give less weight to those whose lives are short.’ These things are avoidable:
One third of all human deaths are due to poverty-related causes, such as starvation, diarrhoea, pneumonia, tuberculosis, malaria, measles and prenatal conditions, all of which could be prevented or cured cheaply through food, safe drinking water, vaccinations, rehydration packs, or medicines ... Not mentioned in the retrospectives and not shown on the evening news are the ordinary deaths from starvation and preventable diseases – some 250 million people, mostly children, in the 14 years since the end of the Cold War. The names of these people, if listed in the style of the Vietnam War Memorial, would cover a wall 350 miles long. [84]
Pogge could be living on a different planet from Simons, although it is one inhabited by rather more people. How can progress and regress occur at the same time? As Esther Leslie points out in her outstanding study of Walter Benjamin, ‘As the bourgeois class secures economic and political power, progress, a cardinal strand in Enlightenment political rhetoric and social theory, unfolds in actuality its class inflections as economic and social progress for one class, presented ideologically as the universally significant progression of humanity itself.’ Technological improvements themselves are not necessarily progressive: ‘The easy identification of technological development with progress overrides questions of social form or production relations.’ The problem, however, is not the technological aspect of the forces of production as such, but, as Leslie suggests, the relations of production within which they occur. Although both develop, the tendency is always for the latter to retard the former: ‘Every inch of progress on a technological level under these relations of production, the oppressed suffer regression on a social level: like Marx’s understanding of machinery as potential liberator that in this moment under this organisation of relations of production only intensifies our exploitation and, often, our discomfort.’ [85] Every discussion of progress must therefore start with the question, ‘Progress for whom?’
This brings me to the final idea, that of reason itself. Of this we must ask, as we did of progress, ‘Rational for whom?’ The central difficulty was once identified by Max Horkheimer: ‘The difficulties of rationalist philosophy originate from the fact that the universality of reason cannot be anything else than the accord among the interests of all groups alike, whereas in reality society has been split up into groups with competing interests.’ [86]
Capitalists have to pursue courses of action which, however rational they may be for individual members of their class, can be terrifyingly irrational for everybody else. The tobacco companies which are currently opening up huge new markets in South East Asia for their drugs will, in due course, be responsible for a cancer epidemic in South East Asia which will in turn put intolerable pressures on the fragile health services of those countries, the costs of which will be born by the working class and peasantry, leading to further internal instability and thus the threat of war – but none of this enters the calculations of the legal drug barons.
A similar logic applies to the nuclear fuel and oil companies supporting George W. Bush in resisting even the most limited attempts to reduce gas emissions; the waters rise in Bangladesh and Mozambique, condemning thousands to death, but not until shores of the US are covered by the Pacific Ocean will this be factored into their calculations – and, if the recent experience of New Orleans is anything to go by, perhaps not even then. Once accumulation is engaged upon it is not a choice, rational or otherwise, because there are no alternatives: they are subject to a compulsion terrible, severe and inescapable.
We therefore cannot simply reject the Enlightenment without depriving ourselves of some of the most important intellectual tools necessary for human liberation. But neither can we pretend that it had no limitations, or that there have been no positive intellectual developments since the early 19th century. The task for socialists is to identify elements of the Enlightenment particular to the capitalist economic and social conditions from which it initially emerged, and which are genuinely universal and consequently capable of being turned to different purposes. Since the Enlightenment those who claim to be its heirs have held opposing positions in relation to its social goals. One is that, to the extent that it is possible for them to be accomplished at all, this has been done in the heartlands of capitalism and now needs to be extended to those parts of the world still languishing in ‘pre-modernity.’ Time has passed judgement on these claims: war, environmental catastrophe, increased impoverishment – these are the fruits of capitalist reason, capitalist progress and the rejection of universality. The other is simply this: Enlightenment social goals will only ever be partially attained under capitalist society and even these limited gains are constantly under threat. In these circumstances, only socialism is capable of ‘defending the Enlightenment’, but, more importantly, of completing it.

Notes
1. B. Spinoza, Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, translated by S. Shirley with an introduction by B.S. Gregory (Leiden 1989), p. 53.
2. See N. Davidson, Islam and Enlightenment, Socialist Review, March 2006.
3. I. Kant, Answering the Question: What is Enlightenment?, in Political Works, edited with an introduction and notes by H. Reiss, translated by N.B. Nisbet, second, enlarged edition (Cambridge 1991), p. 54.
4. A. Smith, Lectures on Jurisprudence, edited by R. L. Meek, D.D. Raphael and P.G. Stein (Oxford 1978), pp. 14, 16.
5. Lord Kames, Historical Law Tracts (Glasgow 1758), p. 56.
6. M. Hardt and A. Negri, Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire (New York 2004), pp. 307, 311 and pp. 306–312 more generally.
7. B. Spinoza, as above, pp. 297, 56.
8. Voltaire to D’Alembert, 2 September 1768, in Oeuvres Completes (Paris 1880), vol. 46, p. 112.
9. P.N. Siegel, The Meek and the Militant: Religion and Power across the World (London 1986), p. 22.
10. D. Outram, The Enlightenment (Cambridge 1995), pp. 122–123; D. Beales, Social Forces and Enlightened Policies, in Enlightenment and Reform in 18th-Century Europe (London and New York 2005), pp. 9–10.
11. C.-L. de S. Montesquieu, The Spirit of Laws, edited by D.W. Carrithers (Berkeley, Los Angeles and London 1977), p. 262.
12. G.W.F. Hegel, Lectures on the Philosophy of History, translated from the third German edition by J. Sibree (London 1857), p. 95.
13. J.G. von Herder, Letters for the Advancement of Humanity (1793–1797) – Tenth Collection: Letter 115, in Philosophical Writings, translated and edited by M.N. Forster (Cambridge 2002), p. 386.
14. C.L.R. James, The Black Jacobins: Toussaint L’Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution, revised edition (London 1980), pp. 69–75; R. Blackburn, The Overthrow of Colonial Slavery, 1776–1848 (London and New York 1988), pp. 145, 169–176.
15. T. Jefferson, The Unanimous Declaration of the Thirteen United States of America, 4 July 1776, in M. Williams (ed.), Revolutions, 1775–1830 (Harmondsworth 1971), p. 45. Jefferson later served as president of the United States between 1801 and 1809. There could be no starker illustration of the decline of bourgeois civilisation than a comparison between the magnificently resonant yet theoretically-informed prose of the Declaration and the utterances of the present incumbent of the post once occupied by Jefferson.
16. M. Berube, New Historicism, American Studies, and American Identity, in Public Access: Literary Theory and American Cultural Politics (London and New York 1994), p. 205.
17. T. Eagleton, The Illusions of Postmodernism (Oxford and Cambridge, Massachusetts 1994), p. 113.
18. M. Foucault, Truth and Power, in Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972–1977, edited by C. Gordon, translated by C. Gordon, L. Marshall, J. Mepham and K. Soper (Brighton 1980), p. 133.
19. P. Chatterjee, Nationalist Thought and the Colonial World, in The Partha Chatterjee Omnibus (New Delhi 1999), p. 168.
20. E. M. Wood, The Origin of Capitalism: a Longer View (London and New York 2002), p. 190.
21. M. Teich, Afterword, in R. Porter and M. Teich (eds.), The Enlightenment in National Context (Cambridge 1981), pp. 216-217. See also F. Venturi, Utopia and Reform in the Enlightenment (Cambridge 1971), p. 11.
22. A.O. Hirschman, The Passions and the Interests, Twentieth Anniversary Edition (Princeton, 1997), pp. 66, 128–135.
23. D. Gordon, On the Supposed Obsolescence of the French Enlightenment’, in D. Gordon (ed.), Postmodernism and the Enlightenment (New York and London 2001), p. 204.
24. A. Callinicos, Social Theory: a Historical Introduction (Cambridge 1999), p. 56.
25. K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party, in Political Writings, edited and introduced by D. Fernbach (Harmondsworth 1973), vol. 1, The Revolutions of 1848, pp. 85, 73.
26. K. Marx, Postface to the Second Edition, in Capital: a Critique of Political Economy, translated by B. Fowkes with an introduction by E. Mandel (Harmondsworth 1976), vol. 1, p. 97.
27. F. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy, in Collected Works, as above, vol. 26, p. 398.
28. V.I. Lenin, The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism, in Collected Works (Moscow 1960–70), vol. 15, p. 29.
29. L.D. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, introduced by L. German (London 1991), p. 225.
30. G. Stedman Jones, An End to Poverty? A Historical Debate (London 2004), p. 235.
31. K. Marx, On the Jewish Question, in Early Writings, introduced by L. Colletti, translated by R. Livingston and G. Benton (Harmondsworth 1975), pp. 218, 221.
32. F. Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, in Collected Works, as above, vol 24, p. 286.
33. R. May, Threats to Tomorrow’s World, anniversary address delivered by the President of the Royal Society, 30 November 2005 (London 2005) pp. 4, 16-17, 23.
34. The Barna Update, Americans Describe Their Views About Life After Death, 23 October 2003, www.barna.org/FlexPage.aspx?Page=BarnaUpdate&BarnaUpdateID=150.
35. P. Harris, Would You Adam ’n’ Eve it ... Dinosaurs in Eden, Observer, 22 May 2005.
36. J. Gray, Al Qaeda and What It Means to be Modern (London 2003), p. 23.
37. B. Ehrenreich, Bait and Switch: the Futile Pursuit of the Corporate Dream (London 2006), p. 221. See also ch. 5, Networking with the Lord.
38. T. Adorno, The Stars Down to Earth: the Los Angeles Times
Astrology Column, in The Stars Dwn to Earth and Other Essays in the Irrational in Culture, edited with and introduction by S. Crook (London 1994), p. 115.
39. D. McKenzie, End of the Enlightenment, New Scientist, 8 October 2005, pp. 41, 43.
40. G. Achcar, The Clash of Barbarisms: September 11 and the Making of the New World Disorder, translated by P. Drucker (New York 2002), p. 89 and pp. 85–89 more generally.
41.
The Root of All Evil?, broadcast on 9 and 16 January 2006, on Channel 4.
42. K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right. Introduction, in Early Writings, as above, p. 244. Several non-Marxist radicals have been quicker to realise what Marx was actually saying than those who simply assimilate him to the Enlightenment. See, for example, G. Orwell, Notes on the Way, in The Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell, edited by S. Orwell and I. Angus (Harmondsworth 1970), vol. 2, p. 33, and M. Foucault, Iran: the Spirit of a World without Spirit, in Politics, Philosophy, Culture: Interviews and Other Writings, 1977–1984, translated by A. Sheridan and others, edited with an introduction by L.D. Kritzman (New York and London 1988), p. 218.
43. For a brief discussion of parallels between the views of Engels and Freud on religion, see P.N. Siegel, The Meek and the Militant, as above, pp. 37–38.
44. S. Freud, The Future of an Illusion, in The Freud Reader, edited by P. Gay (New York and London 1995), p. 716.
45. R. Dawkins, Preface, in Unweaving the Rainbow: Science, Delusion and the Appetite for Wonder (London 1988), p. xi.
46. Rationalism in art can of course avoid the problem expressed here in science, as has been recently demonstrated by Phillip Pullman’s great trilogy, His Dark Materials (1994–2001).
47. A. Dorfman, Childhood as Underdevelopment, in The Empire’s Old Clothes: What the Lone Ranger, Babar and Other Innocent Heroes Do to Our Minds (London 1983), pp. 3–5.
48. Fisk encountered the phrase on the reverse of a campaign medal struck during the First World War and awarded to his grandfather. See R. Fisk, The Great War for Civilization: the Conquest of the Middle East (London 2005), p. ix.
49. A. Massie, The Trial of Christopher Hitchens, Scotland on Sunday, 18 July 2003.
50. C. Hitchens, Against Rationalization, in Love, Poverty and War: Journeys and Essays (London 2005), p. 413.
51. C. Hitchens, Regime Change (Harmondsworth 2003), p. 56. The conjunction of Islam and fascism had first been made by Fred Halliday in his reports from revolutionary Iran in 1979, although far more tentatively than Halliday was later to claim. Compare the parallels which Halliday actually draws in passing in The Revolution Turns to Reaction, New Statesman, 17 August 1979, p. 264, and his subsequent claims to have identified ‘Islam with a Fascist Face’ in The Iranian Revolution and its Implications, New Left Review I/166 (November/December 1987), p. 36–37.
52. N. Cohen, By the Left ... about Turn, Observer, 14 December 2003.
53. N. Cohen, I Still Fight Oppression, Observer, 7 August 2005.
54. E. Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France and on the Proceedings of Certain Societies in London Relative to that Event, edited with an introduction by C.C. O’Brien (Harmondsworth 1968), pp. 248–249. Elsewhere Cohen describes ‘the restoration of the Islamic Caliphate’ as ‘a dream as impossible as communism.’ See The Second Battle of Stalingrad, in Pretty Straight Guys (London 2003), p. 124.
55. F. Wheen, How Mumbo Jumbo Conquered the World, as above, pp. vii–xiv, ch. 1, pp. 309–310.
56. N. Cohen, The Second Battle of Stalingrad, as above, p. 104.
57. O. O’Neill, A Right to Offend?, Guardian (MediaGuardian), 13 February 2006.
58. M. Kettle, When It Was No Longer Sweet and Noble to Kill for the Cause, Guardian, 11 February 2006.
59. F. Halliday, Fundamentalism and Political Power, in Two Hours that Shook the World: September 11, 2001. Causes and Consequences (London 2002), p. 67.
60. R. Burns, A Man’s a Man for a’ Tha’, in The Canongate Burns, introduced by A. Noble, edited by A. Noble and P.S. Hogg (Edinburgh 2001), p. 512.
61. W. Wordsworth, To Toussaint L’Ouverture, in T. Paulin (ed.), The Faber Book of Political Verse (London 1986), p. 229.
62. B. Ehrenreich, For the Rationality Debate, http://www.zmag.org/zmag/articles/ehrenrationpiece.html.
63. Quoted in K.D. Bracher, The German Dictatorship (Harmondsworth 1970), p. 10.
64. L.D. Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution (London 1977), p. 1191.
65. T.W. Adorno and M. Horkheimer, Dialectic of Enlightenment (London 1986), pp. 6, 24, 83.
66. B. Dylan, Love minus Zero/No Limit, in Lyrics: 1962–1985 (London 1985), p. 260.
67. A. Callinicos, Against Postmodernism: A Marxist Critique (Houndmills 1989), pp. 168, 170.
68. A. Sokal and J. Bricmont, Intellectual Impostures: Postmodern Philosopher’s Abuse of Science (London 1998), pp. 187–194.
69. M. Foucault, Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison, translated from the French by A. Sheridan (Harmondsworth 1979), p. 222. For parallels between Adorno and Foucault, see A. Honneth, Foucault’s Theory of Society: a Systems-Theoretic Dissolution of the Dialectic of Enlightenment, in M. Kelly (ed.), Critique and Power: Recasting the Foucault/Habermas Debate (Cambridge, Massachusetts 1994), pp. 177–181.
70. G. Deleuze and F. Guattari, Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, translated by R. Hurley, M. Sean and H.R. Lane (New York 1977), p. 112.
71. Quoted in P. Berman, A Tale of Two Utopias: the Political Journey of the Generation of 1968 (New York 1996), p. 296.
72. S. Harding, A World of Sciences, in R. Figuera and S. Harding (eds.), Science and Other Cultures: Issues in Philosophies of Science and Technology (London and New York 2003), pp. 52, 57, 61.
73. C. Mouffe, Radical Democracy, in A. Ross (ed.), Universal Abandon: the Politics of Postmodernism (Minneapolis 1988), p. 38. ‘Oakeshott was a scoundrel’, according to E.P. Thompson as reported by P. Anderson, In Memoriam: Edward Thompson, in Spectrum (London and New York 2005), p. 187.
74. J.-F. Lyotard, The Wall, the Gulf and the Sun: a Fable, in Political Writings, translated by B. Readings with K.P. Geitman, foreword and notes by B. Readings (London 1993), p. 114.
75. V. Havel, The End of the Modern Era, New York Times, 1 March 1992.
76. J. Sanbonmatsu, Postmodernism and the Corruption of the Academic Intelligentsia, The Socialist Register (2005), p. 198.
77. R. Burbach, Globalisation and Postmodern Politics: from Zapatistas to High-Tech Robber Barons (London and Kingston, Jamaica 2001), pp. 10, 11.
78. Notes from Nowhere, Emergence, in Notes from Nowhere (eds.), We are Everywhere: the Irresistible Rise of Global Anticapitalism (London and New York 2003), p. 23.
79. L. Laudan, Science and Relativism: Some Key Controversies in the Philosophy of Science (Chicago, 1990), p. 163.
80. E. Wilson, Rewinding the Video, in Hallucinations: Life in the Post-Modern City (London 1988), pp. 208–9.
81. R. Wolin, The Seductions of Unreason: the Intellectual Romance with Fascism from Nietzsche to Postmodernism (Princeton and Oxford 2004), p. 160.
82. C. Sheehan, A New World is Possible, http://www.worldsocialforumlive.org/?p=27#more-27 posted on 26 January 2006.
83. J.L. Simon, What Does the Future Hold? The Forecast In a Nutshell, in J.L. Simon (ed.), The State Of Humanity (Oxford and Cambridge, Massachusetts 1995), pp. 648, 659.
84. T. Pogge, World Poverty and Human Rights (Cambridge 2002), pp. 97, 98.
85. E. Leslie, Walter Benjamin: Overpowering Conformism (London and Sterling, Virginia 2000), pp. 178, 231.
86. M. Horkheimer, The End of Reason, in The Essential Frankfurt School Reader, edited with introductions by A. Arato and E. Gebhardt (New York 1978), p. 30.
 



Dave Renton
When We Touched the Sky: the Anti-Nazi League, 1977–1981
New Clarion Press, 2006, £13.95
Over three years one organisation distributed 9 million leaflets, sold 750,000 badges, had 250 branches with 50,000 members, held a conference attracting 800 delegates and received affiliations from – among other bodies – 50 constituency Labour parties, 30 AUEW branches, 25 trades councils and 13 shop steward committees. These are some of the materials produced, activities undertaken and supporters enlisted, not by the Stop the War Coalition since 2002, but by the Anti Nazi League (ANL) between 1977 and 1980. [1]
The goal of the ANL was to stop and reverse the growth of the fascist National Front (NF), and it may be worth reminding ourselves of the extent of the Nazi threat during the latter half of the 1970s, since today this is often downplayed. One estimate, by the journal Searchlight, has 64,000 people passing through the ranks of the NF between 1967 and 1979, with its highest membership level in any one year reaching 17,500 in 1976–77. In the general election of October 1974 the NF stood 90 candidates who received 113,844 votes. Three years later, in the local and Greater London Council elections, NF candidates received an average of 5.7 percent of the vote, pushing the Liberals into fourth place in a quarter of the seats.
For many black and Asian people the threat was immediate and direct, in the shape of violent and sometimes fatal racist attacks, such as those which took the lives of Gurdip Singh Chaggar and Altab Ali. Yet by the time the ANL was effectively disbanded towards the end of 1981, the NF was unable to demonstrate without challenge, had seen all its candidates in the 1979 general election lose their deposits and had suffered disabling internal leadership battles provoked by their failure. By the end of 1984 the NF had lost nine tenths of its membership. [2]
The marginalisation of the NF was, by any standards, a remarkable success for a movement initiated by the revolutionary left, particularly in a period otherwise marked by the beginning of a generalised retreat by the labour movement. It was the formative political experience of an entire cohort of activists, many of whom ended up far from revolutionary politics. ‘Leon Trotsky has not made a big impact on my life, except for the circles and the arrows’, wrote Guardian journalist Jackie Ashley recently:
‘Everyone on the left in my generation probably remembers them: the symbols of the Anti Nazi League. It may have been kicked off by the Socialist Workers Party, but thousands of Labour activists, trade unionists and students carried the circles and arrows, back in the 1970s as we marched against the National Front’. [3]
It is not an achievement which has hitherto been studied in any detail. Until now the major book dealing with this period had been David Widgery’s Beating Time, a work of literary and visual fusion which displays all the characteristic panache of its author, but – mainly because of his role as a leading participant – lacks the necessary historical distance from the material. [4] More to the point, it is focused mainly on the role of Rock Against Racism (RAR), rather than the ANL.
RAR was launched in September 1976, over a year before the ANL, and was a more specifically cultural intervention with a wider remit, indicated by the opposition to racism rather than fascism in its name – although the two organisations did of course work closely together. [5] As Dave Renton points out in the preface, When We Touched the Sky is therefore ‘the first book-length study of the Anti Nazi League’ as such. [6]
Renton begins with two brief chapters setting out the crisis-ridden situation of Britain by the mid-1970s and the history of racism down to that time. The book then moves, more or less chronologically, from 1976 and the formation of RAR in response to racist comments by Eric Clapton – a process which fortuitously coincided with the emergence of punk (Renton has some interesting comments about the relationship of specific forms of music to RAR); 1977 and the great counter-demonstration against the NF in Lewisham which led directly to the formation of the ANL; 1978 and the carnivals in Victoria Park and Manchester (subject of a particularly exhilarating chapter); 1979 and the Southall demonstration in which the police murdered Blair Peach; then through to 1980–81 and the collapse of the NF.
It is clear from this account that the ANL strategy had three main components: mobilisation of the largest numbers of people possible solely on the basis of their opposition to the NF; physical confrontation to stop the NF from marching or assembling; and political identification of the NF as fascists whose ideology was the same as those responsible for the Holocaust. These elements were dependent on their mass character for success. There is a difference between the defensive force of tens of thousands of people, many of whom belong to the threatened community, blocking the path of the NF and their police protectors, and the violence of small gangs of young anti-fascist men fighting with other small gangs of young fascist men: the first is a political act, the second is not and, indeed, it obliterates political difference. These elements were also interlinked. The carnivals were important cultural events, but would have merely left the audiences as consumers affirming their collective anti-fascism if they had not also been involved in the great demonstrations.
Renton is a prolific author, perhaps too prolific. At least some of his previous books – which include three studies of fascism and anti-fascism [7] – give the impression of being over-hastily compiled from research, with all the attendant problems of avoidable errors and incautious judgements, many of which might have been avoided by a longer gestation period. None of this is true of When We Touched the Sky, perhaps because (on his own account) it took seven years to complete and therefore involved a greater deal of consideration. At any rate, Renton’s strengths are on display here. In addition to archival research, he employs the techniques of oral history and has interviewed the organisers of the ANL and a wide range of other activists, including members of other anti-racist groups. As has been his practice for previous books, Renton refuses to interview fascists, but he has used their publications as a source. And, disgusting though the experience of reading the likes of Bulldog and Spearhead no doubt was, it has been useful in confirming that the NF did indeed see the ANL as a threat to their activities.
The point is important, since it is sometimes claimed that the Nazi vote did not collapse because of ANL activity but because NF voters switched to supporting the Tories in the general election of 1979. If this is true then the future of anti-fascist activity is bleak, because apparently the only way to demobilise the fascist right is for conventional right wing politicians to take their place. Renton rightly rejects this position on two grounds. One is that it rests on the highly implausible assumption that all the ANL activity had precisely no effect, in either demoralising the NF activists who were for years unable to appear publicly unopposed, or in separating out hardcore supporters from the soft racists through emphasising the fascist nature of the former. The second is that we have the counter-examples from those countries where opposition to the fascist right did not take a similar form to that of the ANL. France, where Le Pen and the Front National were able to establish themselves, at least until 1995, without serious political opposition, is the key example in this respect. [8] (Indeed, partly as a result of the failure of the French left, voters ended up in the final round of the presidential elections of 2002 precisely with a choice between the conservative Chirac and the fascist Le Pen.)
When We Touched the Sky is therefore an invaluable guide to one of the most important movements in recent British left wing history, perhaps the most important prior to the Stop the War Coalition. My criticisms mainly concern areas which Renton has omitted from consideration.
‘Social movement history’, of which this is a fine example, does seem to have inherited from labour movement history a certain narrowness of focus, particularly in relation to wider issues of the state and economy. The introductory chapters apart, the protagonists here are the ANL/RAR, the NF and the people they were trying to mobilise or influence. The state enters in the form of the police, usually defending the NF, sometimes remaining neutral, very occasionally siding with anti-fascists. From the sidelines we hear the babble of a press typically more concerned with denouncing anti-fascist responses than the fascist activities which provoked them. But the broader social context in which all this took place – the economic crisis and the origins of neo-liberalism, the rightward turn in British society as a whole, the downturn in industrial struggle (the very existence of which was contested within the SWP at the time) – is mentioned, but never integrated into Renton’s account. As a result the conflicts he describes often appear self-contained. The most obvious question which the book implicitly raises – how it was possible for a political victory on this scale to be achieved at a time when the industrial class struggle was stalling or going down to defeat – remains unanswered. In the absence of a revival of generalised trade union militancy it is one which remains relevant to us today.
In other respects, however, the book does provide material of major importance to contemporary debates. I have already referred to the Stop the War Coalition, which is linked to the ANL, not just by the presence of the SWP, but by the common approach both took to building alliances with people who were not revolutionaries.
The models of the united front and the popular front are not useful here if we expect them to take the form that they did between the First and Second World Wars of the last century. The strategy of the united front, as it was codified at the Second Congress of the Communist International in 1920, involves revolutionary working class organisations offering to work alongside reformist working class organisations in pursuit of specific goals. It is not about reaching agreement on an entire political programme, otherwise there would be no need for two organisations in the first place. Nor does it aim for the immediate overthrow of capitalism: it is a genuine attempt to achieve the specific goals as stated (although revolutionaries obviously try to demonstrate to reformist workers the superiority of their ideas and strategy through the experience of joint work). On the other hand, the popular front, first launched in France in 1935 but a key component of Stalinist politics ever since, involves alliances between revolutionaries and bourgeois political parties solely for electoral purposes.
Several critics have seen the ANL as having most affinity with the popular front. One of the most serious of these, the black cultural theorist Paul Gilroy, wrote:
‘Rock Against Racism had allowed space for youth to rant against the perceived iniquities of “Labour Party Capitalist Britain”. The popular front tactics introduced by the ANL closed it down. Being “anti-Nazi” located the political problem posed by the growth of racism exclusively in the activities of a small and eccentric, though violent, band of neo-fascists’. [9]
These remarks involve a fundamental misunderstanding of what both ‘united’ and ‘popular’ strategies involve. Fairly obviously, the ANL was not an electoral alliance between revolutionaries and bourgeois political parties, but was it then a united front? In fact, united fronts in the ‘classic’ Comintern or Trotskyist sense are actually very rare in working class history, although the essential principle is used every day by Respect or Solidarity activists who convince Labour Party members to jointly take a petition or a collection round their workplace. And it is the principle which is important. Renton quotes one ANL activist:
‘The Anti Nazi League wasn’t a united front, but it was a united front type organisation. It wasn’t a pact between mass organisations, but there was an alliance between reformists and revolutionaries, unity around specific organisation demands which left the organisations free.’
The SWP was not in a position to offer ‘unity’ in action with the Labour Party – an organisation which then had a membership around 100 times larger – but it could approach individual members and constituencies in the spirit of the united front in order to conduct joint activity. As Renton writes, with commendable restraint, ‘Perhaps one lesson of the Anti Nazi League is that unity can be too narrowly conceived.’ [10]
Gilroy’s main point lies elsewhere though. It is that the ANL, unlike RAR, wrongly focused on fascism at the expense of the far greater racist threat posed by the British state and what we, post Lawrence inquiry, would now call institutional racism: this was what gave the NF the ideological basis for their appeals to the white population. Essentially this means that, unless you are prepared to challenge every aspect of a threat, it is wrong to challenge any aspect of it, even if the aspect in question poses the most immediate threat.
Similar arguments to those of Gilroy were made at the time by groups on the sectarian left, for whom the very idea of the united front itself was counter-revolutionary. According to one typical example of the genre:
‘The standpoint of the ANL is that of the Labour racists. They are loyal to British imperialism, loyal to the British state, support immigration control and all the actions of the racist Labour government. Thus the ANL has not been for one moment concerned to defend black people. Its sole and single purpose is to prevent the growth of the influence of the National Front ... the ANL attempts to mobilise working class patriotism (to British imperialism) against the National Front’s threat to British bourgeois democracy’. [11]
The usual ‘proof’ offered by critics of this sort is that the ANL leadership refused to support calls for the abolition of all immigration controls. In fact the ANL did adopt a policy of opposition to all immigration controls at its first conference in 1978 (and the SWP carried placards saying ‘Stop the Nazis; No Immigration Controls’ at the Victoria Park carnival); what it did not do was make this position either a condition for membership or the basis of its activity.
Why not? As Renton asks, ‘What was the point of the League, to represent internally all the considered positions of the left or to challenge fascism? ... The League was not a political party.’ [12] If people already agree with opposition to all immigration controls, they would be revolutionary socialists and there would be no need for alliances; if not, then making their participation in an organisation dependent on their adopting this position is unlikely to result in a mass of recruits. It is important to challenge views of people who support immigration controls, but you are far more likely to convince someone of the need to oppose them while working together against the Nazis than as a result of demanding that they adopt all of your politics before you condescend to speak to them.
Anyone who has been active in both the anti-Nazi movement of the 1970s and the anti-war movement of the 2000s will experience a sense of deja vu in relation to these arguments. Instead of criticism for allying with a supposedly entirely racist and imperialist Labour Party, the left has been criticised for allying with a supposedly entirely homophobic, sexist Muslim Association of Britain. [13] In both cases whole groups of people are written off in advance as incapable of engaging in dialogue or ever changing their views.
Towards the end of the book Renton quotes the speech by Darcus Howe at a memorial meeting for David Widgery:
‘Howe said that he had fathered five children in Britain. The first four had grown up angry, fighting forever against the racism all around them. The fifth child, he said, had grown up “black and at ease”. Darcus attributed her “space” to the Anti Nazi League in general and to Dave Widgery in particular’. [14]
Not for the first time, Howe is exaggerating, but there is something in this nevertheless. Perhaps the longer term achievement of the ANL was to help forge a black and white unity deeper than that required by the immediate needs of anti-fascist mobilisation. As Renton suggests, perhaps it ‘had been a necessary precondition for the recent alliance between Muslims and non-Muslims in the movement against the Iraq war ... In that sense, the 1970s provide a stock of experiences on which present-day activists can draw’. [15]

Notes
1. D. Renton, When We Touched the Sky: the Anti-Nazi League, 1977–1981 (Cheltenham, 2006), p. 175.
2. As above, pp. 23, 174.
3. Quoted in D. Renton, as above, p. viii.
4. See D. Widgery, Beating Time: Riot ’n’ Race ’n’ Rock ’n’ Roll, designed by R. Gregory and A. Dark (London 1986). To be fair, the book was not intended to be a cholarly or objective account. See D. Widgery, Beating Time – a Response to Ian Birchall, International Socialism 2 : 35 (Summer 1987).
5. It is possible to exaggerate the distinction between the two organisations. If my own experience in Aberdeen is anything like typical, then in many parts of the country the same people probably ran them both, as two aspects of essentially the same operation.
6. D. Renton, as above, p. 3. Renton admires Widgery’s work, without necessarily accepting all his conclusions. See D. Renton, as above, pp. 47–50, 181–182, and D. Renton, David Widgery, in Dissident Marxism (London and New York 2004), pp. 217–227.
7. D. Renton, Fascism: Theory and Practice (London 1999); Fascism, Anti-Fascism and Britain in the 1940s (London 2000); and ‘This Rough Game’: Fascism and Anti-Fascism in European History (London 2001).
8. D. Renton, When We Touched the Sky, as above, pp. 175–180.
9. P. Gilroy, There Ain’t No Black in the Union Jack: the Cultural Politics of Race and Nation (London and New York 2002), p. 174.
10. D. Renton, When We Touched the Sky, as above, pp. 105, 106. And see pp. 102–106 more generally.
11. M. Williams, S. Palmer and G. Clapton, Racism, Imperialism and the Working Class, Revolutionary Communist 9, June 1979, pp. 41, 42.
12. D. Renton, When We Touched the Sky, as above, pp. 104, 118. Gilroy’s other main argument is that the ANL retreated into a patriotic Britishness based on memories of the Second World War to oppose the NF. In fact, the main ANL slogan was ‘Never again!’ Contrary to what Gilroy appears to believe, this was a reference to the Holocaust, not the Battle of Britain. See the discussion by Renton in When We Touched the Sky, as above, pp. 126–127.
13. For the Stop the War Coalition as a form of united front, see A. Murray and L. German, Stop the War: the Story of Britain’s Biggest Mass Movement (London 2005), pp. 3–5, 47-63.
14. D. Renton, When We Touched the Sky, as above, p. 180.
15. As above, p. 183.
 



Gregor Gall
The Political Economy of Scotland: Red Scotland? Radical Scotland?
University of Wales Press, 2005, £19.99



Macduff: Stands Scotland where it did?
Ross: Alas, poor country, almost afraid to know itself!
                                                  (Macbeth, act 4, scene 3)



Does Gregor Gall’s new book help Scotland to ‘know itself ’? The Political Economy of Scotland is not a political economy of Scotland – the focus is too narrow for that. (In the acknowledgements, Gall still refers to the book by its current subtitle of Red Scotland? Radical Scotland? which suggests late interference by the publisher.) Nevertheless, it should be critically welcomed, if only because it subjects the claims about Scottish radicalism to sustained quantitative scrutiny for what may well be the first time.
Gall takes levels of trade union membership, activity, recognition and collective bargaining over the last 30 years (i.e. roughly since the Upper Clyde Shipbuilders work-in of 1971–72) as the main measures by which radicalism can be assessed. He establishes that, if we compare Scotland to the other 11 administrative regions of the UK, it has generally been in the top quartile by these criteria, but that ‘workers in Scotland are not any more radical than the most radical or militant workers in the rest of Britain – these being found in Wales and the northern regions of England’ (pp. 65–66). At one point Gall suggests that one reason there is more union activity in Scotland is because Scotland has more of the industries where unions are likely to be active – an unspectacular but sound conclusion supported by a series of detailed statistical tables which are among the most valuable features of the book.
In a preface Tommy Sheridan criticises Gall for treating what he calls ‘our nation-state’ as a mere region of the UK. Gall does no such thing. He simply points out that, given the differences in population, geography and economic structure between Scotland and England, it is legitimate to compare Scotland to particular regions of England. This has nothing whatever to do with Scotland’s status as a nation, which is surely not in doubt. But it does lead us to ask what we are taking to be meant by ‘Scotland’. If data for, say, Perthshire or Inverness, were made to stand for the whole of the country, the figures would look less impressive: ‘When talking about Scotland we are really talking of the Central Belt and, in particular, Strathclyde’ (p. 40).
Gall, glumly, but probably accurately, predicts that his work will nevertheless be received with ‘shadow boxing and inaccurate representation’ (p. xvii), citing this reviewer’s experience in 2003 as a precedent. It is therefore important to state that his attempt to quantify what is known about Scottish trade unionism gives his book a scientific rigour which is all too often missing in discussions of this subject.
But there is a problem with simply treating trade unions as a measure of radicalism. Unions will be crucial to the future of socialism, but only a minority of workers currently belong to unions and they may not necessarily be the most radical sections of the working class. Strikes can be passive, leaderships bureaucratic, collective bargaining compromised. There is, in other words, a limit to what can be understood from studying statistical tables.
The data also needs to be contextualised, and this is not done simply by adding the results of opinion polls. We need a method – the term ‘dialectical’ is inescapable here – capable of capturing the social dynamics at work and for this purpose the static models of empirical social science (Industrial Relations Branch) are simply inadequate. Broadening out the range of evidence might include the fact that racist attacks were, until the London bombings in July, higher in Scotland than England and this points to a less palatable aspect of Scottish identity which should not be avoided.
The main problem, however, lies in the latter part of the book. The discussion of trade unions is essentially a preparatory stage for Gall’s central argument. Having dispensed with the more obviously exaggerated claims about Scottish radicalism, Gall attempts to establish its existence on a firmer footing. He claims that a broadly social democratic set of values has become bound up with the Scottish national identity, a process which he – correctly, in my view – sees as taking place through the Thatcher/Major years, when resistance to Tory governments took on a quasi-national character.
Gall sees Scotland as a special example of what he calls a ‘community of collectivism’ where there is a ‘fusion of national identity and consciousness with ... oppositionalism’ (p. 177). National identity is a more powerful basis for this than the regional identity prevailing in areas which otherwise had similar political responses to Thatcherism:
‘With a weaker form of identity ... supported by less well-defined public institutions distinct to these regions, the associations with radicalism for these populaces within their geographical confines are often not so sharp or deep-seated’ (p. 121).
Leaving aside the methodology (sources are almost all derived from opinion polls) and taking the conclusions at face value, I think there are three main problems with this analysis.
First, Gregor regards the strength of Scottish national identity as an advantage people in, say, Yorkshire do not possess. But the opposite is true. One of the greatest problems which faces the left in Scotland is precisely the way in which virtually every issue is viewed through the distorting lens of the ‘national question’, even when that has nothing to do with it.
Second, Gall does not attempt to define what he means by nation, national identity or any of the related terms. ‘What we are discussing is not Scottish national identity per se, but obviously a certain manifestation or type of Scottish national identity which is of a progressive, radical and social democratic bent, for the other form of national identity in Scotland is conservative and reactionary’ (p. 178).
But national identity is not a container which can be filled with a range of ideological contents. National identity can be more or less radical or conservative, but is always confined by the existence of actual or potential capitalist nation-states, which means that there are limits to how radical it can be. It is not compatible with revolutionary socialism, for example. (Indeed Gall points out that Scottish national identity is essentially a form of ‘radical populism’ (p. 156).)
At one point he writes that ‘the strength of Scottish national identity is such that it can never be entirely disassociated so that it is believed by many (workers and non-workers) that workers in Scotland (or [section of text missing]
We gather from this passage that Gall does not regard the possession of a readable prose style as obligatory for a writer, but I can assure readers that I have accurately reproduced the words as they appear in the book. What I think this incredibly convoluted sentence means is: ‘People in Scotland may not actually be more radical than anywhere else, but they believe that they are, and this may influence their behaviour.’ Well, maybe – but I think that it is just as likely that a genuine social crisis would shatter these cosy assumptions. A major conflict over public sector pensions, for example, would test the much-vaunted ‘radicalism’ of the Scottish middle class to destruction. It is more credible to see the radicalism of Scottish national identity as an alternative to or substitute for genuine socialist internationalism, born of a period of defeat from which we are only just emerging.
Third, Gregor’s fixation with the trade union movement to the exclusion of all else blinds him to the fact that we are now moving into a different period. Many of the hundreds of thousands who marched against the Iraq war or to Make Poverty History in recent years were in trade unions, but many were not (although they would join if they had the chance, or they were asked) – surely their views also need to be taken into account? But these are outside the industrial relations frame of reference Gall imprisons himself in here. Nor are they compatible with a purely national narrative – displaying as they did the welcome beginnings of an international consciousness.
In conclusion, this is a deeply frustrating book. At various points Gall himself raises virtually all the problems that I have done here, but never pursues them or integrates them into his account. His refusal to follow through the more sceptical aspects of his analysis will win him no friends on the hard or even soft nationalist wings of the SSP, who do not want a politics of ambiguity. The book stops, rather than concludes, without any clue as to what he thinks socialists should actually do in relation to the identity he describes. Should socialists in Scotland frame their arguments in terms of a supposed radical national identity or not? The answer to this question is one of the most important facing the Scottish left today. In so far as this book begins to tackle the issue, it is to be welcomed. In so far as it avoids the question, it represents a missed opportunity.
 



G. Kiernan
America: The New Imperialism – From White Settlement to World Hegemony
with a preface by E.J. Hobsbawm and an epilogue by J. Trumpbour
Verso, 2005, £15
Neil Smith
The Endgame of Globalization
Routledge US, 2005
These two very different books are notable contributions to the debate over the nature and role of contemporary American imperialism. Both authors are Marxists, albeit from different generations, left wing organisations and academic disciplines. Both examine their subject from a longer historical perspective than is usual.
Victor Kiernan is, with Eric Hobsbawm and John Saville, one of the few remaining members of the Communist Party Historians Group. Born in 1913, of all his contemporaries he has been the most eclectic in his range of interests, as Hobsbawm notes in an informative preface (which itself contains some acute remarks on the continuities of US foreign policy). [2] Indeed, it may be that the very widespread nature of Kiernan’s subject matter has contributed to his relative obscurity compared with – to take the most obvious example – Christopher Hill, whose reputation was based on work almost entirely about 17th century England. Even Hobsbawm, who has a comparable range of interests to Kiernan, is most identified with his great quartet on the history of capitalism since 1789. From 1948 until his retirement Kiernan taught at Edinburgh University, and it is perhaps for this reason that he was virtually alone among the British Marxist historians in showing any serious interest in Scottish history. [3] More important for our purposes, however, is the fact that he was also exceptional among them in paying sustained attention to imperialism, in a series of articles and books across three decades. [4] The book under review here, America: The New Imperialism, first appeared in 1978, in the aftermath of the catastrophic defeat for the US in Vietnam.
Neil Smith’s The Endgame of Globalization is a different type of book. Smith comes from a much later generational cohort and stands in a different political tradition from Kiernan. He became active around the time America: The New Imperialism was originally written, and was for several years a member of the International Socialist Organisation in the US. Like his former supervisor and current colleague David Harvey, Smith is part of the radical geography tradition that emerged in the 1980s. [5]
The Endgame of Globalization is an angrier, more polemical work than those with which Smith first drew attention. [6] It is both a demonstration of how the Marxist theory of imperialism can be used to shed light on current events and an implicit rejoinder to those sections of the left which see the US as virtually invulnerable. [7]
Kiernan writes in a style quite unlike most modern academic historians, for which we can only be grateful. We gather an impression of how US imperialism developed through an accumulation of characteristic details, often derived from letters, diaries, novels and other examples of what are sometimes dismissed as ‘literary sources’ by those who believe that only quantifiable methods are valid. His canvas contains the whole of American history as such, which he treats as virtually co-extensive with the history of US imperialism. On this basis he begins his account with the Puritan settlers ‘building in the wilderness the better society that the Levellers tried in vain to build in England.’ [8]
The implication is that the process by which territory was acquired by colonisation, conquest or (that quintessentially America method) cash constituted the construction of an ‘internal’ empire. ‘The great fact was that industrial capitalism, now firmly installed as arbiter of the national destinies, had a rapidly growing market and a spacious field of enterprise at home, without needing to look for colonies outside.’ [9] This absence of a formal empire constitutes the ‘newness’ of the American Empire.
Kiernan comments with pungent irony on the crimes and follies which fill these pages, but without adopting the persona of the detached observer, judging from outside history. Instead he holds his subjects to account for transgressing their own self-proclaimed codes and values: ‘In Washington’s eyes, since the ultimate goal, preservation of democracy, was righteous, all means toward it were warrantable, including suppression of democracy.’ [10] At the same time, we always know where Kiernan stands in relation to the peoples and classes whose fate he recounts. He treats the question of the Native Americans seriously, at a time when this was far from conventional even in left wing histories of the US. He devotes a substantial part of the book to recounting how they were killed or driven from what were once their lands, but he never romanticises them. [11]
The book is recommended then, but two cautions are in order. First, Kiernan’s style, attractive though it is, can also be an obstacle to clarity. [12] It works well in relation to broad themes in social and cultural history, as he demonstrated in his masterpiece The Lords of Human Kind, a sweeping survey of how the Western merchants, soldiers and colonists regarded the non-European peoples they came into contact with. [13] But because it is illustrative of the ideological expressions of imperialism, it is less effective in dealing with its central political and economic aspects. Second, his refusal to privilege one historical moment over another has the effect of obscuring decisive turning points – the long view tends to present a flat landscape.
This is particularly noticeable in relation to Vietnam. Kiernan underplays both the seriousness of the resistance to the war within the US and the implications of the defeat for US power: ‘Yet as soon as the risk of having to serve at the front was removed, agitation and concern over Vietnamese sufferings died down abruptly; a year or two more, and Vietnam was forgotten.’ [14]
This judgement would certainly be a surprise to US strategists, since they have spent the last 30 years trying to overcome the ‘syndrome’ to which Vietnam gave rise. [15]
But there is a greater difficulty here, which springs not from style or method, but from the underlying theory of imperialism with which Kiernan undertakes his survey:
‘Imperialism today ... may be seen as a continuation or recrudescence within the capitalist era of the “extra-economic compulsion” which is the hallmark of any feudal dominion.’ [16]
The classical Marxist definition of imperialism envisages it as a particular stage in the development of capitalism with two key characteristics: on the one hand, the fusion of financial and industrial capital with the state; on the other, the expansion of capital beyond the territorial boundaries of individual states. In this conception, although we can still refer to ‘American (or whichever) imperialism’ as shorthand for the activities of particular state capitals, it is the system as a whole which is imperialist, and which compels these states to act in certain ways. Consequently, imperialism in this sense is not necessarily concerned with the relationship between oppressor and oppressed states, as Kiernan believes, but with the rivalry between the oppressor states themselves.
In this respect, Smith has a surer grasp of what the Marxist theory of imperialism involves: ‘Where many on the left have still not yet embraced [Lenin’s] insight, and still treat colonialism and imperialism as the same phenomenon, the neo-cons who have embraced empire are, in this respect at least, the truer Leninists.’ [17]
Given these theoretical differences, it is interesting to compare their respective accounts of that main episode in American history where the logic of imperialist rivalry manifests itself most clearly – the ultimately abortive colonial adventures in Cuba and the Philippines in 1898. For Kiernan:
‘There was of course no rational need of mountainous exports; hence an irrationality tinging all the epoch of expansionism now starting ... Here was both the curious logic of capitalism and the American obsession with destiny; a latter-day example also of how, as in the 17th century, Calvinist determinism could be fused with superabundant energy.’ [18]
Smith is equally mindful of the ideological aspects of imperialism, but grounds them far more in the needs of an expanding capitalist economy, rather in a cultural metaphysics:
‘It was a short-lived colonialism, however, not because of some liberal American antipathy to empire – quite the opposite – nor because it solved the questions of economic and liberal expansion. It was short-lived because it didn’t solve these problems.’ [19]
Smith’s core thesis is that the current period is the third attempt by the US to establish a world order based on liberal capitalism.
It is within this overall framework that Smith discusses the specific reasons for the invasion and occupation of Iraq, in which he takes due account of the defeat in Vietnam: ‘The rationale for the Iraq war emerged from the amalgam of ... three elements: the geopolitics of oil, the dramatic loss of US political power after the 1970s, and the partial fragmentation of the delicate system of power interdependencies that had let the region’s petro-capitalism flourish.’ [20]
Powerful though the main lines of Smith’s argument are, the book is not entirely convincing at every level. It bears some signs of having been written in haste, although, unlike Kiernan, Smith is of course trying to deal with these crucial issues while events are still unfolding. Nevertheless, some of his judgements are questionable. Two examples stand out.
One is his treatment of Israel. Where Kiernan simply expresses puzzlement at US support for Israel (‘No nation in history has had a more expensive and more disobliging ally’ [21]), Smith explains its origins in terms of domestic politics: ‘It was in no way a principled response to the horrors of the Holocaust, but a cynical attempt to win Jewish votes at home, in a tight upcoming. In discussing the subsequent history, he broadens this out to include ‘the need for oil’ as well as ‘a domestically inspired support for the Israeli.’ [22]
Now, Smith is absolutely correct to connect the internal politics of the US to its external relationships with other states. The question here is the extent to which the pro-Israeli lobby is decisive in determining policy. If it had not existed, would successive US governments have taken a different attitude to Israel? It seems scarcely conceivable that they would have behaved any differently. From 1967 in particular, the American ruling class has regarded Israel as the only stable force representing the interests of US capitalism in the region, and everything that has happened since, from the fall of the Shah in 1979 onwards, has confirmed it in this view.
A more general issue is the distinction which Smith draws between ‘global aspiration’ and ‘national self-interest’ in determining American imperial policy. Running through his book is the argument that America’s imperial ambitions have previously run aground on the shoals of nationalist isolationalism. This is a real division within the American ruling class, but surely the advocates of global intervention were also motivated by ‘national self-interest’? This may simply be a question of Smith’s presentation, but there seems to be a problem in elevating opposing strategies for advancing those interests into a fundamental political division.
Any criticisms which might be made of either book, however, must be set alongside the fundamental service to truth which, in their different ways, they perform. Members of the pro-war left are fond of explaining America’s tendency to support murderous military dictatorships by claiming that this was an unfortunate by-product of the Cold War, and not an intrinsic part of the operation of American foreign policy.
However, the historical record set out by Kiernan and Smith makes it quite clear that American imperialism preceded the Cold War by a long way, and that current interventions have to be considered and understood in this context rather than as a new form of humanitarian militarism.

Notes
1. With apologies to the late Curtis Mayfield.
2. E.J. Hobsbawm, Preface, in V.G. Kiernan, America: The New Imperialism – From White Settlement to World Hegemony (London and New York 2005), p. vii.
3. See V.G. Kiernan, A Banner with a Strange Device: The Later Covenanters, in T. Brotherstone (ed.), Covenant, Charter and Party (Aberdeen 1989); and The Covenanters: A Problem of Creed and Class, in H.G. Kaye (ed.), Poets, Politics and the People (London and New York 1989).
4. His interest in imperialism was not only theoretical. As a member of the CPGB Kiernan was an active anti-imperialist, and he appears to have done work for the party in India (while in the British army) during the 1940s. As late as 1990 this reviewer remembers canvassing support among Scottish intellectuals and public figures for an open letter opposing the coming Iraq war which eventually appeared in The Scotsman – Kiernan was one of the first to respond. The essays can be found in Marxism and Imperialism (London 1974) and H.J. Kaye (ed.), Imperialism and Its Contradictions (New York and London 1985). A companion volume to America: The New Imperialism, dealing with Europe, is European Empires from Conquest to Collapse, 1815–1960 (London 1982).
5. For David Harvey, see The New Imperialism (Oxford 2003) and A Brief History of Neoliberalism (Oxford 2005).
6. The contrast with the elegant but somewhat abstract formulations of his first book, Uneven Development (London 1984), is marked. This important study is currently out of print.
7. See, for example, L. Panitch and S. Gindin, Superintending Global Capital, New Left Review, II/35 (September/October 2005), pp. 108–118, 121–122.
8. V.G. Kiernan, America: The New Imperialism, as above, p. 3.
9. As above, p. 75.
10. As above, p. 279.
11. As above, pp. 29–46, 70–104.
12. This writing style is not necessarily an obstacle to presenting a rounded picture of imperialism. For a work by a writer with a similar literary approach to Kiernan (albeit with a different political background) which succeeds in doing this, see A. Calder, Revolutionary Empire: The Rise of the English-Speaking Empires from the 15th Century to the 1780s (London 1981 and 1998).
13. V G. Kiernan, The Lords of Human Kind: European Attitudes to the Outside World (London 1969). By the second edition the subtitle had changed to Black Man, Yellow Man, and White Man in an Age of Empire (London 1988).
14. V.G. Kiernan, America: The New Imperialism, as above, pp. 340–341.
15. See, for example, J. Neale, The American War: Vietnam, 1960–1975 (London 2001), pp. 176–177. The slander that anti-war protesters in the US were only opposed to the war for reasons of their personal safety was attacked at the time in blistering style by a recently departed editor of this journal. See A. MacIntyre, Le Rouge et Noir, New Statesman, 22 November 1968, p. 714.
16. V.G. Kiernan, America: The New Imperialism, as above, pp. xv–xvi.
17. N. Smith, The Endgame of Globalization (New York, 2005), p. 25.
18. V.G. Kiernan, America: The New Imperialism, as above, pp. 107–108. Kiernan is equally bemused by the internationalisation of capital: ‘Over much of the globe today there is so complex a criss-crossing of US capital in Arabia and Japan, Arab and Japanese investment in the US, Dutch syndicates buying real estate in the Scottish Highlands, British in Germany, that Lenin would be hard put to say which is the imperialist, who is subjugating whom’ (as above, p. 273). But since Lenin was one of the first theorists to identify one aspect of imperialism as the movement of capital beyond national borders, he would neither have been bemused nor reduced the question to one of ‘subjugation’ in the first place.
19. N. Smith, The Endgame of Globalization, as above, pp. 48–49.
20. As above, p. 188.
21. V.G. Kiernan, America: The New Imperialism, as above, p. 312.
22. N. Smith, The Endgame of Globalization, as above, pp. 114, 115.
 



The European Union provides internationalism for the bosses, not for workers.
We should join the vote to leave it tomorrow.



Tomorrow, the United Kingdom will hold a referendum on whether to remain a member of the European Union. While the reformist left, centered around Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour and the Green Party, are largely for staying in, those identifying as radicals or revolutionaries widely consider the EU to be an antidemocratic, unreformable institution.
The European Union has acted as an uncompromising vehicle of neoliberalism – both economically, in its forced imposition of austerity on Greece and several other member states, and institutionally, in its hollowing out of democratic governance.
Meanwhile, the free movement of EU citizens across its internal borders has been accompanied by the increasing militarization of its outer frontier. Those trying to reach the continent die in the thousands in the Mediterranean, or are forcibly removed to an increasingly authoritarian Turkey, in which they are denied any possibility of refugee status.
But what may seem a simple choice for the Left is complicated by the current political conjuncture. This referendum was demanded by the Right and has been dominated by the Right, highlighting the degree to which the material experience and public perception of the EU varies greatly between member states.
In Britain, neoliberal austerity is an entirely home-grown product. As a result, the EU is popularly imagined not as the imposer of reactionary economics, but as an imposition on the sovereignty of a British state which could otherwise “control its borders,” keep out immigrants, and free the petit bourgeoisie of the minimal rights guaranteed to workers under European law.
The immediate beneficiaries of a Leave vote would be the Tory right, the far-right United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), and even more unsavory and openly racist forces; migrants feel under threat, and rightly so.
In a horrific testament to the volatility of today’s atmosphere, Labour MP Jo Cox was recently gunned down in broad daylight. She was known as a politician who defended migrants and refugees, as well as campaigning for Palestinian causes and aid for Syria. The man arrested for her murder, Thomas Mair, was influenced by fascist ideology: in court, he gave his name as “death to traitors, freedom for Britain.”
The Left is stuck between remaining within an institution antithetical to our aims, and gambling that we can turn the period of crisis which would undoubtedly follow a Leave vote to our advantage.
If this gamble is seen as too great, what does it say about the self-confidence, organizational capacity, and political horizons of the British left? If it is taken, what is the process whereby a blow for the British and European ruling class is translated into an opportunity for progressive, rather than reactionary, politics?
In this interview, Jacobin talks to Neil Davidson, who makes the socialist argument for a Leave vote.



* * *
ED: You advocate “a socialist case for leaving the European Union.” Could you explain the history of the EU’s development and why it, in your eyes, represents an un-reformable obstacle to left-wing goals?
ND: The movement towards European integration began soon after World War II, in 1947 with the establishment of various regional institutions (e.g., the United Nations European Economic Commission) and treaties (e.g., the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), all designed to restart the devastated continental economy and unify the western half of Europe against Russian influence.
The origins of the EU as we know it today lie in the Treaty of Rome in 1957, which established the European Economic Community (the EEC or “Common Market” as it tended to be called in Britain).
There were four main drivers behind the project. The first was to expand the size of the market beyond the boundaries of the individual nation-states, in a situation where the European powers were losing their colonies, but where the system was also experiencing the greatest period of growth in its history.
The second was to abolish the protectionism which was widely seen as contributing to the post-1929 depression – or rather, to abolish protectionism within the EEC, but to reimpose it at the level of the EEC itself, in relation to the Third World in particular.
The third was to contain the interstate rivalry between France and Germany, in a situation where the latter was temporarily weakened by territorial division: this is the element of truth in the canard about “preventing war in Europe” – although the implications are quite remarkable because of the suggestion (quite realistic, incidentally) that otherwise these two countries might have gone to war yet again, despite their “shared European values.”
The fourth is the Cold War – in a sense France and West Germany were less inclined to threaten each other because both were directed against an external enemy in the shape of the Stalinist bloc.
As this last point suggests, the United States was not in any sense opposed to or threatened by the EEC – indeed it saw Western European integration as a necessary institutional compliment to NATO.
This point is important, as some people on the Left argue that the EU is a block against US interests; but while it is true that the major EU states compete economically with the United States, and that they do not always politically agree (e.g., over Yugoslavia or Ukraine) they are united in the same imperialist alliance.
Given these origins it is scarcely surprising that the EU reproduces internally the structured unevenness of the capitalist system, in which the dominant members, namely Germany and – some way behind – France, determine the fate of the weaker.
This has been most obvious in the case of Greece, but also in those of Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and even Italy, which earlier belonged to the top tier.
However, uneven though it is internally, the EU presents a unified face to the Global South outside Europe, both economically, since it both dumps food exports there and blocks imports in return, and geopolitically, in the shape of the “Fortress Europe” it presents to refugees and other migrants.
It might be argued that these aspects of the EU could be subject to reform, but the mechanisms by which this could take place are never made clear.
The dominant bodies in the EU are either unelected, like the Central Bank or the Commission, or like the Council, consist of government leaders from the member states, who are elected by their own voters, but not by those of the EU as a whole, even though they are making decisions which affect it.
The parliament, as is well known, cannot initiate legislation on its own behalf, but simply ratify or at best amend initiatives from the Commission.
In a way, the entire setup was mapped out by Hayek in a 1939 article called “The Economic Conditions of Interstate Federalism,” in which he argued for an EU-type body which would be run primarily by bureaucrats – so that interfering voters, and by extension politicians, would be unable to make demands threatening to the market order, and that economic policy would be governed by a set of unbreakable rules, constitutive of what we now call neoliberalism. Sound familiar?
ED: Was there a time when the EU really did represent a progressive institution in certain ways? And how do you explain the shifting position of the Left regarding the EU?
In the early days the International Socialists were strongly in favor of Britain seeking EU membership; by the 1970s, the British left was largely for an exit position. Now things seem more split, roughly but by no means exclusively along “revolutionary” and “reformist” lines. What accounts for these shifts in position?
ND: As I’ve suggested, the EU and its predecessors have always been capitalist institutions, but during the postwar boom (roughly, 1948–1973) they shared the same Keynesian approach to economic management that was typical throughout the West and among the member-states.
As you might expect, when the neoliberal order began to emerge in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the EU then shifted towards this mode of capitalist organization – something that was actually easier than among the member states themselves, precisely because of the institutional lack of democracy in the EU.
The attitude of the far left was always correctly hostile to the EU as being a bosses’ club which could override even the limited democracy that existed in its member states, although it is important to note that this was not based on a left-nationalist British argument, which members of the Labour left and Communist Party tended to fall into.
The International Socialists had an internal debate about the EU but it was resolved in favor of an “out” position by the early 1970s (Tom Nairn actually discusses the debate in his New Left Review special issue, The Left Against Europe, from 1972). So I don’t think it is correct to say that the IS was ever strongly in favor of going in or staying in.
I do agree that the division on the Left now isn’t a straight reformist-versus-revolutionary one, although the overwhelming majority of the Left, on whatever side of the divide (which is in any case is far less clear than it was in the 1970s), are supporting a Remain position.
This I largely put down to the experience of defeat – the ascendancy of neoliberalism was above all the defeat of the labor movement, at least on a temporary basis.
In other words, leaving aside contingent arguments about how a Leave vote will only strengthen the hard right, many people on the Left believe that the labor and socialist movement is so weak, that the prospects of even a Labour government or coalition are so slim, that the EU is the only protection for workers’ rights and the environment. I don’t agree.
ED: Can you talk about the EU referendum in relation to last year’s Scottish independence referendum? There, the Radical Independence Campaign competed with more right-wing sections of the independence movement, including the Scottish National Party (SNP), to define the meaning of a pro-independence vote. What power do we have now to shape the vote?
ND: When the Scottish referendum was announced in early 2012, the radical left was not in a good way; it was only in the last nine months or so that the popular dynamic from below seized the campaign.
So the Yes arguments were actually made in less than a year; up to the beginning of 2014, the campaign was an entirely conventional affair dominated by the SNP’s extremely conservative agenda of maintaining the monarchy, retaining sterling, and remaining in NATO.
The Yes movement from below was able to make a positive case for independence as a potential way of breaking with neoliberalism and austerity. The SNP adopted this, at least rhetorically, for the final stages of the campaign.
There are obvious differences between the two referendums. First, the radical left is far more divided over the EU than it is over Scottish independence.
Second, in Scotland, there was at least a well-established narrative around the case for independence among the radical left, which had been thrashed out over the previous two decades, but there was no comparable narrative for leaving the EU.
Until the last year, most critical work on Europe was done outside of the UK left by the likes of Guglielmo Carchedi and Wolfgang Streeck. Where comparable British work did exist, it was saturated with “British road to socialism” declamations about “sovereignty” and the sanctity of the Houses of Parliament.
Third, as a consequence of this, most of the anti-EU running, for at least the last two decades, has been made by the hard right, almost always using the issue of migration – either (as seems to be the case for Nigel Farage) because they actually believe their own populist rhetoric about returning to the 1950s, or (as is certainly the case for Michael Gove) because they want to use migration in order to construct an electoral base to take British capital in a different direction, more oriented towards Asia and the United States.
Fourth, and fairly obviously, the mainstream “out” campaign was never going to adopt the arguments of the radical left in the way the Yes campaign did in Scotland.
So, in a sense, I agree that the radical left was very late in coming to the argument, and had less well-worked arguments than in the Scottish case. It is also true that we have a much less defined outcome to offer people – this is one of the reasons why I referred to the indeterminacy involved.
The argument that a Leave result will cause a crisis for the dominant party of British capital and that it will put it at odds with the majority of the capitalist class they seek to represent is true, but will only lead to a positive outcome for the working class if the Left has some strategic idea of how to take advantage of the situation, in quite concrete terms.
It seems obvious, for example, that if there was a Leave vote, agitation for a general election, and for an alliance of Labour, the Greens, the SNP, and any left MPs, would have to start immediately.
However, in spite of these problems, I don’t think that socialists – and certainly revolutionaries – have any choice but to argue for Leave. It is different if you genuinely believe that the EU is essentially a beneficial institution, but if you don’t, then you have to tell the truth about it, what it is for and what it does.
Saying “we know the EU is terrible but this isn’t a good time to leave” is simply setting a trap for yourself.
What happens if Corbyn’s Labour Party wins the next election and then finds that its path to reform is blocked by the EU – do you at that point say, “Er ... sorry we didn’t mention this before, but the EU is actually a regime for imposing neoliberal austerity which we should maybe think about leaving”? Why would anyone listen to you then?
If you put off taking a position on the substantive point because of local circumstances which might be quite short-term, you’ll never do it.
Think about those socialists at the beginning of the Great War who argued for war credits by saying, “Of course we’re opposed to imperialism in general, but we need to consider the specific circumstances under which this particular war is taking place: what will happen if the Germans win? We will lose all our precious democratic freedoms!” And so on.
To be clear, I’m not comparing Remain supporters with the traitors of 1914, but the logic of the argument is the same. If socialists don’t start arguing the case for leaving the EU now, when will there ever be “better conditions”? We’ll be subjected to the same blackmail over and over again.
Finally, it is not the case that everyone who supports Leave is a paid-up racist xenophobe who wants to stop migration. If Remain campaigners really believe that a potential majority of the British working class fall into this category then despair would be the only appropriate response, but they do not, and writing off entire communities off in this way is simply patronizing.
I’m from the northeast of Scotland, where the fishing industry has been devastated by the Common Fisheries Policy. Now, there are certainly valid environmental concerns about overfishing, but to establish a limit with no attempt to find alternative employment for the workers in that industry was always going to be catastrophic for the area, and the people who object to it have a perfectly good case against the EU which has nothing to do with migration.
ED: There are also some contradictions within the Scottish independence movement, which wants to break away from the British state, but is largely in favor of retaining EU membership.
How do you see the EU referendum impacting the Scottish independence movement, and how do you see these potential contradictions playing themselves out, in the case of Remain and Leave votes?
ND: The independence-supporting parties – the SNP, the Scottish Greens, and the Scottish Socialist Party (SSP) – have all taken Remain positions, with greater (SNP) or lesser (SSP) degrees of enthusiasm.
The existence of an official line does not, however, mean that everyone in these parties adheres to it. SNP veteran Jim Sillars has been arguing hard for Leave and claims that as many as 40 percent of the party share his view.
This is impossible to confirm with any certainty, but from speaking to SNP members at demonstrations and meetings, I have encountered considerable dissent.
If we focus on the SNP, since they are currently the dominant party in Scotland, then there are both positive and negative reasons why its members and supporters want to remain.
On the positive side, there is a general revulsion at right-wing Anglo-British nationalism and an identification with whatever it is opposed to – in this case “Europe,” defined here not specifically as the EU, but more the site of border-less cosmopolitanism in which small nations may thrive.
This is a mistake, but it is possible to engage in an argument with people who hold this view.
The negative reason is that the SNP is a party on what might be called the extreme left wing of the social-neoliberal spectrum: in other words it wants to stay in Europe precisely because it supports the current economic order with some ameliorative reforms thrown in.
Some in the SNP have speculated that if Scotland votes to remain, and England votes to leave, which would then lead to Brexit, then this would be the trigger for a second independence referendum.
I think this is unlikely. Support for independence is nowhere near the position where a referendum could be called with any certainty of winning, and Brexit would by no means alter this to the necessary extent.
ED: Perhaps the most contentious issue on the Left – and probably the most compelling reason given by the Left for voting to remain – is the effect that a Leave vote would have on EU citizens currently living and working in the UK. How do you see them being affected in either outcome?
ND: I agree that this is the most compelling argument of the Remain side, since solidarity with migrants is a fundamental duty for all socialists. Whatever the result, attacks on migrants will continue and I think it is a mistake to imagine that the EU will protect them.
For one thing, sections of the Remain campaign are now saying that we must take account of working-class concerns about migration and its impact on wages, social services, and housing.
To their eternal shame, this divisive nonsense has been repeated by members of the Labour Party like that self-promoting arch-buffoon, John Mann.
Inevitably then, more restrictions will be planned, even if there is a Remain vote. In any event I do not see a government of any stripe – other than an actual fascist regime – attempting to deport over two million workers, a move which would lead to the collapse of the British economy.
It is also important to remember that most migrants to the UK are not actually from the EU, and they are under attack already, given such measures as the demand that they earn £35,000 or more after five years before being given leave to remain – and you don’t earn that kind of money picking fruit.
Rather than relying on the EU, the Left needs to unite around a program of defense for migrants, whatever their status (i.e., economic migrant, refugee, or asylum seeker) which attempts to: one, end all restrictions on immigration, irrespective of EU membership; two, extend full rights of British citizenship to all migrants; three, unionize the workers, native and migrant, in the precarious sectors where the latter are most concentrated; four, close down the detention centers; five, establish an unconditional right to citizenship for refugees.
ED: Much of your previous work has focused on nationalism, and both the Scottish referendum and this one are ostensibly votes on “national independence.” How has nationalism, or a more general sense of national belonging, been mobilized in each case?
ND: We need to make two distinctions here. One is between the sense of mutual recognition implied by the term “national consciousness” on the one hand and “nationalism” on the other. It is perfectly possible for a people – including, until recently, the majority of modern Scots (and Catalans) – to develop the former without subsequently adopting the latter.
National consciousness is a passive expression of collective identification among a social group; nationalism is an active participation in the political mobilization of a social group for the construction or defense of a state.
The latter aspect is particularly important since defenders of the British state have a propensity to act as if British nationalism did not exist. This was perhaps the most significant difference in the way British nationalism was mobilized in the two referendums.
If you were a left-winger and supported independence in Scotland then you were inevitably denounced as “capitulating to nationalism” (I have some personal experience of this); but supporting the continuing existence of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was not in any way an example of British nationalism, perish the thought.
Now, as I’ve said, it is possible to argue for both positions without being either a Scottish or British nationalist, but the No campaign simply pretended that the problem didn’t exist for them.
This brings me to a second distinction. In one respect at any rate the question of EU membership is very similar to that of Scottish independence, in that you can have non-nationalist reasons both for wanting Scotland to leave the UK and for the UK to leave the EU.
In a sense it’s the reasons for making the demand which are important, not the demand itself.
The second distinction therefore concerns the reasons for desiring a nation-state, since there can be both nationalist reasons and non-nationalist (socialist, environmentalist) reasons for secession.
One legal theorist (and Scottish nationalist), the late Neil MacCormick, argued that nationalism could take either an “existential” form in which attaining statehood is an end in itself, or be a “pragmatic” means to achieving social and political ends through statehood.
MacCormick himself noted that the latter was a very “weak” form of nationalism, but in certain contexts it need not be nationalism at all.
As a political ideology, nationalism – any nationalism, relatively progressive or absolutely reactionary – involves two inescapable principles: that the national group should have its own state, regardless of the social consequences; and that what unites the national group is more significant than what divides it, above all the class divide.
It is clear from the Scottish experience at least, however, that non-nationalist arguments for supporting independence were widely used by many Yes activists, particularly around the Radical Independence Campaign.
In relation to the EU referendum, however, “existential” British, or more precisely, English nationalism, has been absolutely central to the right-wing Leave case.
ED: An argument often put forward by the Left for leaving the EU is that nation-states are potentially more amenable to reform via popular pressure; a tendency which the EU lacks. But even before Britain joined the EU, the ability of nation-states to impose compromises on capital had diminished. There is now so much investment of European capital across member states that there is a material basis for integration beyond the institutions of the EU itself.
My point is that meaningful reform, even at the national level, will surely require some form of continental organization and coordination by the Left – as will opposing EU-wide measures like the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP). How can we build that, and do you think the outcome of the referendum will have any impact on our ability to do so?
ND: There are two issues here. One is the myth of neoliberal globalization and the supposed weakening of the nation-state. Inter-state investment is not very much higher than it was between 1871 and 1914, and while nation-states continue to vary in size and power, the idea that there is general retreat by the state tends to involve taking neoliberal ideology far too seriously.
What is characteristic of neoliberal regimes is the deliberate abandoning of powers (over exchange controls), or transferring them to unelected committees (in the case of setting interest rates) or contracting out functions to private operators (as is happening in the National Health Service).
This allows regimes to claim that they have “no choice” but to follow certain courses of action – this incidentally is one of the functions of the EU: to provide an excuse in the form of its rules for governments to take actions which they would have almost certainly have carried out anyway.
But of course, while the state withdraws in some areas, it advances in others, from the surveillance of the citizenry to bailing out financial institutions and guaranteeing returns to private providers of public services.
Now, this could all be reversed, and it might even be in the overall interests of the system as a whole for that to happen, but it would require a major struggle to do so, which would inevitably be against the interests of the individual ruling-class figures and their new middle-class hangers-on who have benefited so much from neoliberalism.
So it can only be done as part of the wider struggle for socialism, rather than the reform of capitalism.
The second point, about the need for international cooperation and solidarity across state borders is obviously correct – but what has that got to do with the EU? In what ways does it help trade unions, left parties, or social movements to organize that they cannot already do? By making it easier to travel, perhaps?
The EU organizes a section of the European ruling class, not us. Working-class internationalism has nothing to do with the internationalism of bourgeois states and to imagine otherwise is simply a category mistake.
New international structures of solidarity will have to be built, but this can only be done outside those of the EU.
ED: Do you see any value at all in campaigns which aim to reform the EU, for at least bringing leftist movements from across Europe together, or is their foundational premise too misguided?
More broadly, do you agree that our approach to this is largely a tactical question, and that leftists on different sides of the debate have more in common with one another than differences? And strategically, how do we best respond to the result, whatever it is?
ND: No – I think this is a strategic question, not a tactical one. It is not simply a question of individual nation-states leaving the EU, but one of destroying it, as one of the main institutional supports of the neoliberal capitalist order.
The problem with the “another Europe is possible” arguments, and with Yanis Varoufakis’s in particular, is that they outline brilliantly what is structurally wrong with the EU, but then, with a complete lack of logic or coherence, claim that we have to reform it.
At the root of this, I think, is a very deep pessimism about the prospects for socialism, and a belief that we have to restore capitalism to health before we can even think about moving beyond it.
The problem is that capitalism isn’t going to be restored to health – at least not to the kind of health it enjoyed in the West during the postwar boom, when most of the great social-democratic governments were enacted.
As is quite often the case, the reformist argument is actually more utopian than the revolutionary one.
I start from the assumption that the Left has to unite over as many issues as possible – obviously this is what has been happening over the trade union “reforms” in France, the junior doctors’ struggle in England, demonstrations of solidarity over the Orlando shootings, and so on. And I’ve argued here that is necessary over the defense of migrants, whatever the referendum result.
But what has been missing for many decades now is any serious – here comes that word again – strategic debate about the nature of state power, the contemporary forms of left organization, and the specificity of politics under neoliberalism.
The fate of Syriza obviously makes these debates all the more urgent. It would be absurd for me to attempt to answer these enormous questions here: as with most issues concerning the socialist project, they can only be answered as part of a collective project.
Neil Davidson a lecturer in sociology at the University of Glasgow.
 



Building on arguments made in previous articles, Neil Davidson lays out why he believes socialists should vote to leave the EU
On 23 June, the UK electorate will vote in a referendum on whether to Leave or Remain in the European Union (EU).
On the one hand, the Remain camp, led by Conservative Party Prime Minister David Cameron, argues that a majority vote for Leave will involve a “do-it-yourself” recession, leading to job losses and falling incomes.
On the other hand, the Leave camp – fronted by a member of Cameron’s Cabinet, Michael Gove, and by former Tory Mayor of London Boris Johnson – claims that a majority vote for Remain will open up the floodgates to hordes of migrants, who will steal “British” jobs and put intolerable pressure on housing and social services.
Both sides now pretend to care about the working class they have been attacking in office since 2010, and both are conjuring up apocalyptic visions quite unsupported by any evidence.
Is the debate simply between two sets of right-wingers arguing in ludicrously exaggerated terms about what is best for British capitalism? There are left-wing arguments for both Leave and Remain, but it is the latter which have been dominant during the campaign, supported by the majority of the British center-left and reformist left, from the Labour Party – although with evident reluctance on the part of leader Jeremy Corbyn – through the Green Parties, to the Scottish National Party and Plaid Cymru in Wales.
There is a Left Exit (“Lexit”) campaign involving sections of the revolutionary left and dissident individuals from the parliamentary left parties, although it was set up relatively late and is clearly cutting against the grain. Nevertheless, the Lexit argument is correct because it focuses on the reality of what the EU is and what it does, and the argument will have to be reasserted whatever the result of the referendum.
Why has a majority of the British left been so willing to support remaining in the EU? Essentially, there are two reasons – one positive and the other negative.
The Myth of “Social Europe”
The positive argument for joining the EU tends to be made by the liberal and center-left. For them, the EU is a fundamentally benign institution (“although of course it is not perfect”) which has helped prevent war in Western Europe since 1945, established rights for workers and citizens, and regulated the impact of businesses on health and the environment.
Associated with these claims is a notion of “Europe” as the embodiment of Enlightenment ideals, transcending nationalism and supposedly acting as a barrier to U.S. interests. In this perspective, the EU today may have been temporarily taken over by neoliberals, but it can be reformed until it becomes a body capable of responding to demands for social justice.
The dissonance between the reality of the EU and the fantasy of “European values” is partly disguised by blurring what is and is not part of the former. The European Court of Human Rights, for example, which was responsible for the Human Rights Act, is frequently cited as a reason for remaining in the EU. But it is quite separate and would still have jurisdiction in the UK even in the event of a Leave vote.
The attitude of the socialist left to the EU was historically more hostile, but this began to change during the Thatcher era from 1979 to 1990, when, in the face of massive trade union defeats and the apparent inability of the Labour Party to win general elections, the EU appeared to be the sole bulwark against attacks on the labour movement.
The turning point was a speech by Jacques Delors, then President of the European Commission, to Britain’s Trade Union Congress in September 1988, followed by the adoption of the Social Chapter at the Strasbourg Summit the following year.
Delors, as French Finance Minister under Socialist Party President François Mitterrand, had of course been partly responsible for the government abandoning its reform program of the early 1980s and embracing the neoliberal project. Delors’ advocacy of a “social Europe” was purely tactical in order to bring labor movements on side. But his audience was desperate enough to be willingly deceived.
In fact, the EU sets certain “minimum” and “adequate” conditions for worker’s rights (these are the actual words used in the legislation). In many cases, however, these rights were fought for and won before states joined the EU – including the UK, which joined in 1973, but where workers won equal pay in 1970 as a result of earlier strike action by women at Ford’s Dagenham plant.
But even where the EU has passed potentially useful legislation – like, for example, the Working Time Directive (WTD) – it always comes with opt-out clauses that unorganized or weak groups of workers can be forced to sign for fear of losing their jobs. The WTD hasn’t helped the junior doctors in England who are currently striking for, among other things, a reduction in their hours.
More generally, the EU has not prevented attacks on workers by the Hungarian and Polish governments, nor is it preventing the French state from attacking workers at the moment. Indeed, one of the ways in which the EU is helpful to neoliberal governments is precisely because the latter can use the EU’s rules on competition and so on as an excuse for doing what they would have done anyway.
But the problem is not simply that the EU is a weak or non-existent shield. It has led the onslaught on wages and conditions in Southern Europe – above all in Greece.
When this is pointed out to EU enthusiasts – some of whom claim to be internationalists – they tend to respond by saying that, since the UK is not in the eurozone, it would not be subject to the same treatment. But surely as internationalists, we should want to put an end to an institution which has caused such suffering to so many people, rather than smugly reflect on the protection that Britain’s semi-detached status affords it?
At this point, the question of EU “reform” is usually raised (“We must stay in to change it”). But the EU is structurally incapable of reform. Why?
The onslaught on Greece is not an aberration. The EU began its march toward neoliberalism no later than the Single European Act in 1986, and this has been confirmed and deepened by every single subsequent pact and treaty, from Maastricht in 1991 onwards. This is hardly surprising: The EU is not a body suspended above shifts in the capitalist system, and as the transition to neoliberalism was imposed within the constituent nation-states, it was bound to reflect this in its own policies and rules.
What made this easier than in the individual nation-states was that the EU always lacked most of the democratic constraints which made the transition to neoliberalism a contested process in Britain or Italy, even in the period when it did embody more social democratic conception of ownership and control. In this respect, it was structured in ways remarkably close to the precepts of one leading neoliberal thinker.
In 1939, Friedrich von Hayek wrote an article in which he argued that “Interstate Federalism” at the European level would be desirable. Why? Mainly because it would ensure that economic activity should be removed as far as possible from the responsibility of meddling politicians who interfered with the market order to win electoral support from ignorant voters.
Consciously or not, the EU followed Hayek’s advice by centralizing power in the hands of appointed officials, above all in the Commission, which alone has the power to initiate legislation, three types of which – regulations, directives and decisions – are binding. The parliament has a right to be consulted, in certain circumstances, but none to initiate legislation in its own right. In this respect, it has far less power than any national government – or for that matter, even any devolved government like the Scottish or Catalan.
But this is not the only democratic deficit. If the Commission is a supranational body, the European Council is an intergovernmental one. It consists of the heads of state or heads of government of the member states, who are, of course, elected in their own countries, but not by the inhabitants of the other countries whose fate the Council decides. It proceeds by “consensus” – in other words what is acceptable to France and German axis, and increasingly, to Germany alone. No votes are conducted or minutes taken, and decisions are signaled by the President arriving at a “conclusion.”
These structures are one reason why we should reject claims that the EU is as amenable to reform as any nation-state. In fact, it is much less so.
Capitalist states are permanent structures until they are overthrown, although they can adopt different policies according to the political parties or coalitions which oversee the apparatus at any time, and these can be more or less – usually less – beneficial to working class and oppressed groups.
The problem with the EU is that the balance between unelected state managers and elected representatives is even more heavily weighted in favor of the former in the EU than in its constituent members. It would be easier to achieve reforms in Britain’s parliament than in the EU, where it requires unanimity in the European Council – there is more possibility of simultaneous revolutions in all 28 member states than of this happening.
The second Hayekian aspect of the EU is the use of rule-bound policies – on limits to public spending, on debt as a proportion of GDP, on competition – to limit what national politicians can do at the behest of their electorates. Since the rules do not allow for devaluation or the levels of state expenditure or debt that would have been necessary to stimulate the economy, the only remaining response to the crisis of 2008 was austerity.
The EU’s embrace of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) – far more enthusiastic than Washington’s, incidentally – and the possibly even more insidious Trade in Services Agreement (TISA) are only the latest and most extreme examples of this.
In this context, it is incredible to me how lightly how some Remain supporters are prepared to pass over the experience of Greece. In Yanis Varoufakis’s revelations about his encounters with the so-called Troika, it was the two EU institutions – the European Central Bank and the European Commission – not the International Monetary Fund, which were most relentless in pushing for austerity.
And what did these upstanding upholders of European values tell him? We don’t care that that the Greeks voted against austerity. It is no concern of ours if Greek children are suffering from malnutrition. It is irrelevant that Greek hospitals are running out of pain-killing drugs. These are the rules. Get with the program and start cutting pensions, privatizing services and increasing taxes for low-wage earners.
Watching the Greeks being crucified upon the cross of EU membership, should we now congratulate them on their self-sacrificing support for the European ideal?
The lack of democracy and presence of binding rules would be reasons enough to leave the EU, but there are at least three others – each of which attests not only to the inherently reactionary nature of the project, but to how it fails to perform even the role for which it is most celebrated by liberal boosters: overcoming national self-interest.
First, the EU is designed to maintain the structure of existing inequalities between European nation-states, although this has only become entirely obvious since the enlargement process after 1992, when the poorer areas of Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean were allowed to join.
Beneath all the talk of “solidarity,” this is inescapable: A financial and industrial structure designed to meet the needs of the strongest economies – France and Germany, and since the advent of the euro, increasingly just the latter – but which forces the weakest to play by the same rules, will always be detrimental to them, particularly when there is no mechanism to transfer funds or resources to nations within the EU in the way that can be done to regions within nation-states.
Second, the EU economically acts as a collective imperial power in relation to the Global South, both preventing goods from entering its territory and dumping goods outside it. And although the EU is not a military-imperialist power in its own right, as a collective body, it has always acted as an adjunct to NATO, and consequently as a support to the U.S., which insisted that Eastern European accession states should join NATO before the EU.
But this role was inscribed onto the EU’s DNA from the beginning. The U.S. initially encouraged and supported the formation of the EU’s predecessors as part of a Cold War bulwark against its Russian imperial rival. This is the main reason why there was “no war in (Western) Europe” between 1945 and 1991: Although engaged in economic competition with each other, the EU member-states were united behind the U.S. in the same geopolitical alliance.
Third, the EU is structurally racist. The very idea of “Europe” is necessarily exclusionary. The much-vaunted “freedom of movement” within the EU is predicated on blocking the movement of those without, as tens of thousands of desperate refugees are currently discovering.
The spectacle of these people being trapped in the camps, behind barbed-wire fences and facing the police dogs and tear gas on the borders of European civilization is obscene enough, but it is compounded by the attitude of the constituent states themselves. For here again, their individual interests take precedence over even collective barbarity, as the Schengen Agreement collapses into a free-for-all to defend individual borders against the alien hordes.
The EU is fuelling racism and fascism in Europe, not preventing it, as the electoral rise of the far right within member states demonstrates.
 
Is Remain the “Lesser Evil”?
Many socialists would agree with most, if not all of this, but still argue that we have to vote for Remain purely on contingent grounds: Namely, that a majority vote for Leave will only strengthen the hard right – not so much the actual fascists of British National Party, but the UK Independence Party (UKIP) and the euro-skeptic wing of the Conservative Party, and their media loudhailers in the Murdoch press and other right-wing newspapers.
As a result, the argument for remaining in the EU most commonly expressed by members of the radical left is essentially a negative one. As they correctly point out, the main drive for withdrawal from the EU has historically come from the hard right, and the UKIP popularized this position by focusing on the question of national sovereignty – specifically by highlighting the inability of the UK to control its borders in the face of supposedly unlimited migration either from within or, in the case of refugees, via the EU.
The success of UKIP in turn emboldened the euro-skeptics within the Conservative Party. The referendum is therefore only happening in response to pressure from these forces, and the campaign for exit is being conducted according to their racist agenda. If there is a majority vote to leave, the argument goes, it will immediately mean that non-UK citizens and their families from the EU who currently have right of residence here face the danger of expulsion or, at the very least, will face a much more precarious situation.
Left-wing campaigners can also point to the way in which the official Leave campaign has unleashed a poisonous racism and xenophobia into British politics, regardless of the result. One horrifying result of this seems to have been the fatal assault on pro-Remain Labour MP Jo Cox on June 16, by a man with a history of both mental illness and association with far right – who apparently shouted “Britain First” as he attacked Cox and who later gave his name in court as “Death to traitors, freedom for Britain.”
In this context, voting to remain, while not necessarily leading to any positive result, would at least avoid a negative one: It is the “lesser evil.”
Now, the hard right is certainly our enemy, but in this context at least, it is not the main enemy. The imperial nationalism unleashed by the Conservatives before 1997 in relation to “Europe” was not, as we have seen, because the EU was in any sense hostile to neoliberalism, but as an ideological diversion from the failure of neoliberalism to transform the fortunes of British capital, outside of the City of London at least.
The nationalism invoked for this purpose now places a major obstacle for the overwhelming majority of capitalists, managers and their political representatives who do not want to leave the EU – although many would like to renegotiate the treaty on terms which remove even the minimal worker rights that it currently contains, as Cameron, if victorious, will almost certainly attempt to do.
Above all, they do not want to stem the flow of migrant labor into the UK, any more than U.S. capitalists want to build a wall between the U.S. and Mexico: Both groups want migrants to be precarious and consequently pliable.
There is a problem with some left analyses of the hard right and its far right component in particular, which is the assumption that it represents the “real” face of capitalism unmasked.
In fact, in the developed world at least, it is only in very rare situations of dire extremity – and usually after facing the kind of threat from the labor movement that has unfortunately been absent for several decades – that capital has ever relied on the far right to solve its problems. Actual fascists have been all but invisible during the campaign.
The UKIP, like the Tea Party and Donald Trump in the U.S., is one of capital’s Frankenstein’s monsters, an unintended consequence of the unresolvable social tensions thrown up by the neoliberal order. UKIP has given a focus to a range of concerns in the shape of a quasi-imaginary institution called “Brussels” in a similar way that the Tea Party did in giving shape to another quasi-imaginary institution called “the government.” The main difference is that in the case of the former, the institution is foreign, rather than domestic; thus, the crime of local elites is their compliance with it.
The basis of at least part of the UKIP’s popular support is, however, drawn from a comparable constituency. Unsurprisingly, one section involves small businesses and the petty bourgeois proper, which tends to trade within the UK, rather than with the rest of the continent, and for which increased regulation and improved workers’ rights – even of a minimal sort – pose a far greater threat to their profit margins than they do to large corporations.
It is a fixation with the hard right and its policies on migration to the exclusion of virtually everything else that has led sections of the left to embrace the problematic notion of the “lesser evil,” which, of course, we are currently hearing in relation to Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign against Donald Trump.
There are, however, two reasons for rejecting arguments about the “lesser evil” that are quite specific to the British situation.
The first is that the approach is entirely reactive and deeply pessimistic, since it assumes that all the left can do is adopt a defensive position in relation to the UKIP and the Tory right. In effect, it is saying that a majority of working-class voters are so in thrall to anti-migrant racism that they will only vote for withdrawal on that basis.
But sections of the working class also want to leave because they no longer feel represented as their lives and communities are being destroyed by neoliberal globalization. Former employees in the fishing industry in Peterhead in Scotland or Grimsby in England can point to the Common Fisheries Policy and its attendant quotas and regulations as contributing to its local demise. These are genuine grievances which have nothing necessarily to do with racism, although the UKIP and the Tories, of course, try to frame them in this way.
But even if some workers do express soft racism, socialists have to argue with them on the basis of what we actually believe – on the assumption that we can win them to our positions. If we think this is impossible, whether in relation to migration or anything else, then we are essentially confessing to our own political impotence, our inability to change anyone’s mind. Effectively, it is to succumb to fatalism.
The second reason for rejecting the “lesser evil” is that it reduces the EU (and non-EU) migrant population of the UK to the status of passive victims of the Tory government.
Yet many of the over 2 million EU workers here are integrated into communities, have joined trade unions, and are members of left-wing political parties, like the Polish RAZEM. From the point of view of capital, entire sectors and some whole firms (the retailer Sports Direct springs to mind) are dependent on their labor.
Remain supporters conjure up a nightmare vision of the day after a June 23 vote to Leave in which hundreds of thousands of migrant workers are rounded up by police in unmarked black vans. But this would only be realizable under an actual fascist government prepared to contemplate the collapse of large sections of the British economy, particularly services and agriculture. What happens during the prolonged period of post-referendum negotiations will depend on what the left actually does in that period.
In any case, to argue exclusively in relation to EU migrants who are currently in the UK is to ignore the plight of those actual and potential migrants and refugees from outside the EU, whose position behind the razor wire borders of our Common European Home will be reinforced: the central task is to support and help organize migrant workers while arguing for British borders to be open to everyone, in the EU or out.
Voting Left Remain on tactical (“lesser evil”) grounds, whatever the putative short-term advantages, will be negative in the long term, because it will effectively involve submitting to political blackmail and putting our defense of migrant rights in hock to the EU, which – to say the least – we know cannot be relied upon to defend them.
In other words, we need to build our own independent capacity to make a case. Otherwise, we will find ourselves subject to the same blackmail each and every time it arises, and it will arise again, since the multiple crises of the EU – of which the crisis of its external and internal borders is only the most visible one – are not going to come to an end any time soon.
If we do not, the working class people we hope to influence will conclude either that the left has no positive position of its own or that its position is simply incoherent – by which I mean the spectacle of left commentators, of whom Varoufakis is perhaps the most influential, explaining just how completely undemocratic and neoliberal the EU is…only to then call for a vote to Remain. And the Left Remain position, no matter how “tactical,” ineluctably slides into an apologia for the EU and then onto a delusional reform program.
 
Telling the Truth about the EU
Socialists have to tell the truth about the EU – that it is an un-reformable machine for deepening and extending neoliberalism – and we have to tell it now, not at a more convenient time which may never arrive. And then we have to draw the necessary conclusions.
A British departure from the EU would not cause a fatal crisis for British capitalism – there is no need for us to resort to the same exaggerations as our enemies – but it would cause it a number of problems and open up a political situation in which the left could intervene.
Above all, it would intensify the crisis of the Tory Party, which is potentially facing its greatest division since Irish Home Rule in the 1880s, or even the repeal of the Corn Laws in the 1840s.
Left Remainers always seem to assume that, after a vote to Leave, the Tories – elected by 25 percent of those eligible to vote, having presided over a referendum outcome opposed by most of the capitalist class they are supposed to represent, and now engaged in open civil war – will be in power until the end of time, or at least until 2020. But the Scottish Indyref, Corbyn’s victory and the Bernie Sanders’ campaign have all shown us the volatility of contemporary politics, and the speed with which situations can be transformed in quite unexpected ways, providing the left has not disarmed itself first.
But what would the attitude of the EU be to a Corbyn-led Labour Government or a newly independent Scottish Government which wanted to carry out the kind of serious reforms – renationalization of key services, increased taxes on wealth, repeal of the anti-trade union laws, a massive public house building program – which would be necessary after 40 years of neoliberal capitalism?
To ask the question is to answer it: any course of radical action is simply incompatible with membership of the EU and adherence to its “rules.”
It is sometimes claimed that the internationalist position is to remain within the EU because it is an international organization. It is – but then again, so too are NATO, the IMF and the World Bank.
The EU organizes a section of the international ruling class, not the working class. As Trotsky once wrote in another context, a brake cannot be used as an accelerator. There are no EU-wide political parties or trade unions or movements.
In any case, solidarity across borders does not depend on constitutions or institutions, but on the willingness of workers to support each other, even if in separate countries. The struggle against neoliberal capitalism is unlikely to begin simultaneously across the whole of the EU, or to be confined within its boundaries.
What we are likely to see is an uneven series of movements of different intensities, within different nation-states which, if victorious, could form new alliance and ultimately a United Socialist States of Europe. But that will involve destroying the EU and replacing it with institutions that represent our interests and not those of our ruling classes.
 






Very clear explanation of neoliberalism by Neil Davidson in response to a letter by Dr. Jim Walker (Chief Economist, Asianomics, Hong Kong). – PG



... and an academic weighs in on the topic
WRITING in Saturday’s National (Fry Will Contribute Common Sense and Clear Thinking), Jim Walker writes: “As an economist, I have no clue what a neoliberal is.” In Jim’s view we should therefore stop using the term, because “there is no such thing and you don’t have a clue how to define it.” Actually, there is and I can.
The term neoliberalism can be used in three ways. First, it is an ideology which emerged in Central Europe during the 1930s in opposition to what was mistakenly called “socialism” (ie state planning and ownership) and which later migrated to the economics department at the University of Chicago. The adherents of this conception of neoliberalism actually adopted the term as a self-description; indeed, Milton Friedman wrote a paper in 1951 called Neoliberalism and Its Prospects.
The difference between the neoliberals and more conventional supporters of neo-classical economics was that the former did not believe that the market order they desired was a spontaneous result of human activity, but one which would have to be brought into being by the state. The notion that neoliberalism is about markets as opposed to the state is simply a myth – it is rather about changing what the state does.
Second, neoliberalism is also the strategy adopted by the alliance of state managers, politicians and employers which began to emerge from the mid-to late-1970s, first in Chile, the UK and the USA. This responded to the return of economic crisis in 1973 by seeking to shift the balance of power in the workplace from labour to capital, in the first instance by weakening the trade unions through artificially raising unemployment levels, attacking key groups of workers (miners in the UK, air-traffic controllers in the US), and moving production to greenfield, non-union sites (the “M4 Corridor” in the UK, the “Sunbelt” in the US).
The strategy was not, however, the implementation of a master plan derived from neoliberal ideology: it was largely improvised. But once Keynesianism and other forms of state capitalism had proved themselves no longer able to raise or even maintain the rate of profit, ruling classes had a limited set of options. It is therefore unsurprising that most arrived at the same set of responses – privatisation, outsourcing, deregulation, unrestricted capital flows, indirect rather than direct taxation, and all the rest. The ideologists could claim this as their work, but, without successful resistance, it would almost certainly have happened even if Friedman and co had never written a word.
Finally, neoliberalism is the entire period in the history of capitalism since this strategy began to be applied in the 1970s. There have of course been variations in the regime: the “social” neoliberalism of Blair (or Sturgeon) is different in many ways from the “vanguard” neoliberalism of Thatcher and Reagan, not least in relation to identity politics, but the underlying economic doctrines have remained remarkably consistent.
The problem with Jim’s argument is that it assumes there are underlying economic “laws” which are eternally true for all of human history. On the contrary, every single statement he makes has to be prefaced by the words “under capitalism”. Ironically, Von Hayek, one of the forerunners of neoliberal ideology, knew better than this. He argued in several places that for most of human history we sought cooperation rather than competition – and that this attitude had to be stamped out of us if capitalism was ever to be truly secure. Neoliberalism is an attempt to create a world in which all human relationships are forced to conform to a model of economic competition; but what can be created can also be destroyed – and as far as neoliberalism is concerned, the sooner the better.



 


Neil Davidson
School of Social and Political Science
University of Glasgow



 



Neil Davidson discusses the prospects for revolution in Britain.
In the days after Britain voted to leave the EU, a febrile, volatile atmosphere took hold. Prime Minister David Cameron resigned, the Parliamentary Labour Party began an attempt to unseat its left-wing leader Jeremy Corbyn, and the pound hit an all-time low. For a moment, it seemed that fundamental change was on the agenda – but as has happened so many times in Britain, the country stopped well short of a truly transformative moment. A British revolution, it seems, is not yet on the cards.
This is not all that surprising. Revolutions don’t come about on the back of raw anger or sheer will: all the necessary forces must come together, and certain conditions have to be in place. The crucial thing is for would-be revolutionaries to recognise them. So if we want to imagine a British revolution, we should look at what created the country’s last two near-revolutionary eras.
The first one began brewing in 1910, went through a brief intermission for the first two years of World War I, and then picked up again from 1916 and came to a head in 1919 as various crises and campaigns came to a head. The other ran from 1968 through to 1975 or so; it peaked in around 1972, with the Fisher-Bendix factory occupation, a national miners’ strike, a national dockers’ strike and Bloody Sunday all beginning or taking place in one month alone.
Both these restive periods came at moments of global upheaval that swept Britain up in a wider revolutionary wave. After World War I it seemed briefly as if Europe might follow Russia’s lead and embrace revolutionary socialist and anti-colonial politics; 1972, meanwhile, came halfway through the era bracketed by the French “evenements” of May 1968 and the end of the Portuguese Revolution in 1975.
In Britain, these times drew together a range of different movements. George Dangerfield famously described the combined Home Rule crisis in Ireland, revolts of workers and the campaign for women’s suffrage before 1914 as signalling “the strange death of liberal England“. After receding at the start of World War I, all three factors soon resurged, starting in 1916 with the Easter Rising in Dublin, the engineers’ struggle against dilution and the Glasgow rent strikes.
In the late 1960s and early 1970s, meanwhile, Irish Republicanism, militant trade unionism and what was by then called radical women’s liberation were all in play, but accompanied by the anti-Vietnam War movement, new student and gay rights movements, and Britain’s first genuine revolutionary leftist movements since the Stalinist darkness fell in the late 1920s.
Finally, the events of both 1919 and 1972 were coloured by the struggles of trade unionists, whose mass strikes and occupations posed the biggest threat to the capitalist system. Even combined, the other forces involved did not amount to a comparable threat.
But with the assembled forces unable to seize state power – something that distinguishes all true revolutions – our rulers were able to restore control and secure lasting victories. The order established endures to this day.
So what prospect is there, really, for another revolutionary crisis in Britain?
 
The stars align
Some of the global conditions are clearly in place. As in 1968, we live in a faltering world economy; as in 1914, the UK is being battered by growing geopolitical instability and great power rivalry, with assorted conflicts and proxy wars underway – especially in the Middle East and North Africa.
There’s also a new factor: the existential threat of catastrophic man-made climate change, which many political theorists describe as inevitable while capitalism continues. Together, these three factors have produced another: mass migration and resulting human misery on a scale unseen since the end of World War II.
The next question, then, is whether Britain is actually primed for an epochal change.
The shattering result of the EU referendum and its chaotic aftermath shows that the British ruling class is deeply divided in a way that it wasn’t in 1919, or in even in 1972. And while the reign of neoliberalism has weakened the labour movement and enriched the wealth of the ruling elite and its hangers-on, it hasn’t restored profit rates on any consistent basis, and no obvious alternative form of capitalist organisation to propose as a way of answering the mass discontent.
But if another revolutionary situation arises, it won’t be because everyone wakes up one morning with the intention of overthrowing the system; it’ll be because a significant minority of the population respond to a much more localised and specific attack on their interests.
 
The spark
The Leave vote confronts the political representatives of the British establishment with dire uncertainty. If they put a foot wrong or overplay their hand, they could overreach themselves beyond the point of retreat.
For the moment, it seems reasonable to assume that the Conservative party will hold the reins throughout the post-referendum chaos – but we can imagine the sort of miscalculation that might provide the spark. Perhaps restrictions on in-work benefits or healthcare could be extended not just to migrants but to “native” Britons who haven’t paid into the system for whatever reason. The NHS could face full privatisation. Britain could get involved in a war between Russia and the NATO states.
The forces involved, though, might be very different from the UK’s last two revolutionary moments. Today, not just Ireland but also Scotland threatens the integrity of the union; among the oppressed, migrants are likely to be at the forefront of the struggle for rights.
The working class remains essential to any revolutionary project – not the caricatured “white working class” supposedly in thrall to racism and xenophobia, but the actual multi-ethnic working class employed in call centres, shopping malls and transportation hubs across the country. This potentially revolutionary class is very different to the industrial proletariat of old; it incorporates a vast mass of private sector workers who aren’t currently in trade unions.
That rather changes the mechanics of what revolutionary mobilisation would mean. Mass unionisation is obviously one component, and also relevant here are the three sustained community-based mass mobilisations that have rocked Britain since the defeat of the miners in 1985: the campaign against the “poll tax” (1987–90), the Iraq War (2002–04), and the grassroots independence campaigns “from below” in the Scottish Referendum (2014).
But while the sort of self-organisation that arose at these moments is likely to re-emerge, we might also expect the process to involve such random explosive and damaging episodes as the riots of 2011 – for which there are a great many competing explanations.
One thing is certain: the British capitalist state has entered a deep crisis, one that’s territorial, political and economic all at once. Revolution may not be a utopian solution – but it’s not hard to imagine a group or groups of dissenters deciding it’s the only way out.
 






Scotland wants to remain in the European Union – and that might make a left-wing break from the United Kingdom impossible.



In its manifesto for the May 2016 Scottish parliamentary elections, the Scottish National Party (SNP) stated that it would regard a “significant and material change” in circumstances since the 2014 independence referendum sufficient to trigger the demand for a second vote, without making explicit what might constitute such a change.
It was widely understood, however, that the most likely motivation would be if the then-imminent referendum on the United Kingdom’s membership of the European Union resulted in a Scottish majority for Remain and an English majority for Leave. In these circumstances, the English would determine the UK result as a whole and the democratically expressed wishes of the Scottish electorate would be denied.
This is, of course, precisely what happened. The relatively close overall vote for Leave of 52 percent was reflected in England (where 53.4 percent voted to exit) and – more surprisingly – in Wales (with 52.5 percent). The Scottish vote was more decisive and, as expected, in the opposite direction: 1,661,191 people, or exactly 62 percent of those who voted, went for Remain – the highest percentage of any area in the United Kingdom, surpassing even the London Remain vote of 59.9 percent.
What is perhaps even more remarkable is that there were no major geographical divisions: all thirty-two local council areas voted the same way, with only Moray as a borderline case, casting 50.1 percent for Remain.
Accordingly, the day after the vote, SNP leader and Scottish first minister Nicola Sturgeon announced that a “change of circumstances” had indeed occurred. After some speculation as to whether the Scottish government could veto or nullify the result – a suggestion quickly declared a constitutional impossibility – Sturgeon then said that her government would seek participation in the Brexit negotiations with the European Union in order to defend Scottish interests.
If Scotland were to be denied a seat at the table, then a new independence referendum would be highly likely. Sturgeon immediately traveled to Brussels to launch a visible charm offensive on a European Union still reeling from the British decision to quit.
Sturgeon is perhaps the most capable and tactically astute bourgeois politician operating anywhere in the United Kingdom. She knows that, whatever sympathy there might be for Scotland in the European Parliament, the commission – the actual source of power and authority in the European Union – was never going to allow a currently stateless nation special status in Brexit negotiations, still less grant it its own EU membership.
The commission has always been implacable in sticking to the treaties and applying its own regulations, directives, and decisions – as the Greeks recently learned to their cost – and would have done so even without the intervention of Spanish prime minister Mariano Rajoy, a politician desperately worried that any concessions to the Scots would encourage Catalan separatist aspirations.
The trip to Brussels was therefore a piece of theater on Sturgeon’s part, which would allow her to say that she had attempted to find a way of meeting the Scottish wish to remain within the European Union without recourse to a second independence referendum, but alas, she now had no choice but to pursue that option, although perhaps not immediately.
It is, of course, not entirely within her power to decide whether a second referendum will be held or not, as the British Parliament alone – in this context any government with an effective majority – can authorize one. In these circumstances much would depend on a strong and visible mass campaign to force the issue.
It might seem, therefore, that the Brexit vote has inadvertently been a positive development for the Scottish independence campaign. I am not so sure. And I am even less sure that it is positive for the type of independence the radical left hopes to achieve.
 
Yes and Remain
A common claim on the nationalist blogosphere is that Scottish Remain votes were knowingly cast for Scottish independence. In this scenario, Scottish Remain supporters expected an English majority for Leave and knew that the divergence between the two countries would constitute the “change in circumstances” flagged up by the SNP. This may indeed be the ultimate effect of the vote, but it is unlikely to have been most voters’ intention.
Apart from the vast majority of the British ruling class who had their own reason for wanting to stay in – but who constitute considerably less than 1 percent of the population – the majority of people who voted Remain across the United Kingdom did so for a mixture of two reasons.
On the one hand, they opposed the official Leave campaign’s racism and xenophobia, and signaled this by voting against it. There were a number of pro-Remain demonstrations following the referendum result, in Edinburgh as in London, and – setting aside for the moment the fundamentally undemocratic notion that the result should be ignored and the process rerun – the often homemade banners carried by the mostly young protesters made it clear that their main focus was fundamentally positive: solidarity with migrants from both the European Union and elsewhere.
This is why it was important for the radical left to critically engage with the demonstrators – as the left-wing RISE did. This type of intervention would not have been possible with, for example, a demonstration calling for the border closure.
However, people also voted Remain because they mistakenly believe the European Union to be essentially benevolent. While it may currently follow some misguided policies, their argument goes, it is primarily dedicated to the free movement of people, the prevention of war, the establishment of workers’ rights and environmental protections, and the demise of narrow nationalisms in favor of shared European values. One would have to return to the fantasies about Stalinist Russia in the 1930s to find a comparable disjunction between illusion and reality.
The case against the European Union can be stated simply: it is an undemocratic and unreformable apparatus for imposing neoliberal austerity on all but a handful of the most powerful member states, while simultaneously enforcing racist barriers to migrants from outside the current boundaries of what it alone decides counts as Europe.
In Scotland, we will now be forced to deal with the consequences of not having made these left-wing arguments for Leave. However, whatever the precise reasons people had for voting Remain, it is not plausible to claim that a majority saw it as a mechanism for bringing about another independence referendum.
Many of the 55 percent of Scots who voted against independence in 2014 did so partly because they wanted to stay in the European Union and thought independence would threaten Scottish membership: we can therefore assume that a substantial block of “no” voters were also Remain voters, at least when they cast their votes this June.
Edinburgh, which had one of the highest “no” votes (61 percent) of any Scottish city in 2014, also had the highest Remain votes (74.4 percent) of any British city in 2016. In other words, those people who voted “no” in the independence referendum partly in order to stay in the European Union would have also voted Remain, hoping that a majority across the United Kingdom would do the same. Under this logic, they would not vote Leave just because a Remain vote might inadvertently lead to a new referendum.
Also much of the support for “yes” in 2014 came from areas where the poorest, worst-housed, and most precariously employed Scots live. Voter registration drives by the “yes” campaign reached out to these hitherto disenfranchised working-class voters, producing an unprecedented 97 percent of the eligible population registering to vote.
Now compare the actual turnout in the two referendums: a total of 3,619,915 (85 percent) voted in 2014, but only 2,679,513 (67 percent) in 2016 – placing Scotland below the UK average of 72.2 percent. Part of the drop is accounted for by the exclusion of sixteen- and seventeen-year-olds from the 2016 electorate, but since they only amounted to 109,000 of voters in 2014 this could not have been a decisive factor.
Glasgow, along with Dundee, the Scottish city with the biggest working-class presence, had – at 56.2 percent – the lowest turnout in the entire United Kingdom. And of those who did vote, more opted for Remain in the predominantly middle-class Glasgow North (78 percent) than in working-class Glasgow East (56 percent).
It seems reasonable to assume then that the majority of the missing voters were the most financially insecure, working-class “yes” supporters who, if they had voted, would have likely voted in the same way as their English and Scottish counterparts: for Leave.
In this context it is important to understand that the people who voted Leave are not the vast reactionary mass of racist xenophobes portrayed by the left-liberal journalists writing for the Guardian or the New Statesman, for whom Brexit apparently signals the United Kingdom’s descent into fascism.
Racism and anti-migrant sentiment were undoubtedly present, but there are not seventeen million hardened racists in the United Kingdom. This was, after all, a referendum in which the two leading exponents of austerity – Prime Minister David Cameron and Chancellor George Osborne – were arguing for Remain, backed by virtually the entire British establishment and most capitalists and their organizations.
Imagine you are working-class and living in a deindustrialised and abandoned area, where the long-term unemployed have either been ignored or subjected to a benefits regime unparalleled in its harshness since the 1930s. Is it not entirely reasonable to reject the recommendations from those responsible for your situation? I noted earlier that, of all the local council areas, Moray nearly voted to leave; but this has nothing to do with migration and everything to do with the fact that employment in the local fishing industry has been devastated by the Common Fisheries Policy.
Finally, while all Scottish National Party (SNP) members and most of its supporters voted “yes” in 2014, they did not all vote Remain in 2016. Any claims about members’ views of the European Union are inevitably impressionistic because there is no hard data – which an SNP leadership committed to continued Scottish membership in the European Union has unsurprisingly shown no interest in producing – but there is data about the SNP’s base.
An average of five polls about Brexit voting intentions, taken around the May 2016 Scottish parliamentary elections, found that 66 percent of SNP supporters (that is, people who said they voted for the SNP in the 2015 general election) said they would vote Remain, and 34 percent said they would vote Leave – figures that suggest they were divided in much the same way as Scotland overall.
At best then, we can say that the Remain vote was probably divided between “yes” and “no” independence supporters – which would make sense if we recall that, when EU membership came up during the independence referendum, the debate was not about leaving the European Union, but about whether voting “yes” or “no” to Scottish independence involved equally good prospects for remaining in it.
It has, of course, been argued since June 23 that, whatever people may have thought they were voting, a number of those who previously voted “no” to independence have now changed their minds, reacting in horror to the Leave campaign’s racism and xenophobia and the anti-migrant (and other minority) violence triggered by the result.
And it is true that there have been some high-profile switchers, including leading Conservative novelist and intellectual Alan Massie and, more ambiguously, Harry Potter creator J.K. Rowling. But even if these well-publicized changes of heart turn out to be permanent, there is no evidence that support for independence has risen since June 23 by the extent necessary to ensure a “yes” majority in a new referendum.
A poll conducted the day after the EU referendum showed support for “yes” at 59 percent. One conducted the following week – adjusted for “don’t knows” – showed it at 53 percent. Most commentators – and the SNP leadership – generally accept that “yes” support has to consistently exceed 60 percent over a prolonged period for a successful outcome to be likely.
In other words, the pro-independence share of the vote will have to increase by roughly the same percentage as it did in 2014 (that is, by another 15 percent) to make a “yes” majority certain.
We are not at that level yet, and the reason why is quite obvious: the majority of people who wanted to stay in the United Kingdom did not do so primarily because they also wanted to stay in the European Union, but because they valued the continued existence of Britain, perhaps even seeing themselves mainly as British.
For this majority, Brexit, while an undesirable outcome, will not be the only factor determining their attitude to Indyref2. Indeed, they might well reason that, given the prospective upheaval involved in leaving the European Union, it would be best to minimize further disruption by continuing to remain in the United Kingdom.
 
EU Illusions
Let us suppose, however, that Brexit does persuade a majority of Scots of the need for independence. Does this necessarily benefit the Left? Making EU membership the reason to seek independence is highly convenient for the SNP, but not for the independence campaign’s radical wing. There is little prospect that the European Union will see Scotland as the United Kingdom’s successor state: Scotland will not, in other words, inherit the United Kingdom’s existing opt-outs or special arrangements.
Scotland would therefore enter the European Union as a new, relatively small state with a commitment to meet the Maastricht convergence criteria, if not necessarily to immediately adopt the euro. A newly independent Scotland would – from the start – be confined within the EU neoliberal straightjacket.
This allows the SNP to claim popular support for austerity and use the European Union as an excuse for abandoning its more leftish promises – since no one should be under any illusion that the commission would tolerate social-democratic experiments on the European Union’s western fringe.
Indyref2 is therefore unlikely to resemble its predecessor. The balance of forces on the “yes” side will be very different, given the SNP’s massive membership growth. In 2014, the SNP needed the Radical Independence Campaign (RIC) and the wider Yes campaign, partly because it had tied itself to a post-independence vision of Scotland retaining NATO, the monarchy, and the pound sterling.
A program as conservative as this failed to inspire much support beyond the already committed: it took the interventions of RIC, Women for Independence, National Collective, and the other independence-from-below advocates to actually galvanize support for “yes.”
But despite all the rhetoric of reviving this alliance, the SNP is in such a hegemonic position now that the leadership clearly no longer believes that they need allies – other than perhaps as foot soldiers – in order to win over undecided voters. Some SNP members’ outrage at the very existence of rival organizations which (in member of parliament Mhairi Black’s phrase) “claim” to support independence, suggests the nervousness of a party that is probably aware that the level of support it can garner on the basis of promises rather than delivery has peaked. The leadership will certainly not want to be seen in the company of unwelcome allies intent on exposing the very European Union the SNP is desperate to join.
We can therefore expect an intensification of the type of routines we have become familiar with over the last two years: orchestrated interventions from SNP supporters on social media about the impossibility of delivering any reforms until independence is achieved – and, in extreme versions, that politics itself should be put on hold until then.
In this case the key refrain will be “we can worry about the European Union once we have independence,” by which time it will of course be too late, or at least much more difficult to extricate ourselves. In these circumstances, the radical left has to make three central arguments.
The first concerns democracy. The EU referendum involved two aspects, one which might be called procedural, and the other substantive. The former is that it revealed once again how Scottish voters’ wishes will be ignored if they differ from the rest of the United Kingdom, or even just England; the latter is the specific question of whether or not Scotland should be part of the European Union.
These are separate issues. It is perfectly possible to argue that the democratic deficit that allows Scottish majority votes to be consistently overridden – as has happened again with the Commons vote to renew the Trident nuclear weapons system – is part of the pro-Indyref2 argument while still opposing EU membership. Apart from anything else, going into the European Union as a new member state on far more restricted basis is quite distinct from staying in as part of the United Kingdom.
In other words, we need to argue both for Indyref2 and for a new referendum on EU membership in which the actual nature of the European Union can be openly discussed. It should go without saying that sixteen- and seventeen-year-olds and EU migrants should be allowed to vote in both.
The second argument concerns the European Union’s nature, and what this means for the Left. Many UK socialists supported Remain for “lesser evil” reasons, namely that the dominant Leave narrative had been shaped by the hard right, that a Leave victory would encourage racism, even fascism, and threaten the right of EU citizens to stay in the United Kingdom.
Whatever the merits or otherwise of these arguments – I for one was never convinced that even the plausible aspects constituted a case for Remain – the debate in Scotland over Brexit was not about migration. A separate referendum on entry into the European Union wouldn’t concern immigration either.
Those sections of the Left, like the Scottish Greens, that have illusions about the European Union will undoubtedly argue for entry, but those that have no such illusions should no longer feel constrained over describing what the European Union really is and what it really does; in other words, we would need to argue against entry.
The third argument involves reasserting the actual reasons for supporting Scottish independence, which make no concessions to either Scottish nationalism or to Europhilia’s fake “internationalism.” In addition to democracy, these include getting rid of nuclear weapons; weakening both the United Kingdom’s role as an imperialist power and the broader geopolitical structures in which it is embedded; resisting neoliberal austerity; and establishing genuine open borders so that anyone who wants to come here can do so.
Above all it means arguing that we cannot wait until independence before struggling for reforms if we have any hope of shaping what that independent Scotland will look like.
Neil Davidson a lecturer in sociology at the University of Glasgow.
 






Neil Davidson remembers Alan Rae (5 July 1950–12 November 2016) in this obituary in the form of a memoir.







Alan standing behind the banner on the right side



When a person very close to us is dying, there is (we dimly apprehend) something in the months to come that – much as we would have liked to share it with him – could only happen through his absence. – Walter Benjamin, One-Way Street (1928)
Man is dead, but his spirit lives – The chant of striking black workers in Durban, South Africa, 9 January 1973
Alan Rae, a friend and comrade for nearly two decades, died on 12 November in Ellen’s Glen Care Home in Edinburgh, almost exactly five years since being diagnosed with Motor Neuron Disease (MND) on 3 October 2011. All fatal diseases are terrible in their own way: the particular cruelty of MND is that it leaves the mind and personality intact, but increasingly trapped in a body that is shutting down.







Always a fighter, Alan ‘raged against the dying of the light’ almost until the very end when he began to refuse food in an attempt to hasten the end of a life that he no longer found endurable. Other comrades will have their own memories of Alan, but here I simply want to share my own and to celebrate the kind of activist, the kind of human being, without whom the socialist movement would cease to exist. It is sometimes difficult to recall your first encounter with a particular person – even one who goes on to become a close friend; but I can identify exactly when and where I first encountered Alan Glashan Rae. It was around 7.00 p.m. on Tuesday, 13 April 1999, in the small upstairs function room of the Café Royal on West Register Street, Edinburgh. This was during the war in Kosovo and in the run-up to the first elections to what was then the new Scottish Parliament.
The previous week the SWP had organised a fairly large (100 plus) non-party anti-war public meeting with Labour, SNP, SSP, Kosovar and Kurdish speakers. I was on the SWP’s District Committee at the time and was responsible for the party’s anti-war work in Edinburgh, so at the end of the meeting I duly stood up and said that we should set up a campaign against NATO’s bombing of Serbia. The next day wrote as ‘acting Secretary’ of this putative campaign to everyone who had signed the attendance sheet, inviting them to an organizational meeting upstairs in ‘the Café’ the following week.
Alan was one of the four or possibly five people who turned up. From these inauspicious beginnings we set up the somewhat portentously titled Edinburgh Campaign Against War in Europe (ECAWE), which quickly became an highly effective local group, running several stalls a week and organising a successful conference, much of which was down to Alan’s personal input and initiative. In the intense atmosphere of a campaign you soon get to know which people have to be endured for the sake of unity and those whose company you actively want to seek out. Alan was one of the latter. It turned out that he had an amazing backstory and had been active in the movement since the early 1970s.
Born in Clydebank near Glasgow, Alan had worked and acted as a shop-steward at Upper Clyde Shipbuilders, shortly after the 1971 sit-in. His first political affiliation had been as a member of the Fourth International’s official British franchise, the International Marxist Group, but most striking to me was the fact that he had actually been a member of the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign (VSC). Alan was only seven years older than me, but I had come into political activity with Rock Against Racism in late 1976 and VSC seemed to belong to a different world – variously called ‘1968’ or ‘the long nineteen sixties’ – and one which was rapidly receding into history. Alan was one of the unsung activists of those years who did not abandon his beliefs when our ultimate victory began to seem… less certain than it had once done, but sought new areas in which to put his revolutionary socialist beliefs into practice.
Alan joined the SWP during or shortly after the Kosovo campaign came to an end, but as someone who combined a mercurial temperament with doggedness in defending what he regarded as matters of principle, he subsequently had what might be described as a ‘volatile’ relationship with the party. He left on at least six occasions, although the long-suffering Secretary of Edinburgh South Branch, Pat Smith, always assured me that he would be back – which held true until the crisis of 2012–3, during which the three of us (and most of Edinburgh district’s active membership) left for good, after realising that the organisation many of us had spent decades trying to build was beyond democratic reform.
Our departure more-or-less coincided with the point when the Scottish independence referendum campaign was about to take off in earnest. This was to be the context for the last major disagreement between Alan and me, two years after his diagnosis with MND. I had by this point shifted to a position of active support for independence, after spending many years being deeply sceptical about the possibilities it could offer for socialists.
Alan, like many activists of his generation, found it difficult to abandon the idea that supporting Scottish independence was in effect, capitulating to Scottish nationalism. Ours was not the only friendship to be put under strain by opposing positions on the referendum, but it survived – there are, after all, more important things than the existence or otherwise of a Scottish nation-state. If the left is serious about being, in Robert Burns’ words, ‘of independent mind’ – and Alan certainly was – then these kinds of difference in perspective are only to be expected and the debates they engender welcomed.
When someone dies there can be a tendency to lose sight of the whole person. In particular, when death follows a long illness it can be difficult to think of them as they were before the final stages: it is an experience an increasing number of us have had watching friends and relatives succumb to dementia, a disease as terrible as MND, but in some ways for the opposite reason. It is particularly important then to recall Alan’s entire life – and not only that as a political activist, for Alan had an extremely broad ‘hinterland’.




Clydebank Town Council reception c. 1969 for Lin Qui, with councillors
(inc. Jimmy Reid) & supporters of the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign. I’m thelong-haired geezer fourth from the right 18–19 years old.



He studied Experimental Psychology at Sussex University in the late 1970s. (His friends – OK, me and Raymond – would tease him about having gone to such a den of postmodern iniquity, much to Alan’s annoyance). He was a keen runner throughout his life, until his illness made it impossible, and once represented the university at cross-country. He would think nothing of heading off to Portugal to athletics training camp and even did martial arts at one point.
During the 1980s he lived in New York when it was still the city of Mean Streets and Annie Hall, of Max’s Kansas City and loft living, before Mayor Giuliani gentrified Manhattan and it became too expensive a place for working class people to live. Some people are described as being able to start a fight in an empty room; this was never Alan, but he could and would start a conversation in a room if there was only one other person in it. One of his most attractive qualities was his openness and interest in other people, and zest for finding out about them. His increasing inability to do this as the disease took hold and he had to rely on his Blackberry to communicate was one of the most painful aspects for him.
The other way of obscuring the whole person is to sanctify or prettify their personality. The same characteristics which made Alan such a committed and principled socialist also meant that he could be ‘difficult’, or in the plain English of which he approved, a complete pain in the arse – but how we miss his cussedness now!
It did, however, enable him to bear his affliction with amazing fortitude almost to the very end, even though the inner frustration and torment was only too obvious. He would often text about his condition and the quality (or lack of quality) of his care and was still campaigning to the end to improve it, not only for himself but – typically – also for those coming after him.
Towards the end though he was struggling to make himself comfortable and texting was clearly becoming more difficult. He feared losing the use of his hand and the ability to text and, when he felt this was imminent, he took the brave decision to limit his food intake: his final act of self-determination.
I dedicated my most recent book, Nation-States: Consciousness and Competition, to Alan: apart from regularly visiting him with other friends and comrades, it was the last thing I could do for him, the only commemoration I could make. Marxists believe that there is nothing beyond this world: that is why we seek to transform it; but the dead live on in our memories and, to paraphrase Walter Benjamin, the new world is made as much for those, like Alan, whom we have lost, as much for those who come after. The man is dead, but his spirit lives.
 



Benjamin Birnbaum: In which context did you decide to write Nation-States: Consciousness and Competition? Politically, territorial fragmentation is again on the political agenda in Europe and on the academic level since the 1990s a “new generation, confronted with the sudden emergence of catastrophic post-communist nationalisms in a supposedly ‘globalized’ world, has had a greater interest in ‘the dynamics of relatively rapid changes in degrees of ethnic, racial or national groupness.’” [1]
Neil Davidson: The essays and chapters in the book were written for a number of different occasions between 1999 and 2014. My initial impetus for writing about nations and nationalism was an attempt to understand developments in my own country – Scotland – which in 1997 had just voted in a referendum to establish a devolved parliament, which opened in 1999. I was particularly interested in why nationalism as a political movement had historically been so weak in Scotland, even though “Scottishness” as an identity is paradoxically very strong. The dominant nationalism was British (or even Irish, for many Scots of Irish Catholic descent), not Scottish. Given the recent political hegemony of the Scottish National Party (SNP) it is easy to forget that, although it has been in existence since 1934, it had precisely one MP at Westminster before 1967, and then for a matter of months. It only formed a majority government at Holyrood since 2007 and achieved a majority of Scottish MPs at Westminster in 2015: and even now it is not the case that a Scots necessarily vote for the SNP on a nationalist basis. Explaining the particularities of the Scottish question led me into wider considerations of nationhood in general, but there were also three other factors, all of which were inescapable throughout the 2000s for anyone working in the field. One, of which the Scottish situation was an example, was the emergence of “stateless-nation” nationalisms in the advanced West, in situations where there was not (or was no longer) national oppression, as in Catalonia and Quebec. The second was the disintegration of existing nation-states on what was often referred to as an “ethnic” basis, most obviously in Yugoslavia and in several central African states. The third was the claim by neoliberal globalists that the nation-state form was becoming redundant, although we have obviously heard less about this since the bail-outs of 2008.
BB: In the Communist Manifesto Marx and Engels wrote “the working men have no country” which – interpreted in a very abstract way – became one of their most famous statements on the national question. Yet, later writings on Poland and Ireland focused on a concrete political strategy, underscoring the dialectical relationship between national self-determination and proletarian internationalism. Which lessons can be drawn from Marx and Engels regarding the national question and what did the word “nation” mean to them?
ND: Marx and Engels used the word “nation” in a number of different ways: sometimes, like Johann Herder, to mean a people; sometimes, like Adam Smith, to mean a territorial unit; and sometimes to mean a mixture of the two. In other words, like virtually everyone else of their period, they used the word very loosely and in a common-sense way – quite differently from the scientific rigor with which they defined “the capitalist mode of production,” for example. They certainly didn’t associate nations specifically with capitalism – indeed, Engels occasionally talks about the “German nation” existing during the fall of the Roman Empire. For this reason – as a modernist in relation to nation theory – I don’t think that Marx and Engels’ random and untheorized comments on particular nations are the basis for a Marxist theory of the subject; their theory of ideology has much more to offer us; more specifically, what Marx himself had to say about religion. This has of course long been subjected to both careless and deliberate misrepresentation. The point of the passage containing the reference to “the opium of the people,” is not that religion is a drug administered by a ruling class to dull the senses of the people, but that it is manufactured by the people themselves to fill the void created by what the later Marx would call their alienation. In this sense nationalism is the modern form of religion, with the state, or forces seeking to establish a new state, occupying the organizational role once played by the Church.
Where Marx and Engels have important things which are directly about nations is in relation to the attitude socialists should take towards specific national movements. At heart their attitude is based on whether the success of any movement – secessionist or irredentist – is likely to advance the possibility of the socialist revolution, although this was often in indirect ways. Essentially, they saw nationalism, in the sense of political movements leading to the establishment of nation-states, as part of the process of bourgeois revolution which would sweep away pre-capitalist forms and enable the conditions for the creation of a working class. This is the context in which they decided which nationalisms to support and which to oppose. Poland and Ireland are respectively oppressed and held back in developmental terms by the British and Russian Empires, and so had to be supported. Equally, national movements which relied on the great empires for their existence, such as pan-Slavism in 1848, had to be opposed. It is of course possible to agree with the latter conclusion with accepting the mystified nonsense about “non-historic nations” that Engels sometimes used to support it.
BB: You state the classical Marxists have developed very little systematic thought on the concept of the nation and the main thoughts – mainly formulated by the Austro-Marxists – basically reflect non-Marxist approaches. What did they neglect and what might constitute the basis for a Marxist approach to nation theory?
ND: If we leave aside the Austro-Marxists, most of the Classical Marxist discussions of nationalism follow Marx and Engels in focusing on strategic questions: in other words, which national movements – if any – should be supported and which opposed. It is interesting that the figures associated with the two nations which most preoccupied Marx and Engels, Rosa Luxemburg (on Poland) and James Connolly (on Ireland), took diametrically opposed positions. (Connolly was of course Scottish, but of Catholic Irish descent.) I have some sympathy with Luxemburg’s dismissal of the notion of “the right of nations to self-determination” as a form of metaphysics, but Lenin’s distinction between “oppressor” and “oppressed” nations was nevertheless essential as an operational starting point, at least during the colonial era. Today the situation is more complex. Clearly there are still oppressed peoples like the Kurds, Palestinians and Tibetans, but the notion of oppression is not particularly helpful in formulating a response to the Scottish or Catalan national movements: a wider conception of what is in the interests of the working class is required.
The Classical Marxists did not, however, have very much to say about what actually constituted a nation, other than passing references to the centrality of shared language and the suitability of the nation-state form for capitalist development. It is for this reason that many of the most influential contemporary Marxist analysts of nationalism have turned to non-Marxist thinkers for a theoretical framework, most notably in Tom Nairn’s reliance on the Weberian Ernest Gellner. I am not suggesting that there is no value in Gellner’s work, incidentally – quite the contrary – but the point is that it had a coherence that Marxist equivalents lacked. The Austro-Marxists might seem to be an exception and Otto Bauer’s writings are certainly highly sophisticated, but in ways which seem to me to involve a conception of nationalism which is (to use Anthony Smith’s terms) perennialist or even primordial – any form of identity which a territorially based group might happen to have in, say, the Fifth century CE, is retrospectively labeled a “nation.” But a central Marxist claim is surely that some types of ideology and consciousness are only possible at certain points in history. When theorists abandon this perspective it usually means that have become subject to the very ideology which they were seeking to explain – as I think was the case for both Bauer and Nairn.
BB: In your book you distinguish national consciousness and nationalism. Could you explain these two terms and the implications of this distinction (also with respect to the concept of identity)?
ND: Nations can be defined in either objective or subjective ways. The former, which usually involves a checklist of factors like language or territory, certainly presents an appearance of scientific rigor. Unfortunately, nations have a tendency to emerge in groups where these factors are absent, inconvenient though this undoubtedly is for social and political scientists: telling the Swiss that they are not a nation because they lack a common language, or the Kurds that they are not a nation because they lack a contiguous territory is, however, unlikely to convince either of these (otherwise very different) groups. In fact, the only conceivable definition of a nation which does not immediately lead to anomalies and exceptions is a subjective one: a group of people feel themselves to be collectively distinct from other groups, usually for accumulated historical-cultural reasons, but they need not be. The reasons may be different from case-to-case, but this subjective feeling of identification is the only attribute which they all have in common. This sense of mutual recognition is what I call “national consciousness”: a more-or-less passive expression of collective identification among a social group. It is perfectly possible for a people – including, until recently, the majority of modern Scots and Catalans – to possess national consciousness without becoming nationalists, but it is not possible to be a nationalist without having national consciousness.
National consciousness is not the same as national identity. Identities are the ensemble of all the external signs through which people show both to themselves and to other people how they have chosen to be categorized. These signs can be as visible as particular types of clothing or as audible as particular ways of speaking, but most often they are simply the ways in which people respond to being addressed in a particular way. National consciousness, then, is an internal psychological state which seeks expression in the outward signs of identity.
Nationalism is a more-or-less active participation in the political mobilization of a social group for the construction or defense of a state. As a political ideology, nationalism – any nationalism, relatively progressive or absolutely reactionary – involves two inescapable principles: that the national group should have its own state, regardless of the social consequences; and that what unites the national group is more significant than what divides it, above all the class divide. Finally, it is possible to demand a nation-state without either national consciousness or nationalism: this was certainly the case in Scotland during the 2014 independence referendum, when many Scots campaigned and voted for separate state for “social” rather than “national” reasons.
BB: The sociological tradition inspired by Durkheim and Weber underscores the need for societies to create cohesion in order to counteract the disintegrative effects of industrialization. In what way the Marxist focus on the dominance of the capitalist mode of production gives deeper insights regarding the development of national consciousness?
ND: The key figure here is neither Durkheim nor Weber, but one which I have already mentioned – Gellner. Nationalism here is essentially a substitute for the role of religion in what Weberians call traditional or agrarian societies. In effect they dismiss the idea that nations are permanent aspects of the human condition before industrialization, only to reintroduce it as inescapable after the process has begun. The Marxist emphasis on the dominance of the capitalist mode of production is partly based on the historical fact that some populations developed both national consciousness and fully formed nationalism before industrialization began, above all in England, but also in the United States and France, and to a lesser extent in the United Netherlands. To argue that nations only appeared at some stage in the later 18th century would be as absurd as arguing that capitalism only appeared at the same period. In fact, national consciousness took as many centuries to become the dominant form of consciousness as the capitalist mode of production did to become the dominant mode of production, and it did so as a consequence of the latter.
In these pre-industrial capitalist states nationalism was the product of four main elements. The first element was the formation of externally demarcated and internally connected areas of economic activity. In this context, the importance of capitalist development is less in the domain of production than that of circulation, for it was in the creation of trade networks that merchant capital began to link up dispersed rural communities both with each other and with the urban centers to form an extensive home market. Linked directly to this element was a second, the adoption of a common language by the communities that were being connected to each other at the economic level. The need to communicate for the purposes of market exchange began to break down the distinctiveness of local dialects, forging a language common, or at least comprehensible, to all. Language in this way began to set the boundaries of the economic networks referred to above, boundaries that did not necessarily coincide with those of medieval kingdoms. Clearly such economic and linguistic unification was far easier in a small centralized kingdom like England than in a territory like the German Empire. The formation of standard forms of language was immeasurably aided by the invention of printing and the possibilities it presented for the codification of language in mass-produced works. The increasing standardization of language then fed back into its original economic formation, as the merchants whose trading networks had originally defined the territorial reach of linguistic comprehensibility, increasingly identified themselves with that territory, to the exclusion of rivals who spoke a different language.
The third element was the character of absolutism, the form taken by the feudal state during the economic transition from feudalism to capitalism. The local jurisdictions that characterized the classic epoch of military feudalism began to give way to greater concentration of state power, notably through the introduction of standing armies and, partly in order to pay for them, regular centralized taxation. Death and taxes both involve bureaucracies that required a version of the local language, comprehensible across the state territory, with which to conduct their business, thus strengthening the second, “linguistic,” element referred to above. They also had two unintended effects. On the one hand, the introduction of regular taxation and the adoption of mercantilist policies reinforced the economic unity that had begun to emerge spontaneously from the activities of merchant capitalists. On the other, the military rivalry that characterized the new system necessitated mobilizing the active support of the bourgeois minority as a source of financial backing and administrative expertise. Despite these innovations it is nevertheless important not to mistake the role of absolutism in the birth of nationhood, which was that of a midwife, not that of a mother. The arrival of nationhood coincided not with the establishment of the absolutist states but with their overthrow.
The fourth and final element is the Reformation, which made religion more than an ideologically pious enhancement to the image of the ruling dynasty. Wherever Protestantism became the dominant religion within a given territory after 1517 it contributed to the formation of national consciousness by allowing communities of belief to define themselves against the intra-territorial institutions of the Roman Catholic Church and the Holy Roman Empire. In part, this was through the availability of the Bible in the vernacular, but this in turn was dependent on the existence of pre-existing linguistic frameworks in which market transactions and state administration could be carried out. In short, Protestantism acted as a stimulus to national consciousness only to the extent that the development of capitalism had provided it with the framework to do so. Naturally the process went furthest in England, but even there it was not until after the death of Elizabeth in 1603 that Protestantism came to be separated from regnal solidarity with the monarch.
Outside of a handful of countries, however, capitalism and industrialization arrived simultaneously, so in a sense Gellner is right to say that mass nationalism was a product of industrialization, but his insight was too focused on the functionality of nationalism for industrial societies. At least as much attention should be paid to the way in which industrialization, and the related process of urbanization, together produced the changes in human consciousness which made nationalism possible (for the subordinate classes), as to the way in which the more complex societies they produced made nationalism necessary (for the dominant class). It is all too easy to ignore how unprecedented these experiences were (and still are) for the people undergoing them.
BB: You point out that capitalism is a system of competitive accumulation based on wage labor. These two aspects indicate the reasons for the persistence of the states-system: first, the need for capitals to be territorially aggregated for competitive purposes; second, the need for that territory to have an ideological basis – nationalism – that can be used to bind the working class to the state and to capital. [2] You regret that analyses often overemphasize either internal politics or geopolitical relations. How can one discuss the nation-state in a more balanced way?
ND: Part of the problem is the way in which the way in which the academy is divided into more-or-less arbitrarily defined disciplines, so that national consciousness is a subject for Social Psychology while the nation-state is the province of International Relations. This way of studying the world, which was as alien to Adam Smith as it was to Karl Marx, has the intended ideological effect of fragmenting our understanding of how it works. There are times, of course, when one needs to investigate a specific aspect of the social whole, but this can only be done satisfactorily by keeping in mind that, however microscopic the subject, it is part of a greater whole from which its significance is derived. There is no particularly special way of dealing with academic fragmentation in relation to the subject of the nation, other than by foregrounding the notion of totality in relation to it, as in the case of any other subject.
BB: Could you elucidate why “national consciousness does not compete with revolutionary class consciousness directly for the allegiance of worker, but as a key element in reformist class consciousness” and its consequences for a revolutionary agenda? [3]
ND: Reformist consciousness was famously described by Gramsci as “dual” or “contradictory”; on the one hand accepting the permanence of the system, on the other rejecting the effect of its operation. The most basic expression of this contradiction is an acceptance by workers of the wages system accompanied by a rejection of the particular level of wages which they are being offered, but it extends to all aspects of social life. Workers remain nationalist to the extent that they remain reformist. And from the point of view of the capitalist class in individual nations it is absolutely necessary that they do so, or the danger is always that workers will identify, not with the “national” interest of the state in which they happen to be situated, but that of the class to which they are condemned to belong, regardless of the accident of geographical location. Nationalism should not therefore be seen as something which only “happens” during separatist movements on the one hand, or during fascist and imperialist manifestations on the other: the capitalist system generates nationalism as a necessary, everyday condition of its continued existence. It develops new structural capacities, new modes of experience and new psychological needs in the people who have to work in the factories and live in the cities. It is this need for some collective sense of belonging with which to overcome the effects of alienation, the need for psychic compensation for the injuries sustained at the hands of capitalist society, that nationalism provides in the absence of revolutionary class consciousness, but in conjunction with reformist class consciousness. One might say that the origins of national consciousness see the emergence of an identity-ensemble adequate to the historical conditions of generalized alienation; but the needs produced by capitalist industrialization last as long as the system itself.
It imperative that loyalty to a state be secured, and the nation is the means. Workers have often been asked to accept rises in interest rates, cuts in wages and services, or participation in imperialist wars, but never for the benefit of capitalism, always for the benefit of a particular nation, for “the national interest.” It is not only the state which makes such appeals. The organizations of the working class themselves reinforce reformist class consciousness within a national context. At the most elementary level this is because such organizations are unwilling to challenge the nationalism within which political discourse is conducted, for fear of being labeled unpatriotic. More importantly, however, it is because they seek either to influence or determine policy within the confines of the existing nation-state. Typically, therefore, nationalism is invested with the contradictory character of the reformist world view.
BB: Against the common assumption that neoliberalism doesn’t need the state you hold that it doesn’t only need the state, but with reference to David Harvey you affirm that the neoliberal state “needs nationalism of a certain sort to survive.” [4] Can you explain this link?
ND: In a sense this is only the contemporary form of the general capitalist need discussed in my previous answer. The neoliberal organization of capitalism heightens three existing tendencies: the transformation of human relationships to market transactions, the reduction of human capacities to mere factors of production and the self-identification of human beings primarily as consumers. The result is to raise levels of atomization and alienation to a previously unimaginable extent, with potentially dangerous consequences for capital, which still has to achieve the tacit acceptance, and preferably the active support, of the working class in the process of its own exploitation. Otherwise, the system is potentially threatened, either by social breakdown, as individualized consumers transfer the competitiveness of the market to all other areas of life, or by social conflict, as workers begin to discover or rediscover their class-consciousness and mobilize in their collective interest. But repression on its own will not produce the degree of willing acceptance that the system requires. In these circumstances nationalism plays three roles. First, it provides a type of psychic compensation for the direct producers, which is unobtainable from the mere consumption of commodities. It is, as they say, no accident that the nationalist turn in the ideology of the Chinese ruling class became most marked with the initial opening up of the Chinese economy to world markets in 1978 and the suppression of the movement for political reform in 1989, which was followed by a “patriotic education campaign” the general tone of which continues to this day. Second, it acts as a means of recreating at the political level the cohesion which is being lost at the social level. Third, it uses this sense of cohesion to mobilize populations behind the performance of national capitals against their competitors and rivals. This last aspect requires some elaboration, because potentially it involves risks or at least inconveniences for capital. The imperial nationalism unleashed by the Conservatives before 1997 in relation to “Europe,” was not because the EU was in any sense hostile to neoliberalism, but as an ideological diversion from the failure of neoliberalism to transform the fortunes of British capital. The nationalism invoked for this purpose now places a major obstacle for British politicians and state managers who want to pursue a strategy of greater European integration, however rational that may be from their perspective, as can be seen in the current referendum over British EU membership.
But there is another danger for the ruling classes too, namely that neoliberal nationalism will lead to the fragmentation of neoliberal states. The difficulty here is a deeper one. Because nationalism is such an inescapable aspect of capitalist development, the first response to intolerable conditions is to seek to establish a new nation-state, although this is usually only possible where some level of national consciousness already exists, as it does, for example, in Scotland. In other words, neoliberalism may require nations, but it does not require particular nations. And invoking nationalism as a counterweight to neoliberal social and economic policy can involve a different set of problems for individual ruling classes; not problems of the order of class war or the war of each against all, but those involving the uncertainties and inconveniences caused by the potential fragmentation of the nation-state. This outcome is generally only possible where an alternative national consciousness is available and associated with a distinct territory within the state.
In spite of the risks or inconveniences for capital, however, it is not clear what could replace nationalism as a means of securing even the partial loyalty of the working class to the capitalist state and preventing the formation of revolutionary class consciousness. Could loyalties be transferred upwards to a global or even regional state? This seems implausible. As Benedict Anderson once remarked: who would die for Comecon or the EU? Nor could loyalties easily be transferred downwards to individual capitals. It has been known for workers to support their company, even to make sacrifices to keep it in business. But this tends to happen where firms are local, well established and where workers are employed on a long-term basis. Where workers make sacrifices in terms of job losses, worsened conditions and real cuts in pay, they do not do so because of loyalty to the firm, but because they see no alternative that does not involve the even worse fate of losing their job entirely. Individual managers or “team-leaders” may internalize the ethos of McDonald’s or Wal-Mart, but workers cannot: the reality of the daily conflict between themselves and the employer is too stark to be overcome. Beyond this, even those companies which still retain health insurance and pension arrangements come nowhere near providing the integrative functions of even the weakest nation-state. The oil millionaires and media celebrities who respectively fund and front the Tea Party in the US may intend to make that country even safer for Wal-Mart and Wall Street; but their free market rhetoric always has to be expressed in terms of reclaiming the nation from the Marxist antichrist in the White House and the liberal elites who threaten American freedom, not restoring the rate of profit.
BB: Not all social conflicts can be directly reduced to class struggle. During recent conflicts such as in Yugoslavia or Rwanda and also in relation to Islam the term ethnicity has been imposed as a major explanatory factor of conflict. To what extent should this term be regarded as insightful?
ND: The way in which the notion of “ethnicity” is currently and increasingly being used contains a number of problems for the left. Two stand out in particular. On the on hand, those who approve of ethnicity as the affirmation of an cultural identity, in so far as they emphasize supposedly innate differences between human social groups, are in danger of lending credibility to the current form taken by racist ideology. On the other hand, those who disapprove of ethnicity as a manifestation of (real or imagined) exclusionist tribalism are in danger, in so far as they suggest that “ethnic” nationalisms are particularly prone to oppressive behavior, of obscuring those characteristics which all nationalisms have in common, whether they are oppressor, oppressed, or fall into neither of these categories.
“Ethnicity” has been defined in three ways: first, where members of a group have a common line of descent and consequently a shared kinship; second, where they have a common position within the international division of labor and consequently a shared occupation; and third, where they have one or more cultural attributes in common and consequently a shared identity. Ethnicity in the first sense no longer exists. Indeed, even before capitalism had penetrated all corners of the world in the search for markets and raw materials, the growth of trade, conquest and migration had already made the existence of endogamous gene pools increasingly rare. The second meaning retains some validity where it is used to describe either the way in which existing occupational patterns in pre-capitalist societies were used by European colonists to classify the population as supposedly endogamous groups, or where the migrations set in train by colonialism had led groups to define themselves as either endogamous, or in possession of some quality or characteristic which distinguished them from the native populations around them. It is the third meaning which is currently dominant and which I find the most problematic, since it is effectively a way of labeling people through the use of an ideological super-category that includes virtually any characteristic they might conceivably possess.
For socialists, the aim is to overcome the divisions which are increasingly described as “ethnic,” by removing the oppressions that give them significance, not to perpetuate or add to them. This may mean supporting oppressed nations or peoples, but the notion of “ethnicity” is ultimately a means of dividing people up into ever more arbitrary classifications. At best, under the guise of celebrating “cultural difference,” it only obscures what people have in common by emphasizing relatively superficial aspects of our social world. At worst, in a struggle for scarce resources it can be used as a means of marking down certain people for persecution.
BB: In France, Ernest Renan’s idea of a civic nationalism, opposed to an ethnic nationalism is pretty widespread. Insofar as both types of nationalism act within the frame of a nation-state, can there be substantial difference between these two allegedly inflexible, pure types of nationalism?
ND: “Civic” nationalism is frequently presented as the only true form of nationalism. Certain nationalisms are said to be inherently oppressive precisely because they are based on an “ethnic” identity. The contrast is often made between this kind of nationalism and one described as “civic” or ‘social” – Scottish and Catalan nationalism, for example, are frequently described in this way, not least by Scottish and Catalan nationalists themselves. What is interesting about the argument about “civic” nationalism is that it is precisely the one that has historically been used to defend multi-national oppressor nationalisms like those of Britain, in addition to those with republican constitutions like France. There are significant difficulties for socialists in attempting to use “civic” nationalism as an alternative to “ethnic” nationalism. Two in particular stand out. The first is that the category of the “civic” avoids any engagement with the fact that there are certain activities which nation-states must undertake, regardless of how non-ethnic they may be. One of these, as many refugees from Syria and other war-torn zones are currently discovering, is defending borders against people who are defined as “not-of-our-nation.” The second is that, as I said in response to the previous question, ethnicities can either be invented to categories groups by their enemies or as self-identification by those groups themselves, without any reference to real or imaginary kinship relations: culture can just as easily be made the basis of ethnicity as blood-and-soil tribalism. Precisely because ethnicity is a socially constructed category, however, ethnic categorizations can be produced anywhere with the same disastrous results that we have seen in the Balkans, Rwanda, Iraq and Ukraine. Consequently there is no reason why “civic” nationalism cannot be transformed into “ethnic” nationalism in their turn under certain determinate conditions, just as it did in Germany – a modern, developed and highly cultured capitalist society – during the 1930s. This is a conclusion that adherents of “civic” nationalism are, of course, most anxious to avoid.
BB: In the Critique of the Gotha Programme, Karl Marx wrote “The working class must organize itself at home as a class and that its own country is the immediate arena of its struggle – insofar as its class struggle is national, not in substance, but [...] ‘in form.’” To what extent can exit from the European Union can contribute to shift the balance of power in favor of the working class in Europe?
ND: The EU and its predecessors have always embodied the way capitalism has been organized at any particular time. It is not, in other words a body suspended above shifts in the capitalist system reflecting “European values” or other liberal fantasies. As the transition to neoliberalism was imposed within the constituent nation-states, it was bound to be embedded in the EU’s own policies and rules and the EU accordingly began its own march towards neoliberalism no later than the Single European Act in 1986. This has been confirmed and deepened by every single subsequent Pact and Treaty from Maastricht on 1991 onwards. What made the process easier than in the individual nation-states was that the EU always lacked most of the democratic constraints which made the transition at least a contested process in Britain or Italy, even in the period when it did more-or-less embody more social democratic conception of ownership and control.
Hayek argued in 1939 that “Interstate Federalism” at the European level would be desirable because it would ensure that economic activity should be removed as far as possible from the responsibility of meddling politicians who interfered with the market order to win electoral support from ignorant voters. The EU has followed Hayek’s advice by centralizing power in the hands of appointed officials, above all in the Commission, which alone has the power to initiate legislation, three types of which – regulations, directives and decisions – are binding. The Parliament has a right to be consulted, in certain circumstances, but none to initiate legislation in its own right: in this respect it has far less power than any national government, or for that matter, any devolved government like the Scottish or Catalan. But this is not the only democratic deficit. If the Commission is a supranational body, the European Council is an intergovernmental one. It consists of the heads of state or heads of government of the member states, who are of course elected in their own countries, but not of course by the inhabitants of the other countries whose fate the Council decides. These structures are one reason why we should reject claims that the EU is as amenable to reform as any nation-state. In fact it is much less so. Capitalist states are permanent structure until they are overthrown, although they can adopt different policies according to the political parties or coalitions which oversee the apparatus at any time, and these can be more or less beneficial to the working class and oppressed groups. The problem with the EU is that, although it is not a nation-state, the balance between unelected state managers and elected representatives is even more heavily weighted in favor of the former in the EU than in its constituent members. Reforms are never easily achieved, particularly under neoliberalism, since it has removed several mechanisms from control of states. Nevertheless, it is not impossible. In any event, it would be easier to achieve reforms in any member state than in the EU, where it requires winning unanimity in the Council, and there is more possibility of simultaneous revolutions in all 28 of them than of this happening.
The second Hayekian aspect of the EU is the use of rule-bound policies – on limits to public spending, on debt as a proportion of GDP, on competition – to limit what national politicians can do at the behest of their electorates. Since the rules do not allow for devaluation or the levels of state expenditure or debt which would have been necessary to stimulate the economy, the only remaining response to the crisis of 2008 was austerity. The EU’s embrace of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) – far more enthusiastic than Washington’s, incidentally – and the possibly even more insidious Trade in Services Agreement (Tisa) are only the latest and most extreme examples of this. In this context it is incredible to me how lightly how some Remain supporters are prepared to pass over the experience of Greece. In Yanis Varoufakis’s revelations about his encounters with the Troika, it was the EU institutions – the European Central Bank and the Commission – and not the International Monetary Fund which were the most unbending.
The lack of democracy and presence of binding rules would be reasons enough to leave the EU, but there are least three others, each of which attests, not only to the inherently reactionary nature of the project, but to how it fails to perform even the role for which it is most celebrated by liberal boosters: overcoming national self-interest. First, the EU is designed to maintain the structure of existing inequalities between European nation-states. Beneath all the talk of “solidarity” this is inescapable: a financial and industrial structure designed to meet the needs of the strongest economies – France and Germany and, since the advent of the Euro, increasingly just the latter – but which forces the weakest to play by the same rules, will always be detrimental to them, particularly when there is no mechanism to transfer funds or resources within the EU in the way that can be done within nation-states.
Second, although the EU is not an imperialist power in its own right, as a collective body it does, however, increasingly act as an adjunct to NATO, and consequently as a support to US interests. This role was inscribed onto the EU’s DNA from the beginning. The US initially encouraged and supported the formation of the EU’s predecessors as part of a Cold War bulwark against its Russian imperial rival, and this is the main reason why there was no war in (Western) Europe between 1945 and 1991: although engaged in in economic competition with each other, the EU member-states were united behind the USA in the same geopolitical alliance. But if the EU itself does not act as an imperial power, the main constituent nation-states increasingly do, and they by no means always bow to Washington’s wishes. Here again we see the more powerful placing their own interests over those of supposed European unity. For some this is externalized, as in the persistently underestimated French presence in Central Africa, but for others it is manifested in the heart of Europe itself – most obviously in the case of Germany, whose recognition of Croatian independence in 1992 contributed to the subsequent Yugoslavian bloodbath.
Third, the EU is structurally racist. The very idea of “Europe” is necessarily exclusionary. It is little remembered now that Morocco applied for EU membership in September 1987, much to the hilarity of the Commissioners, who turned it down on the grounds that it “did not meet the criteria for membership.” The much vaunted “freedom of movement” within the EU is predicated on blocking the movement of those without, as tens of thousands of desperate refugees are currently discovering. The spectacle of these people being trapped in the camps, behind barbed-wire fences and facing the police dogs and tear gas on the borders of European civilization is obscene enough, but it is compounded by the attitude of the constituent states themselves. For here again their individual interests take precedence over even collective barbarity, as the Schengen Agreement collapses into a free-for-all to defend individual borders against the alien hordes.
There is one final positive argument for the EU, which tends to be expressed by sections of the radical left. It is that capitalism rules everywhere, from the EU right down to our individual workplaces. But, so this story goes, at least the EU fulfils one of the few positive functions of capitalism: it brings together workers into one of the largest groups on earth, and their pressure can transform the EU. This is a classic example of confusing our wishes for reality. The EU organizes the ruling class, it does not organize workers. As Trotsky once wrote in another context, a brake cannot be used as an accelerator. There are no EU-wide political parties, or trade unions, or movements. Solidarity across borders does not depend on constitutions or institutions, but on the willingness of workers to support each other, even if in separate countries. Instead of invoking imaginary battalions of workers organized at a European level, it would more useful to begin building where we are. The struggle against neoliberal capitalism is unlikely to begin simultaneously across the whole of the EU, or to be confined within its boundaries. What we are likely to see is an uneven series of movements of different intensities, within different nation-states which, if victorious, could form new alliances and ultimately a United Socialist States of Europe. However, this vision cannot be realized within the EU, but only built afresh on its ruins.
BB: Regarding US foreign policy in the Middle East you observe that “failure to ground analysis in the class basis of modern states leads to a restricted notion of what is rational for state managers and consequently a failure to understand why they take certain actions.” [5] What place is there for anti-imperialism within an anti-capitalist strategy?
ND: The point I was trying make in the passage you quote was mainly directed against some versions of the “Political Marxism” associated with Brenner, Wood, Teschke, et. al, in which capitalism is reduced to market dependence or compulsion. But capitalism is not simply about markets – indeed, if this definition were taken at all seriously then you would have to doubt whether it exists across most of the world even now. In the specific context of imperialism, however, the fixation on markets leads to either (what are effectively) Weberian conclusions, in which geopolitics is treated as a separate sphere from economics, or to regarding decisions by politicians and state mangers as “irrational,” because they don’t immediately correspond to the needs of specific capitalist groups. Now, it is clear that the US-based oil companies were not exactly enthusiastic about the Iraq War, but the capitalist state has to act in the interests of national capital as a whole, not merely particular sectors, which is ultimately what the war was about: the US teaching former allies and current enemies what would happen to them if they got out of line, showing allies that the US is still the only state which deploy the necessary levels of firepower to subdue rogue states, controlling Chinese access to oil supplies, and so on – none of which has much to do with market competition as such. Leaving aside the unspeakable misery the invasion of Iraq has caused for the Iraqis, it was in most respects a failure for the Americans, but that does not mean it was irrational, simply that it was a gamble, the outcome was contingent on a number of factors which they could not foresee, not least levels of internal opposition.
As this suggests, I do think that anti-imperialism is a necessary part of any serious anti-capitalist strategy, but it is important to understand what this means. Part of the left’s inability to arrive at a coherent position on the current situation in the Middle East is because Stalinists and other “socialism-from-above” types actually believe that (e.g.) Assad is an anti-imperialist – or who at any rate cannot see any prospect of an alternative to him ever emerging from below. But there is also another problem of a more theoretical nature, which takes two forms. One is a series of misunderstandings of the Classical Marxist positions on imperialism and self-determination which were established immediately before and during the First World War. The other, compounding the initial error, is to imagine that these positions can simply be transposed from the period in which they were formulated to today without any serious attempt to assess what has changed in the intervening period (although this problem scarcely confined to the issues of imperialism and self-determination).
When Karl Liebknecht raised the slogan “the main enemy is at home” he did not mean to imply that the only enemy was at home. The context is crucial here. The right and center of the Second International justified supporting “their” states in the First World War on grounds of either self-defense or because the other side was worse in some way – less democratic, more oppressive to the colonial peoples over which it ruled, and so on. This was why understanding the systemic nature of imperialism was so important: it was irrelevant who fired the first shot as competition between the dominant states would have led to war at some point in any case. Hence the necessity for socialists everywhere to oppose the state in which they found themselves, rather than using the actions of its enemies as an excuse for not doing so. But Lenin did not imagine that revolutionary opposition to Russian barbarity required him to remain silent on German atrocities, and he was not, in fact, silent on them. The slogan “turn the imperialist war into a civil war” was meant to be applicable everywhere, on both sides, from Britain to Japan.
At least some contemporary would-be anti-imperialists have abandoned several aspects of this tradition. For one thing, imperialism is no longer understood as a system, as an inescapable aspect of contemporary capitalism. Instead, imperialism is a policy carried out by governments, or it is an attribute possessed by particular nation-states, or it takes the form of sentient beings with cognitive or emotional capacities – as in those extraordinary formulations where imperialism is reified so that “an” imperialism “wants,” “needs,” or “thinks” this or that. Mostly US imperialism is held responsible for any event or process from the formation of Da’esh to the Ukrainian revolution: no one else possesses any agency, or has any motivations. Everything that happens is apparently the result of the omnipotent if hidden hand of “US imperialism.” With an enemy this powerful is there any point in resisting? Sometimes the US is replaced by an undifferentiated and unified “Western imperialism” in which there are apparently no conflicting interests, competing capitals or geopolitical rivalries. In fact, this usage rather gives the game away. “Western” imperialism used to be counterposed to the (supposedly non-imperialist) “East.” Now, the notion that there could be “degenerated” or “deformed” worker’s states in which actual workers were not only powerless but subjected to monstrous bureaucratic oppression was always a piece of metaphysical claptrap, but calling for their defense at least had a certain logical consistency. What are quite incredible are the calls by Stalinists and at least some orthodox Trotskyists to defend, to exculpate, Putin’s Russia or Assad’s Syria – both corrupt, undemocratic, but conventionally capitalist states. Pursued logically, in 2011 this would have led – and in some cases did lead – to supporting the Egyptian Revolution (because it was directed against am ally of the US), but opposing the Syrian Revolution (because it was directed against an enemy of the US). It is incumbent on socialists in the West to oppose their government’s bloody interventions in the Middle East and elsewhere, but there is no reason why this should also involve supporting the regimes which are murdering the workers and peasants who will be the basis of any renewed revolutionary movement.
* * *
References
1. Mike Davis, Marx’s Lost Theory, New Left Review II/93 (May–June 2015).
2. Neil Davidson, Nation-States: Consciousness and Competition (Chicago: Haymarket, 2016), p. 220.
3. Ibid., p. 70.
4. David Harvey, A Brief History of Neoliberalism (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005), p. 85.
5. Davidson, p. 228.
Benjamin Birnbaum is member of the editorial committee of the French-language review Période and graduated from Sciences Po Paris.
Neil Davidson lectures at the University of Glasgow. Among other works, he is the author of The Origins of Scottish Nationhood (Pluto, 2000), How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions (Haymarket, 2014), and Nation-States: Consciousness and Competition (Haymarket, 2016).
 



Neil Davidson makes the case from a Scottish perspective about why socialists should support leaving the EU
Faced with the impending referendum on British membership of the European Union (EU), and the reactionary arguments which dominate on both sides, socialists might be forgiven for echoing Mercutio’s dying cry in Romeo and Juliet of “a plague o’ both your houses” and opting for abstention. It is certainly true that the radical left cannot join either of the highly fragmented “official” camps, both of which espouse anti-working class politics of one variety or another. But refusing to take a side is also untenable. Abstention will simply mean invisibility and, consequently, irrelevance. An even worse position would be where socialists do have a preference between Leave and Remain, but are unwilling to state it publicly because they fear being tainted by association – in effect hoping that someone else will make their arguments for them. Leaving aside the moral bankruptcy of such a position, it is also politically useless: on 24 June the UK will either be heading for Brexit or it will not, but we cannot avoid taking a position unless we are prepared to live with consequences which we had no part in shaping. If the radical left says nothing then we can be sure that the right-wing positions will continue to dominate both the campaigns and the aftermath.
We have to approach this situation, not as bystanders, observers or commentators, but as participants who can help determine whichever outcome looks most likely to open up a dynamic advantageous to the left – providing, of course, the left is capable of recognising the possibilities and acting on them. Brexit would intensify three existing crises: of the EU itself, of the British state, and of the Tory Party, which is potentially facing its greatest split since the repeal of the Corn Laws. Indeed, the very absence of effective opposition to the Tories at Westminster is weakening internal discipline within the main party of British capital and encouraging unrestrained internecine warfare. Yet I have lost count of the number of articles which seem to start from the assumption that, after a vote to Leave, the Tories – elected by 25% of those eligible to vote, having achieved an outcome opposed by most of the capitalist class they are supposed to represent, and now engaged in open civil war – will be in power until the end of time. But after Indyref, after Corbyn, after Sanders, we have to understand the volatility of contemporary politics, the speed with which positions can shift in quite unexpected ways.
 
The Left Consensus for Remain
It would something of an understatement to say that the position stated in the previous paragraph does not exactly have majority support on the Scottish left. Indeed, in terms of formal party positions, there is a remarkable unanimity about remaining in the EU all the way from the Scottish National Party through the Scottish Greens to the Scottish Socialist Party. RISE, an alliance rather than a party, has not taken a position and need not do so, although candidates will inevitably and quite properly be asked to set out their personal views on the issue in the Holyrood elections in May. The Radical Independence Campaign (RIC), a movement rather than a party, is under the least pressure to arrive at a position – and judging from the discussion of the EU at RIC conference on 20 February – its members are currently as uncertain and divided as most other people in Scotland.
Normally, this level of comradely agreement on the left would be welcome, as it was during Indyref. Unfortunately, in this case I believe that the majority of the radical left have converged on a position which is both wrong and potentially dangerous. Let me be clear what the problem is here. It is not that those arguing for Remain are seeking the same outcome as David Cameron and Peter Mandelson: I am arguing for Leave and that means that I am seeking the same outcome as Nigel Farage and George Galloway. Clearly, we are not doing so for the same reasons in either case. A similar situation arose in the 1975 referendum on membership of what was then the European Community (“the Common Market”). The revolutionary left at the time rightly argued for Britain to leave, even though this was the same outcome supported, not only by the Labour Party left and the Communist Party of Great Britain – whose arguments were, to say the least, coloured by British nationalism – but also by Enoch Powell and the fascist National Front (NF).
In other words, it remains perfectly possible for two groups of people to support the same political position in the expectation of, not only different, but diametrically opposite outcomes. When this happens, it is usually for one of two reasons: either one group has simply misunderstood the situation – in other words, the two opposing groups cannot both be right and the meaning of the outcome will be different from what one of them expects; or because the situation is genuinely indeterminate – in other words, the outcome will be decided by what the different groups do in the process leading up to it. Both misunderstanding and indeterminacy were on display during Indyref.
On the No side, Labour left-wingers like Neil Findlay argued a case based on British-working class solidarity and defence of the welfare state. I think that case was misleading about the issues at stake, but it was a perfectly honourable one to make; the problem was that it was clearly incompatible with the dominant case for No (effectively the official Labour position), which was based on strengthening British capitalism and maintaining its position in the global imperialist order. Once the votes were counted, it was obvious from a range of indicators, from fascists rampaging in relief through George Square in Glasgow to the soaring value of stocks in Scottish financial companies, that supporters of the official No position had been correct.
On the Yes side, the vision of a Scottish socialist republic held by RIC was clearly different from the small-scale capitalist utopia envisaged by Business for Scotland, and it was by no means settled in advance which of these would have triumphed had Yes actually won. Given the role played by the left and its relative strength by the end of the campaign, however, there is at least a realistic possibility that our version of Scottish independence would have prevailed. And it remains the case that how we struggle for independence will shape the nature of a new Scotland.
There are several differences between Indyref and the EU referendum, to which I will return. In one respect, however, the latter involves a similar misunderstanding, in this case by the majority of radical left about what a vote to remain will involve. It is not about maintaining the status quo, but changing it in two respects. First, we are being asked to vote remain on the basis of Cameron’s deal attacking migrant access to benefits, which is itself predicated on the false claim that migrants are essentially a parasitic drain on “our” resources. And of course, once the logic of only being able to draw out benefit system what you have paid in is accepted, we can be sure that it will be extended from migrants to all inhabitants of the UK, be they ever-so white and their lineages of the purest Anglo-Saxon. Second, it means participating in a full-spectrum (i.e. not just in relation to migration) rightward-shifting agenda which is being driven by other member states of the EU. There is a particular inverted conceit on the part of the British left, to which the Scottish contingent is particularly prone, where the British state is the most undemocratic in Europe and our present Westminster government the most right-wing in the EU. I will return to the British state later, but – incredible though it may seem – the Tory government is by no means the most right-wing in the EU; that dishonour could realistically be claimed by the governments of Hungary and Poland, or of Denmark and Finland. The point is that they will now draw two conclusions for their own countries from a British Remain vote on the current basis: one, that the road to neutralise populist anti-EU sentiment is to increase attacks on migrants; the other that they can press their own “exceptional” demands of the EU with the expectation that they will be granted in order to keep the Euro-show on the road.
For some Scottish nationalists, and supporters of independence more widely, none of this matters. The prospect of a renewed crisis of the British state is significant mainly, or in some cases, solely because of the implications for Scotland. They look forward to a scenario in which a majority in England vote to leave while a majority in Scotland vote to remain, thus triggering Indyref2. This, as the English say, is too clever by half. Leaving aside the question of whether we want Indyref2 to be generated as a side-effect of a separate process at a time not of our choosing, the assumptions behind these calculations are manipulative in the extreme. The issues of the EU and consequently of voting in this referendum have to be addressed on their own terms. If we believe that staying in the EU is beneficial to working class people, why would we wish to deny these benefits to those who happen to be English? If, on the other hand, we think that the EU is detrimental to working-class interests, why would we argue for the Scots to be subject to it a moment longer than necessary? There are, however, two non-nationalist, left-wing arguments for voting to remain across the UK, to which I now turn.
 
Europe as “the Lesser Evil”

With one very important exception, the forces supporting the UK’s continued membership of the EU are the same as those who opposed Scottish secession from the UK: internally – the institutions of the British state including the Treasury, the BBC, and the Chiefs of the Armed Forces, most British capitalists of any size and their representative organisations like the CBI, all the mainstream political parties including (for the moment, at any rate) the Labour Party, and the liberal news media; externally – the US State Department, President Obama and both of his potential Democrat successors (although this is one of the few issues on which Democrats and Republicans agree), and, most obviously, the European Commission and Council, the European Central Bank and mainstream political members of European Parliament. In short, the principal opposition to Brexit consists of those ruling class representatives and their hangers-on who understand the importance to the international neoliberal and imperialist order of maintaining both the territorial integrity of the British state against the threat of Scottish independence and its EU membership against the threat of Brexit.
But the political parties which were on the Yes side during indyref are now arrayed, in relation to the EU, with the very people and groups to whom they were opposed in the previous referendum. What has led these quite different and – in virtually all other contexts – bitterly opposed forces into such extraordinary political alignment? The main explanation is the nature of those arguing for withdrawal. I wrote above that there was an important exception to the way in which the indyref line-up for No has moved seamlessly to an EU Remain position, and that exception is the hard right, from the actual fascists of British National Party (BNP) and the NF, through the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP) to the Eurosceptic wing of the Conservative Party – still its most influential section – and its media loudhailers in the Murdoch newspapers, plus the Daily Mail and the Daily Express.
As a result, the arguments for remaining in the EU most commonly expressed on the radical left is essentially a negative one. This perspective begins from the correct observation that the main drive for withdrawal from the EU has historically come from the hard right. It recognises that UKIP popularised this position by focusing on the question of national sovereignty in general, specifically by highlighting the inability of the UK to control its borders in the face of supposedly unlimited migration either from within or – in the case of refugees – via the EU. The success of UKIP in turn emboldened the Eurosceptics within the Conservative Party: the referendum is therefore only happening in response to pressure from these forces and the campaign for exit is being conducted according to their racist agenda. If there is a majority vote to leave, the argument goes, it will immediately mean that non-UK citizens and their families from the EU who currently have right of residence here face the danger of expulsion or, at the very least, will face a much more precarious situation. In this context, voting to remain, while not necessarily leading to any positive result, would at least avoid a negative one: it is the “lesser evil”.
Now, the hard right is certainly our enemy but, in this context at least, it is not the main enemy. The imperial nationalism unleashed by the Conservatives before 1997 in relation to “Europe,” was not, as we shall see, because the EU was in any sense hostile to neoliberalism, but as an ideological diversion from the failure of neoliberalism to transform the fortunes of British capital, outside of the City of London at least. The nationalism invoked for this purpose now places a major obstacle for British politicians and state managers who want to pursue a strategy of greater European integration, however rational that may be from their perspective. The overwhelming majority of capitalists, managers and their political representatives do not want to leave the EU, although many would like to renegotiate the treaty on terms which remove even the minimal worker rights which it currently contains, as Cameron, if victorious, will almost certainly attempt to do. Above all, they do not want to stem the flow of migrant labour into the UK, although they do want it to be precarious and consequently pliable.
The hard right has, in effect, broken with this mainstream ruling class position. There is a problem with some left analyses of the hard right and its far right component in particular, which is the assumption that it represents the “real” face of capitalism unmasked. In fact, in the developed world at least, it is only in very rare situations of dire extremity – and usually after facing the kind of threat from the labour movement that has unfortunately been absent for several decades – that capital has ever relied on the far right to solve its problems. UKIP, like the Tea Party in the USA, is capital’s Frankenstein’s monster, an unintended consequence of the unresolvable social tensions thrown up by the neoliberal order. UKIP has given a focus to a range of concerns in the shape of a quasi-imaginary institution called the “Brussels”, in a similar way that the Tea Party did in the shape of another quasi-imaginary institution called “the Government”; the main difference is that in the case of the former, the institution is foreign, rather than domestic, the crime of local elites being their compliance with it. The basis of at least part of UKIP’s popular support is, however, drawn from a comparable constituency to that of the Tea Party. Unsurprisingly, one section involves small businesses and the petty bourgeois proper, which tend to trade within the UK rather than the rest of the continent, and for which increased regulation and improved worker rights – even of a minimal sort – pose a far greater threat to their profit margins than they do to large corporations. But the constituency also includes a section of the working class who no longer feel represented as their lives and communities are being destroyed by neoliberal globalisation. Former employees in the fishing industry in parts of northern England like Grimsby can point to the Common Fisheries Policy and its attendant quotas and regulations as contributing to its local demise. These are genuine grievances which have nothing necessarily to do with racism, although UKIP of course tries to frame them in this way.
It is a fixation with the hard right and its policies on migration to the exclusion of virtually everything else that has led sections of the left to embrace the problematic notion of the “lesser evil” – regrettably, since it has not proved to be a particularly successful tactic in the past. Indeed, history tends to suggest that it can also result in the “greater evil”. Think of Germany in 1932, when the Social-Democratic Party refused to stand their own candidate in the Presidential elections and called instead on its supporters to vote for the right-wing but non-fascist Hindenburg as the “lesser evil”, only to find that, once elected, he appointed Hitler – the “greater evil” – as Chancellor anyway. This is obviously an extreme example, although I suspect we will shortly be hearing the same argument again in relation to Hilary Clinton and Donald Trump. There is, however, two reasons for rejecting arguments from the “lesser evil”, quite specific to our current situation.
The first is that approach is entirely reactive and deeply pessimistic, since it assumes that all the left can do is adopt a defensive position in relation to UKIP and the Tory right. In effect, it is saying that a majority of working-class voters are so in thrall to anti-migrant racism that they will only vote for withdrawal on that basis. But socialists have to argue for what they actually believe in on the assumption that we can win working class people to our positions. If we think this is impossible, whether in relation to migration or anything else, then we are essentially confessing to our own political impotence, our inability to change anyone’s mind. It is to assume that we have to work within the policy limits of what the Parliamentary Labour Party and the trade union leaders will allow Jeremy Corbyn to say on the subject.
The second reason for rejecting the “lesser evil” is that reduces the EU (and non-EU) migrant population of the UK to the status of passive victims of the Tory government. Yet many of the over 2 million EU workers here are integrated into the communities where they live, have joined trade unions and are members of left-wing political parties, like the Polish RAZEM. From the point of view of capital, entire sectors and some whole firms (Sports Direct springs to mind) are dependent on their labour. Remain supporters conjure up a nightmare vision of the day after a 23 June vote to Leave in which hundreds of thousands of migrant workers are rounded up by police in unmarked black vans; but this would only be realisable under an actual fascist government prepared to contemplate the collapse of large sections of the British economy, particularly services and agriculture. What happens during the prolonged period of post-referendum negotiations will, again, depend on what the left actually does before and in that period. In any case, to argue exclusively in relation to EU migrants who are currently in the UK is to ignore the plight of those actual and potential migrants and refugees from outside the EU, whose position behind the razor wire borders of our Common European Home will be reinforced. In any case, the central task is to support and help organise migrant workers while arguing for British borders to be open to everyone, in the EU or out. And if comrades think this is Utopian, where does that leave the prospects of ever achieving socialism, which is, if anything, an even harder argument to win?
Why is the source of the fatalism which large sections of the radical left displays over the EU? A comparison between the 1975 and 2015 referendums is interesting in this respect. In the former, after nearly seven years of intensive and largely victorious industrial class struggle, and the emergence of several new social movements, the left felt confident enough to argue for what it actually thought was the right course of action. The fact that it lost can, in retrospect, be seen as the beginning of the turn to the right and the onset of the neoliberal era. It is sobering to think that the last generalised victory achieved by the working class since then was the repeal of the Poll Tax legislation and the downfall of Thatcher, twenty-five years ago. Yet even that struggle was based in working class communities, not their workplaces, as was the Yes campaign. These decades of defeat have left their mark.
But it is still possible for left interventions to shift popular consciousness, as socialists in Scotland should know better than anyone. RIC did so by pushing the entire campaign for independence to the left and mobilizing forces which had previously been ignored by official politics. And sometimes this can happen even without the left. The expressions of public support for refugees which followed publication of the photographs of Alyn Kurdi’s body were only in part a shift in popular mood; the photographs were also the occasion for people who were always unhappy with the racism surrounding this issue to find their voices. There was a quite uncharacteristic silence from UKIP spokespeople following their publication, which suggests they were aware that they were no longer setting the agenda. Of course this did not mean that anti-refugee racism had vanished, but neither is it unchallenged. The point is that people are capable of both supporting refugees and also rejecting the EU – not least because it is visibly the behaviour of the EU as an institution which is at least partly responsible for their suffering.
Finally, a situation may well arise in which the argument becomes completely redundant. Imagine that England votes to leave and Scotland votes to remain. Indyref2 then follows according to plan, with a Yes vote of sufficient size to silence any attempts to question its legitimacy. At this point Scotland could apply for membership of the EU and, in all probability, be accepted with the usual conditions which would include – since we would not have the UK’s current opt-outs – adoption of Maastricht convergence criteria, including cutting the percentage of debt to 60% of GDP, the Euro (including the Eurozone bailout mechanisms), and the Schengen agreement. The assumption has been that this would proceed without any further reference to the Scottish electorate, but this would be undemocratic in extreme. A vote to remain while part of the UK may not be replicated when the context is a newly independent state and would have to be tested again, not least because the UK referendum electorate excluded 16-17 year olds and migrants, who should be given the chance to register their choice. However, at this point the “lesser evil” position would no longer be relevant, since the anti-migrant hysteria associated with the English hard right will no longer distort the nature of the argument. The positive case for joining the EU, based on what it actually is and does, could finally be made on its own terms, without distraction or evasion. What is that case?
 
“Social Europe”
The positive argument for joining the EU, independent of the contingent ravings of racist Europhobes, tends to be made by the liberal and centre left. In their vision, the EU is a fundamentally benign institution (“although of course it is not perfect”) which has helped prevent war in Western Europe since 1945, established rights for workers and citizens, and regulated the impact of businesses on health and the environment. Associated with these claims is a notion of “Europe”, usually presented in a cloud of vaguely uplifting waffle, as the embodiment of Enlightenment ideals, transcending what is invariably described as “narrow” nationalism and acting as a barrier to US interests, which are presumed to be different. In this perspective, the EU today may have been temporarily taken over by neoliberals, but it can be reformed until it becomes a body capable of responding to demands for social justice. The dissonance between the reality of the EU and the fantasy of “European values” beloved by the likes of Polly Toynbee, Will Hutton and Martin Kettle (whose support for the EU is matched only by their opposition to Scottish independence) is partly disguised by blurring what is and is not part of the former. Here, liberals effectively collude with the hard right, which has its own reasons for sowing confusion. The European Court of Human Rights, for example, which was responsible for the Human Rights Act, is frequently cited as a reason for remaining in the EU; but it is quite separate and was established with the support of Churchill during the 1950s, although this unsettling fact is usually concealed from readers of both the Guardian and the Daily Mail.
The attitude of the socialist left to the EU tended to be more hostile to the EU than the liberal and centre left, as the line-up in the 1975 referendum suggests. Tom Nairn was only slightly exaggerating when he titled a famous article from 1972, “the left against Europe”. All this began to change during the Thatcher era when, in the face of massive trade union defeats and the apparent inability of the Labour Party to win General Elections, the EU appeared to be the sole bulwark against attacks on the labour movement. The turning point was probably a speech by Jacques Delors, the then President of the European Commission, to the TUC in September 1988, followed by the adoption of the Social Chapter at the Strasbourg Summit the following year. Delors, as French Finance Minister, had of course been partly responsible for the Mitterrand Government abandoning its reform programme of the early 1980s and embracing the neoliberal project, which should have alerted his audience to the purely tactical nature of his blandishments, but desperation makes fools of us all.
Contrary to the sophisticated conspiracy theory promulgated by Naomi Klein in The Shock Doctrine, neoliberalism was not created because politicians, state mangers and corporate CEOs, after years of being mysteriously thwarted, suddenly saw opportunities in “disaster capitalism” to successfully apply the doctrines of Freidrich von Hayek or Milton Friedman. On the contrary, neoliberalism was a strategy improvised in response to the return of generalised economic crisis in 1973/4, in conditions where mode of accumulation which had prevailed since 1945 was no longer working and where policy options – or at least those supportive of capitalism – were consequently highly constrained, hence the turn to privatisation, deregulation, indirect taxation, and the rest. But neoliberalism is no longer simply a set of policies, but the way in which capitalism is currently organised. In retrospect, we can see neoliberalism as an entire period in the history of capitalism, as yet open-ended, in which the dominant social and liberal democratic consensus of the post-war boom was overthrown and replaced: these days will not return.
The EU had begun its own march towards neoliberalism no later than the Single European Act in 1986 and this has been confirmed and deepened by every single subsequent Pact and Treaty from Maastricht on 1991 onwards. This is hardly surprising: the EU is not a body suspended above shifts in the capitalist system and, as the transition to neoliberalism was imposed within the constituent nation-states, it was bound to reflect this in its own policies and rules. What made this easier than in the individual nation-states was that the EU always lacked most of the democratic constraints which made the transition at least a contested process in Britain or Italy, even in the period when it did more-or-less embody more social democratic conception of ownership and control. Ironically, in this respect it was always structured according to the precepts of one leading neoliberal thinker.
In 1939, Hayek wrote an article in which he argued that “Interstate Federalism” at the European level would be desirable. Why? Mainly because it would ensure that economic activity should be removed as far as possible from the responsibility of meddling politicians who interfered with the market order to win electoral support from ignorant voters. The EU has followed Hayek’s advice by centralising power in the hands of appointed officials, above all in the Commission, which alone has the power to initiate legislation, three types of which – regulations, directives and decisions – are binding. The Parliament has a right to be consulted, in certain circumstances, but none to initiate legislation in its own right: in this respect it has far less power than any national government, or for that matter, any devolved government like the Scottish or Catalan. But this is not the only democratic deficit. If the Commission is a supranational body, the Council of Europe is an intergovernmental one. It consists of the heads of state or heads of government of the member states, who are of course elected in their own countries, but not by the inhabitants of the other countries whose fate the Council decides. It proceeds by “consensus” – in other words what is acceptable to the French and German axis, and increasingly, to Germany alone. No votes are conducted or minutes taken, and decisions are signalled by the President arriving at a “conclusion”.
These structures are one reason why we should reject claims that the EU is as amenable to reform as any nation-state. In fact it is much less so. Capitalist states are permanent structure until they are overthrown, although they can adopt different policies according to the political parties or coalitions which oversee the apparatus at any time, and these can be more or less – usually less – beneficial to the working class and oppressed groups. The problem with the EU is that, although it is not a nation-state, the balance between unelected state managers and elected representatives is even more heavily weighted in favour of the former in the EU than in its constituent members.
Reforms are never easily achieved, particularly under neoliberalism, since it has removed several mechanisms from control of states. Nevertheless, it is not impossible – even in Britain. This point is important since there is an argument, to which I have already alluded, that whatever may be possible in Other Countries, the UK is a uniquely archaic and undemocratic formation in Europe, or perhaps the world. The supposed archaism of the British state is actually more apparent than real, and can only be sustained by a truly catastrophic confusion between form and content, in which the existence of the Monarchy and the House of Lords is supposed to mean that the British constitution has remained unchanged since 1707. In fact, behind the façade of continuity, the British state has been one of the most flexible and adaptive states in the history of capitalism and always concedes reforms when forced to, which is one reason why it has manged to survive for so long. (For a genuinely archaic constitution you need to look across the Atlantic.) If reforms have been few in recent years it is because pressure to deliver them has been severely reduced, not because the British state is any less capable of reform than any other. All capitalist states have their own special ways of trying to thwart democracy: that is one of the functions of a capitalist state. It is not clear to me, however, why the Spanish constitution, which stresses “indivisible unity” and makes Basque or Catalan secession actually illegal, or the vaunted French republican constitution, which allowed the government to make public wearing of Muslim clothing illegal, are inherently superior to the British. In any event, it would be easier to achieve reforms in Westminster than in the EU, where it requires winning unanimity in the Council, and there is more possibility of simultaneous revolutions in all 28 member states than of this happening.
The second Hayekian aspect of the EU is the use of rule-bound policies – on limits to public spending, on debt as a proportion of GDP, on competition – to limit what national politicians can do at the behest of their electorates. Since the rules do not allow for devaluation or the levels of state expenditure or debt which would have been necessary to stimulate the economy, the only remaining response to the crisis of 2008 was austerity. The EU’s embrace of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) – far more enthusiastic than Washington’s, incidentally – and the possibly even more insidious Trade in Services Agreement (Tisa) are only the latest and most extreme examples of this. In this context it is incredible to me how lightly how some Remain supporters are prepared to pass over the experience of Greece. In Yanis Varoufakis’s revelations about his encounters with the Troika, it was the EU institutions – the European Central Bank and the Commission – and not the International Monetary Fund which took the most merciless position. And what did these upstanding upholders of European values tell him? We don’t care that that the Greeks voted against austerity. It is no concern of ours if Greek children are suffering from malnutrition. It is irrelevant that Greek hospitals are running out of pain-killing drugs. These are the rules, so get with the programme and start cutting pensions, privatising services and increasing taxes for low earners. Watching the Greeks being crucified upon the cross of EU membership, should we now congratulate them on their self-sacrificing support for the European ideal?
The lack of democracy and presence of binding rules would be reasons enough to leave the EU, but there are least three others, each of which attests, not only to the inherently reactionary nature of the project, but to how it fails to perform even the role for which it is most celebrated by liberal boosters: overcoming national self-interest.
First, the EU is designed to maintain the structure of existing inequalities between European nation-states, although this has only become entirely obvious since the enlargement process after 1992, when the poorer areas of Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean were allowed to join. Beneath all the talk of “solidarity” this is inescapable: a financial and industrial structure designed to meet the needs of the strongest economies – France and Germany and, since the advent of the Euro, increasingly just the latter – but which forces the weakest to play by the same rules, will always be detrimental to them, particularly when there is no mechanism to transfer funds or resources within the EU in the way that can be done within nation-states.
Second, although the EU is not an imperialist power in its own right, as a collective body it does, however, increasingly act as an adjunct to NATO, and consequently as a support to US interests. It is, as they say, no accident that the US insisted that Eastern European accession states should join NATO before the EU. But this role was inscribed onto the EU’s DNA from the beginning. The US initially encouraged and supported the formation of the EU’s predecessors as part of a Cold War bulwark against its Russian imperial rival, and this is the main reason why there was “no war in (Western) Europe” between 1945 and 1991: although engaged in in economic competition with each other, the EU member-states were united behind the USA in the same geopolitical alliance. But if the EU itself does not act as an imperial power, the main constituent nation-states increasingly do, and they by no means always bow to Washington’s wishes. Here again we see the more powerful placing their own interests over those of supposed European unity. For some this is externalised, as in the persistently underestimated French presence in Central Africa, but for others it is manifested in the heart of Europe itself – most obviously in the case of Germany, whose recognition of Croatian independence in 1992 contributed to the subsequent Yugoslavian bloodbath.
Third, the EU is structurally racist. The very idea of “Europe” is necessarily exclusionary. It is little remembered now that Morocco applied for EU membership in September 1987, much to the hilarity of the Commissioners, who turned it down on the grounds that it “did not meet the criteria for membership”. The much vaunted “freedom of movement” within the EU is predicated on blocking the movement of those without, as tens of thousands of desperate refugees are currently discovering. The spectacle of these people being trapped in the camps, behind barbed-wire fences and facing the police dogs and tear gas on the borders of European civilization is obscene enough, but it is compounded by the attitude of the constituent states themselves. For here again, their individual interests take precedence over even collective barbarity, as the Schengen Agreement collapses into a free-for-all to defend individual borders against the alien hordes. There are certainly evils here, but it is not apparent to me that they are “lesser”.
There is one final positive argument for the EU, which tends to be expressed by sections of the radical left. It is that capitalism rules everywhere, from the EU right down to our individual workplaces. But, so this story goes, at least the EU fulfils one of the few positive functions of capitalism: it brings together workers into one of the largest groups on earth, and their pressure can transform the EU. This is a classic example of confusing our wishes for reality. The EU organises the ruling class, it does not organise workers. As Trotsky once wrote in another context, a brake cannot be used as an accelerator. There are no EU-wide political parties, or trade unions, or movements. In any case, one of the arguments Yes supporters used during Indyref was that solidarity across borders did not depend on constitutions or institutions, but on the willingness of workers to support each other, even if in separate countries. That is as true for the nation-states in the EU as it is for the nations of the UK. Instead of invoking imaginary battalions of workers organised at a European level, it would more useful to begin building where we are.
Let us return to the question with which I ended the previous section. Faced with the choice of whether to join the EU, from the position of starting afresh in an independent Scotland, should we choose to do so? For one thing we would be seeking to join a body which was aligned with NATO, from which the left is committed to withdrawing, but let that pass. Suppose we did join and subsequently a genuinely radical government took office, consisting of a coalition of the left parties. The EU’s rules already affect Scotland in relatively trivial ways: the Aberdeen Ring Road, the new Children’s Hospital in Edinburgh, the proposed film studio in Cumbernauld – in each case the Scottish Government had to seek private (and more expensive) funding because of EU prohibitions on state spending. But what would be the case if a radical Scottish Government wanted to renationalise the railways, or nationalise and decommission the oil industry? These policies are not revolutionary, simply the kind of serious reforms which – along with increased taxes on wealth, repeal of the anti-trade union laws, a massive public house building programme and land reform – would be necessary to rebuild Scottish society after the depredations of neoliberal capitalism. What do you suppose the attitude of the EU would be to them? A message saying: “we congratulate the Scottish people in their attempt to realise the European ideal of social justice”, perhaps? Or would it be threats, then expulsion, followed by boycotts, blockade and a course in “preventative retaliation” by our NATO allies? To ask the question is to answer it. Any course of radical action is simply incompatible with membership of the EU. It is clear why the SNP find this acceptable since it is committed to maintaining the neoliberal settlement, at least at the fundamental economic level; but why are members of the radical left even contemplating move that will make our goals even harder to achieve?
 
Can the Left Make a Difference?
I wrote earlier that there were differences between the Scottish independence and the EU membership referendums. In the former, most of the forces of the radical left were united in RIC and we had over two years to shift the broader Yes campaign away from the Monarchy-Sterling-NATO package initially offered by the SNP. In the case of the latter, we are divided and the time is absurdly short to alter the terms of the debate. Nevertheless, whatever the difficulties, a left argument for Leave urgently needs to be made.
Voting Left Remain on tactical (“lesser evil”) grounds, whatever the putative short term advantages, will be negative in the long term, because it will effectively involve submitting to political blackmail and putting our defence of migrant rights in hock to the EU, which – to say the least – we know cannot be relied upon to defend them. In other words, we need to build our own independent capacity to argue a case, otherwise we will find ourselves subject to the same blackmail each and every time it arises. And it will arise again, since the multiple crises of the EU – of which the crisis of its external and internal borders is only the most visible one – are not going to come to an end any time soon. If we do not, the working class people we hope to influence will conclude either that the left has no positive position of its own or that its position is simply incoherent – as illustrated by the spectacle of usually credible left commentators like Owen Jones and George Monbiot explaining just how completely undemocratic and neoliberal the EU is…only to then call for a vote to Remain. And the Left Remain position, no matter how “tactical”, ineluctably slides into an apologia for the EU and then onto a delusional reform programme.
One final point: some would argue that a Left Leave position is simply retreating to the follies of socialism in one country, whether that country is Britain or Scotland, but that is not what is being argued here. The struggle against neoliberal capitalism is unlikely to begin simultaneously across the whole of the EU, or to be confined within its boundaries. What we are likely to see is an uneven series of movements of different intensities, within different nation-states which, if victorious, could form new alliances and ultimately a United Socialist States of Europe. However, this vision cannot be realised within the EU, but only built afresh on its ruins.
 



Neil Davidson reviews Steve Fraser’s book The Age of Acquiescence:
The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organised Wealth and Power
Left-wing histories of the US working class tend to highlight a series of Great Moments, starting with the Gear Uprising of 1877, proceeding through Pullman Strike of 1894, the unionisation of auto, steel and rubber during the 1930s and concluding with the most recent inspirational event – for us, the Chicago Teacher’s Strike and the ongoing fight for $15 an hour across the fast food sector. The message is usually that the victories of 1877, or 1936, or whenever, are still possible today, if only workers draw the necessary lessons.
Underlying such accounts is, however, a curiously ahistorical conception of the class struggle, in which the conditions under which it is waged never change in any significant ways, so the same ‘lessons’ are always applicable, no matter what the period. Steve Fraser’s The Age of Acquiescence approaches the question quite differently. In what is essentially a history of the US working class since the Civil War, Fraser makes two original claims in relation to its development.
The first is that the great struggles until the period around the First World War, involving incomparably higher levels of violence than were conceivable in Britain after the 1840s, were often waged by the subordinate classes in defence of pre-capitalist relations, against the dominance of full capitalist industrialisation. This is something that Craig Calhoun earlier argued was the case for England in his 1982 book, The Question of Class Struggle. Fraser argues that newly proletarianised workers, artisans and small farmers could envisage a society beyond capitalism because they had recently emerged from a non-capitalist society themselves.
The second is that we have to reconsider the dominant, positive interpretation of the struggles of the 1930s and 1940s. Fraser argues that, although many of them were massive and militant, they helped establish a form of highly bureaucratic trade unionism that abandoned any conception of socialism, fighting instead for a share in the spoils of capitalism. This was sustainable only so long as there were spoils which capital could afford to share.
Which brings us to Fraser’s central argument. The original ‘gilded age’ was in the 1880s and 1890s was a time of extraordinary inequality, but also intense class struggle. The second half of his book examines what he calls the new gilded age, essentially coterminous with the neoliberal era. This has even greater inequality than the first, but nothing like the level of class struggle, which he explains partly through the absence of any conception of an alternative to capitalism.
There is much in this book that revolutionaries would wish to disagree with, both in terms of his interpretation of history and assessment of the contemporary scene, but Fraser is never less than thought-provoking. In particular, his portrayal of the changing social world of the US working class is extremely rich and never loses sight of how it interacts ideologically with that of the ruling class. Indeed, he is at his strongest in chapters 9–11 that explore the myths of neoliberalism. These are indispensable for understanding the general background to the rise of the Tea Party and Donald Trump. This book is recommended then, not because socialists will necessarily find their views confirmed, but because of the crucial issue of working-class consciousness that it helps us to address, even if we ultimately reject its specific conclusions.
 



Occasionally when I have spoken before at Socialism, the organizers have tried to generate some interest by giving me controversial topics to deal with: “The irrelevance of permanent revolution” was a particular favorite of mine. So I’m delighted to be speaking on such a totally uncontentious subject as the European Union (EU). However, speaking in the aftermath of the Brexit vote, the question before us isn’t so much whether the EU is going to break up – at least in the short-term – but whether the United Kingdom will, since the latter is likely to happen more quickly.
I expected a very close Remain vote, as indeed – to judge from their visible astonishment at winning – did most leaders of the Leave campaign. So this has been a startling development, and it is one that has thrown the entire British political system into crisis. I left behind a situation where things are changing daily and almost hourly. Consequently, I have to give a talk of two halves: one, a talk about the EU, because it is absolutely important to understand the reality of what that body is and what it does; and two, a talk about what has happened in Britain. I want to start with the latter, since as I’ve already suggested, it is where the most immediate crisis is taking place.
 
Misinterpreting the Brexit vote
To begin with we have to reject two false interpretations of Brexit. One, which is almost exclusively argued by those sections of the revolutionary left that (rightly) supported Leave, is that the vote is a great working class victory that represents a proletarian insurgency against neoliberalism. While I also argued for a Leave vote, this interpretation seems to me to be completely untenable. As I will argue, part of the Leave vote did indeed involve a rejection of the political elites and members of the ruling class who made the case for the EU; but you can’t uncomplicatedly say that this is a kind of conscious movement from below against neoliberalism. If this over-optimistic gloss on what just happened is taken seriously as a guide to action, it would lead comrades into real problems. But of course it is not intended in that way and in my view quite an unnecessary justification for taking a Leave position in the first place. We need ask only one question: have any of the groups arguing for this interpretation called for demonstrations to celebrate this class triumph, or for the immediate triggering of Article 50, which would start the two-year process of Brexit? Of course not, because everyone is perfectly aware that at least some of the people who voted to leave would be calling for the removal of migrants – and not just EU passport-holders but also British citizens who have been here for decades.
On the other hand, the opposite position – that the vote is an absolute victory for the far right – is equally exaggerated, equally wrong, but more dangerous, because it is upheld by more people particularly on the liberal left. (If you read The Guardian newspaper or New Statesman magazine you will have some idea of what I mean.) However, the same position is also accepted by sections of the radical left, some of whom have lapsed into virtual hysteria about the “carnival of reaction” which is supposedly now going to be unleashed. According to these people, we have entered the antechamber to fascism: we haven’t. There was a serious upsurge in both physical and verbal attacks on minority groups in Britain, including white immigrants, in the immediate aftermath of the vote. But the racism and xenophobia on display in those days were not caused by the result; they long preceded it and have now been given legitimacy by the demagoguery of the official Leave campaign. However, even if the result had gone the other way, I think it is likely that similar attacks would have taken place. These racists would still have regarded themselves as justified but in defeat would have been vengeful rather than triumphant. We have to look this racist reality in its face but also be sober about its extent: most of the perpetrators will have been hard-core racists and fascists, not mainstream Leave voters. If I had any evidence that the seventeen million Leave voters were all hardened racists then I would be making plans to stay here in Chicago: permanently.
No, Britain is neither on the eve of the October Revolution nor in the last days of the Weimar Republic. There were working-class voters on both sides and they had both good and bad reasons for voting the way they did. Trotsky used to quote Spinoza to the effect that we should neither laugh nor cry but understand so, therefore, let us try to understand the class forces involved.
 
Internally divided classes
The majority of British capitalists and their organizations like the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) supported Remain. So too did the key institutions of the British state, including the Treasury and the chiefs of the armed forces, all the mainstream political parties including the Labour Party, especially its right-wing, and the liberal news media. The European Commission and Council, the European Central Bank and mainstream political members of the European Parliament were obviously all in favor of Remain, but so too was the Chinese Communist Party and the Democratic and Republican Parties – or at least the remaining sane elements within the latter. In other words, with the exception of some hard right-wingers, the same people from the international capitalist class who wanted Scotland to stay in the UK also wanted the UK to stay in the EU, and for the same reasons: the stability of international neoliberal and imperialist order – not least because of Britain’s role as the US’s Trojan horse in Europe. That’s why Obama and Kerry intervened so heavily in the debate.
The principal support for Leave from within the bourgeoisie came from relatively small capital – small businesses shading into the petty bourgeoisie proper. These are people who find European Union directives difficult to meet because, unlike large corporations, they can less easily afford to meet health and safety standards or regulations about maternity leave. (Although some of the laws they resent most do not actually originate from the EU, but stem from the British legislative process.) These people, not “the white working class,” are central to the United Kingdom Independent Party (UKIP). The only other coherent section of the ruling class that supported Brexit are hedge-fund managers who tend to be free-floating anyway and are not tied geographically to any state. They therefore don’t need an entry point into the EU like other sections of capital. Beyond these definable economic interests I think there is a small faction in the political wing of the ruling class – of whom Michael Gove [1] is a representative – that is looking for a different strategy for British capital, involving a shift of focus from Europe to China East Asia, and the United States. Even leaving aside the fatal overestimation of the UK’s importance to the US, I don’t think this is likely to be successful, but it should be noted that, from the ruling class-perspective, Brexit wasn’t just an irrational xenophobic spasm.
The middle-classes – the traditional petty bourgeoisie, professionals, and the new middle class (NMC) – were more divided. Although a lot of attention has been paid to the working-class Leave votes in the north of England, equal attention should have been paid to middle-class Leave votes in the south, particularly from the first two groups, and often in places where immigration is minimal or non-existent.
Many of what you might call the left-leaning sections of the NMC voted Remain because they mistakenly believe the European Union to be essentially benevolent. While it may currently follow some misguided policies, their argument goes, it is primarily dedicated to the free movement of people, the prevention of war, the establishment of workers’ rights and environmental protections, and the demise of narrow nationalisms in favor of shared European values. They also believe the EU prevented nationalism from becoming a driving force in European politics and perhaps even acted as a barrier against America’s imperial interests in the area. One would have to return to the fantasies about Stalinist Russia in the 1930s to find a comparable disjunction between illusion and reality.
If you do rely on the idea that all the good things, like working hours and the rest, come from the EU, it makes the working class actually sound weaker than it actually is. For one thing, the workers’ movement was the source of the original victories on holiday pay and the welfare state. We won those because we fought for them, not because of the beneficence of the EU. That argument implies that we are completely helpless because without Europe we are unable to achieve anything. This besmirches the actual record of the workers’ movement in achieving some of the things that we actually got, which were subsequently enshrined in EU law because they had already been achieved by workers’ struggle in individual countries.
The working class was also divided, and this is really quite serious. Some say that London voted Remain because it is the most neoliberal city in Britain, but it is also one of the most working-class cities in Britain, and by and large those who voted in London didn’t want to embrace the EU’s neoliberalism but wanted to oppose racism and xenophobia. So this comes from a good place and from an attitude that is healthy, but the problem is that it comes with incredible illusions in the EU as an institution.
Only a very small minority of people opposed the EU for the reason that I am about to give, namely that it is a ruling-class club whose main function is to impose neoliberal austerity. But only a small number of workers on the extreme left voted to oppose the EU on internationalist, anti-austerity, and anti-capitalist terms.
On the other extreme are fascists who oppose it because they are extreme British nationalists. They also are quite small. One of the things that the British Left has successfully done over the last forty years is to make sure that the British fascists are a very small minority, compared with those in France or some of the other countries in Europe. For example, when the Scottish Defense League turns up in Edinburgh there are only about thirty of them, and half of those are from Newcastle, which is in England. The counter-demonstrations always outnumber them by at least ten to one. So the fascist backing of Leave is very small. The opposition to the EU among workers in not coming from fascism, it’s coming from much deeper wellsprings of opposition to the Tory Party.
Then there are people who don’t know about the EU’s exact relationship to neoliberalism but understand it's a ruling-class club. And basically if you’re told by David Cameron, George Osborne and their ilk, who have been imposing austerity on Britain for decades, to vote Remain, you’re immediate instinct is going to vote Leave. It’s a healthy response to reject what these people are saying. Next to that there are people who are worried about immigration and think that it’s reducing wages, putting a strain on the National Health Service (NSH) and housing and so forth. These people are wrong but I don’t think their arguments are racist. Some of the people making these arguments are sons of Pakistani shopkeepers or Afro-Caribbean bus-drivers. They’re not racists and can’t be – unless you’re going to extend the concept of racism so far that it becomes just a blanket description of any people with a position you don’t like. That’s not helpful theoretically or politically; they are wrong in their attitude toward immigrants, but they are capable of being won over to opposing the EU on a left-wing basis. That is, they can be won and we must win them.
Next to them are people who do have soft racist ideas and think that everyone who is not British is coming to steal their jobs, a kind of distorted displacement of the very real problems they have encountered over the last thirty years as their communities have been destroyed. And no one has paid any attention to them or their problems including the Left. It’s relatively easy to call a demonstration defending immigrants in London; it’s quite another thing to do it in Bradford or Oldham, but these are precisely the place where these discussions must be held.
We cannot abandon them otherwise they will simply go to the people who do talk to them, which is the Far Right. This is the problem, and it hasn’t just happened in the last six months but has been building for years and years during the neoliberal onslaught, displacing their real grievances on to immigrants, who are not in fact the cause of their problems. The Left has a responsibility to provide them real answers and real reforms to redress their legitimate grievances. To people who voted Leave and who may be subject to racist ideas or Far-Right ideas against migrants, it is no good at all to say “Well OK, we’re in favor of leaving, but you won’t understand the reasons because you’re a racist idiot.” That is patronizing; we instead have to argue with them and explain why they are wrong.
 
The triple crisis
To understand the actual situation in the wake of the Leave vote, let’s start by looking at the triple crises facing Britain today: in ascending order of seriousness, the concurrent crises of strategy, of party, and of state. In relation to strategy, think of the British ruling class’s misjudgments over Suez in 1956 or Iraq in 2003. In relation to party, think of the divisions within the Conservative Party over the Corn Laws in 1846 or within the Liberal Party over Irish Home Rule in the 1880s. But these kinds of crisis are relatively common; state crises are relatively rare. If you exclude 1745–46 and 1831–32, there have only been three in modern British history. One was from 1916 to 1921, from the Easter Rising in Ireland to the defeat of the Triple Alliance, with 1919 being the key year. The second ran from 1968 to 1975, again involving Ireland and massive working-class insurgency, but in this case the antiwar movement, women’s liberation movement, and other struggles against oppression. Here, 1972 is the decisive year. The third state crisis is happening now, but before turning to it I want to look at the concurrent crises with which it is converging, beginning with that of ruling-class strategy.
The decision to go ahead with the Bexit referendum not only unleashed vicious anti-immigrant sentiments, but also demands for a revival of those towns and communities that have been devastated by neoliberalism. The Tories will obviously do nothing to address the real needs of workers in these towns, but neither will they be able to restrict immigration, and they are already backing off from their promises to “take control” of it. Angela Merkel has quite clearly said that if a post-Brexit Britain wants to be part of the single market it must accept free movement of people. So the Leave campaign has stoked up demands, which are actually impossible to satisfy.
But the Tories also have other difficulties. The plan to use a referendum on EU membership – which, remember, is supported by most of British capital – as a bargaining chip, a way of resolving an internal dispute within the Tory Party, and of seeing off UKIP as a rival, has backfired enormously. We used to say during the Scottish independence referendum that David Cameron might go down as the twentieth century Lord North – the British prime minister who ‘lost’ America during the Revolutionary War in the eighteenth century. Cameron may well oversee the destruction of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which may explain why he was not looking particularly happy the day after the referendum. His personal responsibility for the disaster is almost total. Think: the leading party of British capitalism for nearly 150 years, the Conservative Party, is committed to a position of leaving the EU that is opposed by most of the capitalist class it is supposed to represent. To put it mildly, this is not helpful for that class especially since it has no obvious alternative “party of capital” on which to rely.
For the moment at least, the Labour Party cannot play this role – not just because of its internal divisions, but because it is possible, even likely, that Jeremy Corbyn will stand for reelection as leader and win on the basis of mass support from the party membership: twenty thousand people have joined the Labour Party since the referendum and the influx continues, and most of them support Corbyn. The unbridled hostility of the majority of the Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP) to Corbyn is not because they fear that he would lose a general election, but precisely because they fear he would win. Consequently, there is the possibility of a split and even that the PLP could set themselves up as a centrist parliamentary Labour Party in an alliance with the Liberal Democrats. It is therefore conceivable that the Labour Party could be either fundamentally transformed into an organization nearer to the new formations emerging in southern Europe, or fragment entirely.
But the party crisis is wider than the Labour Party – indeed, in some ways this transcends individual organizations and threatens the party system itself. There is no longer a single bourgeois party that commands support across the whole of the UK. The Tories have collapsed in Scotland, and Labour has collapsed in whole areas of England as well as Scotland. There is no longer any party that can claim to represent the entire nation – something unprecedented in the history of the British state.
And so we turn to the crisis of that state. It really started in 2011, in the context of the long depression, which began three years earlier, when the Scottish National Party (SNP) first got elected with a majority government in Scotland, making a referendum on independence inevitable. The 2014 referendum was a close call – an earlier tactical blunder by Cameron – but what Brexit has put on the agenda is of course the possibility of a second Scottish referendum, more quickly than I or most other people thought possible in 2014. By the way, the loss of Scotland is much more important to the British state than the loss of Ireland. Ireland was a colony; Scotland was central to the whole project of the conquest of Ireland, above all in Ulster. And so if Scotland goes then the United Kingdom is well and truly finished. The break-up of Britain would have an enormous impact on the structure of world imperialism.
It looks at the moment as if the SNP is going to argue for a second independence referendum, on the basis that the majority of Scots voted Leave. However, the fact that many people in Scotland have illusions in the European Union is a major problem. One of the key issues facing the Left in Scotland is to argue, against the SNP (and the Scottish Greens), that the questions of Scottish independence from the UK and Scottish membership in the EU are entirely separate questions. We must therefore start by understanding what the European Union actually is and go from there. How did the EU emerge and how does it work?
 
EU origins: Imperialist geopolitics and capitalist growth
If we leave aside early post-war formations like the European Coal and Steel Community, the EU as we know it today grew out of the European Economic Community (EEC), which was established by the Treaty of Rome in 1958. There were four drivers and one condition for setting up the EU, none of which have much to do with worker’s rights or concerns for the environment.
The first driver was the need to end historic imperial rivalry between France and Germany, which had resulted in three wars over the previous eighty years. After World War II, there was a general agreement among most of the western ruling classes that this rivalry, which had caused such devastation in Europe, could not continue – a conclusion which for obvious reasons the French were particularly keen to support. Even had it wished to resist, Germany was in no position to do so, following its catastrophic defeat in World War II and further weakening by the Cold War division into East and West states. West Germany was at the mercy of the western powers, and its politicians thought it best to agree to incorporation into the EEC. Thus they agreed to a balance of power within the new setup. Moreover, what does it say about “European values” that many people thought these two countries would be at war with one another again unless both countries belonged to a supra-state institution like the EU?
The second driver was the broader context of the Cold War. The United States was very keen to establish hegemonic control of Europe through NATO and the EEC and use its European subordinates as allies against Russia and Eastern Europe. To a certain extent, this involved a degree of self-sacrifice on the part of the US ruling class, for the greater good of the system as a whole. The United States correctly thought of itself as a global power with the task of restoring economic health to parts of Europe and indeed Japan, which were important to revive – not least as customers for US goods – but also as part of facing down the Stalinist regimes in the East. So Washington was prepared to encourage the emergence of the EEC, knowing that it would eventually be an economic competitor but prepared to do so in the knowledge that it would face no political competition because the EEC would be subordinate to the United States in the Cold War. The relationship between the EU and US geopolitical strategy did not, however, end with the fall of the USSR; it is no accident that before the East European states were allowed to join the EU after 1991 the United States insisted that they first join NATO.
The third driver was the need for West European capital to seek markets and sources of investment beyond the boundaries of the individual nation-states, during a period (roughly 1950–1973) which saw the biggest and most sustained growth the system has ever undergone or is ever likely to undergo again. This expansion was of course happening when the western powers were losing their colonies, meaning that the classical imperialist strategy of exporting capital to India or wherever was no longer going to be feasible. So the original six countries of the EEC became the initial terrain of investment and expansion for capital needing a home, which then expanded further outward as new members joined.
The fourth driver was the need to avoid protectionism, which was widely, if not entirely accurately seen as having prolonged the crisis of the 1930s. But while the EEC did tear down protectionist tariff barriers within Europe, it maintained tariff barriers against the Global South, and its member states continued to dump goods and destroy industries there, a strategy enshrined in the Common Agricultural Policy, which Nigel Harris once memorably described as “a criminal conspiracy” against humanity.
The condition for establishing the EEC was that the various states possessed approximately the same level of capitalist development with broadly the same kind of social democratic welfare regimes. In the UK we often delude ourselves about our welfare state being the greatest in the world, especially – and plausibly – when compared with the United States; but in comparison with the original member states of the EEC, this is only true in relation to the National Health Service, not in terms of hours worked, paid holidays, and so on. In some respects the EEC was superior to the UK from quite early on.
Unsurprisingly then, the original EU embodied the same kind of Keynesian liberal democratic lines as most of the member states of the time, but, of course, it is not something independent of the capitalist system and as the turn to neoliberalism evolved through the 1970s the EU began to reflect that change.
 
The neoliberal turn: Two phases
The neoliberal turn took place in two phases. The first occurred when Britain joined in 1973 and voted to stay in 1975, altering the balance of power within the EEC. Thatcher’s subsequent election in 1979 was followed by her successful attempt to push the EEC to the right. Next the Mitterrand government, within two years of coming to power, abandoned all its promises to achieve positive reforms for the working class and turned to neoliberalism.
The person responsible for that shift was a man called Jacques Delors, a member of the French Socialist Party, and its finance minister. Later he became the president of the European Commission. As a supposed socialist, he was able to sell the whole idea of the EU as an essentially social-democratic, solidaristic institution to the British Trade Union Congress and the Labour Party in the late 1980s. So the person responsible for imposing neoliberalism in France also sold it to the British workers movement. Ever since it has become a part of the self-deception of the trade unions that the EU is their friend.
This whole shift of the labor movement and its reformist representatives behind the EU begins to cohere around 1986 with the adoption of the Single European Act. It is at this time that the seduction of the left by the EU really gets consolidated. Most of the European and certainly the British Left used to be hostile to the EU. Revolutionaries voted to leave the EU in 1975, and so did the fascists, but no one then said that we were lining up with them. But with Thatcher’s election, Kohl’s election in Germany, and Mitterrand’s capitulation in France, there was an enormous shift. The Single European Act goes through, and the Left adopts EU as something worth defending.
The second phase began in 1991 and set the EU on course toward the current austerity regime. There were three elements to this phase:
The first was the fall of the Stalinist regimes, after which most of the East European states were desperate to join the EU. This changed the composition of the EU in a fundamental way, shifting it from a club of richer countries with more less the same level of development to a formation with a much higher level of unevenness. But all were nevertheless asked to cohere around a common project, above all adoption of the Euro.
The second phase, and this was decisive, was the reunification of Germany, introducing a massive new state in the middle of Europe, which was both the biggest in territory and in population. In other words, the outcome that the European project was originally initiated to avoid, the dominance of Germany, had now come about.
The third phase was the introduction of the Euro as a shared currency. The French insisted on this as their price for allowing Germany to reunify. They argued that the only way to reign in Germany’s ambition was to make everyone adhere to a new currency. This is a big mistake. Germany has far greater economic power than any other member-state and the European Central Bank is essentially modeled on the Bundesbank – even down to its obsession with fighting inflation. Now, inflation has not been a general problem for capitalism in over twenty years, and for the last seven years – with the partial exception of energy – deflation has been a bigger issue. Nonetheless, the European Central Bank and the Bundesbank have pushed for austerity, cutting wages, and all the rest in order to combat a nonexistent danger.
These developments fundamentally changed the balance of power within the EU, which used to involve Germany and France, with Italy tagging along,and Britain influential in some areas but always semidetached. Now Italy is totally out of the picture, France has lost its former position as co-hegemon, Britain has voted to leave, and Germany has become the dominant power in the EU. So clearly there is no equality between nations in the EU. In fact, its structure enshrines and freezes the hierarchical power relations between states within the European Union itself.
To compound the problem, the Maastricht convergence criteria beginning in November 1993, requires member states to control inflation, maintain deficits of no more than 3 percent of GDP, and limit national debt to 60 percent of GDP. For states joining the Euro, interest rates have to be no more than 2 percent higher than the average of three countries with the lowest inflation rates. This may sound complicated, but the results are straightforward: It requires states to accept a level of austerity like that which brought Greece to its knees. That applies to everything because Germany imposes uniform rules. They defend it by saying it’s a level playing field. That’s a lie. There are massive uneven levels of development between countries and the bigger powers in the EU, especially Germany, thus have an enormous advantage over all their fellow members.
 
Structures against reforms
Now the question is: can the EU be reformed? The cry from the left Remain camp is that “We’re better in than out and in we have some power to influence the structures themselves.” In reality, the EU is structured in such a fashion that it is nearly impossible to reform it in any meaningful or serious way.
First of all there are structures that are totally undemocratic, like the European Central Bank (ECB). It is, of course, completely unelected. The interesting American conservative commentator, Edward Luttwak wrote a great book called Turbo Capitalism that is almost Marxist in its analysis. (He also believes, incidentally, that eastern Europe was state capitalist.) He argues that what he calls “central-bankism,” especially as practiced by the Bundesbank and the ECB, is one of the main obstacles to reviving the economy in Europe and America. He argues that if you got a bunch of trade unionists and businesspeople together in a room, they would come up with better positions than the central banks currently do. He rightly says the ECB is not an independent instrument. It’s modeled on the German Bundesbank and is utterly committed to its austerity regime.
Then there is the European Court of Justice. This must not be confused with the European Court of Human Rights or the Human Rights Act. It is a totally different institution, but in Britain they are always being confused, often quite deliberately. The European Court of Justice is made up of unelected judges. It’s tasked with interpreting European Union law and ensuring that the laws of individual countries are compatible with the EU’s overall positions. It has a totally undemocratic structure.
Then there is the European Commission – the central body really and absolutely at the core of the EU. It is also completely unelected. Its members are nominated by the individual countries and serve for a fixed period of time. The Commission has the right to propose legislation; it also issues directives, decisions, and resolutions. Its decisions are binding on all EU countries. It also represents the interests of EU states externally with countries like the United States. It is the decisive body and is utterly committed to neoliberalism, as indeed are most of the countries that make up the membership of the EU. If you think of the people responsible for this, they are people like New Labour architect Peter Mandelson and Jean-Claude Junker, who was for twenty years the president of Luxemburg, a country that primarily exists as the world’s biggest tax haven.
The European Council is made up of the heads of state of the member countries. These people are elected to govern in their own countries, but they are not elected to govern Europe. Yet they do come together to act as a governing body over Europe. And these are very unequal powers. So British representatives have much more power than a small country like Cyprus. The Council gets together as a hydra-headed monster of different committees. It’s worth noting that in this undemocratic structure, 90 percent of people who lobby represent business interests. Only 5 percent of lobbyers deal with worker’s rights, environmental protections, and so forth.
So what about the European Parliament? It is, of course, made of people who are elected. Perry Anderson describes it in his book The Old New World as playing the same role as the monarchy does in Britain. It has no actual or real power; it can’t propose legislation, but only amend or send back legislation that comes from the Commission. It has only symbolic value. We have to be clear about this. It can’t generate any legislation. That’s because it isn’t actually a governing body. The governing body is the European Commission and its associated bureaucracies. They run the entire thing. People often say to me that the Commission’s bureaucracy is not really that big. But that doesn’t matter. Regardless of its size, the bureaucracy expects the individual nation states to carry out its rules and regulations.
We saw this in Greece, when Finance Minister Varoufakis went to meet the Troika (ECB, IMF, EC) of which the IMF representatives were actually the most willing to compromise. (Just think about that, if you will: the IMF, the body that we have to thank for the structural adjustment program, was less inclined than the Commission and the ECB to enforce the austerity regime.) In the end, the Troika said:
“Sorry, Yanis, old boy, but the rules are the rules. We don’t take a mandate from the people of Greece or indeed from any people at all. That would go against the way that the treaties are formulated. So get with the program and go back and start slashing pensions, restricting child benefits, and cutting healthcare benefits for things like pain-killing drugs. That is what is necessary for you to impose the austerity regime and pay off your debt.”
The structure of the EU also explains why it’s going into crisis. It is a halfway house between the original Common Market and the “ever-closer” political union the treaties envisage. The latter is not quite the “European Super State,” which Nigel Farage and UKIP fear, or pretend to fear. It’s halfway-house status has the worst of both worlds. In the EU, unlike in Britain, you can’t transfer funds from one country to another. In Britain, you direct state funding to different regions to address needs in particular areas like Scotland. That cannot happen in the EU. You can’t transfer money to Greece. Instead the ECB loans it money that the Greek state has to pay back. So it doesn’t function as a nation state although it has some of the attributes of one.
So these are the difficulties that the EU poses. Everyone is forced to conform to a set of conditions that most of the states cannot actually achieve. Within the Eurozone it is obviously impossible for individual member-states to increase the money supply (“quantitative easing”), but neither can they alter interest rates or devalue currency. The only ways to achieve competitiveness is unemployment, wage cuts – or emigration. The result is a permanent low level of growth, massive unemployment – particularly among the young where it is as high as 50 percent in some areas – and the rise of the far right as a populist response to the EU-wide neoliberal regime.
 
Conclusions
These were some of the reasons why I thought it was necessary to argue for Leave, whatever other people – including those on the far right – were arguing. You have got to be honest with people. It would have been wrong to avoid discussing the crimes of the EU during the campaign, on the grounds that this wasn’t “the right time.” You can’t put off the question of dealing with the actual issue of what the EU is and what it does to some better time, because that better time may never come. If Jeremy Corbyn, head of the Labour Party, becomes prime minister and finds his plans stymied by the EU, perhaps that is the time for this discussion; at that point it would be a suitably “left” occasion to argue about the EU. One can imagine the conversation: “Sorry we didn’t mention during the referendum campaign that the EU is actually a racist neoliberal machine for imposing austerity. That must have slipped our mind because we were so worried about the rise of the far right.” Who would believe you if you came and said that to them after not having talked about it earlier on?
First, socialists have to accept the result of the referendum, in the same way that we would have expected others to accept the result of the Scottish referendum if it had been Yes. The idea of ignoring it, or running the referendum again until “we” (i.e. the Guardian-reading middle classes) get the “right” result (i.e., the one most of the British and global ruling class want), is deeply undemocratic – although there are many precedents in the history of the EU. The starting point should instead be to campaign for the right of all migrants currently in the UK – whether on an EU passport or not – to remain, and in the longer term, to fight for open borders regardless of the UK’s or its component’s relationship to the EU.
Second, and specifically in relation to Scotland, socialists there have to argue against Scotland remaining – or more plausibly – joining the EU. If Scotland joins the EU and is forced to meet the Maastricht convergence criteria – let alone adopt the euro – it would mean austerity worse than anything we’ve seen before. We have to argue against Scottish accession to the EU however hard it may be, because that is the only honest and revolutionary approach.
Finally, we have to have a genuine internationalist position that goes beyond winning a better deal for each individual member-state. We have to argue with comrades in Portugal, Greece, Spain, and beyond that a progressive future, let alone a socialist one, is impossible within the EU, not only within the Eurozone.
The EU may break up of its own internal contradictions over the long term. In any event, that kind of collapse – the result of structural failure rather than conscious intervention – is unlikely to benefit the working class. No, it will have to be destroyed, and perhaps the most serious argument facing the European Left at the moment is to convince a majority of comrades of this necessity.
* * *
Note
[1] An unsuccessful challenger for Tory Party leadership.
 



Last Train to Memphis: The Rise of Elvis Presley
Peter Guralnick
Little, Brown and Co £17.99
Elvis Presley has not, on the whole, enjoyed a sympathetic press since his death in 1977. But even when Presley is not being treated as a postmodern joke, he is typically portrayed as a talentless racist hick, who made his fortune ripping off black musicians before dying a Benzedrine addled, cheeseburger bloated wreck: a symbol, in fact, of everything that revolutionaries most hate about capitalist America.
The popularity of this view is understandable, given, among other things, the generally dire nature of his music during the 1960s and 1970s, his hypocritical posturing with Richard Nixon in opposition to drugs and much else besides. Nevertheless, there is one thing wrong with this version of the Elvis Presley story, namely that – for the first eight years of his career at any rate – it is completely false, as has at last been comprehensively demonstrated by Peter Guralnick in this first volume of a biography which traces Presley’s life up until he was drafted into the US army in 1958.
Guralnick’s account brings out three crucial aspects of Presley’s relation to black music and culture.
The first is a reaffirmation of the originality of his early work. Guralnick demonstrates that, although there was already a two way traffic in musical ideas between white country and black rhythm and blues before 1954, their fusion into rock and roll resulted in a new form. He regards Presley as a serious singer and musician who painstakingly and consciously effected this fusion. Around 40 years of familiarity with the early recordings, and the cosy iconographic status which Presley now enjoys, have combined to obscure the musical impact of his first records. It is particularly exciting, therefore, to read the description here of Presley and his band recording their first single, That’s All Right, and the astonished reactions of everyone lucky enough to have been in the studio.
The second point is to show that Presley was, initially at any rate, as popular with black audiences as with white. There is a fascinating description of his performance (and the audience reaction) at a concert organised by the black radio station WDIA in 1956.
This takes us on to the third and most controversial point: racism. The view expressed by Public Enemy in Fight The Power – ‘Elvis was a hero to some but he never meant shit to me / Straight up racist that sucker was / Simple and plain’ – must be doubted in the light of the preceding paragraph; but there is more. Sam Phillips, Presley’s first and greatest producer, is quoted as saying, ‘if I could find a white man who sang like a nigger, I could make a billion dollars.’
Sam Phillips was no socialist, but an astute liberal businessman. He did, however, establish the only white run studio in Memphis which recorded black artists and was regularly denounced for it by his fellow whites. Similarly, for a poor white like Presley to embrace black music, to go to black areas in search of that music, to wear the clothes associated with black hustlers in segregated Tennessee was not to behave like a racist.
But for all his sensitivity in discussing the cultural and racial components of the ‘New South’ into which Presley was born and raised, Guralnick does not explicitly comment on the historical context of the origins of rock and roll. For example, on 1 December 1955, the same day that Presley signed to RCA Victor Records, Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat to a white man on an Alabama bus, thus precipitating the struggle for black civil rights that was to dominate American politics for the next two decades. Although that struggle featured obliquely in the work of black rock and rollers (Chuck Berry’s Brown Eyed Handsome Man, for example), it took more that ten years for the music which Presley helped create to deal explicitly with these political issues.
The system destroyed Presley personally, just as it did comparable talents like Robert Johnson, Hank Williams or Charlie Parker; his particular tragedy was that it also destroyed him musically.
The decline and fall of Elvis Presley will presumably be the theme of Guralnick’s next volume. For the moment, however, we have this portrait of Presley at the peak of his powers. For anyone wishing to understand his impact on popular music, this book, along with Greil Marcus’s Mystery Train, is the place to start.
 



Neil Davidson says knowing fascists from hard right populists is essential in fighting them both
The left always risks making two errors when faced with a threat from forces on the hard-right. One, most disastrously realised in Germany during the 1930s, is complacency, ignoring or at least downplaying the genuine threat of fascism. The other, far more common today, involves misrecognition, or even deliberate misrepresentation, by extending the term ‘fascist’ to other right-wing movements which, however odious they may be, have different objectives and deploy different methods. Golden Dawn in Greece is a classic fascist formation in a way that the Northern League in Italy is not. Stephen Yaxley-Lennon (aka ‘Tommy Robinson’) is a fascist, but Nigel Farage is not and neither is Donald Trump and the latter two are currently more dangerous than the former.
Establishing the distinction between the fascist and non-fascist hard-right inevitably involves ‘ideal types’. In the real world, of course, these blur and overlap at the edges, but the distinctions are nevertheless necessary, not to indulge in academic hair-splitting over definitions, but because it determines the different tactics which need to be deployed by the left if it to successfully oppose them both, above all in relation to the use of physical force.
The hard-right always occupies a spectrum of positions, but all points on this continuum tend to share two main characteristics. One is a primary social base of membership and support in one or more fractions of the middle-class, above all the self-employed petty bourgeoisie, but also among traditional middle-class professionals and the technical-managerial new middle class. The other is an ideology of extreme nationalism, in which the nation is usually under double threat from above and inside by treacherous elites and from below and outside by disruptive external intruders. There are, nevertheless, three main differences between the respective methods and goals associated with actual fascists and their non-fascist cousins.
First, is their attitude to the working class. One defining characteristic of fascist movements is to seek the destruction of working class organizations; this not the case with other sections of the hard-right. Indeed, after the Argentinian coup of 1943, the Peronists found that they had to rely on unions in order for the regime to survive. This is why not only Peronism, but a movement like Ulster Loyalism, based as it was on the skilled Protestant working class, is not fascist, however reactionary and divisive as it may otherwise be.
Second, is that, while fascists may stand for election, they primarily rely on paramilitary organization and violence to attain power. The two main fascist regimes, the Italian and German, installed themselves through a combination of paramilitary violence and elections, but it was success of the former that gave credibility to the latter. Once in power, of course, fascists will dispense with, not only elections, but every manifestation of democracy and every institution which might challenge their power – which is why unions and worker’s parties cannot be permitted to exist in the fascist state.
This one of the reasons why fascism is the last, rather than the first resort for any capitalist ruling class; in addition to being inherently disruptive and unstable, it removes the mechanism for changing regimes without recourse to civil war or invasion. The non-fascist hard-right are, however, primarily electoral and seek to attain office through the normal working of bourgeois democracy at local, national and European levels. If defeated in 2020, Trump almost certainly will claim electoral fraud, but will not attempt to cling to power through a coup.
One might then say that fascism is revolutionary and the non-fascist hard-right is reformist; but what do these terms mean in this context? Many Marxists are reluctant to use the term ‘revolution’ in relation to any modern political movement not of the left, with the possible exception of nationalisms in the Global South. But if we consider fascist seizures of power as political revolutions – in other words as those actions which change the nature and personnel of the political regime without changing the mode of production – then there is no reason why the term should not be applicable to them. Revolution and reform do not involve different roads to the same place but – as in Rosa Luxemburg’s formulation concerning the left – different destinations.
This leads to the third major difference. Fascism is not defined simply by its recourse to extra-parliamentary or illegal activity, but by their purpose: a project of transformation which seeks the creation of a ‘new’ society, the final realisation of a national destiny which had hitherto been denied. But to achieve this the people – inevitably conceived in racial terms – themselves must be purified, must prove themselves worthy of the world which the fascists hope to bring into being. Fascism is never uncomplicatedly the ‘tool of monopoly capitalism’: it is rather that the goals of fascism overlap at certain points with that of capital, notably in the crushing of a perceived working-class threat and pursuance of imperialist goals. But the Holocaust was not ‘necessary’ for German capitalism; rather, it was fatal for Jewish members of the capitalist class and diverted resources which could have been deployed in fighting the Allies. The non-fascist hard-right, however, insists that the people are already the repository of homogeneity and virtue, but that these qualities are under threat. This is a project of restoration: ‘Make America Great Again’. Its political goal is always to push popular attitudes and legal rights back to some lost Golden Age, a time before the homogeneity of the people was polluted by immigration and its virtues compromised by decadent elites.
Are these historical differences ceasing to exist, or have they perhaps already done so? The implication of some of the more hysterical assessments of the contemporary hard-right is that they have and that the beneficiaries are its fascist wing. In fact, the opposite is nearer to the truth. In France, for example, the transformation of the Front National into the more mainstream hard-right National Rally led to a revival of its electoral fortunes. But in so far as there has been a blurring of the lines between the fascist and non-fascist right, it has been the result of two main developments.
One is the virtual disappearance of the traditional conservative component of the hard right and its replacement by forces which share most of its positions, but whose style and rhetoric – usually referred to as ‘populism’ – is very different. Most members of the British Conservative and Unionist Party are either outright reactionaries, or neoliberals, or unprincipled opportunists willing to pander to both. (In philosophical terms, Rory Stewart was the only genuine conservative candidate in the recent Tory leadership election.) For our purposes, the significance of this shift has been that conservatives were historically loath to mobilise their supporters for demonstrations, marches or other mass manifestations – unsurprisingly, since one of the founding tenets of conservatism is fear of the passions of the ‘mob’ which, once unleashed, cannot easily be contained. This was one of the reasons why even those Conservatives who agreed with Enoch Powell about migration were appalled by his pandering to popular racism. Contemporary right-wing populists have no such inhibitions. What this means is that right-wing populism engage in forms of political activity which were once the preserve of the left or the fascist right. It is also the case that fascists have started to practice ‘entryism’ into the populist hard right parties, although usually at an individual rather than at an organisational level. But on social media particularly, this can give the impression that, say, UKIP is ‘really’ fascist because of tweets by members who are also in the BNP.
The other development has occurred on the fascist wing of the hard-right and is a new emphasis on democracy. Previously, fascists have argued that democracy is an impediment to the pure expression of the people’s will to which their party or leader has direct access, and no doubt if installed in power contemporary fascists would also attempt to suppress democracy. In Britain in particular, however, ‘elite’ attempts to negate or minimise the EU referendum result have enabled fascists like Yaxley-Lennon and non-fascist right-wingers like Farage to both claim that they are upholding democratic outcomes ignored by a corrupt establishment.
Nevertheless, important new differences have also opened up between sections of the hard-right. The non-fascist wing have been prepared to abandon or at least down play formerly reactionary positions in relation to gender and sexual orientation – although even this is linked to ethno-cultural racism, particularly in its Islamophobic form: hard-right politicians in the Netherlands, for example, rhetorically invoked the relative freedoms of women or gays in the West as way of denouncing the supposedly oppressive beliefs of Muslims. This is not a reason which fascists are likely to give for opposing Islam.
All variants of the hard-right obviously have to be fought, but it is important to retain a sense of perspective: at the moment the right-wing populism is the more immediate danger, if only because it is proving to be the most successful. But opposing it also involves understanding why it exists. The conditions for the emergence of the populist hard-right were set by forty years of neo-liberalism, compounded by the more recent imposition of brutal austerity regimes, to which the populists provide false solutions. The social neo-liberals responsible for much of this since the 1990s – Blair and Brown, the Clintons and Obama, the post-Maastricht EU and so on – exist in a symbiotic relationship with the populist hard-right. In other words, the latter cannot be fought by simply returning to the policies of the former. That will simply lead to further disillusion with politics, leading to a situation in which actual fascism may appear to be an answer,
Neil Davidson lectures in politics and social science at the University of Glasgow and is author of numerous books including How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions? (2017), Nation-States: Consciousness and Competition (2016), We Cannot Escape History: States and Revolutions (2015), and Holding Fast to an Image of the Past: Explorations on Marxism and History (2014). All were published by Haymarket Books.
 






Neil Davidson
was interviewed by
Ashley Smith
from the US-based Socialist Worker about the Brexit crisis and what it means for British politics and the European Union.



*
Brexit has thrown the whole establishment into a mess. How did we get here, and what are the latest developments?
The first thing to say is that the situation is so feverish that some unexpected development could happen at any time. But as of 18 December, this is the situation.
The immediate cause of the crisis is a gamble by Conservative Party Prime Minister David Cameron in 2016. He faced dissent within his own party from right-wingers who wanted to leave the EU and even more pressure from the far-right United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), which was beginning to take seats from the Conservatives in their core areas of support.
Cameron thought he would be able to smash these Brexiteers by staging a referendum on EU membership that he assumed he would win – misunderstanding how the far right could use popular anger over austerity and migration to win a “leave” vote. The right was very successful in deflecting class anger onto migrants, who had – particularly since the accession treaties with the former Eastern Bloc – come to be associated with the EU.
In most respects, this was a displacement from the real issues people face. Many of the areas that voted most heavily for leave had the lowest levels of actual migration.
So Cameron gambled, just like he did with the Scottish referendum two years previously in 2014, which he nearly lost. With Brexit, he did lose, and it has thrown the British capitalist class into a crisis, as the overwhelming majority definitively do not want to leave the EU.
But it is the Conservatives, the capitalists’ historic party for over 300 years, that has gotten them into this mess. After the referendum, the government invoked Article 50 of the 2007 Lisbon Treaty, which means that the UK has to leave by March 29.
According a European Court of Justice decision, it would be legally possible for parliament to revoke Article 50, but – and this is a phrase I’m going to use quite often – there isn’t a parliamentary majority for that.
So the Conservative government headed by Theresa May – who succeeded Cameron and who was herself for remaining in the EU – is now stuck in a position of trying to orchestrate a leave in the interests of British capital, which does not want to leave.
May spent the last two years negotiating with the EU. The irony is that Britain had really enjoyed a privileged position in the EU, with all sorts of opt-outs and exceptions. These won’t be available under even the most favourable Brexit deal – nor would they even if the UK now attempted to crawl back into the EU. Obviously, there are no circumstances under which the EU would allow an ex-member to enjoy equal status with actual members.
So the deal May has come back with is highly problematic and unpopular for different reasons with almost everyone in the ruling class and parliament.
It insists that there will be an open border between the North of Ireland and the Republic of Ireland – which, of course, is totally opposed by the pro-British and sectarian Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) that is currently propping up May’s government with its support for the Conservatives in parliament.
The deal she’s come back with is unlikely to pass, which is the reason she refused to even bring it to a vote. Now she’s gone back to Europe to get some kind of face-saving formula, but it’s almost impossible that she will be able to work one out because of the Irish question.
The Republic of Ireland is a member of the EU, and the EU won’t agree to closing what is currently an open border between the Republic and Northern Ireland, which remains part of Britain. The DUP won’t accept an open one if Brexit occurs. So as long as the Irish question remains unresolved, there will be no deal – and there’s little to no possibility of that being solved. So we’re at an impasse.
It’s very difficult to see what May’s alternatives are, and the crisis has undermined her rule as Prime Minister. She survived the vote challenging her leadership of the Conservative Party earlier this month (December 2018), but she said she will step down before the next election in 2022, so she won’t be Prime Minister again.
Although she also said that she wasn’t going to call a snap general election in 2017, and then she did. So this could mean nothing at all.
So May remains in office, if not exactly in power. But her government is rudderless and confused about how to resolve the crisis over Brexit.
 
This seems to be an untenable situation. What are the government’s possible options to solve the crisis?
This government is about as unstable as any in British history since about 1846. Comparisons are being made with crises as deep as those over the Suez Canal or the Munich Agreement. Since the EU won’t seriously renegotiate the existing deal, the options they have are really decorative tinkering.
They could call a second referendum. But it’s difficult to imagine what you would ask in a second one. Would it be over the EU all over again? Would it be over the Brexit deal itself? Regardless, May has said for now that she opposes a new referendum. In that case, there are three possible alternatives to the existing deal.
First, there is what is usually referred to as “Norway Plus.” That would allow Britain to stay in the EU Customs Union and European Single Market. But crucially, it would also mean continuing freedom of movement between the UK and EU, with the UK having no say in making the rules.
Those conditions make it completely unacceptable for most Tories and – for reasons which I guess we’ll come to later – for the Labour Party. Apart from anything else, the Norwegian government has said that it will oppose the UK being granted comparable conditions to those Norway has with the EU.
Second, at the other end of the spectrum, there’s what is usually called “Canada Plus Plus.” This would require Britain to accept World Trade Organisation rules for its relationship with the EU. This would basically be as hard a Brexit as you could get while still having some trade agreements in place.
Third, there could be no deal at all. Britain would crash out of the EU without any agreed terms whatsoever.
The Treasury has prepared two models of the impact of a “No Deal” Brexit. One of them they call “shock,” which would involve a fall in GDP of 3.6 percent. Another called “severe shock” would involve a GDP drop of 6 percent. As you can imagine, the British capitalist class is now beginning to panic as the full reality of what its representatives have done is beginning to emerge.
We are thus in uncharted territory. What May seems to be trying to do is delay the “meaningful vote” on her deal in parliament for as long as possible – it’s currently scheduled for mid-January – while ramping up the fear of what will happen if a “No Deal” Brexit goes ahead.
May announced that 3,500 troops will be deployed at the end of March 2019 to prevent complete social breakdown, for example. In this way, she probably hopes to frighten even those opposed to her deal to support it because the alternative is even worse.
 
How can the May’s government survive this mess? Is there a possibility that it could fall?
Traditionally in such situations, opposition parties would bring a vote of “no confidence,” which the government is constitutionally bound to act on. If that passed, it would trigger a new election.
But the Labour Party’s leader Jeremy Corbyn has said that he won’t bring forward such a motion unless he’s sure he could win it. What he did do earlier this week (17 December 2018) was table a motion of “no confidence” in Theresa May herself. But as he surely must know, there is no obligation for a government to hold a vote on a motion of “no confidence” in a particular person.
The Scottish National Party (SNP) has led the other opposition parties (Plaid Cymru, the Liberal Democrats and the Greens) in tabling a motion of “no confidence” in the government, but because none of them are the “official” opposition, the Conservatives aren’t obliged to respond to that either.
Corbyn is clearly reluctant to bring this to a vote because he’s balancing between several forces within and outside the party. Time is slipping away, and he isn’t making any moves to do anything.
It seems that Labour’s position is to let the Tory bastards destroy themselves, which they obviously are doing. But Labour isn’t doing anything to increase support for their position – or even to make clear what that position is, other than wanting a general election.
Corbyn’s refusal to take a clear stand is eroding his popularity at a time when the Tory catastrophe should mean that Labour is well ahead in the polls. He hasn’t made the case for how leaving the EU would make easier all sorts of popular social reforms, and because he hasn’t done that, there is no positive case for a Labour Brexit.
The reason for this is that the Labour Party is deeply divided – although not, obviously, as divided as the Tory Party. The Blairite wing of the party, which dominates the parliamentary wing, either wants to stay in the EU or go with the Norway Plus option.
Corbyn himself is a soft leaver – a position that has long been held on the left. But his popular base – particularly among the youth, which voted for him to be party leader – in general supports remaining in the EU. At the same time, Labour’s older working-class supporters, especially in the North, are eager to leave.
So there’s a real tension among the membership. This is one of the reasons that Corbyn is so cautious. He’s not eager to risk division disrupting the Labour Party or its electoral base.
But his position has been worse than inaction and indecision. He’s made unforgivable concessions on the question of migration. This is disastrous because it gives ground to the right’s strategy of displacing class grievances into racism.
The rest of the left is also quite divided on how to respond to the Brexit crisis. Much of left is reluctant to adopt an internationalist position against the EU because almost all arguments against the EU are associated with or are drowned out by the right.
So they conclude that they have no option but to support the EU. This is a completely mistaken position, and the problems with it are coming home to roost. So in this moment of crisis, sections of the radical left are caught flat-footed, unable to clearly articulate a way forward.
 
Why do young Corbyn backers support membership in the EU? Is there any merit to their case? What is the real function of the EU?
Generally speaking, the younger you are, the more in favour of the EU you are. It’s a reaction to the right-wing opposition to the EU. But in opposing the right, young activists, Guardian columnists and some of the radical left accept completely fantastical ideas of what the EU stands for.
They claim that the EU stands for workers’ rights and environmental protections. In reality, the EU enforces neoliberalism throughout Europe. It patrols its borders, denying refugees and migrants access to “Fortress Europe.”
The EU has legislated some absolutely minimal workers’ rights, but these are often inferior to those in member states. In fact, I heard a Tory member of parliament on the radio this morning claiming – quite correctly – that some workers’ rights, over maternity leave for example, are actually stronger in Britain than those upheld by the EU.
And remember what the EU has done to Greece and Portugal, and what it’s currently doing in Italy. It has used financial blackmail to enforce the most barbaric austerity measures on countries. In the case of Greece, these measures tipped the country into the equivalent of a Great Depression. Even Italy isn’t immune from the enforcement of neoliberal norms, as the current pressure on the country demonstrates.
The only two countries that don’t get pressured into such neoliberal attacks are Germany and France. Why? Because they run the EU. That’s the structured unevenness of power in the EU.
This is not a democratic institution. The most powerful institutions – the Central Bank, the European Commission, the Court of Justice – are the least democratic, and those with a semblance of democracy, such as the EU parliament, are the least powerful.
If the left doesn’t challenge the EU as a reactionary, neoliberal and anti-migrant institution, it opens the door to the far right as the only opposition to the EU. The left has no choice but to oppose the EU with a left-wing program. You have to come down very clearly.
The sad predicament for Corbyn is that his inclination is toward leave. He should really come clear and say: ‘Look, the EU is a neoliberal and anti-immigrant institution, and if we break, we could implement a socialist program.’ That would be an infinitely better approach than what he’s doing now because he’s not pleasing anyone.
One final point: supporters of the EU, even those who do so on a “lesser evil” basis, often claim that EU rules wouldn’t stop a left government from carrying out its program.
This is totally disingenuous. Take nationalisation. It’s true that this isn’t completely forbidden, but state-run services – unless you’re Germany or France, obviously – are only allowed under market conditions, meaning in competition with private providers, which means they have to be run on a commercial basis, not as a public service designed as a public good.
In other words, if you are planning to implement a right-wing social democratic program of minimum reforms, then it is just about possible to do so under the existing rules. But surely we’re aiming higher than that. Otherwise, what’s the point of a future Corbyn government?
 
So British politics is in crisis, and it’s not clear how the parties in parliament are going to resolve it, if they even can. What is the EU going to do in this situation?
The EU obviously doesn’t want Britain to leave. It weakens the whole project and causes all sorts of problems for trade and movement, not least for France. So they want to cut the best deal in a bad situation. But there are less obvious reasons.
Britain’s membership in the EU has been very useful, not only for commerce, but also for political and economic policy. In the 1980s, the EU used Prime Minister Margret Thatcher’s rule in Britain as an alibi to adopt even more extreme neoliberal measures. That’s why they gave Britain so many exceptions and options compared to other member states.
From their point of view, Norway Plus would be the best thing for the EU. It’s as close as they can come to Britain being inside the EU. It would also preserve as much of the integrity of the EU as possible while Brexit goes ahead.
The EU is concerned to stem any further exits. Right now, weaker countries are complaining about austerity measures, but no one is threatening to leave. If conditions worsen, other countries could start threatening to leave – or demanding the type of concessions which the UK used to enjoy.
For this reason, the EU will make no concessions to Britain because it doesn’t want to seem weak. It has to show that it’s willing to protect its interests.
 
Given this dynamic around Brexit, what should the British left do?
This is difficult to answer because the left is so divided on the question of the EU. But I think we must be clear that the EU is an obstacle to advancing the struggle for socialism. Breaking with the EU will make it easier to achieve.
I don’t need to be told that “socialism in one country” is an impossibility – whether that country is Scotland or the UK – but some country has to start, or else we will be left clinging to the imaginary comfort blanket of the EU forever more. If we don’t, then what we’re saying is that the left is so pathetically weak, it’s incapable of taking advantage of the greatest crisis in the British ruling class for over a hundred years.
The first thing is to do is understand more clearly why people voted for Brexit. The key thing to grasp is that it’s a distorted response to unemployment and austerity. The leave vote is the form of opposition, which is susceptible to the right. But those voters are not lost to the right.
The left can and should address their grievances and turn them into a left-wing argument for leaving the EU. In Scotland, we set a precedent for this approach with the independence referendum in 2014, which we narrowly lost.
Much of the vote for independence was similarly rooted in unemployment and poverty. It could have gone in a right-wing direction. But we in the radical independence campaign shifted the entire discussion onto a left-wing basis. We’ve come up with a socialist program that addresses the same grievances in the rest of Britain.
The second thing is to unite the left beyond the question of Brexit on questions of austerity and migration. We have to work toward agreement among Greens, the revolutionary left and the left in Labour, regardless of our position on Brexit, to fight austerity and defend the free movement of people across borders.
Above all, we have to show that free movement doesn’t have to be dependent on the EU’s “four freedoms,” which is the capitalist reasoning – but that it should be argued for as a human right, which a left government could introduce on its own terms.
None of this will be easy – especially figuring out how to position the left on Brexit. Of all the issues I’ve been faced with in my political lifetime, this is the one that is least possible to boil down to a simple set of slogans or demands to solve the problem.
But the basis of a coherent socialist position must be opposition to the EU, a commitment to fight austerity and support for open borders.
But we’re headed into a period of intense crisis in British politics. I’ve talked about Ireland being an obstacle to agreement. The other development on Ireland – and really one of the few positive ones right now – is that people are now beginning to talk again, for the first time in my lifetime, about unification.
This is good, but the Irish left will have to fight for independence from the EU against the illusion that any master is than the British one.
The Brexit debate is also provoking people in Scotland to discuss organizing a second referendum on Scottish independence. Everyone is asking: “How we can extract ourselves from this British mess over Brexit?”
The trouble is that an awful lot of the left in the SNP and the Greens are pro-EU. But it would be a disaster to tie a new independence referendum with staying in the EU. Generally, the left has to argue that there should be two referenda, one on independence and then another on EU membership.
So the whole integrity of the British polity is at stake in the Brexit crisis. The situation can go in any number of directions. I genuinely don’t know where the crisis will end up.
March seems to be a hard deadline for things to come to a conclusion, but it will be a conclusion that will provoke even more problems. At the same time, I wouldn’t rule out the possibility of May asking for an extension beyond March for further negotiations. This could result in a staggered messy process that could drag out for years.
But the last thing I would want to do is make predictions. Instead, the left must begin carving out an analysis and an argument for a way forward – against the EU, against austerity, for migration and for socialism.
 






Boris Johnson’s drive toward a no-deal Brexit is hastening calls for the breakup of the United Kingdom. The crisis of the British state creates opportunities for the Left’s socialist message – but only if it can navigate the messy politics of national identity.
Boris Johnson recently won the vote among the Tory membership to succeed Theresa May and is now prime minister of Britain. He won based on a promise to take Britain out of the European Union by October 31, with a new Brexit deal or without one.
Here, Jacobin contributor Ashley Smith speaks to Neil Davidson about Johnson, Brexit, and the prospects and impact of a possible general election in Britain. Davidson is a member of Revolutionary Socialism in the 21st Century (rs21) and RISE – Scotland’s Left Alliance, and is the author of numerous books, including How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions? and We Cannot Escape History: States and Revolutions.



*
AS:
After trouncing his various opponents on the Tory right, Boris Johnson has become prime minister of Britain. Who is Johnson and what does he stand for?
ND: Boris Johnson is a public school boy, who went to Eton and then Oxford, where he was a member of the Bullingdon Club with other Tory lowlifes like David Cameron. He made his name at the Daily Telegraph, or “Torygraph,” as we usually call it, and then edited leading right-wing magazine the Spectator.
Based for a time in Brussels, he made a name for himself as a right-wing Eurosceptic penning “news stories” replete with lies about the European Union. The right-wing press published this rubbish because it bashed the EU, regardless of its dubious journalistic quality.
After his career as a “journalist,” he became a television personality on quiz shows and then found a safe Conservative Party seat in Parliament. He used that to launch his successful campaign for the mayoralty of London, which projected him as a national politician. Since that office was established in 2000, left-winger Ken Livingstone won it twice and held it for eight years.
Johnson, ever the political chameleon, defeated Livingstone in 2008 by posing as a social neoliberal, combining some progressive rhetoric with traditional Tory economic policies. This deceptive combination was essential to get elected in London. He didn’t do much in his two terms as mayor; he did enact some reforms, which had in reality been proposed by Livingstone, like free bicycles, but he also wasted loads of money on ridiculous vanity projects.
Soon he was back in Parliament in another safe Tory seat. After a period of vacillation between the “Leave” and “Remain” viewpoints on Britain’s membership in the European Union, he opportunistically calculated that Leave would be best for his political career and turned himself into an ardent Brexiteer. He rivaled far-right politician the Brexit Party’s Nigel Farage in demagogy and lying about the EU.
Theresa May resigned as Tory leader and prime minister after she failed to win a majority in the 2017 general election or to get her Brexit deal passed by Parliament. Johnson jumped at the chance to replace her, engaging in a nostalgic campaign of British nationalism, invoking all sorts of myths about the country’s imperialist past, and promised that as leader of Great Britain he could force the EU to agree to a new deal and that, if they didn’t, he would lead the country out with a no-deal Brexit on or before the October 31 Halloween deadline.
AS:
What has Johnson begun to do now that he’s in power?
ND: He’s conducted something resembling Harold MacMillan’s famous “night of the long knives” by kicking out all of Theresa May’s cabinet appointees who had not already resigned their posts. His new cabinet is stuffed full of hard Brexiteers with various combinations of neoliberal economics and reactionary political positions.
Dominic Cummings, who, as head of Vote Leave, was responsible for some of the biggest lies in the original campaign for Brexit, is Johnson’s chief adviser. Home secretary Priti Patel supports bringing back the death penalty. Chancellor Sajid Javid is a hard-core neoliberal in economics and supported Theresa May’s anti-migrant call for “illegals” to “go home.”
Johnson appointed these people for cynical reasons. He wants them close so he can prevent them from attacking him, and also to share the blame if his government ends in disaster. That is not out of the question by any means. Johnson faces the same problem that Theresa May did; the EU will not give an inch on the terms of Brexit and certainly will not cut Johnson any new deal.
Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, has already said that there is no way they are going to reopen negotiations. He’s made it clear that they think they’ve already struck a deal, and that Johnson must either push it through Parliament or Britain will go out with a no-deal Brexit. The twenty-seven member states will no doubt back Juncker’s hard line.
So, Johnson will face the same impasse that May did. The EU is intransigent, and the Tories do not have a majority to pass the current deal. One possible solution for him is to call a general election before October in the hopes of getting a majority for his position. So, realistically, it’s either crash out without a deal, or a new election.
Beyond the never-ending Brexit crisis, Johnson is not pursuing a simple right-wing agenda. He has proposed some reforms like infrastructure spending designed to curry favor with working-class voters in the north of England. But the truth is that Johnson’s base is not the working-class north, south, east, or west, but the middle classes and, in particular, those sections mainly in the south of England where the Leave vote was strongest.
Essentially, Johnson’s election has not solved anything, and his rise to power is a symptom of the degeneration of the British political class. Beyond self-promotion, he has absolutely no talent whatsoever, and he’s never had a real job in his life. Now this buffoon is at the head of the British state. He’s utterly unprepared and unfit to engage in strategic thinking, as are the people around him.
At least as mayor, he was surrounded by officials who did the work he was incapable of doing. Whole sections of the actual ruling class are, quite understandably, at their wits’ end about his ascent to leadership. The Financial Times, for instance, has had several articles where they express despair about Johnson and the other people running the country.
Some of them would actually prefer Corbyn because they think they know how to deal with the Labour Party and have done so many times. That they even entertain this idea shows how frustrated they are with the complete mess the Tory Party is in.
AS:
Many in the United States have likened Johnson to Trump. Are they comparable figures? Do they share a far-right program?
ND: It would be an exaggeration to say that Johnson has a program besides his own self-advancement. He’s not as right wing or programmatic as Trump.
Of course, he says stupid and racist things, but he’s not a hard-core racist. Just look at his cabinet; he appointed several black, Asian, and minority ethnic people and women, all of whom are, of course, profoundly conservative. Johnson is just an opportunistic power-seeking careerist who will say and do anything to cultivate an audience in politics or the media.
Where he does resemble Trump is how they used their status television personalities, as many twenty-first-century politicians do, to build a political career. But Trump, unlike Johnson, actually ran a company; he was a real-estate tycoon. And Trump, despite all his erratic behavior, does have a racist and xenophobic program, which he uses to rouse his petty-bourgeois base and drive through his “America First” nationalist agenda.
Not only does Johnson lack a consistent program, he also cannot appeal to the “ordinary” middle class as effectively as Trump. He’s too much an obvious product of the English ruling class, the very model of the bumbling public school boy. This persona will perhaps appeal to a section of the middle class in the south of England, but it will be the kiss of death in Scotland and Wales.
AS:
How have Jeremy Corbyn and the Labour Party reacted to Johnson’s victory? How are they positioning themselves over Brexit now? What about the other smaller parties?
ND: Corbyn has rightly attacked Johnson for his right-wing positions, but Brexit continues to pose real problems for him and the Labour Party. There are divisions at the top of the party and its base between those supporting Leave and Remain. While Corbyn is personally for Leave, he has not tried to make that argument, but has balanced between the two positions.
As a result, Nigel Farage, his Brexit Party, and Johnson’s Tories have set the terms of opposition to the EU. Within the Labour Party, its neoliberal wing has seized the opportunity to push for Remain and paint anyone opposed to the EU as a right winger.
Corbyn’s fudging on Brexit has pleased no one and has opened up space for his right-wing opponents in Labour to attack him. They’ve denounced him for his hesitancy to oppose Brexit and have invented completely false charges that, because he supports Palestinian rights, he and the Labour left are antisemitic.
Despite these attacks, Corbyn’s leadership of the party is currently invulnerable. He consolidated it through the party’s relative – and unexpected – success in the last general election. That said, no one is any longer chanting “Oh Jeremy Corbyn” at the Glastonbury Festival now. That’s partly because some of those people are Remainers, but it’s also because he’s not arguing for anything.
So, Corbyn’s balancing act has opened the door in the party for the neoliberals to shift the party in favor of Remain. Labour now seems prepared to call for a new referendum and, in the event of that, support a vote for remaining in the EU.
Outside the Labour Party, the Remain camp is quite strong. One of the bourgeois parties, the Liberal Democrats, are for Remain. The Green Party, which has a white-collar petty-bourgeois base, is also for Remain. The Scottish National Party (SNP), which is hegemonic in Scotland and is also the third largest party in the British Parliament, is also for Remain.
AS:
If the EU remains unwilling to negotiate, will this produce a no-deal Brexit? Could the Tories opt for a new election? What will be the possible results of that?
ND: We are in an unpredictable situation. But two options seem the most likely. One is that Johnson will fail to strike a new deal and Britain will crash out on or before the 31st of October. The other is that Johnson calls a general election.
The Tories will try to make an election all about Brexit. They will argue that the EU is out to get everyone and that they’re defending the democratic vote from the last referendum against Labour and other Remainers. One consequence of this position will be that the Tories reabsorb all those voters that defected to Nigel Farage and his far-right Brexit Party.
If the Tories win and change the balance of power in the House of Commons in favor of Brexit, Johnson would try to get the EU to negotiate a new deal, and then if he secured one, push it through Parliament. But Johnson would run into the same opposition from the EU to any new negotiations and hit a dead end and likely carry out a no-deal Brexit.
Corbyn and Labour will attempt to make the election about broader issues than just Brexit. But they will be forced to address Brexit. They will probably argue for another referendum, and support Remain.
The SNP will also focus on Brexit as well and support Remain. They wrongly believe that Scottish independence and staying in the EU must be linked. We in the Radical Independence Campaign have argued and will argue that – whatever your attitude to the EU – the two issues have to be kept separate.
In other words, if Scotland achieves independence, that should be followed by a further referendum. My own view is that the EU’s neoliberalism would compromise the ability of an independent Scotland to pass social reforms, let alone build a socialist Scotland.
I think it’s possible that Corbyn and Labour could win a general election and form a government with the support of the SNP and the Greens. That could produce another referendum on EU membership, whose outcome is not predictable, but if it ended in Leave again, the crisis would re-erupt.
But even a Labour victory would not solve the crisis of the British state. Why? Because the SNP would require as part of an agreement to form a coalition government (or to even provide “confidence-and-supply” support) that a second referendum on Scottish independence be held. So, in the event of a possible yes pro-independence vote in Scotland, which would likely trigger similar moves in Wales and for the reunification of Ireland, we would be headed for territorial breakup of the British state.
AS:
What will be the impact of all of this on the EU itself?
ND: Sadly, the Brexit crisis has strengthened the EU against any dissenters. We should remember that the EU is a neoliberal, undemocratic, and anti-migrant institution entirely set up for the benefit of the European capitalist classes, especially those in its dominant countries like Germany and France. That’s why so many countries like Greece, which had borne the brunt of EU austerity policies, had considered breaking with it.
But the Brexit crisis has scared them away from doing that. Governments and parties in the member states look at the mess Britain finds itself in and don’t want to end up in that position. They may lobby for reforms, but no one is going to imitate Britain now. Even some of the right-wing parties that are hostile to the EU have dropped that demand. Even they are no longer talking about leaving.
AS:
What will this mean for Britain’s ruling class, its parties, and its state?
ND: The bourgeoisie is in a profound and organic crisis. It lacks a coherent political representative that can implement its general interests. The Tory Party is now under the control of the buffoon Johnson. He is backed and funded by a narrow faction of capitalists consisting mainly of hedge-fund financiers, not a broad cross section of the capitalist class, and the former want his government to serve their narrow interests.
This is a dangerous situation for the ruling class; since Adam Smith, their most astute intellectuals have always argued that it was a mistake to let one small group of capitalists dominate, because they will do things against the interests of the whole class. And Johnson and his hedge-fund sponsors are already undercutting the interests of manufacturing and finance capital, who support the EU to gain access to cheap migrant labor and European financial institutions.
But the ruling class does not have an alternative party to the Tories at this point. The Lib Dems would like to be a representative party of capital, but they have yet to prove themselves capable of that. This is actually a very serious crisis for the ruling class. This is not a one-off episode, but the end of the long process of a crisis of the political representation of ruling-class interests in Britain.
In reality, there is not a single party that’s strong across the whole of the UK the way the Whigs and Tories, then Tories and Labor used to be. The Tories’ base has shrunk to a base mainly in the south of England. Labour has lost Scotland to the SNP. And minor parties like the Lib Dems and Greens have eaten away at the edges of these parties.
One positive impact of this whole crisis is that it’s finally put paid to any idea that Britain is an important world power. The ruling class has proved itself unable to run its own country, let alone maintain its status as an imperialist power. A good example of its decline was its incapacity to do anything when Iran seized a British flagged ship in the Persian Gulf.
So, Brexit has thrown the British ruling class, its parties, its state, and really its existence as a nation-state into crisis. But this won’t necessarily play out in the favor of the working class and oppressed groups, unless the Left is prepared to take advantage of the crisis as an opportunity to put forward an alternative socialist agenda.
AS:
So that raises the question of what the Left should do amidst the seemingly unending Brexit crisis.
ND: To be honest we’re in a very difficult situation. Unlike in the Scottish independence referendum, the radical left failed to hegemonize the argument for Leave. Consequently, the center left immediately associate you with Farage and the right. It becomes even impossible to talk about the EU and its actual nature because all opposition to it is wrongly identified with that of the populist right.
I don’t think a general election is a solution of any of our problems in a broader sense, but it might make it possible to break out of the sense that Brexit is the only issue of our time. Even crashing out would obviously cause huge problems, but at least then Brexit is over, and we can start saying, “You put us into this mess, these are the demands – above all, protection of jobs – we want met as trade unionists and working-class people.”
Then we can focus attention on the pressing issues of our time, which have been subordinated to Brexit. The climate struggle is a central one and a sign of hope for the future. There have been big actions happening, and then there will be the climate strike on September 20.
The Left should be fully behind this. It is a strike, after all! I think one of the things that is fascinating is that social movements like climate justice and the women’s movement have resurrected the idea of striking. Unions should join the action on September 20, even if just for a lunch break, and in the process recover for themselves the idea of striking.
There are also hopeful signs of a recovery of industrial action, but we’re coming up from a low level of strikes. Just last year, they had dropped to the lowest level in a hundred years. But conditions have grown so bad that now a lot of young workers are willing to strike, leading to an uptick in actions so far this year with more coming, including a possible strike of university lecturers in the fall.
There is also anti-war activism against saber-rattling against Iran. I don’t think there will be war with Iran, but we have to remain vigilant. And, of course, we have to protest Johnson and the Tories. This has already started – there were several demos across the UK last week, including three in London involving around ten thousand mostly young people.
In all of this, simply raising slogans like “Bring down the Tories,” without specifying how, is less than helpful. At this point, only a general election seems to be capable of doing that, especially if Labour manages to present a broader program. But, in reality, until there’s some kind of resolution to Brexit, we are stuck in a log jam.
 






Brexit, the European Union, and the Left
Costas Lapavitsas’s The Left Case Against the EU (Polity, 2019) is recognized as the leading work advocating Lexit, the left-wing case for Brexit, and for nations leaving the European Union more generally. In light of current Conservative British Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s commitment to exit the European Union by October 31, even if it means a no-deal Brexit, the role of the left takes on growing importance. Moreover, this raises issues of the European Union generally, including the dominance of neoliberalism within it and the question of German hegemony. Given the importance of these issues, we are publishing two assessments of Lapavitsas’s book followed by his extensive response.

Socialist Internationalism Against the European Union, by Neil Davidson.
Navigating the Brexit Strait, by Andy Storey.
Learning from Brexit, by Costas Lapavitsas.

– the Editors
Neil Davidson lectures in Sociology with the School of Social and Political Science at the University of Glasgow.



*
Those on the left generally take one of four attitudes toward the European Union (EU). [1] These are, of course, rarely found in absolutely pure form and there is inevitably some overlap. [2] The first, which was central to the Remain vote in the United Kingdom, sees the EU as a largely beneficent organization (“although of course it is not perfect”), which exists primarily to prevent war in Europe, protect the environment, ensure workers’ rights, counter U.S. influence, facilitate free movement, and resist the populist far right. [3] When anti-Brexit demonstrators hold up banners proclaiming “We Love EU,” it is this imaginary institution that they have in mind, not the actually existing EU.
The second attitude is narrower, almost entirely fixated on the rise of the populist far right, which in the United Kingdom was partly responsible for calling the referendum on EU membership in the first place and which has grown as a result of the ensuing political chaos. In this perspective, Brexit is purely a project of the right, premised on antimigrant racism, and should be opposed on those grounds alone – the actual nature of the EU is almost irrelevant. Indeed, some proponents of this position are critical of the role the EU plays for European capital and argue that, if Brexit had been on the left’s terms, the dismantling of the EU would have been on the agenda. [4] But given the absence of the left, we must adopt a lesser evil approach in the face of the imminent threat of fascism.
In response to these attitudes, it is worth asking why far-right parties – the majority of which are not in fact fascist – have arisen across the EU, including in the supposedly social democratic wonderlands of Sweden and Denmark. What both positions ignore, of course, is the symbiotic relationship between the embedded social neoliberalism of the EU (and the governments of the member states) and the rise of the populist far right, particularly the way in which the social conditions created by the former are a breeding ground for the latter. Remaining or rejoining the EU would not in itself alter these conditions and would simply further enable the far right to justify its betrayal.
The third and by far most widely held attitude is more realistic than either of these. It starts precisely from an understanding of the way in which the EU has helped sustain the neoliberal order and, in some cases, even acknowledges the democratic deficit within its institutions. Often, the focus of critique is not the EU itself, but the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and the euro, the establishment of which is seen as a disastrous wrong turn in a hitherto commendable internationalist project. Nevertheless, the political conclusions drawn, although varying in their radicalism, all tend toward a remain and reform agenda that, at most, would involve withdrawal from and perhaps even the dissolution of the EMU. [5] Possibly the most powerful statement regarding this position has been given by former Syriza Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis, whose autobiographical account of how Greece was subjected to an austerity regime of unparalleled savagery by EU institutions, above all the European Central Bank, nevertheless concludes with a plea for “constructive disobedience” within the EU. [6]
The fourth and least common attitude overlaps in many respects with the third, particularly in relation to the EMU. It is, however, far more pessimistic about the possibility of reform in a left-wing direction. Consequently, adherents argue that radical governments must be prepared to leave the EMU and even the EU itself as a prelude to the establishment of new alliances based on a radical, democratic alternative to begin the transition to socialism. [7]
The latest addition to this small body of literature is The Left Case Against the EU by Costas Lapavitsas. Like Varoufakis, Lapavitsas is Greek and represented Syriza in the Hellenic Parliament between January and August 2015 before leaving to form Popular Unity in disgust at his former party’s capitulation to the troika – the consortium of the European Commission, European Central Bank, and International Monetary Fund. Unlike Varoufakis, however, he has no illusions in reforming the EU and demonstrates this with reference to the qualified majority voting procedures within the European Council, the body charged with outlining the EU’s overall direction and tasks. [8] Lapavitsas has also studied and worked in the United Kingdom for nearly thirty years, and is currently Professor of Economics at the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London. In other words, he has first-hand experience of the states occupying wildly contrasting positions within the EU. Despite Greece being subjected to extreme suffering at the hands of EU institutions, the majority of politicians and – more to the point – people still want their country to remain a member. The United Kingdom, in contrast, has been allowed exceptional levels of indulgence, involving a number of opt-outs and special arrangements, but nevertheless contains a (small) majority who voted to leave. Yet, as Lapavitsas writes, although the EU is unable to treat a powerful (but non-core) state like the United Kingdom in the same way as Greece, the negotiations over Brexit have nevertheless been “instructive”: “The EU has assumed an implacable attitude, particularly with regard to the power of the ECJ [European Court of Justice] and the power of the acquis communautaire [the body of EU law].” [9]
His earlier cowritten book, Against the Troika, was more focused on the eurozone, although it raised the possibility of left-led member states “tak[ing] the path of confrontational exit” that required “political legitimacy and active popular support, if it is to be handled successfully by a government of the left.” However, the book also contained a warning: “Note that a confrontational exit could also be managed by a nationalist and authoritarian government, but this would be disastrous for working people because it would involve taking oppressive political measures, and it would probably shift the bulk of the costs on wage labour and the middle class.” [10] Some of the new book repeats arguments from this earlier work, but now, in the aftermath of the Greek debacle, his critiques of left responses to the EU are sharper.
The book begins with a brief chapter setting out the problems associated with the positions held by a majority of the left, in which Lapavitsas makes a central point: “The EU and EMU are not a neutral set of governing bodies, institutions, and practices that could potentially serve any socio-political forces, parties, or governments, with any political agenda, depending on their relative strength. Rather, they are structured in the interests of capital and against labour.” [11] The second chapter summarizes the development of the EU and its predecessors. Like earlier authors such as Perry Anderson and Wolfgang Streeck, he sees the current incarnation of the EU as approximating the model of interstate federalism drawn up by Friedrich von Hayek in 1939 – not because it has been consciously modeled on his work, but because of the structures that have grown up with the EU are intended to have the same effect. On the one hand, there are rules, which forbid certain economic strategies and make others mandatory (except, of course, for the most powerful core member states like Germany and France) in order to prevent politicians from deviating from the neoliberal path for electoral reasons. On the other hand, there are institutions, the most democratic of which (the Parliament) have the least power and the most powerful of which (the Council, the Commission, the Court of Justice, and the Central Bank) are not democratic at all, meaning that decision-making is unconstrained by the need to pander to electorates. [12]
The main focus of the book is, however, more recent developments and, in particular, three main themes, each with a dedicated chapter of their own: the ascendancy of Germany, replacing France as the hegemonic power, increasingly through the neoliberal era, but especially since reunification; the way in which the EU used the specific form taken by the financial crisis of 2007–09 (the Eurozone Crisis of 2010) to impose an intensified form of neoliberalism, especially on the periphery; and the fate of one of those peripheral countries, namely Greece, used as an example of what would befall “delinquent” member states that failed to behave in a so-called disciplined and efficient manner.
These chapters are perhaps the most concentrated and clearly written expression of the left-wing anti-EU position currently available, but in the final chapter, where Lapavitsas sets out his perspective on what the left needs to do, even those in broad agreement with his position (like the present reviewer) might begin to feel a certain uneasiness. Lapavitsas has made a powerful case against left illusions either in the existing EU or some putative reformed version, but he undermines it with some of his concluding arguments.
One of these concerns the attitude that any left government would have to take to the EU if it is seriously committed to implementing its program in a way that Syriza was not. The problem here is not that Lapavitsas fails to call for the immediate revolutionary overthrow of global capitalism, or even just the Greek variety. He quite rightly dismisses the position taken by the Greek Communist Party (KKE), which rendered it “irrelevant”:
The party failed entirely to propose a political program that would confront the key class questions of the crisis, that is, the debt and the Euro. Instead it sought refuge in ultra-leftism, largely implying that the Greek crisis could be dealt with only by overturning capitalism, a step that would naturally take the country out of the EU and the EMU. The party was quick to add, however, that leaving the EMU, or even the EU, without “popular power” would be disastrous for Greece. [13]
The rhetoric of the KKE was simply a way of avoiding any actual engagement in the here and now. Clearly, any serious strategy would have to involve a series of measures to give strength and confidence to the working class and the oppressed while preparing for a showdown that might be some way off – a real transitional program, in other words. The problem is rather with the components of such a program that Lapavitsas sets out:
Faced with EU hostility…the Left should reject the single market and its institutional and legal framework. It should argue in favour of controls on the movement of goods, services, capital, and people, in the absence of which it would be impossible to apply a radical programme in the direction of socialism.
For Lapavitsas, this will inevitably lead to a break with the EU and the possibility of “re-establishing national jurisdiction” and “recoup[ing] popular and national sovereignty.” [14] Why the concern with “national sovereignty”?
For the plebeian classes of Europe, sovereignty has never been anathema. On the contrary, it is understood as the power to make and apply laws, to design and implement social and economic policy, and to elect and hold to account those who administer those laws and policies. For workers and the poor, sovereignty has a popular dimension representing the right to be consulted but also to refuse government policies. Popular sovereignty goes directly against the fetishism of the economy as a technocratic entity, while also protecting a cultural and political community from the will of another. [15]
Lapavitsas is not alone in emphasizing the need for a return to national sovereignty. [16] My difficulty with these arguments is not – in his case, anyway – because I suspect that they involve consciously collapsing into a left nationalist position, or worse, a version of socialism in one country. On the contrary, Lapavitsas is quite clear in his concluding passages that “exiting the EU need not necessarily be a nationalist step ... On the contrary, it could signal the emergence a radical internationalism that would draw on domestic strength and reject the dysfunctional and hegemonic structures of the EU.” [17] But by making immigration controls (“putting an end to free movement”) part of the restoration of sovereignty, it has effectively conceded and thereby legitimized part of the right-wing argument that migrants are the problem. Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour Party has done this in the United Kingdom and it was a disastrous mistake for, quite apart from any moral considerations, the right will always be able to outbid the left on this issue.
The left should certainly reject the EU’s four freedoms (of capital, services, goods, and labor), not by rejecting freedom of movement altogether, but by widening it to encompass everyone who wishes to move and then arguing for this internationalist position among the working class. One of the problems of the British radical left is that it was not large enough to do so in a way that could have made the Leave vote expressive of a socialist perspective. Unfortunately, Lapavitsas simply claims that anti-migrant racism was not a key driver behind Brexit:
There is no doubt that the working class and the plebeian strata have generally tended to support Brexit. The vote to Leave became a vote against the dominant wing of the British historical bloc, which had clearly expressed its preference for Remain. It was a vote by proxy against austerity, poor jobs and the decline in welfare provision, particularly since the great crisis of 2007–9. Moreover, far from representing a surrender to racism, rabid nationalism, and right-wing authoritarianism, the referendum facilitated the radicalization of British politics in an unexpected way. The Conservative Party barely won the general election of 2017, and the real victor was a revived Labour Party, with a manifesto based on a social democratic programme opposing austerity and even calling for nationalization of the railways and other resources. [18]
However, as Danny Dorling and Sally Tomlinson have shown, the majority of Leave voters were not “the working class and plebeian strata,” but middle-class people living in the south of England outside of London. Many of these voters cited migration as a reason, even though the areas involved had relatively few migrants compared to the actual working-class urban areas that largely voted Remain, such as Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle, and Glasgow. [19] In other words, there are two issues here that Lapavitsas avoids confronting and that make the situation highly complex. One is that many – certainly not all – Leave voters did do so for racist, antimigrant reasons, although the majority were not members of the working class. The other is that this unfortunately also means that at least a section of Remain voters who are working class have illusions in the EU. Any serious strategy for the left has to begin by recognizing these problems as a precondition for addressing them.
The final criticism I wish to make concerns the expectations Lapavitsas has of the nation-state itself. It is true that, even after forty years of neoliberalism and ten years of resurgent right-wing populism, virtually any European state is more democratic than the EU, partly because the latter is not (and never will be) a state, but mainly because of the structural impediments to democracy that Lapavitsas explains so clearly. Nevertheless, the classical Marxist argument about capitalist states is that there are very definite limits to how far they can be used to undermine the capitalist mode of production itself, regardless of how radical any one government may be. Seeking to leave the EU and implement left social democratic reforms, let alone beginning the transition to socialism, would almost immediately find itself blocked by the state apparatus – another reason why national sovereignty is largely illusionary, so long as the sovereignty of the bourgeois state is unimpeded. In any event, a break with capital could not be successfully attempted in a single state, or even several acting serially. Pierre Dardot and Christian Lavall argue that what is required is “an international democratic bloc”:
Not a cartel of parties, like the Left Front in France or Syriza in Greece – forms that have revealed their limits – but a bloc composed of all political forces plus trade union, community, ecological, scholarly and cultural organisations ... The international dimension would not be subsequently added to the national struggle, but would be co-extensive with it. The second lesson to be drawn from Alex Tsipras’s capitulation is precisely that we must beware the illusion that a national electoral victory, even one derived from massive social mobilizations, is enough to change the situation. Once again, the weakness of that government was that it let itself be trapped in a face-off with the Eurocratic oligarchy, without seeking to construct a balance of forces at a continental level.
As these authors insist, it will be necessary to counterpose Europe to the EU:
No left-wing government in one country can break out of the monetary and normative iron corset on its own. It can create and widen rifts, lead the way – but it will soon require the support of other governments and the backing of social movements in other countries. The point is therefore to construct the conditions for such solidarity now, rather than cultivate the illusion of a return to national sovereignty. [20]
For me, these arguments complete those of Lapavitsas and point to a way of overcoming some of the weaknesses in his conclusions. In spite of these, his work is a major contribution to the literature of the anti-EU left, the central chapters of which set out with compelling clarity the realities of the European project.
* * *
Notes
1. In order to avoid littering the text with initials and acronyms, I will refer to the EU throughout, although I am obviously aware that it has gone through several incarnations and name changes.
2. By the left, I am excluding centrists who admire the EU precisely because it embodies social neoliberalism; see, for example, Mark Leonard, Why Europe Will Run the 21st Century (London: Fourth Estate, 2005).
3. See, for example, Will Hutton, The World We’re In (London: Little, Brown, 2002), pp. 237–351.
4. See, for example, Neil Faulkner with Samir Dathi, Phil Hearse, and Seema Syeda, Creeping Fascism: Brexit, Trump, and the Rise of the Far Right (London: Public Reading Rooms, 2017), p. 16.
5. For a selection, see: Ulrich Beck, German Europe (Cambridge: Polity, 2013); Larry Elliot and Dan Atkinson, Europe Isn’t Working (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2016); Susan George, We the Peoples of Europe (London: Pluto, 2008); and Claus Offe, Europe Entrapped (Cambridge: Polity, 2015).
6. Yanis Varoufakis, Adults in the Room: My Battle with Europe’s Deep Establishment (London: Bodley Head, 2017), p. 485.
7. See, for example, Guglielmo Carchedi, For Another Europe: A Close Analysis of European Economic Integration (London: Verso, 2001).
8. Costas Lapavitsas, The Left Case Against the EU (Cambridge: Polity, 2019), pp. 121–22.
9. Lapavitsas, The Left Case Against, p. 139.
10. Heiner Flassbeck and Costas Lapavitsas, Against the Troika: Crisis in the Eurozone (London: Verso, 2015), 80, 81. Interestingly, the preface to this book was written by Paul Mason before his retreat to the Remain and Reform position.
11. Lapavitsas, The Left Case Against, p. 11.
12. Lapavitsas, The Left Case Against, pp. 14–19. See also the discussions in Perry Anderson, Origins and Outcomes, in The New Old World (London: Verso, 2009), pp. 30–32, 64–66, and in Wolfgang Streeck, Buying Time: The Delayed Crisis of Democratic Capitalism (London: Verso, 2014), pp. 97–103. For Hayek’s original position, see Fredrick von Hayek, “he Economic Conditions of Interstate Federalism,” New Commonwealth Quarterly 5, no. 2 (1939).
13. Lapavitsas, The Left Case Against, p. 106.
14. Lapavitsas, The Left Case Against, p. 137.
15. Lapavitsas, The Left Case Against, p. 130.
16. See, for example, Streeck, Buying Time, pp. 177–81, 185–89.
17. Lapavitsas, The Left Case Against, p. 140.
18. Lapavitsas, The Left Case Against, p. 139.
19. Danny Dorling and Sally Tomlinson, Rule Britannia: Brexit and the End of Empire (London: Biteback, 2019), pp. 28–35. There are some problems with Dorling and Tomlinson’s categories of social class, notably the C1 occupational category that they treat as “lower middle class,” but which (in Marxist terms anyway) is part of the working class. However, this is not significant enough numerically to undermine their overall assessment.
20. Pierre Dardot and Christian Laval, Never-Ending Nightmare: The Neoliberal Assault on Democracy (London: Verso, 2019), pp. 166–67.
 






The British political system has been thrown into turmoil since the summer of 2016, when a narrow majority of voters supported a referendum in favor of Britain leaving the European Union (EU). The Conservative Party government headed by Prime Minister Theresa May has been negotiating with the EU over the terms of “Brexit” since March 2017, when Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty was triggered, giving the UK two years to leave.
While May reached an agreement with the EU, she failed to get it approved by her fellow Tories, let alone Parliament, despite three attempts. After a couple of short extensions on the deadline for getting it passed, the EU has now granted a delay until October 31. But it is not at all clear that May will be able to reach a deal with her party and the Democratic Unionist Party – the Northern Irish loyalists whose support she relies on to stay in office.
This crisis has thrown Britain’s major political parties into deep turmoil. May is, for all intents and purposes, a zombie prime minister who faces a revolt from within the Conservatives and who could easily be toppled and replaced with a new party leader. The Labour Party has also been deeply divided by Brexit; its Eurosceptic leader Jeremy Corbyn has tried to balance between those who support remaining in the EU, both in Parliament and among Labour’s membership, and others who support leaving.
As a result, British politics and indeed the British state and capitalism are trapped in a deep crisis with no end in sight. Ashley Smith here interviews Neil Davidson about the roots, politics, and trajectory of the battle over Brexit. Davidson is a member of Revolutionary Socialism in the Twenty-first Century across the UK, and RISE  –  Scotland’s Left Alliance, and is the author of numerous books, including How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions? (Haymarket, 2012) and We Cannot Escape History: States and Revolutions (Haymarket, 2015).



*
Ashley Smith:
The EU just gave a long extension to Brexit negotiations until Halloween to give the British government time to come up with an agreement and pass it in Parliament. Why did this happen and what will be the impact of the long delay?
Neil Davidson: The first reason for the delay is the failure of Theresa May and Parliament to vote in favor of any plan. The EU is itself divided between hards and softs. The six-month extension is a compromise between the two – between Germany’s leader Angela Merkel, who is willing to allow an even longer time to negotiate some kind of resolution and France’s leader Emanuel Macron, who is much more impatient to force a conclusion to the crisis over Brexit.
No one in the EU wants a hard Brexit or no-deal Brexit. At the same time Germany and France, who really run the EU, want to make sure that Britain does not set a precedent that leads other countries to leave. So, they want a deal that is painful but not so painful as to damage the economies of EU members themselves.
They hope to sort out a deal like “Norway Plus,” which would allow Britain to remain in the Customs Union but have no power in decision-making over the EU. Basically, they gave Britain the extension time to sort themselves out, agree on a deal, and pass it through Parliament. But, because of the deep divisions within both the Tory and Labour parties, I don’t think that they will be able to resolve the crisis by Halloween.
AS:
A lot of people, even on the left, think the EU is a progressive formation. What was the EU set up to do, and what is its nature?
ND: The EU developed over many decades since the end of World War II. (I’m just going to call it the EU regardless of earlier forms and names it took.) It was set up for four reasons. First, France wanted to avoid another war with Germany like the three they had fought over the previous seventy years. They wanted to establish rules that would separate economic competition from geopolitical and military competition. That’s the element of truth in the idea that the EU has kept peace since 1945.
Second, the United States wanted the EU established as a political and economic complement to the NATO military alliance. This fact should demonstrate that the EU was never an alternative to the United States. In fact, Washington helped set it up to bind Europe together economically and to integrate it with the United States as opposed to with Russia and its satellites in Eastern Europe. It was part of Washington’s Cold War imperial project.
Third, the EU was designed to avoid protectionism within Europe. The United States, Germany, and France thought such limitations on trade were one of the causes of the Great Depression. So, from the very beginning, free trade and globalization were immanent dynamics in the EU.
Fourth, the EU took shape during the postwar boom – the greatest boom in capitalist history – when capital needed outlets for investment beyond the boundaries of individual states at a time when de-colonization meant that this was no longer possible across the Global South in the way it had been before 1945. The EU provided a mechanism for that to take place within Western Europe itself.
Given the illusions many on the left have about the EU, it’s ironic that its structure corresponds quite closely to the model of “interstate federalism” devised by Frederick Von Hayek in 1939. Hayek, in many ways the intellectual forerunner of neoliberalism, proposed that economic activity in a federal Europe should be governed by a set of nonnegotiable rules presided over by a group of unelected bureaucrats, without any elected governments and irrational voters getting in the way.
That’s how the EU is actually structured. The institutions that are least democratic – like the European Commission, the European Council, the Central Bank, and the Court of Justice – have the most power, while those that are at least nominally democratic – like the European Parliament – have the least.
Thus, at its core, it’s a totally undemocratic institution. It’s more undemocratic than any of the nation-states that compose it, including Britain. It was designed to prevent social democrats from infringing on the logic of capital in Europe. Its structures make it almost impossible for left-wing reformists like Jeremy Corbyn to implement his program in the EU.
Over time the EU has also become a thoroughly neoliberal institution. After the end of the postwar boom in the 1970s, it eliminated whatever space was open for Keynesian policies, adopted neoliberalism, and enshrined it in the 1992 Maastricht Treaty. This makes a program of “reform from within” all but impossible today.
With the EU expansion after the end of the Cold War, it went on to establish a highly unequal set of relations between member states. Germany stands at the top, with France, Britain, and Italy below it and in that order. These states dominate the weaker ones like Greece, Portugal, and all those in Eastern Europe. The crisis exposed these structural inequalities. Germany imposed austerity measures on weaker states and their economies, throwing countries like Greece into depressions.
There are many other features of the EU that prove its reactionary nature. It is a deeply racist formation. Just look at how it bars refugees from entry, leaving them to drown by the thousands in the Mediterranean. And in many ways, especially in its economic relationship with the Global South, it is an imperialist power in its own right.
Thus, the EU is a capitalist institution that’s neither democratic nor progressive. It has some basic rules like workers’ rights and environmental rights, but they are usually minimal and often weaker than those of individual member states. And its weaker rules on these questions are used to erode stronger ones in more social democratic member states.
AS:
What has been the majority viewpoint among the British capitalist class on membership in the EU?
ND: British capitalists on the whole have always been in favor of the EU. They saw it as a replacement for their colonies, which they had used as key sites for investment. After they lost those, they turned to the EU as a new site for investment and trade. British capital remains in favor of remaining in the EU today.
There are two exceptions to this rule at the opposite extremes of that capitalist class. First, many among the smaller capitalists, shading into the petty bourgeoisie proper, support Brexit. They do so because they are negatively impacted by the EU regulations on health and safety, maternity leave, and so on, which they can least afford. These form part of the base of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP) and the Tory Brexiteers.
Second, some large financial capitalists also support Brexit. They tend not to be based in the City of London nor are they oriented toward investment in the EU. Instead they are oriented toward Asia, the United States, and the Middle East and don’t see the importance of the EU. But these two extremes are dissident wings of the capitalist class. Most of the core of British capital in finance, manufacturing, and service want to remain in the EU.
AS:
Why then did the Tory Party, the traditional party of capital in Britain, opt for Brexit? How have Labour and its party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, positioned themselves on the issue?
ND: The Tory Party is not acting in the interests of British capital in pushing through Brexit. This dereliction of its duty is the result of how ruling-class parties have evolved in the neoliberal era. Usually capitalist parties at least try to run states in the interests of capital as a whole.
They are supposed to come up with a program not in the interests of this or that section of capital. As Adam Smith argues in The Wealth of Nations, at the very dawn of the system, capitalist parties and not capitalists should run the state, because individual capitalists tend to pursue their own selfish interests. They don’t think about capital’s collective interests.
That’s why, as Marx and many others argued, capitalist classes, their parties, and their states tend to be semiautonomous. This changed under neoliberalism in Britain. During Thatcher’s reign, the Tory Party and a particular section of capital – financial capital – became ever closer, and that began to distort the capacity of the party to represent British capital as a whole.
Moreover, ever since Thatcher the Tory leadership has progressively degenerated in their capacity to think about developing a program to solve problems. They have been recycling the same ideas for four decades. On top of that, since the Poll Tax revolt of the late 1980s, they’ve not faced real opposition from organized labor, social movements, or even the Labour Party, which fully accepted and implemented neoliberalism until Corbyn took leadership.
The Great Recession changed all of this. Neoliberalism has stopped delivering for a capitalist class that desperately needs solutions to restore growth and profits. But the Tories have not been able to come up with any. As a result, three things have happened.
First, as I mentioned earlier, the capitalist class has splintered, with the petty bourgeois and a small section of finance capital deciding to call for leaving the EU, even though it’s not in the general interests of the class.
Second, the leadership of the Tory Party started denouncing the EU to fend off a challenge from their right by the nationalist and bigoted UKIP. This party had gained in polls and seats in Parliament based on a call for Brexit and attacks on immigrants and Muslims. The standing Tory Prime Minister David Cameron adopted much of the rhetoric of UKIP for narrow electoral gain.
But he did not think through the impact of bad-mouthing the EU and denouncing immigrants, which they were doing just to rally their base and get them to vote Conservative. It led Cameron into a total contradiction when it came to the vote on Brexit. After having denounced the EU, he then advocated a referendum vote to remain.
Third, a lot of Tory politicians are incompetent, ideologically driven, and incapable of thinking through the consequences of their rhetoric and policy proposals. This is a symptom of the decline of the quality of the ruling class – a global phenomenon, but one which for historical reasons is particularly acute in the UK. So, you have a perfect storm of divisions in the capitalist class over the EU, deep discontent in British society with neoliberal austerity, and ideological madness and political incompetence in the Tory Party.
In this context, Cameron made an idiotic decision. After nearly losing a referendum on Scottish independence, which terrified British capital, he then foolishly decided to stage yet another referendum on Brexit. Unbelievably, he thought he could win the vote to remain and sideline UKIP, even though he’d been bad-mouthing the EU for years as responsible for Britain’s problems.
We know the results. People angry over conditions in Britain narrowly voted to leave. The petty bourgeoisie voted to do so for narrow self-interest, racist contempt for immigrants, and British nationalist fantasies. Some working-class people fell for such rhetoric as well. At the same time a section of workers voted to leave as way of expressing their opposition to neoliberalism and austerity, which they associate with the EU.
On the other side, the capitalist class on the whole backed Remain. Other sections of the professional middle class and well-paid workers in places like London, Edinburgh, and Manchester voted to remain for good anti-racist reasons. But they also fell for ideological fantasies that the EU is progressive, anti-racist, and pro-migrant.
Corbyn and the Labour Party were caught in a contradiction. Corbyn stands in the tradition of Tony Benn and others, who long opposed the EU as a capitalist club. But he knows that the bulk of MPs supported Remain, and his base was divided between Leavers and Remainers. As a result, the party mildly supported Remain.
AS:
May’s failure to get a deal over Brexit and the long delay are likely to precipitate both a general election and a leadership fight in the Tory Party, right? What will happen to them in an election? What will happen in Labour, where Corbyn seems to be under massive pressure from Remainers and Leavers at the same time?
ND: Most of the sane elements of the Tory Party did not want a delay for Brexit, because they were worried it would trigger a general election, in which they know they would suffer one of the biggest defeats in their history. There will be a fight over party leadership in the run up to the elections.
A bunch of buffoons like Boris Johnson will stand for party leader. Four or five hardcore Brexiteers will run, while some soft-Brexit MPs will throw their hat in the ring. It’s not clear who will win, partly because of the procedure for elections. First, the party will organize an election among the MPs to narrow it down to two people, and then they put it to the Tory Party membership.
Many of those members are in the extreme wing of the Tory Party; most of them are over 60 and will probably vote for the most right-wing candidate possible. The more rational elements know that would be a disaster because they know that a right-wing leader would be totally unpopular in the general election.
It has often been noted that this is the worst crisis the Tory Party has suffered since the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, which struck down tariffs on imported grain. In fact, it’s worse. At least in 1846 it was clear what the two positions were; a minority of Tories were for repeal, against the party majority. In this case, there are no clear-sighted leaders in the party who have even a clue about how to get the bourgeoisie out of the mess they caused.
A lot of Tories are now saying that they are not just a Brexit party, that they stand for many other things. That is a sign that they realize that their position on Brexit is deeply damaging. Their absolute crisis over Brexit should be good news for us.
But the main electoral opposition to them, Labour, is also deeply divided. The Blairites, who are for remaining in the EU, have launched unrelenting attacks on Corbyn for months. They charged him with being an anti-Semite, and they have denounced him for his reluctance to aggressively campaign for Remain.
Their attempt to portray Corbyn as anti-Semitic and their assertion that anti-Semitism is rampant in the Labour Party are of course absurd. They are intentionally confusing Corbyn’s support for Palestinian rights with anti-Semitism. In reality, he has a long record of combining opposition to anti-Semitism with support for Palestine.
The charge that Labour is swamped with anti-Semites is just as dishonest. There are of course some anti-Semites in the party, but very few. There have been 673 allegations of anti-Semitism since April last year. Now, even if all of these were upheld – and 227 have already been thrown out for lack of evidence or because the accused were exonerated – that amounts to around 0.36 percent of the party’s current membership of 525,000. That should not surprise anyone; anti-Semites don’t tend to join left-wing social democratic parties.
Nevertheless, the Blairites, who are the majority of the MPs, weakened Corbyn with these attacks. They will do anything to get rid of Corbyn. So, Labour is deeply divided and it will be very difficult for the party to come up with a manifesto for either the upcoming EU election or a general election.
While the two main parties are deeply divided, other parties are in a better position politically. There are two anti-EU parties, UKIP and Nigel Farage’s new Brexit Party, with clear platforms. On the other hand, there are a range of parties supporting Remain, including the Scottish National Party (SNP), the Greens, and the Liberal Democrats, and as a result they too stand to gain in any future general election.
AS:
What are the dynamics behind the push for a new vote on Brexit? What are the class and social forces behind it? Will it happen, and what would be the likely result of a new vote?
ND: The main backers of Remain and a new vote on Brexit come from the big capitalists, the professional middle class, and sections of the well-paid working class. Each has different visions of the EU. The bourgeoisie wants to stay in the EU or secure a soft Brexit for their class interests and neoliberal project.
They have drawn behind them sections of middle- and working-class people who have illusions in the EU as a progressive and anti-racist institution. These forces came together in a mass march of hundreds of thousands of people – a million according to the organizers – on March 23 in London. Unfortunately, it was initiated and led by Blairites like Alistair Campbell and Tories like Michael Heseltine, who are on the side of capital.
In reaction to this push for a new vote to remain, Corbyn is trying to maintain a studied ambiguity about where exactly he stands. He supports the least bad Brexit possible, while all the time saying we need a general election, but has so far been silent on the question of a second referendum.
Opinion on the left is divided about a new referendum on whether to stay in the EU. Most people on the radical left think this would be disastrous. It would simply consolidate divisions and open the whole situation to charges from the right of betrayal of the original vote. I could see the case for a vote on the terms of departure from the EU.
But there has not been a serious proposal that could even come to a referendum. May’s proposal has gone down to defeat three times already and now has no hope of passage. Corbyn clearly wants a Norway Plus deal, which is the softest Brexit possible. But even on that he’s been quite evasive about whether he would put it to a popular vote.
The left liberal press like The Guardian support a new vote and claim that there’s a majority for Remain. That may be true, but if there is, it is only a small majority for Remain. If another referendum manages only a narrow reversal, it would be catastrophic. It would not resolve anything and would only deepen the polarization and harden it on each side.
AS:
What impact will the European elections have on all of this?
ND: The Tory Party is panicking about these elections because they are deeply afraid of losing them just as they would a general election. So, it may concentrate their minds and compel them to resolve Brexit to stop the European elections from taking place. But they have no proposal and no prospects of cutting a deal amongst themselves and their governmental partners.
So, barring some deus ex machina that helps them cut a deal over Brexit, they will have to participate in the elections, which they will lose and lose very badly. The most likely beneficiaries of these will be the smaller parties with clear positions on the EU. The SNP will do well, the Greens will do well, and so will the far-right parties, all at the expense of the Tories. Labour too will likely make some gains.
Labour is polling higher than the Tories in general. But Corbyn’s individual popularity is relatively low, lower even than that of May. If there were a general election, Labour would win, but it’s foolish to make predictions because things are so chaotic.
I think if Labour won it would still have to rely on the support of the Greens and especially the SNP to form a government. And that will produce divisions over the questions of the EU. There is, in other words, no simple political way out of the organic crisis Brexit has caused for the British state, its capitalist class, the Tory Party, and its various rival parties.
AS:
How will the fight over Brexit affect the EU?
ND: As I said earlier, the EU is of two minds on Brexit. On the one hand, they want to punish the British sufficiently scare anyone else away from doing an exit of their own. And they are succeeding in this; even right-wing governments and parties, who are mainly opposed to migrants, have dropped plans for leaving the EU because they do not want to suffer Britain’s fate.
On the other hand, the EU doesn’t want to be so punitive as to force a hard no-deal Brexit that would affect their economies. So, it is trying to get Britain to accept a Norway Plus deal. They would prefer this result because a no-deal Brexit would cause all sorts of problems, particularly in France where customs would hold up trucks trying to make deliveries in and out of Britain in long waiting lines.
Nevertheless, they don’t want to concede too much to Britain that would in any way compromise their neoliberal project. This is accentuated by the long history of EU frustration with Britain, based on the long time it took for British politicians to agree to join in the first place. Some European states, especially France, which under de Gaul criticized Britain for being too close to the United States, are particularly hard on Britain.
So, they will let Britain leave but on terms that preserve the project of the EU and intimidate any other member states from following them. But ironically, they might miss Britain, which the EU used to enact right-wing neoliberal policies particularly during the 1980s. Thatcher would make hard neoliberal demands, the EU would concede to her, implement the policies, and then turn around and blame Britain for them. But this was all a smokescreen. In reality, of course, the EU wanted these policies all along and used Britain as a Trojan horse to get them implemented.
AS:
What does this all mean for the neoliberal program of free trade globalization?
ND: Brexit is a sign that neoliberalism is weakening as a regime of accumulation or possibly coming to an end, not just in Europe but around the world. Protectionism is beginning to revive. Some of this is just rhetorical, but the conflict between the United States and China is a harbinger of things to come. I think we are probably in a transition to a new phase of capitalism.
This transition is going to last a long time. Think about the crisis of 1929; it took until after World War II for state capitalism and embedded social democracy to emerge out of the Great Depression. Or think about the transition to neoliberalism itself. The ruling class first articulated this strategy in the late 1970s, but it took a decade or two for it to be consolidated throughout the world system. So, it will take some time for a new strategy to replace neoliberalism.
I’m not sure what that new regime of accumulation will be, nor am I clear what range of options capitalism has now. We won’t know the real form of its replacement for a decade or two. At the moment, you’re seeing the ruling classes reviving old strategies from the 1930s, like tariffs.
The process of globalization, which began in 1945 and eventually led to neoliberalism, is now in retreat into regional blocs. The EU is one. China is trying to do similar things. So, the patterns are just beginning to emerge.
We also may see a movement toward protectionism by the economically less developed states in Europe. They may try and do this without leaving the EU through things like nationalization, which can be done at least temporarily. If they try to go further, they will face strong resistance by the top-tier powers like Germany and France.
But this is all speculative. The main point is that Brexit is a signal that neoliberalism is played out as a strategy of accumulation. Capitalists and their states will have to come up with an alternative in the coming years.
AS:
Finally, the radical left seems to have been divided, confused, and unable to impact the crisis over Brexit. Are there any signs of this changing? How should the revolutionary left position itself today?
ND: British politics is highly contradictory right now. On the one hand, there is the unending crisis around Brexit, which frankly the radical left has yet to figure out how to intervene in with any degree of coherence and influence. On the other hand, there are signs of hope, especially the Extinction Rebellion, which has essentially closed down the centers of London and Edinburgh for days, with hundreds of young people arrested.
This action has come on the heels of the massive protests and school strikes against climate change. These have been some of the biggest actions since the anti-war protests in the 2000s. But they are different from those protests and earlier ones. Young people, largely from outside the traditional parties and organizations of the left, are initiating these demonstrations.
The anti-war protests would not have happened without the British Socialist Workers Party initiating them through Stop the War. The anti-Poll Tax campaign of the late 1980s in Scotland would not have happened without the old Militant tendency. Today, these struggles are not being initiated and led by left-wing groups.
That indicates that we’re coming to an end of a particular way of building revolutionary organization and its relationship with social and labor movements. We’ve tested that method for half a century but have not managed to succeed. That’s one reason why Kautskyism is making a bit of a comeback, and, although that’s not the answer, it’s clear that we have to do something differently, because it’s not going to happen like 1917 in Russia.
Now, how to do that is a question. We need intellectual clarity about what we’re doing, first and foremost. The approach of the British International Socialists back in the early 1960s is more like what we need to do today. It was about 500 people, it had real analysis of the dynamics of the system, and it was open and fluid and really more “Luxemburgist” than Leninist. So, we need revolutionary organization of that sort.
In the movements we need to gather together people who agree and want to collaborate, regardless of organizational affiliation, around shared viewpoints to push demands on a left government if it comes to power. This is classic united-front tactics, and it might be easier in Scotland than Britain as a whole. But we have to work together on what we agree on, like anti-austerity, freedom of movement, more democracy, defense and expansion of the welfare state, and so on.
We have come to the end of the process of party building that began in the 1960s. We are in a new phase and there are new movements. Of course, there are similarities with the past, and there will always be as long as capitalism exists; but the left should stop expecting tomorrow to be like yesterday and the day before that.
There are new things happening, like the struggle over climate change. And the most interesting thing today is how these new movements are adopting working-class methods of struggle. Just look at how climate activists, the International Women’s Strike, and immigrants’ rights groups have all turned to striking as the way to advance their demands.
That’s interesting because it means that working-class methods of organizing are developing within the movement, but not as a result of initiatives from the unions or left organizations. It’s coming up organically, with people realizing that if you want to have an impact you have to shut down institutions and workplaces by striking. Out of this dynamic, we have to find our way to build new forms of revolutionary organization and parties to fight for transformation of the system into socialism.
Ashley Smith is a socialist writer and activist in Burlington, Vermont. He has written in numerous publications including Truthout, International Socialist Review, Socialist Worker, ZNet, Jacobin, and New Politics. He is currently working on a book for Haymarket Books entitled Socialism and Anti-Imperialism.
 






Neil Davidson, winner of last year’s Isaac Deutscher memorial prize, explains how the capitalist system was both progressive and destructive



THE QUESTION of what we owe to the capitalist system is important. In the anti-capitalist movement there is a tendency to argue that capitalism is simply a system of exploitation and oppression, and that nothing good has ever come out of it.
I want to go back to Marx and Engels, and argue that socialism was impossible before capitalism.
Their Communist Manifesto gives a positive account of capitalism:
“The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up fresh ground for the rising bourgeoisie.
“The East Indian and Chinese markets, the colonisation of America, trade with the colonies, the increase in the means of exchange and in commodities generally, gave to commerce, to navigation, to industry, an impulse never before known, and thereby, to the revolutionary element in the tottering feudal society, a rapid development.”
In Capital, written 20 years later, Marx writes:
“The discovery of gold and silver in America, the extirpation, enslavement and entombment in mines of the aboriginal population, the beginning of the conquest and looting of the East Indies, the turning of Africa into a warren for the commercial hunting of black-skins, signalised the rosy dawn of the era of capitalist production ...
“The treasures captured outside Europe by undisguised looting, enslavement, and murder, floated back to the mother country and were there turned into capital.”
The second quote is much more negative. That isn’t because Marx and Engels changed their minds.
It is because capitalism is simultaneously dynamic and destructive. It is both the best thing that has ever happened to the human race, and the worst.
I want to look at four things that are produced by capitalism, but which could be turned against it.
One is the development of the forces of production, the second is the development of the working class, the third is the development of a global culture and the fourth is the Enlightenment.
Without the development of the forces of production nothing else would be possible. The forces of production include two things. Firstly, the means of production. This is not just technology, but also the ability of humans to work and the techniques used. Secondly, the labour process, which is how human beings put the means of production to work.
The forces of production exist within different societies. Under capitalism the forces of production have developed much more rapidly than in any previous form of society. This has produced real benefits.
In 1700, 1600 and 1500, people in England lived an average of 37 years. Now it’s about 80 years. That’s because of our ability to feed and clothe ourselves, and so on.
This is true even in the Third World. From 1939 to 1970 average life expectancy went from 32 years, which it had been since the time of the Roman Empire, to 49 years.
A system can still develop the forces of production even after it has ceased to be progressive.
Capitalism stopped being progressive when socialism became possible, at some point in the final decades of the 19th century, or the first decades of the 20th century.
But the development of the forces of production still means something to us. Until the mid-1960s my family lived in two rooms with an outside toilet.
My mum had to use a mangle to dry our clothes.
All four of us slept in the same room, until we moved to a fabulous council house outside Aberdeen. It had a garden front and back, a fridge, a washing machine.
Those things freed people like my mother to work full time but they also contributed to her health and happiness.
It’s not true that we support every form of capitalist technology. Socialists would have nothing to do with nuclear power. But other technologies, like tractors, are needed by millions of people in the Third World.
The second thing that capitalism has given us is the working class. The working class is a product of the development of the forces of production in the late 18th and early 19th century. The working class is a class without property. Workers do have belongings – fridges, mowers and so on – but these aren’t forces of production.
Contrast that with the bourgeoisie who, even while they were still oppressed under feudalism, had their own property and exploited the working class. Their coming to power simply replaced one form of exploitation with another.
The working class has to behave collectively because it is organised collectively. The great demand of peasant struggles is to divide up the land between them. But workers can’t divide up a factory or office.
These have to be operated collectively.
The working class is the most significant class in the world numerically. They have grown from 1.6 billion in 1970 to 2.8 billion in 2000. Most of that growth has been in the Third World, but in the top industrial countries the working class grew from 307 million to 401 million.
That’s if you define workers as the people who have to sell their ability to work and who have no direct control over their work.
There is still the problem of class consciousness, of people’s awareness of themselves as a class and of how they can fight back.
This brings us to the question of global working class culture. This is not about Rupert Murdoch and the homogenisation of everyone under the crushing weight of Fox TV, although that is one aspect.
Because workers are linked to the same system, they see they have a common identity.
Different doesn’t always mean good. The capitalist state might oppress people who are different, but capitalism itself has no problem with difference.
Difference means a niche market – for example, selling things to the gay community.
There are no truly homogeneous national cultures. However, you do get homogeneous class culture. Benjamin Franklin was the US ambassador to absolutist France after the American Revolution.
He would dress in the revolutionary, bourgeois style, wearing clothes and speaking in a manner that was instantly recognisable to the French bourgeoisie.
Around the same time there was an attempted uprising in New York State by a mixture of slaves, Irish indentured labourers and captured Spanish sailors, in which the notions of black and white were used to identify class positions.
There were white Irish people standing up in bars saying, “We have to kill all the white people,” meaning the rich people.
That kind of class culture cuts across national culture.
The Russian revolutionary Lenin explained:
“Each nation contains a workers’ culture as well as a bourgeois culture. We take from each national culture only its democratic and socialist elements.
“We take them only, and absolutely, in opposition to the bourgeois and nationalist culture of each country.”
When Lenin talked about proletarian culture he was wasn’t thinking of an early equivalent of EastEnders, he was thinking of things like trade union libraries.
The final thing capitalism has given us is the Enlightenment – the ideas that came, in particular, from 18th century France and Scotland. Enlightenment thinkers argued that the world could be explained rationally, without recourse to god or superstition.
They said that people have the same capabilities which they can develop – if they are not restricted by the church or absolutist state.
Many of the writings of the Enlightenment were directed very specifically against feudalism. The Enlightenment economist Adam Smith wrote, “No progress in society can be made until the nobles are rightly crushed.”
There is a problem with the rationality of the Enlightenment. When George Bush refuses to sign the Kyoto treaty and allows global warming to grow until the waves come crashing down on Los Angeles, that is irrational from the point of view of even the capitalists.
But it is rational from the point of view of individual capitalists chasing short-term profits. They don’t think of the world as a whole, but simply of achieving their immediate ends.
Working class rationality is about seeing the world as a whole. We should adopt this side of Enlightenment rationality.
Each of the things I’ve discussed is shot through with contradictions.
Marx gave a speech in which he explained this well:
“There is one grand fact characteristic of the 19th century. On the one hand, there have started into life industrial and scientific forces which no epoch of the former human history had ever suspected.
“On the other hand, there exist symptoms of decay far surpassing the horrors recorded of the latter times of the Roman Empire.
“In our days everything seems pregnant with its contrary: machinery, gifted with the wonderful power of shortening and fructifying human labour, we behold starving and overworking it.
“The newfangled sources of wealth, by some strange weird spell, are turned into sources of want. The victories of art seem bought by the loss of character.
“Even the pure light of science seems unable to shine but on the dark background of ignorance.
“We know that to work well the newfangled forces of society, they only want to be mastered by newfangled men – and such are the working men. They are as much the invention of modern time as machinery itself.
“In the signs that bewilder the middle class, we recognise our brave friend, the old mole that can work in the earth so fast, that worthy pioneer – the Revolution.”
Neil Davidson’s prize-winning book, Discovering the Scottish Revolution, 1692–1746, is available from Bookmarks (£19.99). Phone 020 7637 1848 or go to www.bookmarks.uk.com.
 






This year’s Isaac Deutscher memorial lecture was given by Neil Davidson. He took up the controversial issue of the role played by bourgeois revolutions in the formation of the modern world.



I owe at least two debts to Isaac Deutscher. One is that, for non-academics like me, he provided a model of how to write politically engaged but scholarly historical work. The other is more relevant to the theme of my lecture: his writings on the bourgeois revolutions.
‘Bourgeois revolution’ is perhaps the Marxist concept which has come under the most severe attack in recent years. Since the 1950s anti-Marxist ‘revisionists’ have set about demonstrating that the events we traditionally call by this name – the Dutch Revolt, the English Civil War, the American War of Independence, the French Revolution and so on – were nothing of the sort. Instead, revisionists claim, these conflicts were just what they appeared to be: in other words, expressions of inter-elite competition, religious difference or regional autonomy. At any rate, they were not conflicts between an urban capitalist bourgeoisie and a rural feudal aristocracy, as Marxists supposedly believed.
 
Revolution from above and below
Revisionism in this form is, happily, reaching the end of its shelf life. More serious, however, has been an increasing tendency for Marxists, and anti-capitalist radicals more generally, themselves to deny the role that bourgeois revolutions – or perhaps I should call them the Events Formerly Known as Bourgeois Revolutions – have played in the establishment of the capitalist system. This denial comes in several different forms. Indeed, the reasons given in the work of very different writers such as Arno Mayer, Immanuel Wallerstein and Robert Brenner are noticeably incompatible with each other, but their overall effect has been to foster a climate of scepticism. Against this, Isaac Deutscher’s work demonstrates that the notion attacked by both sets of revisionists is a caricature of the real Marxist position. Essentially, Deutscher makes two points.
First, in his biography of Stalin – which was published in 1949, before the first revisionist works appeared – Deutscher noted that bourgeois revolutions can be conducted from above as well as from below. This could take place in two ways. On the one hand, a state founded by revolution from below could spread the revolution by military conquest, like the New Model Army in Scotland during the 1650s or the French revolutionary armies in the Italian peninsula during the 1790s. On the other hand – and this really applies only after the French Revolution – a section of the old ruling classes themselves could restructure the state and economy, often in order to compete militarily with those states that had already made the transition. This suggests a second point, which Deutscher made explicit in The Unfinished Revolution (1967). The bourgeois revolutions are bourgeois not because they are led by the bourgeoisie, but because they make possible the development of bourgeois society on the basis of the capitalist mode of production. In other words, it is the outcome which is important, not the process or the personnel.
These positions were shared by other figures in the Trotskyist movement, like Max Shachtman and Tony Cliff, who in other respects were among Deutscher’s most severe critics. Their agreement is less surprising than it might at first seem, for his position was not in any sense innovatory. On the contrary, over this issue at least, Deutscher was simply upholding the classical Marxist position. Take Marx and Engels’ writings on the English Civil War and the Great French Revolution. These are not entirely consistent, but the main thrust of their view in both cases was that the bourgeoisie, far from leading the revolutionary process, had to be pushed forward by classes below it in the social structure. Engels later argued that the completion of the German Revolution during the 1860s came from the opposite end of the class structure: Bismarck and a section of the Prussian Junkers-that is, the great feudal landowners. George Lukács extended this analysis to Central and Eastern Europe as a whole in his great work History and Class Consciousness (1923). Writing in his Fascist jail during the 1930s, Antonio Gramsci argued that the Italian Risorgimento of the 1850s and 1860s was similarly a form of ‘passive revolution’ from above. Before the First World War Lenin argued that the era of bourgeois revolution in Russia had started with the tsarist agrarian reforms of 1861 and would only be completed by the working class. It should be obvious, therefore, that the classical tradition is not committed to a version of bourgeois revolution in which a fully conscious bourgeois class announce the abolition of feudalism, execute the king and proclaim the republic to the thunderous acclaim of the assembly or its local equivalent.
This is not to say that that the bourgeoisie have never been revolutionary on their own behalf. On the contrary, in certain situations – the Dutch Revolt, the early stages of the French Revolution, Scotland after 1746 and, above all, the American Civil War, they clearly have been. But it is not necessary that they should behave in this way. Where then did the caricature of bourgeois revolution come from, if not classical Marxist thought? I think there are two sources.
One is the work of the liberal bourgeois historians of the first half of the 19th century: for example Thomas Macaulay writing on 1688 in Britain or François Guizot writing on 1789 in France. The vision of the heroic, conquering bourgeois essentially derives from these sources. There were national peculiarities, of course – the British were noticeably less enthusiastic about revolutionary violence than the French, hence the emphasis on 1688 rather than 1649, but the similarities were obvious enough.
Contrary to what is claimed by writers like George Comninel, Marx did not simply adopt this position. In fact, his admiration for the bourgeoisie, as expressed in The Communist Manifesto, was far more for its economic and intellectual achievements than its boldness in mounting the barricades.
The other source, and this may not come entirely as a surprise, is Stalinism. In the early 1920s the Communist International – still a revolutionary organisation at this point, of course – adopted the term ‘bourgeois-democratic’, for those revolutions in the colonial or semi-colonial world where socialism was not immediately on the agenda, but in which democratic rights were a necessary prerequisite for the organisation of movements for socialist and national liberation. This was a serious strategy at the time, as not even Trotsky believed that permanent revolution was on the cards outside Russia at this stage.
As the Communist International degenerated along with the Russian Revolution which gave it birth, however, the concept began to shift from one which advocated allying with bourgeois (or even pre-bourgeois) forces only where they were genuinely involved in fighting imperialism, to a stages theory in which support had to be given to the supposedly ‘revolutionary’ bourgeoisie as a matter of course in line with Stalin’s foreign policy. This was disastrous enough politically, most of all in the Chinese Revolution of the late 1920s, but it also affected how history was written. From the onset of the period of the Popular Front in 1935, there was effectively a fusion of Stalinist and liberal bourgeois notions of historical development.
 
Rethinking capitalism
One consequence was the notion of a ‘bourgeois democratic’ revolution being read back into history and applied to England, France, and the other countries where bourgeois revolutions had been identified. The main problem is that, although a minority of the bourgeois revolutions involved episodes of democracy, none resulted in the establishment of permanent representative institutions, and most did not involve popular insurgencies of any sort. Indeed, the ‘revolutions from above’ in Germany, Italy, Japan, etc., were conducted, at least in part, precisely to pre-empt popular revolt. Nor was this the only distortion.
The Stalinist model established a checklist of ‘tasks’ borrowed from the French Revolution – i.e. democracy, the agrarian question, national unification – which had to be ticked off before the bourgeois revolution could be declared complete. If these were really taken seriously, then the Japanese Revolution was incomplete until the agrarian reforms imposed by the US occupiers after 1945, the American Revolution itself was unfinished until the black civil rights legislation of the mid-1960s and the Scottish Revolution has presumably still to be consummated in the absence of an independent Scottish state.
The absurdity of such notions should be obvious. There are still important democratic issues unresolved in most countries in the world, but they have nothing to do with the consolidation of capitalism. In fact, the only real goal which bourgeois revolutions can have is the establishment of independent centres of capital accumulation. (In the case of Scotland, this independent centre of capital accumulation was called Britain.)
One reaction to the Stalinoid celebration of the bourgeois revolution has been the attempt by people on the left to find more revolutionary forces with which contemporary radicals can identify. Hence, in an English context, the attempts to diminish the role of Oliver Cromwell in favour of the Levellers and of the Levellers in favour of the Diggers, and so on. (The latter two groups, which are often spoken of together, were of course completely different in ideology, class composition, size of membership and virtually every other respect.) This seems to me to be both completely mistaken and completely unnecessary. In Discovering the Scottish Revolution I argue that we have to distinguish between two different sets of historical actor in the bourgeois revolutions.
One set consists of our socialist predecessors – that is, those who looked towards collectivist solutions which were unachievable in their own time, like the Diggers in England or the Conspiracy of Equals in France. The other set consists of our bourgeois equivalents – that is, those who actually carried the only revolutions possible at the time, which were, whatever their formal goals, to establish the dominance of capital. Clearly, our attitude to these groups is very different. But since one aspect of bourgeois revolutions is to establish the most successful system of exploitation ever seen, it is scarcely surprising that the people who carried them through should, like Cromwell, leave a complex and contradictory legacy.
Finally, we have to ask why so many Marxists are anxious to dismiss the bourgeois revolutions, these events which did so much to shape the contemporary world. There is probably no single answer to this question, but one appears to be an unwillingness to credit capitalism and, by extension, the bourgeoisie, with any positive contribution to human development. Understandable though this position is, given the horrors for which capitalism continues to be responsible, Marxists must nevertheless reject it. Without capitalism, we would have no possibility of developing the forces of production to the extent that will enable the whole of the world’s population to enjoy what is currently denied most of them – a fully human life.
In fact, without capitalism there would be no ‘us’ – in the sense of a working class – to seriously consider accomplishing such a goal in the first place. What seems to me to be completely implausible is the view that if only capitalism had not come into existence we could all be living in a happy hobbit-land of free peasants and independent small producers. In fact, the world would probably have been divided between endlessly warring absolutist and tributary states without even the possibility of escape that capitalism provides.
I want, however, to end on a note which recognises the fact that the bourgeoisie, in the hour of their greatness, did more for the possibility of human liberation than simply provide the material basis for future socialist development. I think here of the universalism of Enlightenment thought at its best. In the context of my own country, the thinkers of the Scottish bourgeoisie were engaged in changing their world, not merely interpreting it – The Wealth of Nations is a programme for transforming Scottish society as much as it is a history of the world economy. But what Smith and his colleagues wanted – ‘commercial society’, in their terminology – was not the same as the capitalist society they eventually helped bring into being.
Lukács once wrote of the Enlightenment hope that ‘democratic bourgeois freedom and the supremacy of economics would one day lead to the salvation of all mankind’. As we know only too well, it did not. I think that the more perceptive of the Scottish Enlightenment thinkers – Smith himself, Adam Ferguson, John Millar – were aware of this and that awareness is responsible for their studied ambiguity towards ‘actually existing capitalism’ as it emerged towards the end of the 18th century. To paraphrase William Morris, the thing that they fought for turned out to be not what they meant, and other people have since had to fight for what they meant under another name.
We in the movements against globalisation and imperialist war are those ‘other people’. But what we fight for is not to accomplish outstanding ‘goals of the bourgeois revolution’ in the sense I have already rejected, but those universal principles of freedom and justice which the bourgeois revolutions brought onto the historical agenda but, for all their epochal significance, were unable to achieve.
* * *
The full version of Neil’s lecture will be published in Historical Materialism during 2005, which will include a discussion on the origins of and transition to capitalism. Neil was awarded the Isaac Deutscher memorial prize for his book Discovering the Scottish Revolution, 1692–1746 (Pluto £19.99), available from Bookmarks.
 






Hundreds of thousands of civil service workers in the PCS union struck on Friday of last week against job cuts and attacks on sick pay and pensions. As PCS members report, the strike showed the new spirit of resistance in the union.



One-day strike is solid across the country
Edinburgh was always going to be important to the strike in Scotland because it is where most of the Scottish Executive ministers and buildings are based.
The signs were good before the strike, with overflowing meetings at the main workplaces and hundreds joining the union.
Virtually every office had a picket line. Many of the most enthusiastic pickets were the newest members.
At Saint Andrew’s House a manager admitted to activists the strike was effective.



 


Neil Davidson
Edinburgh


 



Dissident Marxism
David Renton
Zed Books £14.95
David Renton has begun the bold project of writing the history of Marxism through the lives of individual Marxists. The approach of his first book on the subject, Classical Marxism (2002), was relatively simple. It traced how, from apparently similar theoretical starting points, the paths of individual figures in the Second International led in quite different directions; either to accommodation with the system, like Kautsky, or to opposition to it, like Lenin.
His new book, Dissident Marxism, has a far wider sweep, taking in figures from revolutionary Russia like Vladimir Mayakovsky to members of the 1968 generation like David Widgery. The question is whether they actually constitute a distinct tradition, as David Renton claims.
The first thing to be said is that the biographical essays which comprise this book are always interesting and informative, and only rarely fall into mere chronology. Some of the people discussed here, like Victor Serge, may already be familiar to readers. But I imagine that many will be as ignorant as I was about George Henein, the Egyptian surrealist who became a Trotskyist for a brief period at the end of the Second World War.
However, there are difficulties involved in the concept of ‘dissident Marxism’. What, if anything, connects the Marxists which David has included here?
He distinguishes the notion of ‘dissident’ from ‘classical’ Marxism on the grounds that the former were ‘people who did not treat their socialism as an inherited canon of knowledge, but at each moment were willing to think their politics anew. The acid test of dissidence was a willingness to criticise the conduct of the Soviet state.’ He argues that Trotskyism and the New Lefts of 1956 and 1968 were the traditions from which dissidence was most likely to emerge, but that ‘other left wing traditions including African socialism, Titoism, Castroism and even Maoism could sustain dissidence, for a certain short time’. The specific examples were therefore chosen ‘because they were seen to express key arguments, important moments on the left, or common dilemmas’.
There are three central problems with this conception.
First, to describe Trotskyism as a ‘dissidence’ seems to me to confuse the issue. Trotskyism represented a dissent against Stalinism, true; but it was a dissent in the name of classical Marxism and its relationship to the working class. That is not consistently the case for the other traditions that David invokes.
Second, it is never made clear whether he sees ‘dissident Marxism’ as being a particular response to the period when the socialist movement was dominated by Stalinism and social democracy, or – since those days are over – as being a much more general category, which is just as applicable now. At one point he suggests the first: ‘Dissident Marxists lived in a situation shaped by the failure of the workers’ parties, the Communists and socialists who had seemed capable of transforming the world but became shells.’ At other times, the second: ‘A distinction has been made between “orthodox” thinkers who used their Marxism to defend existing projects, and dissidents, who reapplied Marxist categories, holding on to what was central, but who were not afraid to think for themselves.’ (Both definitions point to Lenin as the greatest dissident Marxist of all!)
The second definition in particular implies that, even in an organisation that was neither a ‘shell’ nor tied to a sterile ‘orthodoxy’, there would be a need for ‘dissidence’. Now, an alert and critical attitude to one’s own organisation is certainly a necessary aspect of revolutionary politics, but ‘dissenting’ from it on a regular basis would suggest that you were in the wrong organisation to start with. In short, ‘dissidence’ is not an end in itself, at least for revolutionary socialists. This is why, enjoyable though the chapter on Widgery is, I think that it is wrong to describe him as a dissident within the IS/SWP tradition; he seems rather to have been one of its best representatives.
Third, the category is simply impossibly broad. Take the two English Communists that David discusses, Dona Torr and Edward Thompson.
Torr is a neglected figure who was in many ways the inspiration for the Communist Party Historians Group and David is right to draw attention to her influence. It is her presence in this book that is odd. Like many intelligent CP members she may have had private reservations about Russia and the internal party regime (although David produces no evidence to this effect), but if so, it did not affect her political practice. Torr remained a Stalinist to the end of her life and her posthumously published book, Tom Mann and His Times, is structured around the Stalinist concept of ‘the people’ from beginning to end. Where is the ‘dissidence’ here?
David contrasts Torr with Thompson, who did break with Stalinism after 1956 – a step which freed him to write his great historical works. But admirable though they are, they are theoretically further away from Marxism than the orthodoxy he abandoned. Here I have to disagree with David that The Making of the English Working Class represented a theoretical step forward for Marxism.
In short, the parts of this book are greater than the whole. If the overall concept is not convincing, the individual chapters are excellent introductions to the work of the Marxists concerned, and serve to remind us of the rich and often ignored strands of thought within the Marxist tradition.
 



AUGUST IN Edinburgh. And as the global middle class descends on the Scottish capital for the International Festival and Fringe, it can seem that the entire city is nothing more than a bourgeois cultural playground.
It is true that Edinburgh has never had the same size of industrial working class as Glasgow – although the class structures of the two cities are becoming increasingly similar.
But Edinburgh does have its own traditions of struggle – traditions that should be better known to socialists.
Most people who visit the festival will walk up and around the Royal Mile unaware that, within a few hundred yards of performers playing Peruvian nose-flutes or giving Estonian mime versions of Richard III, are the sites of many great class battles.
On the Royal Mile itself stands the old parliament building.
It was here that, in the dying months of 1706, crowds of several thousands demonstrated and rioted against the nobles who were preparing to sign the Treaty of Union with England in their class interests.
The crowd failed to stop the Union, but they did win several important concessions.
These included protection for the democratic institutions of the Church of Scotland, and prevention of increased taxes on essentials like salt and – how culturally stereotypical is this? – beer.
Around the corner, on George IV Bridge, is Greyfriars Kirk. It was here in 1638 that mass signings of the National Covenant signalled the beginning of the revolutionary challenge to Charles I across Britain – a challenge that is still too often simply referred to as the “English” Civil War.
Hidden in the north of the Kirk graveyard is the prison where the artisan and peasant Covenanters were thrown during the failed uprisings against Charles II after the Restoration of 1660.
Down in the Grassmarket is where public executions took place.
In 1736 the Edinburgh “mob” temporarily took control of their city.
It was in the Grassmarket that, with exemplary discipline, they lynched the hated Captain Porteous of the Town Guard, who had earlier ordered his men to shoot at demonstrators.
Along the Grassmarket in the Cowgate is the birthplace of James Connolly. And this brings us into the modern world of working class struggle.
Although he was rightly associated with the struggle for Irish freedom, it was here in the slums of Victorian Edinburgh that Connolly became a socialist leader and activist – and the only Scot who can stand comparison with John Maclean.
These struggles go on today. Above the High Street stands the castle, symbol of all that is militarist and imperialist about Scotland.
During the height of the anti-war insurgency last year a crowd of school students managed to occupy the forecourt.
These students – many from schools on the peripheral estates to the west of the city – were at the forefront of the great demonstrations organised by the Edinburgh Stop the War Coalition.
Marching down the High Street, it was difficult not to imagine the ghosts of the Edinburgh mob, the embodiment of the city’s radical past, saluting them – representatives of socialist future, and the real spirit of the festival city.
 



Award-winning historian Neil Davidson spoke to Chris Bambery about how Scotland was incorporated into Britain
What lay behind the union of Scotland and England in 1707?
The formation of the British state was part of the conflict for global supremacy between capitalist-constitutional England and feudal-absolutist France.
The English ruling class wanted Scotland to accept the Hanoverian succession to the three thrones of Britain – essentially to end any possibility of the Scots restoring the Stuart dynasty, which had been overthrown for the second time in 1688 and was now backed by France.
The feudal ruling class in Scotland was divided, and the English regime concluded that it would have to incorporate Scotland into a new British state.
The Scottish bourgeoisie was almost totally opposed to the union of England and Scotland, and so were the popular classes – there was of course no working class at the time.
For several months the Edinburgh crowd were in an almost permanent state of anti-union insurgency outside the Scottish parliament.
They rightly feared that the union would bring higher taxes and the Anglicisation of the Church of Scotland, virtually their only democratic institution.
The riots and demonstrations did not stop the treaty going ahead.
But they did manage to get several of the most offensive clauses changed or deleted.
In the end, the lords pushed the treaty through parliament because the English regime was prepared to guarantee the preservation of their feudal jurisdictions and legal system – their class position.
What was the attitude of people in Lowland Scotland to the Jacobites and to Highland society?
The Jacobites were not all Highlanders and Highlanders were not all Jacobites. Jacobitism was a counter-revolutionary political movement whose formal goal was to restore the Stuarts. Behind this, however, lay a deeper motivation.
Although the union was deeply conservative in Scottish terms, it did open up the country to greater capitalist development, through trade with the Americas (which had previously been illegal), the beginnings of agricultural improvement, and so on.
The Jacobite social base was among the lairds (equivalent to the gentry in England) and some of the great magnates who were unwilling or unable to make the transition to capitalist production. Unlike every other feudal class west of Poland they still had the power to raise their tenants to fight, but they also relied on support from the Britain’s European rivals.
During the last rising, the ’45, the Jacobites were received with hostility in all the major cities from Aberdeen southwards, except – alas – Edinburgh.
In Perth there was a major riot against the Jacobite occupation. In Stirling the townspeople themselves took up arms after the British army surrendered.
The idea that the Jacobite risings were national liberation struggles is a complete fantasy.
Can we turn now to Culloden? You treat it as the real turning point in the creation of the modern United Kingdom.
When I was a child in Scotland, Culloden was presented as yet another chapter in an age-old conflict between we Scots and the English. Presumably things were a little bit more complicated?
I was brought up with a similar view, although my parents, like most people, were not Scottish nationalists.
By the 1740s Scottish attitudes had changed from 1707, not least because the majority of Scots had come to accept – if not exactly to love – the new state.
Culloden was the final battle in the British bourgeois revolution.
Although the process had been completed in England in 1688, as long as Scottish lords retained feudal powers and could be used as the basis of a French invasion, the revolution was not secure.
Previously, only Cromwell had seriously challenged Scottish feudalism, but after 1746 the British state finally moved to destroy it.
This is the absolutely decisive moment in Scottish history. It also had important ideological consequences. It allowed the British state to become a nation, through the formation of shared national identity across the border.
It also allowed a unified Scottish identity to emerge for the first time, by removing the distinctions between Highland and Lowland.
One of the blackest ironies in Scottish history is that the symbols of Highland identity – some of which, like the kilt, were themselves of relatively recent invention – came to represent Scotland as a whole, but only after Highland society itself was in the process of being destroyed.
How did Marx see the Highland Clearances, the process of driving the Highlanders off the land?
Marx was outraged by the Clearances. There is no justification at all for the claims that are sometimes made that Marxism “must” regard the Clearances as a regrettable but necessary “progressive” measure which brought capitalism, and consequently socialism, closer.
In fact, had there been closer links between the Highland peasants and the Chartists, it is possible that the Clearances could have been fought more effectively than they were – since the Highlanders did resist, of course.
My view on this is that the Clearances were not inevitable, but constitute a major defeat for the oppressed. This is why we have to treat what Marx wrote on this subject with some care.
Not because he was wrong to support the Highland peasants – he was rightly on the side of the oppressed – but because he discusses the Clearances in Capital as an example of “primitive accumulation”.
However, unless “primitive accumulation” is an ongoing process which continues throughout the history of capitalism, this cannot have been the case.
Scotland was already at the pinnacle of world capitalist development by the time the enforced clearances began around 1815.
What I think Marx is doing in Capital is saying, “If you want to see what primitive accumulation was like, here is the nearest equivalent in the contemporary world”.
Reading David Hume, Adam Smith or Walter Scott, there is a tremendous sense of just how much had changed in a few decades in Scotland. How dramatic was that change?
The transformation of Scotland between 1760 and around 1815 was the quickest and most complete transition from feudalism to capitalism in European history. There is no comparable experience until the Stalinist industrialisation of Russia after 1928.
I think this is the first significant episode of what Trotsky called “uneven and combined development”, where a hitherto backward country “catches up and overtakes” the advanced in many ways, but in which the modern and archaic still coexist for a time.
The Scottish Enlightenment was crucial to this process.
The conscious destruction of feudal agriculture in the Scottish Lowlands and the introduction of capitalism in its place was its great accomplishment – the kind of bourgeois achievement that Marx hails in the opening pages of the Communist Manifesto.
Reading your books, you get a sense of how upper class Scots were not just junior partners in the creation of the British Empire but at the cutting edge of its construction and administration.
Yes, but it’s important to get the timing right. The union was not a deal to jointly rule the Empire. Nor does it appear as an issue in the private correspondence or diaries of those involved. It was only later on in the 18th century that the British Empire became important for the Scots – and not only the ruling class.
It did so in two main ways. One was economic. Scotland was a much poorer country than England at the time of the Treaty of Union.
But after 1707 the younger sons of the landed gentry had legal access to the colonies and could go there to make money.
The wealth accumulated in the Empire fed back into agricultural improvement, industrial investment and urban development, particularly in Glasgow. Much of this wealth was the product of slave labour in the sugar and tobacco plantations, where the Scots were disproportionately represented among the owners.
The other way was in terms of national identity. Many Highlanders fled from their collapsing society to North America or joined the British army. At one point in the 1760s around 40 percent of Highland men of military age had joined up.
It was their role, as colonists and as soldiers, that finally integrated the Highlanders into the Scottish nation and helped to integrate the Scots into the British nation.
* * *
Timeline

1603 Queen Elizabeth I of England died. James VI of Scotland became James I, king of Scotland and England.
 
1651 Oliver Cromwell’s army conquered Scotland.
 
1688 James II, a Catholic, was removed from the throne and William of Orange was invited to take over.
 
1715 The first Jacobite rebellion in Scotland. The rebellion fizzled out.
 
1745 Second Jacobite rebellion, an attempt to put Charles Edward Stuart on the throne.

Neil Davidson’s latest book, Rediscovering the Scottish Revolution 1692–1746, is available from Bookmarks – phone 020 7637 1848. He will be giving the Isaac and Tamara Deutscher Memorial Lecture on “How revolutionary were the bourgeois revolutions?” on Saturday 9 October, 2 p.m., Birkbeck College, Malet Street, London. Admission free.
 



The materialist conception of history was once described by a notable practitioner, the late Edward Thompson, as ‘perhaps the strongest discipline deriving from the Marxist tradition.’ [2] Of all the different modes available to that discipline, biography is the least commonly employed. Why? One reason is that, while Marxism does not deny the role of individuals in the historical process, the balance required by Marxist biographers in relation to their subjects is extraordinarily difficult to achieve. It is not entirely surprising, therefore, that there are very few biographies among the classics of Marxist historiography. [3] The exceptions, such as Thompson’s own William Morris (1955 and 1977), tend to be excursions into the genre by writers whose reputations rest on works of broader scope than any one individual. Given these difficulties, the achievements of Isaac Deutscher (1907–1967) are all the more remarkable. Of all the great Marxist historians, he was unusual, perhaps unique, in making biography his primary mode of expression. With the exception of a handful of substantial essays, most of which were posthumously collected in Marxism, Wars and Revolutions (1984), Deutscher’s biographies of Stalin (1949 and 1966) and Trotsky (1954–1963) are his central and most enduring legacy.
Not everyone shares this opinion, including many of his erstwhile admirers. David Horowitz, former US student radical, author of From Yalta to Vietnam (1965) and subsequent convert to neo-conservatism, wrote in the course of a recent dispute with Christopher Hitchens, ‘When all is said and done the Trotsky biography must be seen as an incomparably sad waste of a remarkable individual talent.’ [4] Horowitz has, at any rate, read it. Others have suggested that even this effort is unnecessary. Martin Amis informs us, in the course of yet another dispute with Hitchens, that he has fairly definite views about Trotsky (‘a murdering bastard and a fucking liar’) and it therefore comes as no surprise to learn that ‘No, I haven’t read Isaac Deutscher’s The Prophet Armed and The Prophet Unarmed and The Prophet Outcast, but I have read Volkogonov’s Trotsky: The Eternal Revolutionary.’ [5] Martin, we had guessed as much.
Horowitz, Amis and Hitchens are a trio of political corpses in search of a decent burial. We can safely leave them to their literary dance of death. What can those who still want to oppose the new rulers of the world rather than grovel at their feet learn from these books? Whatever the problems with Deutscher’s political judgements – and as we shall see these are considerable – any criticism of them must start from the simple recognition that they represent not only a model of Marxist biography, but also two of the essential histories of the Russian Revolution written in any historical mode. Verso are therefore to be congratulated for republishing the Trotsky trilogy and making one of the classic works of socialist literature available to a new generation of activists.
 
The qualifications of a biographer
A general level of imaginative sympathy is, of course, necessary for any biographer to engage with their subject. In Deutscher’s case, this faculty seems to have been heightened in relation to Trotsky because of four specific personal characteristics or experiences which the two men had in common. [6]
First, they shared a political commitment. Deutscher joined the Communist Party of Poland in 1926 or 1927, when the factional struggle within Russia was reaching its climax. He was quickly elevated to the leadership and remained there until his expulsion in 1932 for opposing, in the party press, the disastrous Stalinist policy in Germany. He was, in other words, one of the very few Communists who both accepted and was prepared to act on Trotsky’s analysis. Deutscher helped form the Polish Trotskyist organisation and led it throughout the 1930s. Furthermore, unlike most of the Trotskyist leaders of the time, he was capable of independent thought: the Polish delegates to the founding conference of the Fourth International in September 1938 carried his – essentially correct – arguments against proclaiming the new organisation at that time. [7]
Second, they shared the experience of exile. While in London seeking work as a journalist in 1939 Deutscher was stranded by the outbreak of the Second World War and the partition of his country between the Third Reich and Stalinist Russia. His political opposition to the regime imposed by Stalin after 1945 meant that he was never able to return to Poland. Deutscher once wrote of Trotsky that, ‘Like Thucydides, Dante, Machiavelli, Heine, Marx, Herzen, and other thinkers and poets, Trotsky attained his full eminence as a writer only in exile.’ [8] These sentiments equally apply to their author.
Third, they shared exclusion from academic life. A lectureship would have saved Deutscher from relying on journalism for a living, since his writing in this capacity is by far the weakest part of his output. There is no doubt that his work as a Sovietologist was often highly speculative and his predictions mostly wrong. Nevertheless, as Peter Sedgwick wrote in an obituary for this journal, it is misguided to criticise Deutscher on the basis of what he wrote while carrying out what was, in effect, his day job: ‘It is as if Marx’s theoretical standing was to be criticised on the basis of the rubbish he wrote against Palmerston in the Tory press.’ [9] When he could have benefited from a university position in Britain, to enable him the time and a regular income to complete his unfinished Life of Lenin, he was denied one on political grounds. [10]
Fourth, they shared a command of literary expression. [11] Like another Pole from an earlier generation of exiles, Joseph Conrad, Deutscher mastered the English language rather better than many a native. In his major works, socialist commitment and first-hand knowledge of the labour movement are combined with a technical skill in handling primary source materials. Indeed, his abilities in this sphere put to shame many of those academics who spent their professional lives doing little more than warming the professorial chairs that he was denied. One advantage he retained from being denied access to university employment, however, was the freedom to write for a general audience, unconstrained by the bloodless conventions of British academic propriety. His work shows how irony – now mainly used as a self-congratulatory sign of one’s postmodern sensibility – can be an essential part of the historian’s repertoire. [12]
Although the politics of the Russian Revolution are at the heart of his books, they never display the tendency towards depersonalisation which is often a feature of ‘political’ biography. At the beginning of The Prophet Armed we are introduced to the proud and impetuous youth who is prepared to follow any idea of which he is convinced to its logical conclusion; we still recognise him at the end of that volume in the leader determined to impose militarisation of the trade unions if that is what it takes to preserve the revolutionary state. Equally, Deutscher can suggest analogies between the fate of individuals and societies, and the connection between the two, without extending these into absurdity. A chapter in The Prophet Outcast called Reason and Unreason deals, among other things, with the rise of fascism in Germany. Here Deutscher gently draws a parallel between the psychological collapse and suicide in Berlin of Trotsky’s eldest daughter, Zina, and the descent into madness of the German society in which she vainly sought refuge. [13]
Let us explore one example of his approach. Trotsky was universally recognised as one of the great orators of the socialist movement – as great as Jean Jaurès, it is said. Throughout the trilogy Deutscher takes the relationship of Trotsky as a public speaker to his audience as both a barometer of the health of the revolution and an index of his personal fate. To begin with, between February and October 1917, we see Trotsky addressing the thronging crowds at the Cirque Moderne in Petrograd as an agitator and member of a Bolshevik Party still contesting for leadership of the working class. Later, in 1921, after the Civil War, the suppression of the Kronstadt rebellion and the introduction of the New Economic Policy, we find Trotsky addressing the crowds in an official capacity, as a senior member of the ruling party. Later still, in 1926, as Stalin and his faction consolidate their grip on power, Trotsky and the other leaders of the Opposition are depicted attempting to take their case to the rank and file in party cells and workplace meetings. Finally, we observe the circumstances of Trotsky’s last public meeting, late in 1932. Now three years into his last exile, and under the threat of attack from Stalinists or fascists or both, he speaks at the invitation of Danish Social Democratic students whose politics were distant from his own (he describes them as ‘opponents’ in the speech). [14] In each of these successive incarnations, from agitator to statesman to oppositionist to exile, Trotsky’s oratorical powers remain the same, but their effect is conditioned by the circumstances in which he is called upon to use them. Thus Deutscher, while unravelling the specifics of Trotsky’s life, illustrates the truth of the general Marxist proposition that human beings not only make history under conditions unchosen by themselves, but that these conditions also determine whether it is possible to make history at all.
 
The revolutionary as tragic hero
For nearly a decade the only work which stood comparison in scale with Deutscher’s was E.H. Carr’s History of the Bolshevik Revolution. But Carr wrote like the senior civil servant which, for at least part of his life, he was; Deutscher wrote, in Peter Sedgwick’s phrase, as a ‘tragedian’. [15] What does tragedy mean in this context? The distance between human aspirations and the material conditions which might allow them to be realised is necessary, but insufficient. Also required is the attempt to overcome that distance, ‘to beat against history with one’s fists’, no matter how unyielding the stuff of history might be. Trotsky rejected the notion of tragedy as illegitimate with respect to his own life. In 1929, at the end of the first year of his third and final exile from Russia, he wrote in his autobiography that he had ‘more than once read musings in the newspapers on the subject of the “tragedy” that has befallen me.’ Against these musings he declared, ‘I know no personal tragedy.’ [16] At the time when he wrote this passage, the point seemed doubly justified. On the one hand, the fate of the Russian Revolution was the collective experience of the Russian people. Trotsky had no wish to elevate his own share of that experience to a special category simply because of his fall from political pre-eminence. On the other, it was by no means clear to Trotsky at this time that the Russian Revolution had been lost. He still believed that, degenerated though it was, the state which had exiled him could still be reformed through working class pressure. Consequently, he thought that there was no need in either case to invoke the notion of tragedy. In the first it was self-aggrandising and in the second premature. These judgements reflect both his personal modesty as a historical figure and – in his refusal to abandon established positions until they had been conclusively proved redundant – his sobriety as a theorist. Nevertheless both judgements were to be proved wrong.
Russia was ready for communism in 1917 only as part of an international movement, not isolated and devastated in the way that it emerged from the civil war in 1921. The bureaucratic degeneration which these conditions engendered culminated, by 1928, in a counter-revolution which was as complete as it was unacknowledged by the perpetrators – perhaps even to themselves. Trotsky never accepted that the counter-revolution had triumphed in Russia. Indeed, he was only prepared to contemplate it, even as a theoretical possibility, at the very end of his life. No matter. Whatever the weaknesses in his analysis – and it is only our position on Trotsky’s shoulders that allows us to see what he could not – it is from the struggle which Trotsky conducted against Stalinism, particularly during his last exile, that his status as tragic hero derives. Deutscher was therefore right to speak of ‘the truly classical tragedy of Trotsky’s life, or rather a reproduction of classical tragedy in secular terms of modern politics.’ [17] No other biography or work of art has ever captured the nature of that tragedy so well. [18]
New facts have obviously come to light since Deutscher wrote, and in some cases they mean that some of his specific conclusions must be revised. Deutscher argues, for example, that prior to the twelfth party congress in 1923 Trotsky failed to argue in the Politburo for the publication of Lenin’s Testament attacking Stalin, and abstained during the vote. According to Deutscher this was because he felt secure in his own position, was contemptuous of Stalin and was unwilling to jeopardise the compromise which he thought had been reached with his rivals. [19] We now know that Trotsky voted for publication in the Politburo: his refusal to carry the argument into the Central Committee was not the result of complacency, but out of his respect for the decision-making process of the party, and unwillingness to take any action which might have given the impression that he was acting from personal motives. [20] Similarly, Deutscher tends to downplay the level of Left Opposition support and to portray it as essentially passive, at least beyond the core membership. There is at least some evidence, from contemporary participants and the memoirs of witnesses like Victor Serge, that it was more significant than Deutscher allows, and his failure to take account of their testimony (of which he must have been aware) indicates an attitude towards Stalinism which – as we shall see – was different from that of Trotsky. We now know that the Left Opposition had far higher and more active levels of support in both the Bolshevik Party and the working class more generally than was conceded by Deutscher. [21] However, neither of these examples, or any of the others that could be cited, fundamentally alter our view of Trotsky. Nor do the materials that have become available in the Russian archives since the fall of Stalinism in 1989–91. Trotsky’s most recent Russian biographer, the late, Martin Amis – approved General Dimitri Volkogonov, lists ‘the former Central Party Archives, the Central State Archives of the October Revolution, those of the Soviet Army, the Ministry of Defence, the Committee for State Security’ as new sources. [22] But these have not led even to the type of marginal modifications discussed above. As Daniel Singer wrote of Volkogonov’s own book, ‘What is important is not new and what is new is relatively unimportant.’ [23] Deutscher’s books therefore remain indispensable for an understanding of the period they discuss and unsurpassed in bringing their hero alive. [24]
 
Problems of Deutscherism
An honest assessment of these three volumes cannot, however, restrict itself to highlighting their many positive qualities. Deutscher had been a leading figure in both Polish Communism and Polish Trotskyism. But he came to suffer from the same pessimism about the revolutionary potential of the Western working class that affected most socialists after the Second World War and drove them, with varying degrees of enthusiasm, into the arms of either Washington or Moscow. Deutscher was severely critical of Nineteen Eighty-Four, but his own position was in many respects the mirror image of Orwell’s reluctant embrace of the Western side of the Cold War. [25] I suggested above that there were four reasons why Deutscher might have been particularly empathetic towards Trotsky as an individual. Against them, however, his pessimism led to two major political differences with Trotsky. These both distorted Deutscher’s account of Trotsky’s life – particularly in the final volume – and gave many of the thousands of radicals who read his books a basic orientation towards Stalinism which, in some cases at least, was to prove deeply disabling for their politics.
The first difference was in relation to revolutionary socialist organisation and activity. After the outbreak of the Second World War – or rather, after Russia’s entry into the Second World War – Deutscher never again seems to have considered active participation in a political organisation. In 1951 Deutscher reviewed The God That Failed, a collective confessional by ex Communist Party writers justifying their abandonment of revolution for various forms of social democracy. His revealing alternative to Stalinism or capitalism was that ex-Communists should withdraw to ‘the watchtower’. [26] Tony Cliff argued that Deutscher was effectively describing his own situation, and that in practical terms his position in the watchtower was no different from one in the ivory tower that he ostensibly rejected. [27] As we shall see, there is evidence that Deutscher did descend from the watchtower towards the end of his life, but during the period in which his biographies were written there is no doubt that Cliff’s criticism was substantially correct. Deutscher joined neither the Fourth International nor of any of the dissident organisations which split from it after Trotsky’s death. Indeed, his attitude to Trotskyism was deeply dismissive and Trotskyists paid him back in the same coin. [28]
Deutscher had first-hand personal experience of the weaknesses of Trotskyism. The endless arguments which preoccupied many of the small groups were usually unproductive. The activities which they undertook in the breaks between arguing were often unrewarding. Yet Trotsky regarded it as essential to establish, with whatever human material was available, organisational and theoretical continuities with the early years of the Third International and the traditions of classical Marxism which it embodied. During 1935 he wrote in his diary that ‘my work is now “indispensable” in the full sense of the word’, rightly adding that there was ‘no arrogance’ in this statement. [29] Very little of this emerges in Deutscher, creating, at the very least, a severe imbalance in The Prophet Outcast. We learn that, for Trotsky, ‘neither his character nor his circumstances permitted him to resign from formal political activity. He would not and could not contract out of the day to day struggle.’ [30] Yet the impression is given that all of the energy which Trotsky expended during the 1930s attempting to resolve the internal disputes of his followers, all of the effort which he spent trying to guide them towards more productive activity in the labour movement, really involved so much wasted time. The only dispute discussed in any detail is the one which split the American Socialist Workers Party at the end of decade, and even here Deutscher focuses almost solely on the aspect which turned on the class nature of the USSR, rather than the debate over the political direction of the organisation within which this issue arose. Why is Deutscher so uninterested in the issue which preoccupied his hero for virtually the entire period between his exile and his murder? The answer seems to be that he considered organisation unnecessary because another mechanism existed which could bring about socialism. This brings us to the second difference between the two men: their attitude to Stalinism.
What was Trotsky’s position? This changed at least four times between 1923 and 1940, but always in increasingly radical directions. [31] His initial approach to reversing the bureaucratic degeneration of the Russian Revolution, before Stalin had consolidated his power, envisaged workers reforming the apparatus through the medium of the existing soviets. His final position, recognising that soviet democracy had long been completely suppressed, advocated working class political revolution to overthrow the bureaucracy. Why only a political as opposed to a social revolution? Because, according to Trotsky, the continued existence of nationalised property meant that Russia remained a workers’ state; the bureaucracy represented a caste which was parasitic on these property relations rather than a new ruling class. Now, as Cliff noted in 1948, this definition of a workers’ state is not the one Trotsky originally held. On the contrary, in the immediate aftermath of the Russian Revolution, he had believed, along with Lenin and the entire Bolshevik Party, that a workers’ state was defined by the political rule of the working class through its representative institutions, regardless of whether property initially remained in private hands or not – and between 1917 and 1928 most of it did remain in private hands, particularly in the countryside. It is possible, of course, to debate the extent to which the working class exercised political rule between these dates, but the basis of the definition itself is unambiguous. [32] On this basis of his revised definition, Stalin’s ‘Second Revolution’ after 1928 could be deemed far more revolutionary than October 1917 because it introduced the nationalised property relations upon which the ‘workers’ state’ was supposed to depend. Furthermore, if the decisive criterion was nationalised property, then why did it matter which class or social force introduces it? What need was there for the revolutionary party, the working class or indeed any of the tenets of classical Marxism? The Red Army would be sufficient.
The anti-Marxist implications of shifting from working class power to nationalised property relations were largely held in check in Trotsky’s own work. He was careful to emphasise in his last writings that nationalised property was a remnant, a last remaining vestige of the workers’ state, and that the progressive content of nationalisation would only be realised after the overthrow of the bureaucracy. Moreover, he did not expect the Stalinist regime to survive the Second World War. He regarded it as a deeply unstable formation which would either be overthrown by working class revolution or bourgeois restoration – and imminently, not in 50 years’ time. If it survived, let alone expanded the territory under its control, then the Stalinist bureaucracy would have demonstrated that it was indeed a class. [33]
The war ended. Russian Stalinism survived. Russian Stalinism expanded. Worse, indigenous Stalinist movements founded new states based, in all essentials, on the Russian Stalinist model. Yet the vast majority of orthodox Trotskyists continued to hold fast to a position which had been proved inadequate by events, and even extended it to Eastern Europe and China. Like them, Deutscher accepted that Russia, its satellites and imitators were all ‘workers’ states’ because they were based on nationalised property. Yet his description of how The Revolution Betrayed (1937) became ‘the Bible of latter-day Trotskyist sects and chapels whose members piously mumbled its verses long after Trotsky’s death’ conveys his impatience with the religious veneration they accorded Trotsky’s last writings. Why? Not because they clung to its definition of a ‘workers’ state’, but because they refused to abandon their formal commitment to political revolution. [34] Even the dominant tendency within the Fourth International, associated with Michael Pablo, which had successfully argued that the Stalinist states in Eastern Europe and China were ‘workers’ states’, assumed that future revolutions would be led by Stalinist parties under ‘exceptional circumstances’, ‘pressure from the masses’, and the like. Deutscher described himself as ‘free from loyalties to any cult’, by which he meant Trotskyism as much as Stalinism. [35] He was therefore able go much further than orthodox Trotskyists could (without rendering their existence completely redundant) and claim that Stalinist Russia was not only capable of internal self-reform, but that, even unreformed, it was the major force for world revolution. At one level this is, of course, merely the logic of orthodox Trotskyism taken to its conclusion. For many Trotskyists, therefore, their rage at Deutscher was that of Caliban at seeing his face in the mirror.
Deutscher’s position does at least have the benefit of consistency. Unfortunately it is consistently wrong. ‘We need not doubt’, he wrote, ‘that ... the logic of [Trotsky’s] attitude would have compelled him to accept the reality of the revolution in Eastern Europe, and despite all distaste for the Stalinist methods, to recognise the “People’s Democracies” as workers’ states.’ [36] I do doubt this, for the simple reason that it is entirely incompatible with Trotsky’s view of Stalinism. Deutscher undoubtedly thought it would be desirable for these property relations to be supplemented by democracy, but that was not decisive. ‘No one can foresee with certainty whether the conflict will take violent and explosive forms and lead to the new “political revolution” which Trotsky once advocated, or whether the conflict will be resolved peacefully through bargaining, compromise, and the gradual enlargement of freedom.’ [37] This leaves the question open, but effectively concedes that the bureaucracy is capable of self-transformation, of bringing the degenerate political superstructure into line with the socialist economic base, so to speak. At no point, even before his last exile, did Trotsky ever believe that the bureaucracy could reform itself. Even more damaging, Deutscher believed that the working class should refrain from any activities which might threaten this self-reformation by opening the door to the restoration of capitalism: ‘Eastern Europe (Hungary, Poland and eastern Germany) ... found itself almost on the brink of bourgeois restoration at the end of the Stalin era; and only Soviet armed power (or its threat) stopped it there.’ [38]
The theoretical roots of these attitudes are suggested by Deutscher’s inability to distinguish between different types of revolution. In The Unfinished Revolution (1967) Deutscher actually makes several sensible observations on the nature of bourgeois revolutions. In particular, he notes that their class nature does not depend on the presence of the bourgeoisie in the revolutionary process, but rather on whether the outcome of the revolution ‘was to sweep away the social and political institutions that had hindered the growth of bourgeois property and of the social relationships that went with it.’ In this respect, as he rightly remarks, ‘bourgeois revolution creates the conditions in which bourgeois property can flourish.’ [39] These remarks are perfectly compatible with the views of several contributors to this journal, including those of the present reviewer. The problem is when Deutscher begins to extend his model from bourgeois to proletarian revolutions, whose structures are necessarily quite different. [40]
In several places Deutscher argues that all of the ‘great revolutions’ (English, French, Russian) follow the same pattern, even down to role of the leader who eventually emerges. ‘What appears to be established is that Stalin belongs to the breed of the great revolutionary despots, to which Cromwell, Robespierre, and Napoleon belonged.’ [41] If Hegel saw Napoleon as the World Spirit mounted on horseback then, reading this passage, one has the impression that Deutscher saw Stalin as the World Spirit mounted on a tank. We are therefore lucky that Trotsky set down his own thoughts on Stalin’s despotic lineage, for they are very different from Deutscher’s: ‘In attempting to find an historical parallel to Stalin, we have to reject not only Cromwell, Robespierre, Napoleon and Lenin, but even Mussolini and Hitler.’ His own preferred comparisons are with Kemal and Diaz, the Turkish and Mexican modernising dictators. [42] Deutscher was evidently disturbed by the fact that Trotsky did not support his view of Stalin: ‘Here the lack of historical scale and perspective is striking and disturbing.’ [43] In fact, a parallel with the bourgeois revolutions is relevant, but not the one Deutscher imagined. Stalin’s historical role was in fact unique. The ‘Second Revolution’ from 1928 was both a counter-revolution in terms of socialism and the functional equivalent of the bourgeois revolution in terms of (state) capitalism. Any serious parallel for Stalin would have to embrace, not the political leaders of the bourgeois revolutions, but the individual landowners, capitalists and imperialists who carried out the original process of primitive accumulation, a process that took nearly 250 years to accomplish in the case of Britain but only 25 in the case of Russia – with all that implies in terms of compressed suffering. Deutscher’s confusions between bourgeois and proletarian revolutions lead him to make two central distortions in relation to the Russian experience.
One concerns the role of the working class. Discussing the History, he notes of Trotsky that, ‘he does not ... overstate the role of the masses.’ [44] At first this seems an odd sentence: Trotsky allocates to the masses their rightful – that is, pre-eminent – place in the revolutionary process. When one understands, however, that Deutscher has very little confidence in the masses then it becomes far more comprehensible:
By 1921 the Russian working class had proved itself incapable of exercising its own dictatorship. It could not even exercise control over those who ruled in its name. Having exhausted itself in the revolution and the civil war, it had almost ceased to exist as a political factor. [45]
There is a difference between ‘exhaustion’ and ‘incapacity.’ A class can recover from exhaustion, but to be described as incapable suggests a permanent condition. Deutscher occasionally tries to enlist Trotsky in support of the latter contention, but only by basing himself entirely on the temporary solutions to which Trotsky and the other Bolsheviks were driven as a result of economic collapse and Civil War. [46] Now it is true that Trotsky wrote some dire stuff – mostly in Terrorism and Communism (1920) – about the necessity for the centralised authority of the one-party state under all circumstances. The way in which he, to put it mildly, made a virtue out of necessity during this period may well be the least glorious episode in his political life. But it was not his final position. In his writings on Germany from the 1930s, for example, Trotsky writes of the period of dual power, before the victory of the working class, that ‘the worker’s control begins with the individual workshop. The organ of control is the factory committee.’ After the conquest of power, ‘the organs of management are not factory committees but centralised soviets.’ [47] ‘Management’ is a higher form of activity than ‘control’, indicating that the soviets will be making the decisions, not merely checking decisions made elsewhere. Deutscher’s attitude towards the Russian working class is of a piece with his attitude towards the European working class as a whole after the First World War, which he claims never rose above reformism. [48] Again, this was not Trotsky’s view. His position – admittedly often exaggerated to the point of absurdity by some of his followers – was that working class failure to consistently take the revolutionary road was in part due to a crisis of leadership which it was the task of communists to overcome. Deutscher underestimates the role of revolutionary leadership to an even greater extent than he underestimates the revolutionary capacity of the working class. His treatment of Lenin during 1917 is instructive here.
In The History of the Russian Revolution Trotsky argues that the arrival of Lenin in Russia in April 1917 was decisive in pushing the Bolshevik Party towards the socialist revolution and the seizure of power:
Without Lenin the crisis, which the opportunistic leadership was inevitably bound to produce, would have assumed an extraordinarily sharp and protracted character. The conditions of war and revolution, however, would not allow the party a long period for fulfilling its mission. Thus it is by no means excluded that a disorientated and split party might have let slip the revolutionary opportunity for many years.
Trotsky is not saying that the Bolsheviks would never have arrived at the correct strategy without Lenin, or that the revolutionary opportunity would never have come again, simply that in revolutionary situations time is of the essence and that without Lenin it would have been allowed to pass. ‘Lenin was not an accidental element in the historic development, but a product of the whole past of Russian history.’ [49] Deutscher finds this intolerable and devotes several pages (far more than Trotsky’s original discussion) to an attempt to refute it. For Deutscher, such a lapse from ‘the Marxist intellectual tradition’ can only be explained by Trotsky’s psychological response to his own isolation: ‘He needed to feel that the leader, whether Lenin in 1917 or he himself in the 1930s, was irreplaceable – from his belief he drew the strength for his solitary and heroic exertions.’ [50] These are among the very worst passages in the entire trilogy and they are rather more revealing of Deutscher’s ‘needs’ than they are of Trotsky’s.
If both the masses and the individual leaders are irrelevant to the accomplishment of socialism, what remains? What forces can take their place? Deutscher often claimed to uphold what he called ‘classical Marxism’ against the ‘vulgar Marxism’ practised by Stalin, Mao and their epigones, and the virtues of his works confirm that this was no idle boast. Yet within the category of ‘classical Marxism’ he included many of the thinkers of the Second International, like Kautsky and Plekhanov, whose work was characterised – to different degrees – by an extreme determinism. For them, socialism was inevitable given a certain level of development of the productive forces. ‘Classical Marxism’ was therefore divided between the determinists and those (like Lenin, Trotsky, Luxemburg, Lukács or Gramsci) who understood the relationship between material circumstances and human activity. Reading Deutscher’s trilogy it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the experience of the defeat of the Russian Revolution led him to revive the determinism of the Second International. If defeat is too overwhelming, if the prospect of starting again is too difficult, then the temptation can be to present it, through the application of pseudo-dialectical voodoo, as a victory – or at least as being in the process of being transformed into a victory. Hence the title of the postscript to The Prophet Outcast: Victory in Defeat: ‘The very preconditions of socialism which classical Marxism had seen as existing only in the highly industrialised countries of the West were being created and assembled within Soviet society.’ [51] There is a name for the social system which produces ‘the preconditions of socialism’: it is capitalism. Yet this was the conclusion which Deutscher wished so much to avoid that he dedicated his considerable powers to persuading his readers of the opposite.
 
Deutscher’s influence
The trilogy exerted a great influence over the New Left when it emerged after 1956, an influence which was as contradictory as the books themselves. To understand it, we need to envisage the context in which they were first read and discussed.
When Trotsky was murdered in 1940 Stalinist rule was restricted to Russia itself and its immediate western border regions. By 1954, when the first volume of the trilogy appeared, Stalinism had encompassed the whole of Eastern Europe, China, North Korea and North Vietnam. It also held the allegiance of the most militant sections of the world working class. Some threats to the stability of the Stalinist ruling class had, of course, already appeared: the first internal split came with the expulsion of Yugoslavia from the Cominform (the Comintern’s successor) in 1948 and the first serious opposition from below came with the rising of East German workers in 1953. It was only retrospectively, however, that these events were generally seen as exposing the inherent problems of state capitalism. For all practical purposes, in the early 1950s Stalinism appeared to offer the only real alternative to Western capitalism and imperialism. Against the seemingly unstoppable rise of the system established by his arch-enemy, Trotsky seemed irrelevant, a figure from another time or another world – perhaps ‘the lost world of Atlantis’ which Deutscher invokes on more than one occasion. As he notes in the Preface to The Prophet Armed, ‘For nearly 30 years the powerful propaganda machine of Stalinism worked furiously to expunge Trotsky’s name from the annals of the revolution, or to leave it there only as the synonym for arch-traitor.’ [52] There was little effective defence against this onslaught.
Few of Trotsky’s own works were in print at this time, except for a handful of pamphlets produced by the nominally Trotskyist organisations which, during this period at least, had few members and little influence. The three biggest groups in the West – the American, French and British – had maybe 3,000 members between them. Even if we apply the label of ‘Trotskyist’ beyond adherents of the Fourth International to such dissident groups as the Workers’ Party in the US and the Socialist Review Group in the UK, their total memberships would have been less than that of, for example, the relatively small Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB). Asked whether he was aware of Trotsky’s writings during and immediately after the Second World War, Raymond Williams – perhaps the leading academic socialist thinker of his generation and one who organisationally broke with Stalinism during the late 1940s – replied:
No. That was a crucial lack. It wasn’t until much later that I really learnt of the existence of a socialist opposition in Russia.
This is somewhat disingenuous, since Williams would of course have learned something from his days in the CPGB about ‘the socialist opposition in Russia’, namely that it was composed of class traitors in the pay of MI6 and the Gestapo. But Williams is correct to describe the existence of a ‘generational block’. [53] The point is confirmed by John Saville, a Marxist historian and member of the CPGB until 1956, who writes that ‘before the war or after I personally never met a Trotskyist, or was confronted with one at any meeting I addressed; and the same was true, with only a very few exceptions, of members of the ILP.’ [54] And even if Saville or Williams had chanced to meet a Trotskyist, he would have found that their relationship to Trotsky’s own theory and practice was increasingly distant. For all the brilliance of many of the individuals associated with Trotskyism, Alasdair MacIntyre was right to say in his review of The Prophet Outcast that:
So called Trotskyism has been among the most trivial of movements. It transformed into abstract dogma what Trotsky thought in/1950/ex-communist.htm concrete terms at one moment in his life and canonised this. It is inexplicable in purely political dimensions, but the history of the more eccentric religious sects provides revealing parallels. The genuine Trotskyism of [Alfred] Rosmer and Natalya [Sedova] must have at most a few hundred adherents in the entire world. [55]
Nor did Trotsky’s non-revolutionary admirers keep his memory alive. During the 1930s several centrist groups and individuals had independently arrived at interpretations of Stalinism, particularly its international role, which were compatible with that of Trotsky – George Orwell’s Homage to Catalonia (1938) is perhaps the best example – but it soon became apparent that, for the majority, the political conclusions which they drew were quite different and in most cases, quite unrevolutionary. More generally, many intellectuals, particularly in the US, were attracted to Trotsky not only by his anti-Stalinism, but because of his literary and theoretical abilities, and what they saw as the romance of the revolutionary exile – the superficial aura of tragic heroism that Trotsky himself rejected. Some went so far as to join Trotskyist organisations, but most were unwilling to adopt the life of political commitment which membership entailed. Deutscher himself vividly describes their gradual retreat. [56] Nor were his ideas sustained by academics, since, as Deutscher rightly points out, the Stalinist version of history ‘strongly affected the views of even independent Western historians and scholars’. [57] As late as 1967 the New Left Review – later to be the vehicle for the super-Deutscherism of its editorial board – could publish, as its first serious consideration of Trotsky’s work, an article by Nicolas Krasso which concluded, ‘In practical political struggle, before and after the revolution, his under-estimation of the specific efficacy of political institutions led him into error after error.’ [58]
It was onto this scene, where Trotsky was regarded, at best, as a harmless icon of non-specific anti-Stalinism or, at worst, as a counter-revolutionary renegade from the socialist cause, that the first volume of Deutscher’s biography exploded in 1954. Not the least of our debts to Deutscher is that, in spite of his own disagreements with Trotsky, he played a major role in transmitting the legacy of his hero to subsequent generations. His timing was fortuitous. Two years after his first volume appeared, the revelations in Khrushchev’s Secret Speech and upheavals in Eastern Europe, culminating in the suppression of the Hungarian Revolution, blew apart the Stalinist myth. Deutscher was not the first person to refer to Trotsky or his role in the Russian Revolution. Orwell had done so through the characters of Snowball in Animal Farm (1945) and Emmanuel Goldstein in Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949), whose book, The Theory and Practice of Oligarchic Collectivism is – as Deutscher himself acknowledged – clearly derived from The Revolution Betrayed. [59] Nor was his the first biography: Bertram D. Wolfe had published his triple biography of Lenin, Trotsky and Stalin, Three Who Made a Revolution, in 1948. Nevertheless, the impact of Deutscher’s trilogy was qualitatively different.
For virtually the first time, revolutionary socialists had in their hands a substantial, documented history which broadly supported their arguments about the respective roles of Trotsky and Stalin in the Russian Revolutions. More importantly, open-minded socialists who had no contact with Trotskyists – which at this time would have meant most of them – had an independent source of information from which to construct an alternative to the disintegrating orthodoxies of Stalinism. As David Widgery once noted, ‘Even [in 1968], the range of readable socialist literature didn’t overtax a table top.’ [60] From 1956 to 1968 Deutscher’s three volumes would have accounted for quite a large part of the table’s surface. The Scottish miners’ leader Lawrence Daly, who broke with the CPGB in 1956, wrote of Deutscher, ‘His books on Stalin and Trotsky certainly enlightened thousands of active trade unionists, people who were not only trade union conscious but politically conscious, and they undoubtedly played a very important role in rescuing some thousands of people in this country, dedicated workers in the labour movement, from a kind of mummified Marxism, within the narrow and stultifying confines of which they had been ideologically asphyxiated.’ [61] Tariq Ali, for example, wrote, ‘My own political formation has been greatly influenced by Isaac Deutscher, Leon Trotsky and Ernest Mandel (in that order).’ [62] Now, the fact that Ali places Deutscher before Trotsky may indicate nothing more than the order in which he read these authors, but in many cases newly radicalised workers and students read Trotsky through Deutscher’s interpretation. From Widgery’s account, Deutscher’s Trotsky anthology, The Age of Permanent Revolution, was one of three main sellers on bookstalls at the London School of Economics during the student rebellions of the late 1960s. [63] And for some radicals at least, it was possible to be a Deutscherist without becoming a Trotskyist. In 1989, David Horowitz, whom we have already encountered, confessed to a Polish audience:
I was inspired to join the new Left by a Polish Marxist called Isaac Deutscher, who was my teacher. It was Deutscher who devised the theory out of which we hoped to revive the socialist dream. [64]
In his autobiography Tony Cliff recalled his concern over the dominance which Deutscher began to exert over audiences during the 1960s:
I remember going to lectures by Deutscher at which there were 1,000 or more present. Twice I spoke from the floor in the discussion criticising Deutscher’s position, but I hardly cut any ice with the audience ... Our puny group, offering a tough approach to Stalinism, could not overcome Deutscher’s soft soap. [65]
Cliff thought that because Deutscher’s position did not involve a complete break from Stalinism it was easier for people from that tradition to accept than one based on a harder Trotskyist analysis, let alone that associated with International Socialism. The claim has some validity for the period in which the books first appeared – it clearly explains Lawrence Daly’s enthusiasm, for example. But it cannot explain why people with no previous history of Stalinism, who were becoming socialists for the first time, found Deutscher’s arguments so compelling. Nor can it explain why they continued to do so long after the nature of Stalinism was accepted even by the majority of Communist parties. The answer is that, as I have already suggested, Deutscherism was a theory of consolation. It was – and here the cliché really is inescapable – no accident that Deutscherism reached its maximum influence between the onset of the downturn in international class struggle from 1975 and the fall of Stalinism in Eastern Europe in 1989. No matter how difficult the current situation may have been in Western Europe or the US, no matter how few papers were sold on the high street of a rainy Saturday morning, socialism – or societies ‘transitional’ to socialism – already existed in the world and their number was being added to year on year: Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Angola, Ethiopia, South Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia (where the phenomenon of a genocidal ‘workers’ state’ was shortly to be discovered) and Afghanistan.
The main vehicle for spreading these views was a journal in which Deutscher’s work had regularly appeared: New Left Review. The apotheosis of ‘theoretical Deutscherism’ was attained in an essay of 1983 by Perry Anderson, somewhat misleadingly called Trotsky on Stalinism. After a brilliant summary of Trotsky’s changing analysis of the Soviet Union, Anderson discusses the limitations of Trotsky’s analysis, which supposedly led to failures in prediction. All are derived from Deutscher. [66] The key example of what might be called ‘applied Deutscherism’ is Fred Halliday’s The Making of the Second Cold War (1983 and 1986), about which Anderson wrote, ‘It is fitting that the best work confronting the current Cold War should have been produced out of direct inspiration of [Deutscher’s] example.’ [67] Deutscherism was perhaps best summed up by Mike Davis as the proposition that ‘the Cold War between the USSR and the United States is ultimately the lightning-rod conductor of all the historic tensions between opposing international class forces.’ [68]
The fall of the Soviet bloc destroyed all the assumptions upon which Deutscherism was based. Some of his acolytes had already changed sides before the debacle of 1989–91, but after it became apparent that that the USSR would neither economically compete with the US nor politically reform itself in a socialist direction. Horowitz explained to a Polish audience in 1989 how he ‘waited in vain’ for the self-reform of the Stalinist states, before concluding, ‘Deutscher was wrong. There would never be a socialist political democracy erected on a socialist economic base.’ [69]
For those, like Fred Halliday, who had essentially seen the Soviet bloc as the bearer of socialist progress, the debacle ‘means nothing less than the defeat of the communist project as it had been known in the 20th century and the triumph of the capitalist.’ [70] Incredibly, some writers who had previously accepted International Socialism’s position on the nature of Stalinism began to endorse a Deutscherist position after the USSR had collapsed. [71] It would be going too far to say that every Deutscherist has now switched sides to support the US, capitalist globalisation, ‘liberal values’ and the invasion of awkward Third World states. For every Halliday or Hitchens there is a Davis or an Ali. Nevertheless, Deutscherism made it easy, for those who had no countervailing belief in the ability of the working class to sustain them, to transfer their allegiance from Moscow to Washington.
 
Conclusion
Towards the end of his life Deutscher began, in response to the Vietnam War, to engage in political activity for the first time in decades. In 1965 he was invited to speak at the National Teach-In about the war in Washington, and then at the far more political event of the same name in Berkeley. He said of the latter event, ‘This is the most exciting speaking engagement I have had since I spoke to the Polish workers 30 years ago.’ More important, perhaps, was his address to the Socialist Scholars Conference the following year (On Socialist Man), when he criticised the assembled ranks of the left academy (much smaller in those days, of course) for their failure to connect with the American working class:
Can’t you approach the young worker and tell him that the way to live is to work for life and not for death? Is it beneath American scholars to try to do that? ... Your only salvation is in carrying the idea of socialism to the working class and coming back to storm – to storm, yes, to storm – the bastions of capitalism. [72]
These remarks, and his involvement in the Bertrand Russell International War Crimes Tribunal, do not suggest the attitude of a man contemplating the world from a watchtower. And why should that come as a surprise? The present crisis over the invasion and occupation of Iraq has not only had the effect of smoking out of the closet supporters of US imperialism, but of revitalising socialists who had previously appeared lost to activity. Deutscher, a product of the finest traditions of European socialism before Stalin and Hitler had done their worst, was scarcely likely to be unaffected by the revival of struggle which surrounded him.
Changed circumstances enabled Deutscher to re-engage in political activity, but it was the circumstances which prevailed for decades beforehand which shaped both the strengths and weaknesses of the trilogy. The Deutscher who resisted Stalinism gave us what is most valuable in it; the Deutscher who capitulated gave us those aspects most redolent of that epoch of defeat. Now that the false alternative of Stalinism is itself history, the latter will diminish in significance, but the virtues of Deutscher’s great work are likely to endure for as long as we still need to discuss the rise and fall of the Russian Revolution. And of how many other books of the period can that be said?

Notes
1. A review of I. Deutscher, The Prophet Armed. Trotsky: 1879–1921, The Prophet Unarmed. Trotsky: 1921–1928 and The Prophet Outcast. Trotsky: 1929–1940 (London 2003), £15 each.
2. E.P. Thompson, The Poverty of Theory: or an Orrery of Errors, The Poverty of Theory and Other Essays (London 1978), p. 193.
3. But see M. Perry, Marxism and History (Houndmills 2002), p. 9, for an alternative judgement.
4. D. Horowitz, David Horowitz versus Christopher Hitchens, History News Network, http://hnn.us/articles/893.html.
5. M. Amis, Koba the Dread (London 2002), pp. 251, 252.
6. Where not otherwise specified, details on Deutscher’s life are taken from D. Singer, Armed with a Pen, in D. Horowitz (ed.), Isaac Deutscher: The Man and His Work (London 1971); P. Anderson, Preface, in I. Deutscher, Marxism, Wars and Revolutions (London and New York 1984), pp. i–vi; and T. Deutscher, Isaac Deutscher, 1907–1967, www.deutscherprize.org.uk.
7. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, p. 341.
8. As above, p. 176.
9. P. Sedgwick, The Tragedy of a Tragedian: An Appreciation of Isaac Deutscher, International Socialism 31, First Series (Winter 1967/8), p. 11.
10. See M. Ignatieff, Isaiah Berlin: A Life (London 1998), pp. 93, 235.
11. Deutscher variously compared Trotsky as a historian to Marx, Churchill and Carlyle. See I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, pp. 177–178, 189. In fact, Marx apart, the most appropriate comparison for Trotsky is Thomas Babington Macaulay, whose The History of England from the Accession of James VII to the Revolution (1848–53) bears a startling structural resemblance to The History of the Russian Revolution.
12. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, as above, p. 428; The Prophet Outcast, as above, pp. 94–95.
13. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, pp. 141–146, 157–158.
14. For two outstanding examples, see I. Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, as above, pp. 216–217, and The Prophet Unarmed, as above, pp. 22, 235–236; The Prophet Outcast, as above, pp. 148–149.
15. P. Sedgwick, as above.
16. L. Trotsky, My Life: An Attempt at an Autobiography (Harmondsworth 1975), p. 604.
17. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, as above, p. ix.
18. There are two great exceptions: Meaghan Delahunt’s novel In the Blue House (London 2001), which reconstructs Trotsky’s life during his Mexican exile, and Ken McMullen’s film Zina (1985), which focuses on the fate of Zinaida Lvovna.
19. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Unarmed, as above, pp. 76–77.
20. P. Broué, Trotsky: A Biographer’s Problems, in T. Brotherstone and P. Dukes (eds.), The Trotsky Reappraisal (Edinburgh 1992), pp. 20–21.
21. Compare I. Deutscher, The Prophet Unarmed, as above, pp. 308–310; and The Prophet Outcast, as above, pp. 49–65, with M. Reiman, The Birth of Stalinism: The USSR on the Eve of the ‘Second Revolution’ (London 1987), pp. 22, 27–28, 54–55; V.Z. Rogovin, 1937: Stalin’s Year of Terror (Oak Park 1998), pp. 374–392; and B. Starkov, Trotsky and Ryutin: from the History of the Anti-Stalin Resistance in the 1930s, in T. Brotherstone and P. Dukes (eds.), as above.
22. D. Volkogonov, Trotsky: The Eternal Revolutionary (New York 1996), p. xxiv.
23. D. Singer, The Prophet Vulgarised, The Nation, 25 March 1996.
24. I am unable to say to what extent P. Broue, Trotsky (Paris 1988) has advanced beyond Deutscher, since this potentially important work by a serious Trotskyist historian still awaits translation into English.
25. I. Deutscher, 1984: The Mysticism of Cruelty, in Heretics and Renegades (London 1955) and Marxism, Wars and Revolutions, as above.
26. I. Deutscher, The Ex-Communist and His Conscience, in Heretics and Renegades, as above, p. 20; Marxism, Wars And Revolutions, as above, pp. 57–58.
27. T. Cliff, The End of the Road: Deutscher’s Capitulation to Stalinism, International Socialism 15, First Series (Winter 1963), p. 20; Trotsky, vol. 4, The Darker the Night the Brighter the Star, 1927–1940 (London, Chicago and Melbourne 1993), pp. 304–307.
28. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, pp. 45–49, 342–328 [sic]. See, for example, his response to criticism from the American SWP in I. Deutscher, The Prophet Unarmed, as above, p. 449, n64.
29. L. Trotsky, Trotsky’s Diary in Exile (London 1958), p. 54.
30. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, p. 210.
31. A. MacIntyre, as above, pp. 54-55; P. Anderson, Trotsky’s Interpretation of Stalinism, New Left Review I/139 (May/June 1983), pp. 49–54.
32. T. Cliff, The Nature of Stalinist Russia, Selected Writings, vol. 3, Marxist Theory After Trotsky (London 2003), pp. 3–4. See also V.I. Lenin, Left Wing Childishness and the Petty Bourgeois Mentality, Collected Works, vol. 27 (Moscow 1972), pp. 335–336.
33. L. Trotsky, The USSR in War, In Defence of Marxism (Against the Petty-Bourgeois Opposition) (London 1966), pp. 9–11.
34. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, p. 266.
35. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, as above, px.
36. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, p. 241.
37. I. Deutscher, The Great Contest (London 1960), pp. 21–22.
38. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Unarmed, as above, p. 429, n69. See also I. Deutscher, Russia in Transition, Ironies of History (Berkeley 1971), pp. 44–46.
39. I. Deutscher, The Unfinished Revolution (London 1967), p. 22.
40. The point was very forcibly made at the time by Max Shachtman in Isaac Deutscher’s Stalin, The Bureaucratic Revolution: The Rise of the Stalinist State (New York 1962), pp. 229–34. See also N. Davidson, Discovering the Scottish Revolution, 1692–1746 (London and Sterling, Virginia 2003), pp. 9–15, 290–295 and A. Callinicos, Making History (Houndmills 1987), pp. 229–233, and Bourgeois Revolutions and Historical Materialism, International Socialism 43, Second Series (Summer 1989), pp. 122–127. I pursue this topic in greater depth in the 2004 Deutscher Lecture, How Revolutionary were the Bourgeois Revolutions?, forthcoming in Historical Materialism.
41. I. Deutscher, Stalin: A Political Biography (London 1949), pp. 565–566.
42. L. Trotsky, Stalin: An Appraisal of the Man and his Influence, edited and translated from the Russian by C. Malamuth (London 1947), p. 413.
43. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, as above, p. 372.
44. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, p. 369.
45. As above, p. 189.
46. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, pp. 80–81.
47. L. Trotsky, What Next?, Fascism, Stalinism and the United Front, 1930–34, International Socialism Special Double Issue 38/39, First Series (August–September 1969), p. 43; The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany with an Introduction by E. Mandel (Harmondsworth, 1975), p. 228. Available online, go to www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/germany/1932-ger/.
48. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Unarmed, as above, p. 368.
49. L. Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution (London 1977), pp. 343–344. See also L. Trotsky, Trotsky’s Diary in Exile, as above, pp. 53–54.
50. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, pp. 197, 198, 201.
51. As above, pp. 422–423.
52. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, as above, p. viii.
53. R. Williams, Politics and Letters (London 1979), pp. 49, 402.
54. J. Saville, The Communist Experience: A Personal Appraisal, The Socialist Register 1991 Edited by R. Miliband and L. Panitch (London 1991), p. 21.
55. A. MacIntyre, Trotsky in Exile, Against the Self-Images of the Age (London 1971), p. 59. One assumes that when MacIntyre wrote this he included the members of the International Socialists, to which he still more or less belonged, among the ‘genuine’ few hundred.
56. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, p. 353. For an excellent account of this group, see A. Wald, The New York Intellectuals (Chapel Hill and London 1987).
57. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, as above, p. viii.
58. N. Krasso, Trotsky’s Marxism, New Left Review I/44 (July–August 1967), p. 85. The same issue also contains a perceptive interview with Deutscher: On the Arab-Israeli War.
59. I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, p. 261.
60. D. Widgery, Ten Years for Pandora, Socialist Review 2 (May 1978), p. 21.
61. L. Daly, A Working Class Tribute, D. Horowitz (ed.), as above, p. 89.
62. T. Ali, Revolution From Above (London 1988), p. ix.
63. D. Widgery, The Left in Britain, 1956–1968 (Harmondsworth 1976), p. 525. Apparently the others were The Autobiography of Malcolm X and Hal Draper’s Berkeley: The New Student Radicals.
64. D. Horowitz, Reality and Dream, www.frontpagemag.com
65. T. Cliff, A World to Win: Life of a Revolutionary (London, Chicago and Sydney 2000), p. 67.
66. P. Anderson, Trotsky’s Interpretation of Stalinism, as above, p. 57. Compare I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast, as above, p. 373.
67. P. Anderson, Preface, Marxism, Wars and Revolutions, as above, p. xix.
68. M. Davis, Nuclear Imperialism and Extended Deterrence, New Left Review (ed.), Exterminism and Cold War (London 1982), p. 44.
69. D. Horowitz, Reality and Dream, as above.
70. F. Halliday, The Ends of the Cold War, New Left Review I/180 (March/April 1990), p. 12.
71. C. Hitchens, Left-Leaning, Left-Leaving, Los Angeles Times, 16 November 2003. Mercifully, the introduction by Hitchens to The Prophet Armed which was once threatened in the advance publicity has not materialised.
72. Quoted in S. Unger, Deutscher and the New Left in America, in D. Horowitz (ed.), as above, pp. 215, 218–219.
 






Politics in Britain have been upended by the results of the June 8 election that Conservative Party Prime Minister Theresa May called two months ago, expecting to win easily. Instead, the Tories lost their parliamentary majority – they will cling to power by bringing the right-wing Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), based in Northern Ireland, into the government.
In a matter of weeks, the opposition Labour Party came from far back in opinion polls to rival the Conservatives for most votes overall and increase their seats in parliament. This is a vindication of party leader Jeremy Corbyn and his avowedly left-wing message – and a further indictment of the party establishment that has tried to bring down Corbyn since he was elected Labour’s leader in 2015.
The election has raised hopes on the British left – along with a host of questions about what comes next to engage the millions of people, predominantly young, who saw Corbyn as a new direction for politics. Here, Neil Davidson, a member of revolutionary socialism in the 21st century (rs21)/International Socialism Scotland (ISS) and author of numerous books, including We Cannot Escape History: States and Revolutions, talked to Alan Maass about the outcome of the vote and the issues at stake in the coming weeks and months.



* * *
THIS RESULT is something no one would have predicted in April when Theresa May called the snap election. Can you introduce the factors that led to this?
THE MAIN thing is that nobody expected Jeremy Corbyn and the Labour Party to be anything like as successful as they were.
One reason for the success was that hundreds of thousands of people joined the Labour Party in the last year and a half – and a lot of them became activists and were involved in the campaign. So we’ve had a whole bunch of young people doing electioneering for Labour in a way the party hasn’t seen in 10 or 15 or even 20 years.
Another reason is that the manifesto that Labour ran on was fairly left wing by contemporary standards. It wouldn’t have been particularly left wing in the 1960s, but it has to be considered left wing now, compared to Labour under Tony Blair. The manifesto talked about renationalization, doing away with student fees, defending the National Health Service and so on.
Frankly, a lot of people had just never heard that before – especially young people, who were highly mobilized during this campaign. Some of it is old hat to socialists of my age – but this is stuff younger people never heard before, and it was extremely attractive.
I also think it’s the case that the left badly overestimated the strength of racist and anti-migrant feeling on the basis of the Brexit vote. There was an assumption that because people had voted for Brexit, they must automatically be racists.
That was always an oversimplification. And what we saw in the election is that a lot of the people who previously supported the right-wing UK Independence Party and voted to leave the EU actually voted for Labour.
This happened in some quite extraordinary places. In Canterbury, which has been a Tory seat since 1831, there was a massive swing to Labour of almost 30 percent, which must have been made up of a number of previous UKIP voters, because UKIP didn’t stand in that race.
That sort of result happened all over the place, and it speaks to the strength of Labour’s turn to the left and Corbyn’s own impressive abilities as a campaigner.
But the other side of the election was that the Tory campaign was a complete disaster, in ways that even they had to concede.
The Tory manifesto had no cost estimates at all for its proposals, unlike Labour. The Tories started off saying they were going to make ordinary people pay for social care, and then, when faced with a massive response to that, they reversed themselves and said they wouldn’t do that, all in the space of a day. Theresa May appeared to be incapable of defending her position.
I’m less surprised by the collapse of the Tories. I’ve been saying for some time that the quality of British ruling class leadership is appallingly low – it has been for a good 30 or 40 years, and this was just demonstrated again. These people aren’t used to having to fight – they haven’t had a union movement or an effective opposition, so they don’t know how to do it.
But what I think what is in some ways quite surprising is the revival of Labour as a left-wing social democratic party.
 
MAY IS making a deal with the Democratic Unionist Party to cling to power, so she’ll still be the prime minister. Does that mean it isn’t such a bad defeat for the Conservatives?
NO, I think this is catastrophic – an absolute disaster for the Tory Party. This is as bad as the Iraq invasion of 2003 was for Tony Blair, or the Suez crisis in 1956 before that.
May had, I think, four things in mind when she called the snap election.
One, she knows that Brexit – or at least the particular Brexit the Tories have in mind – was going to be really damaging to the people who voted for it in the referendum, and working-class people in particular. And with Brexit due to be completed the previous year, the effects would kick in just about the time that the next election would have been scheduled. May wanted to circumvent that by holding an earlier election.
Second, of course, May thought the Tories could win easily because Labour was obviously not going to – not with Jeremy Corbyn, the mad, IRA-supporting pacifist who nobody was going to support.
Third, I think May wanted a reinforcement of the Brexit referendum last year – to say: I was elected on the program of leaving the EU, so shut up about it.
The fourth reason was what she called strengthening her hand in negotiations about Brexit, which people took to mean gaining leverage with the EU negotiators. But what she really meant was to strengthen her hand within the Tory Party, against the ultra-right Brexiteers.
The negotiators for the EU will be laughing themselves sick, I would think. This obviously hasn’t strengthened the power of whoever’s going to be doing the negotiating for Britain. The Tories are badly divided, and it’s a divided parliament, so clearly, the EU will be able to make demands that they might not otherwise have made.
I think the Tories have virtually no cards to play in the negotiations. There must be some talk at the moment about delaying the start of the talks, because the British side is simply in no position to enter them. There’s some flexibility on when negotiations begin, but no flexibility about when they end – Britain has to be out of the EU by March 2019.
But to go back to the election, May was claiming she would get a gigantic majority – like what Margaret Thatcher won in 1983. But she actually ended up with fewer seats than she went into the election with.
So this is a disaster. Everyone knows it – the right wing press, her own party members, who have been lining up to stab her in the back since the vote. The general line is that May can’t leave immediately, because that would produce complete chaos, but she’ll get the Brexit process started, and then there will be a leadership election in the Tory Party.
But that’s a problem as well because it would mean another election – presumably, any new leader of the Tories would run in a new election to gain some legitimacy for themselves. And now, we know that Labour could possibly win that election.
The snap election was the latest in a series of unbelievable miscalculations. First was the Scottish referendum, which they almost lost. Then came the Brexit referendum, which forced out the last Conservative prime minister. And now this. If I were a British capitalist, I would be tearing my hair out at the moment at the condition of the political leadership.
Plus, the Tories will have to rule with the Democratic Unionist Party in the government in order to have a parliamentary majority.
This is the Irish equivalent of the Tea Party. They’re not just a unionist party that’s committed to preventing unification of Ireland so the North can remain part of the UK. These are people want to stop abortion, they believe in creationism, they’re climate-change deniers.
And they’re linked to ultra-loyalist terrorist groups from the 1970s and ‘80s. Given all the smears about terrorism that were thrown at Corbyn, the fact that May is consorting with a party with links to loyalist terrorist organizations is going to play very badly.
So everything’s been thrown into the air. To quote Chairman Mao: "There is great disorder under the heavens – the situation is excellent!" Because the ruling class is in extreme disarray.
 
CAN YOU talk about what happened in Scotland? The Scottish National Party (SNP) lost a number of seats, more of them to the Tories than to Labour.
YES, THE Tories are up from one seat in Scotland to 13, and Labour went from one seat to seven seats. The SNP still has more seats in Scotland than all the other parties put together, so we shouldn’t exaggerate this.
This is coming after the SNP result in 2015, where they ended up with 56 out of 59 seats in Westminster. That was purely on the basis of the massive radicalization of the 2014 referendum on Scottish independence. That was never going to be sustainable, so what’s really happened is that the SNP is back to what is still a commanding position.
As to why the Tories did well, I think the unionist vote for staying in the UK has consolidated itself around the Tory Party, which in Scotland is led by Ruth Davidson, who at least appears to be reasonably intelligent and personable. Also, a lot of people in the northeast of Scotland, which used to be a Tory stronghold, went to the SNP last time on a fairly conservative basis – a lot of those people are just coming home to the Tory Party.
So it’s not a new group of people abandoning the SNP. But I think there’s a limit to how much support there will ever be for the Tory Party in Scotland. They’re probably about at that limit at the moment, with around 28–29 percent of the population.
On the other hand, the Labour Party in Scotland had a revival because of Corbyn. The Scottish Labour Party is on the right wing of Labour, and it was really hostile to Corbyn. Yet a lot of people in Scotland voted for the Labour Party anyway because of his left-wing message.
I did. This is the first time I voted for Labour in 30 years, because I’m done with the SNP, and the candidate for Labour where I live was a real left-winger. I think that’s what gave Labour its revival.
The SNP made two miscalculations. One was to think that everyone who supports independence supports the SNP, which isn’t true. At least a third of the independence vote isn’t SNP supporters.
And the second was to assume that everybody who supports independence supports staying in the EU. The SNP made that a major plank of their argument for a second independence referendum – which would be about staying in the UK or going back to the EU. That was a really stupid position to take, because there’s quite a big section of the Scottish population that supports independence, but doesn’t support the EU.
I think those assumptions meant the SNP was exposed to the unionist argument on the one hand that drained votes to the Tories, but also to the arguments of the anti-EU wing on the other.
However, I don’t think the SNP is going to collapse. A lot of what’s been said about how the SNP is in decline is nonsense. I think that Scottish politics has become normalized. We’re back to talking about class issues, for both of the two major classes – and that’s done away with the idea that everything is about independence.
People are starting to talk about social questions again, and that’s obviously good for the left, and something we have to encourage. But I suspect the SNP will continue to be the dominant party for the foreseeable future, and the Tories will be their main opponents in the Scottish parliament.
 
CAN YOU look ahead to the future and talk about the impact of this election for the left? Let’s start with struggles outside the electoral arena. Will the Labour Party’s success build working-class confidence?
I THINK a lot of the campaigns that are already running – for example, unionization campaigns for people on zero-hour contracts or initiatives to abolish zero-hour contracts – are going to gain new momentum, because a lot of the people involved in these campaigns are young people, and they’re precisely the people who came out to support Corbyn.
The same will be true about anti-racist campaigns, campaigns to defend the National Health Service, and so on. Previously, people didn’t feel like the Labour Party was the party behind these campaigns. But because of Corbyn, they do now.
Plus, people have seen that it’s possible to mobilize in political ways. Because that mobilization took place on the basis of a series of Labour Party manifesto commitments – all of which relate to these kinds of social struggles – I think this will give them an added impetus.
A lot of this depends on whether people go beyond an exclusively electoral focus with the Labour Party.
There are a lot of issues here that aren’t new. We’ve all known, going back decades, about the difficulties of working within the Labour Party. It’s only because the Labour Party has been so right wing for the last 20 to 25 years that this appears to be a new set of questions.
A lot of the people who joined Labour are more like the people who joined Podemos in Spain or SYRIZA in Greece, or the people who supported Bernie Sanders in the U.S. They’re not embedded in the old kind of constituency parties, like Labour has always been. They’re much more interested in struggle and political activity than in traditional election campaigning. That’s much healthier.
The question is how the radical left, outside of the party, is able to work with these young, very motivated people who are in the Labour Party, and build a relationship with them.
That hasn’t been an issue we’ve had to confront over the last 20 to 25 years, because there haven’t been those kinds of people in the older mainstream parties. Now there is, and it means that a lot of the things the left used to take for granted about relating to people with reformist ideas moving to the left have to be rethought – or at least we have to go back over some of that ground.
It would be a problem to just sloganeer at people about the dead end of reformism. Because at this moment, it doesn’t seem like a dead end. It seems like it’s actually going somewhere.
I think the debate will come up now about whether people on the left should be inside the Labour Party. That has obviously been an argument since Corbyn took over the leadership, and I think it’s a serious discussion now. Given that the radical left is dispersed among different organizations, there’s an argument for at least temporary membership in the Labour Party.
I’m not sure what the answer to that is yet. I think we need to see what the fallout is after the election, once it’s settled down, assuming it does. But certainly, it’s not a stupid question – it’s a legitimate one for revolutionaries to discuss now.
 
WHAT ARE some of the questions the left needs to ask and answer in having that discussion?
I THINK the main issue is about forms of organization and the assumptions people on the left have made for past hundred years – or at least the last 50 years, from 1968 onwards – about the need for revolutionary parties.
To what extent do we need to rethink that assumption, given that no one has successfully built a mass revolutionary party anywhere, at any time, through different periods and different situations, even if you take the mid-1960s as a starting point?
Maybe the answer to that question is the object now is to create a cadre – a group of people who have experience in the class struggle, who participate in campaigns and trade unions, who learn to operate and to argue and to lead.
That’s something that is still possible. Whether it’s possible to do in the form of a mass revolutionary party, outside of a revolutionary situation – that’s what I’m dubious about. To go back to the early 20th century, the problem in Germany – and Italy, too – wasn’t that there wasn’t a party beforehand. It was that there weren’t enough experienced cadre able to form that party when the time came and have people listen to them.
So I think there are two separate questions. There’s a need for some kind of organization or structure for revolutionaries – that’s certainly necessary. And then there’s the question of whether it’s possible to build a mass revolutionary party, which I’m not sure about, based on the experience of the last half century.
One way of reaching people and having that discussion is to actually be inside the reformist parties – on the condition that you don’t make staying in those parties the main priority.
I would think that the question is different in the U.S., where there isn’t an actual social democratic party, and where Sanders didn’t succeed in transforming the Democratic Party – it’s doubtful that anyone could.
But here, that’s the issue, and I think it needs to be looked at seriously, especially during the centenary year of the Russian Revolution – what is still relevant and what is of historical versus contemporary significance.
These are very difficult questions, and of course, as soon as you say any of this, the specter of revisionism is thrown at you. But it’s something that has to be confronted.
We need to talk about the question of organization – and the implications flowing from that answer in terms of whether people on the left go into, individually or in groups, social democratic organizations to try to influence them, but knowing that these bodies can’t by totally transformed.
We’re just at the beginning stages of this discussion, of course. I know a lot of people are thinking these things through and haven’t reached conclusions yet.
 
WHAT QUESTIONS need to be asked about revolutionaries joining the Labour Party?
I THINK the first question would have be whether you can operate openly as a revolutionary within the Labour Party, without silencing yourself on certain issues in order to stay in. That’s absolutely fundamental.
If people can operate openly, make arguments and sell literature, that makes it possible. If you have to make compromises about your positions and not openly tell people what you stand for – if you have to have some kind of a secret organization – that won’t lead anywhere. There are plenty of historical examples of that failing.
So this question is actually going to be about the Labour Party from Corbyn on down. Corbyn did usually defend revolutionaries in the Labour Party in the past. So it’s possible he might be in favor of people coming in. He might see it as strengthening his hand, and also on the basis of a belief that revolutionaries ought to be there.
What it comes down to is whether the Labour Party becomes the kind of organization that allows people on the left to organize openly. I have enough historical experience with the Labour Party to wonder whether it will, even under a left-wing leadership.
And I don’t think it’s possible to go in without the ability to be open as a revolutionary. Because that means deceiving people, and I think you ultimately end up deceiving yourself. We’ve seen many times in the past people going into reformist parties, hoping to change them and ending up being changed themselves, and accepting reformist positions.
I guess it’s an open question at the moment, but the main point for me starts with this: Can you be a revolutionary without compromising or hiding your views?
 



George Souvlis: By way of introduction, could you explain what personal experiences strongly influenced you, politically and academically?
Neil Davidson: I was born in Aberdeen, the regional centre of the North-East of Scotland, in 1957. Of all the major cities in Scotland, it was the one which retained the closest links to the surrounding countryside well into the twentieth century. The greatest of all North-Eastern novels (and an outstanding work of Marxist Modernism), Lewis Grassic Gibbon’s Sunset Song, is essentially about the end of the local peasantry in the aftermath of the First World War – and in many ways it tells the story of my family. My maternal grandfather, Wullie Farquhar, was a farm servant on the estate at Monymusk who migrated to the city in the late twenties where he got a job as a mechanic on the trams and then on the buses. My grandmother Helen was always too ill to work. My mother Margaret was born in the thirties and went to school during the War: she was one of the brightest girls in her year, but Granny and Granda Farquhar obviously couldn’t afford to pay for further education, so she went to work in a bank as a typist, then as a secretary. My paternal grandfather was an industrial worker on the Donside paper mills, but I never knew him as he contracted a lung disease from breathing in paper fibres (this was before the tyranny of Health and Safety) and died during the War – an end hastened by pre-NHS experimentation with radiation treatment which burned off large sections of his skin and required my Granny Davidson to change his bandages twice a day. My dad Doug was also academically talented and won a state bursary to go to one of the private schools (Robert Gordon’s) he couldn’t possibly have gone to otherwise – one consequence of which was that he always knew professional middle-class people who were much better off than we were. Dad trained as a radiographer while doing his National Service in the army during the early fifties and that became his job at the Aberdeen Royal Infirmary once he was discharged.
For the first 10 years of my life (1957–67) Mum, Dad, my sister Shona and me stayed in a privately-rented, two-room tenement flat in Claremont Street. We had an outside toilet which we shared with our neighbours across the landing. Also outside was a wash-house in which the women would put the cloths through a mangle to get the worst of the water out before pegging them up on the washing line. (Every family had a ‘day’ in which they got to use the line.) Like most of the tenements in our street there was a WWII bomb shelter in the back green. All four of us slept in the same room – Mum and Dad in a double bed and Shona and I in a bunk bed next to it. We washed in the sink and didn’t have a phone or a fridge, although we did have a TV. My students often react with horror when I tell them this, but I had a happy childhood and most of the people of the kids I went to school with lived in similar ways. I was encouraged to read and often retreated into an imaginary world where I made up stories involving my favourite Marvel Comics characters (especially Dr Strange). Granny and Granda Farquhar lived in the flat above us and so we benefited from an extended family situation; they would always take Shona and me in if Mum and Dad needed some space. I was dimly aware that some of Dad’s friends lived in what seemed to me to be palatial homes in the West End. I don’t remember this, but apparently at the age of 7 I asked my parents why these people had more money than us – a very good question which I’ve since tried to answer. I suppose the point is that this was at the height of the post-war boom, of embedded Social Democracy and the emergence of a supposedly “affluent” working class; it is very easy to romanticise this period, particularly after 40 years of neoliberalism, but with the extremely important exception of our health – the impact of the NHS should never be underestimated – actual living conditions had not necessarily improved since the War. Scottish crime novelist Val MacDiarmid has a joke about how, in Scotland, “1968” really only got going in “1979”; with some exaggeration you could say that, for many people, “1945” only got going in “1968”.
Take housing. When I reached age 10 in October 1967 the local Council was legally obliged to re-house us as siblings were not allowed to sleep in the same room after one became a teenager. (It didn’t matter about parents sleeping in the same room as their children, apparently.) We moved to a council housing scheme called Summerhill on (what was then) the extreme western edge of the city. It was paradise. We had an inside toilet, a bath, a bedroom each, a lawn front and back, and our neighbours all moved in at the same time as us. We couldn’t afford to go abroad for holidays until the early 1970s, so we would stay with with my “aunties” in the countryside. One of them, Betty, had a tied cottage on the same estate where my grandfather had worked in the twenties: she was a shepherd and a cowherd – something I suspect not many people in the UK today can say of their female relatives.
In 1969 I passed the “11 plus” which meant that I went to Aberdeen Grammar School, rather than the local comprehensive, although the Grammar itself became a comprehensive in 1971 (when Margaret Thatcher was Education Secretary!). Like most working-class children who go to these places, I ended up in much the same kind of job that I would have got anyway – a clerk working for the Grampian Health Board. There was never any question of me going to University – the important thing was to get work. It was while I was at secondary School (1969 – 75 that I became politically aware and began to consider myself a socialist in a fairly vague way. My family never really talked about politics although in retrospect I can see that Mum and Dad were moving to the right throughout the mid- to late-Seventies: even so, in 1977 Dad and I were both on the NALGO (now part of UNISON) Executive Committee for the Health Board, him representing radiographers and me “youth”. Thinking about politics was partly a response to events of the time (my secondary school years almost exactly correspond to the “1968” period), partly to the music I was listening to (Dylan, The Mothers of Invention, Bowie, Roxy Music, Steely Dan, Curtis Mayfield, the MC5, The Velvet Underground – I took my cues assiduously from the New Musical Express), but also because of four books that I stumbled across in the Grammar School library. George Orwell’s Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters had just been published in hardback the previous year and there they were. I must have read Animal Farm by this point , but nothing else. These books opened up a whole new world for me, about Stalinism, the nature of the USSR, literary Modernism, the study of popular culture – even language itself. To this day, Inside the Whale remains one of my top ten essays of all time – its up there with The Peculiarities of the English and Breaking the Chains of Reason. For this reason I get slightly irritated at a kind of snobby, supercilious critique of Orwell – not least from the editors of Salvage – which seems to be more a response to the way he has been appropriated than to his actual writings.
One consequence of this literary encounter was that when I bumped into the International Socialists in the second half of 1976, their state capitalist position on Russia made perfect sense to me, and set it on a properly scientific basis. This was the year a number of things came together for me: culturally, punk was just about to break, as was disco (the supposed hostility of adherents of these forms to each other is a myth: I liked both, as did most of my mates); politically I was enthused by Rock Against Racism and then the Anti-Nazi League, for which I became the Aberdeen Carnival transport organiser. By this point my initial political formation was more-or-less complete, although I didn’t really immerse myself in the literature of the Classical Marxist tradition until I temporarily moved to London in the early Eighties and spent quite a lot of time reading on commutes to and from work. At this point I was very influenced by Alex Callinicos – as I continued to be for the next thirty years – as I thought he was doing the most to actually develop the IS sub-tradition, rather than simply repeat it. My favourite book from the period is probably Nigel Harris’s Of Bread and Guns, though.
I eventually got a degree from the Open University and also did some tutoring for it, but I never really imagined becoming an academic. I only did so because as I entered my fifties it was getting physically much more difficult to spend all weekend and evening writing on top of my day job – I was a career civil servant from 1987 to 2008. The writing itself only started because I wanted to understand what was politically changing in Scotland during the late 1980s, in a longer-tern timescale, and nobody else seemed to be doing this. Why had Scottish nationalism been historically so weak, when Scottish national consciousness was so strong? Was it to do with the particular form of the Scottish transition to capitalism? And so on. I began to work on these issues, but found myself having to undertake much more general explorations of the concepts I had to deploy – nation-state, bourgeois revolution, uneven and combined development – so my later general studies in these subjects all emerged out of my initial attempt to get to grips with the specifics of the Scottish experience.
 
One of the main riddles of contemporary marxist theory is the issue of the nation, which for many theorists is considered as an incompatible reality with this of class, both in analytical and political terms. Could you delineate the basic lines of an analytical marxist framework that could effectively grasp the national aspect of an historical social formation? Can marxist theories be combined fruitfully with the contemporary literature on nationalism (Hobsbawm, Gellner etc) or they are mutually exclusive?
Of the non-Marxists the key figure here is the one you mention: Gellner, whose work I admire and think can be incorporated into a Marxist account – it is equally “modernist” in that it rejects notions of nationalism which see it as existing during the feudal era, for example. Weberians like Gellner treat nationalism as essentially a substitute for the role of religion in what they call traditional or agrarian societies. In effect they dismiss the idea that nations are permanent aspects of the human condition before industrialisation, only to reintroduce it as inescapable after the process has begun. Marxist accounts place the emergence of nationalism earlier, with the capitalist mode of production itself, since it is demonstrable that England developed both national consciousness and fully formed nationalism long before industrialisation began, which is also true of the United States and to a lesser extent of the United Netherlands. To argue that nations only appeared at some stage in the later 18th century would be as absurd as arguing that capitalism only appeared at the same period. In fact, national consciousness took as many centuries to become the dominant form of consciousness as the capitalist mode of production did to become the dominant mode of production, and it did so as a consequence of the latter.
Outside of a handful of countries, however, capitalism and industrialisation arrived simultaneously, so in a sense Gellner is right to say that mass nationalism was a product of industrialisation, but his insight was too focussed on the functionality of nationalism for industrial societies. At least as much attention should be paid to the way in which industrialisation, and the related process of urbanisation, together produced the changes in human consciousness which made nationalism possible (for the subordinate classes), as to the way in which the more complex societies they produced made nationalism necessary (for the dominant class). It is all too easy to ignore how unprecedented these experiences were (and still are) for the people undergoing them.
What does nationalism mean for the working class? Reformist consciousness was famously described by Gramsci as “dual” or “contradictory”; on the one hand accepting the permanence of the system, on the other rejecting the effect of its operation. The most basic expression of this contradiction is an acceptance by workers of the wages system accompanied by a rejection of the particular level of wages which they are being offered, but it extends to all aspects of social life. Workers remain nationalist to the extent that they remain reformist. And from the point of view of the capitalist class in individual nations it is absolutely necessary that they do so, or the danger is always that workers will identify, not with the “national” interest of the state in which they happen to be situated, but that of the class to which they are condemned to belong, regardless of the accident of geographical location. Nationalism should not therefore be seen as something which only “happens” during separatist movements on the one hand, or during fascist and imperialist manifestations on the other: the capitalist system generates nationalism as a necessary, everyday condition of its continued existence. It develops new structural capacities, new modes of experience and new psychological needs in the people who have to work in the factories and live in the cities. It is this need for some collective sense of belonging with which to overcome the effects of alienation, the need for psychic compensation for the injuries sustained at the hands of capitalist society, that nationalism provides in the absence of revolutionary class consciousness, but in conjunction with reformist class consciousness. One might say that the origins of national consciousness see the emergence of an identity-ensemble adequate to the historical conditions of generalised alienation; but the needs produced by capitalist industrialisation last as long as the system itself.
It imperative that loyalty to a state be secured, and the nation is the means. Workers have often been asked to accept rises in interest rates, cuts in wages and services, or participation in imperialist wars, but never for the benefit of capitalism, always for the benefit of a particular nation, for “the national interest”. It is not only the state which makes such appeals. The organisations of the working class themselves reinforce reformist class consciousness within a national context. At the most elementary level this is because such organisations are unwilling to challenge the nationalism within which political discourse is conducted, for fear of being labelled unpatriotic. More importantly, however, it is because they seek either to influence or determine policy within the confines of the existing nation-state. Typically, therefore, nationalism is invested with the contradictory character of the reformist world view.
The neoliberal reorganization of capitalism heightened three existing tendencies: the transformation of human relationships to market transactions, the reduction of human capacities to mere factors of production and the self-identification of human beings primarily as consumers. The result is to raise levels of atomization and alienation to a previously unimaginable extent, with potentially dangerous consequences for capital, which still has to achieve the tacit acceptance, and preferably the active support, of the working class in the process of its own exploitation. Otherwise, the system is potentially threatened, either by social breakdown, as individualized consumers transfer the competitiveness of the market to all other areas of life, or by social conflict, as workers begin to discover or rediscover their class-consciousness and mobilize in their collective interest. But repression on its own will not produce the degree of willing acceptance that the system requires. In these circumstances nationalism plays three roles. First, it provides a type of psychic compensation for the direct producers, which is unobtainable from the mere consumption of commodities. It is, as they say, no accident that the nationalist turn in the ideology of the Chinese ruling class became most marked with the initial opening up of the Chinese economy to world markets in 1978 and the suppression of the movement for political reform in 1989, which was followed by a “patriotic education campaign” the general tone of which continues to this day. Second, it acts as a means of recreating at the political level the cohesion which is being lost at the social level. Third, it uses this sense of cohesion to mobilize populations behind the performance of national capitals against their competitors and rivals.
This last aspect requires some elaboration, because potentially it involves risks or at least inconveniences for capital. The imperial nationalism unleashed by the Conservatives before 1997 in relation to “Europe,” was not because the EU was in any sense hostile to neoliberalism, but as an ideological diversion from the failure of neoliberalism to transform the fortunes of British capital. The nationalism invoked for this purpose has now places a major obstacle for those British politicians and state managers – the majority – who want to pursue a strategy of greater European integration, however rational that may be from their perspective: we will discuss this later, but Brexit has to be understood primarily as a catastrophe for British capital.
But there is another danger for the ruling classes too, namely that neoliberal nationalism will lead to the fragmentation of neoliberal states. The difficulty here is a deeper one. Because nationalism is such an inescapable aspect of capitalist development, the first response to intolerable conditions is to seek to establish a new nation-state, although this is usually only possible where some level of national consciousness already exists, as it does, for example, in Scotland. In other words, neoliberalism may require nations, but it does not require particular nations. And invoking nationalism as a counterweight to neoliberal social and economic policy can involve a different set of problems for individual ruling classes; not problems of the order of class war or the war of each against all, but those involving the uncertainties and inconveniences caused by the potential fragmentation of the nation-state. This outcome is generally only possible where an alternative national consciousness is available and associated with a distinct territory within the state. This is obviously what has happened in the case of Scotland.
 
Werner Bonefeld, in one of his articles, described the idea of a “progressive” form of nationalism as an “entirely regressive phenomenon”. Do you agree with this take? Do you not think that the nationalist movements in Catalonia and Scotland contain any potential emancipatory content?
Werner is obviously right that there are limits to how “progressive” any nationalism can be, since – as I have argued – they are products of capitalism. But even if we restrict ourselves to national movements in the advanced West and include, say, Quebec, in addition to the stateless nations you mention, then I think his main point is wrong. It is true that the SNP is committed to the neoliberal agenda – but a vote for independence in the referendum is not the same as a vote for the SNP: support for a national demand such as Scottish independence is quite distinguishable from support for a party which advocates it: it depends on what your reasons for supporting the demand are. There can be both nationalist reasons and non-nationalist (socialist, environmentalist) reasons for secession. One legal theorist (and Scottish Nationalist) the late Neil MacCormick argued that nationalism could take either an “existential” form in which attaining statehood is an end in itself or a “pragmatic” means to achieving social and political ends through statehood. MacCormick himself noted that the latter was a very “weak” form of nationalism, but in certain contexts it need not be nationalism at all. As a political ideology, nationalism – any nationalism, relatively progressive or absolutely reactionary – involves two inescapable principles: that the national group should have its own state, regardless of the social consequences; and that what unites the national group is more significant than what divides it, above all the class divide. It is clear from the Scottish experience at least, however, that non-nationalist arguments for supporting independence were widely used by many Yes activists, particularly around the Radical Independence Campaign. It argued, for example, that the secession is a means of resisting the neoliberal strategy of devolving responsibility for implementing austerity down from governing parties and central state apparatuses to elected bodies whose policy options are severely restricted both by statute and partial reliance on the central state for most of their funding. In the case of the devolved nations the assumption is that the people most likely to participate in local decision-making will be members of the middle-class, who can be expected to behave, en masse, in ways which will impose restrictions on local taxation and public spending, and thus maintain the neoliberal order with a supposedly popular mandate: atomised citizens voting for which services they want to close. In these circumstances, without any illusions in the ability of small states to resist the pressures of the world capitalist system, deciding to secede can be seen as both a progressive and democratic option which need not involve nationalism at all.
There is another point. In a capitalist society, all politics is by definition “bourgeois” unless working-class interests are forced onto an agenda which would otherwise exclude them. Some areas of political life are obviously more susceptible to working-class intervention than others, and some will always have greater priority, but none can be dismissed as entirely irrelevant. The referendum on Scottish independence may have been one of the more unlikely triggers for a mass progressive social movement, but this is in actuality what happened. The sections of the Scottish radical left who actively supported a Yes vote – the overwhelming majority, bar some fossilised sectarians – were therefore right to throw themselves into the campaign and, in doing so, not only took part in but helped create one of the greatest explosions of working class self-activity and political creativity in Scottish history, far greater in depth and breadth than those around the Make Poverty History/G8 Alternatives mobilisations in 2005, the Stop the War Coalition in 2002–3 or even the Anti-Poll Tax campaign on 1987–90. The level of participation and relative closeness of the outcome, for which the left can claim much of the credit, are two measure of this. It would have been madness to abstain or worse, argue for the defence of the British imperialist state.
 
The tradition of Political Marxism has received a strong criticism in your writings. Would you like to explain the main epistemological and political limitations that you detect in the works of Robert Brenner and Ellen Meiksins Wood in regards to the ‘transition debate’?
Part of the difficulty I find with Political Marxism is the vastly different political positions which its adherents are able to adopt on the basis of the same theory. Brenner himself, and Charles Post, are revolutionaries who in most respects see themselves as standing in the Classical Marxist tradition; Wood was much more ambivalent; others still, like Spencer Dimnock, have argued quite specifically against revolution and for reform. Yet others are essentially academics with no discernible political positions at all. In other words the theory is a highly specific one about the nature and origins of capitalism, which need not have any implications for wider political practice – although as I will argue in a minute, one aspect of the theory leads to some very odd conclusions indeed.
For political Marxists, capitalism is defined by the existence of what they call market compulsion – the removal of the means of production and subsistence from the direct producers so that they are forced to rely on the market to survive. In fact, there have never been capitalist societies, even mid-Victorian Britain or the United States today, where all economic relations been market determined. (In some cases this has been because of the retention of precapitalist relations such as led to the reassertion of “moral economy” against “political economy,” of the “just price” against the “market price,” which occurred in England and Lowland Scotland as late as the end of the eighteenth century. (Indeed, if capitalist social relations of production were already in place by before the English Civil War, then what were these great social struggles actually about?) But more commonly it has been the imposition of public or state provision and regulation by capitalist states. In other words, “pure” capitalist social property relations have never been completely dominant anywhere, nor – unless socialists completely fail in their objectives – will they ever be. For Marx, capitalism was defined not as a system of market compulsion, but as one of competitive accumulation based on wage labour. The existence of wage labour does not in itself necessarily signify the emergence of the capitalist mode of production; wage labour also took place under feudalism, but primarily as a means of meeting the consumption requirements of the lords rather than contributing to the self-expansion of capital. It is rather that the existence of the capitalist mode of production determines that wage labour becomes the central means through which surplus extraction takes place. Equally, however, various types of unfree labour associated with pre-capitalist modes of production, including slavery itself, can also take place within the context of the capitalist mode of production.
Even if some social relations remain, initially at least, those associated with pre-capitalist modes in the purely technical sense, the decisive fact is that these technical relations are subordinated to capitalist laws of motion. Political Marxists repeatedly highlight the radical difference between capitalism and preceding modes of production. This emphasis is useful up to a point, but beyond it we lose all sense of what capitalism has in common with other exploitative class systems. Indeed, if capitalism did not possess this commonality, then it is difficult to see how it could have successfully incorporated aspects of these earlier modes, as it has in most of the world outside of a handful of countries at the core of the system where, quite exceptionally, capitalism exists in more or less pure form. Feudal lords were able, in some circumstances, to transform themselves into capitalists, just as ancient slave owners before them were able, in other circumstances, to transform themselves into feudal lords. The continuing fact of exploitation is what makes these adaptations possible. In this respect, as in many others, it will surely be socialism rather than capitalism that is distinct from all previous modes of production.
In the Brenner thesis the emergence of capitalism, in England at least, is an unintended, contingent outcome of the actions of the two main feudal social classes, peasants and lords. Brenner conceives of feudalism as a self-enclosed, self-perpetuating system that cannot be undermined by its own internal contradictions. It is often claimed that Brenner has an explanation for the – in his terms, highly unlikely – appearance of capitalism: the class struggle. In fact, it is the outcome of such class conflicts that Brenner is interested in, not the conflicts themselves. In the case of England, the outcome of the rural class struggle acted as a mechanism (“an exogenous shock”) for establishing capitalist social relations of production, but in the United Netherlands ecological pressures played the same role. Why does Brenner need such a mechanism in the first place? Essentially it is because Political Marxists cannot conceive of people willingly choosing to become capitalists rather than doing so only when the role was imposed on them. The rejection of one form of bourgeois ideology – that capitalism is “natural” – should not blind us to the dangers of accepting another, albeit with the inversion of its value system. No mode of production is intrinsically alien to human nature. Human beings may not have a propensity for capitalism but they can develop such a propensity under certain conditions and without compulsion. What I am suggesting, therefore, is that the entire elaborate edifice of the Brenner thesis is based upon a conception of human nature in which it is seen as innately opposed to capitalism (another of the many positions Political Marxists inadvertently share with Von Hayek) – indeed, in which it is seen as innately opposed to economic development as such – and will only be induced to accept capitalist relations under duress. While this may allow us the comforting thought that capitalism need not have happened, it also has certain other implications. For if capitalism is essentially a contingent or accidental historical outcome, then so too is the possibility of socialism. One does not have to accept, in Second International or Stalinist style, that human social development has gone through a succession of inevitable stages to reject the ascription of absolute randomness to key historical turning points as a viable alternative.
How did the new, capitalist way of organizing production supposedly first emerge? The elements that would eventually combine to create the capitalist mode of production – not only market competition but also wage labour and commodity production – pre-existed it by many centuries. Political Marxists are therefore right to insist that the existence of these elements does not in itself indicate the existence of capitalism as such. One can further agree with them that the socio-economic activities that ultimately ended up producing capitalism were not, initially at any rate, necessarily undertaken with capitalism as a conscious goal. Neither of these observations should be taken to mean, however, that capitalism was an unlikely outcome. There are very few ways in which exploitation or the social relations of production more generally can be organized. Given this highly restricted range of options, the chances of something like capitalism arising were actually rather high, given certain conditions.
After all, the productive forces do not “develop” themselves: they are not sentient, nor are they even independent variables, “calling forth” this or “selecting” that response from the relations of production. To say that forces of production have developed is simply to say that human beings have been motivated to change them and have then successfully done so in such a way that the social productivity of labour has risen as a result. Human agency is quite as decisive here as it is in the class struggle. When people develop the productive forces it creates a situation in which they, or other people, can adopt new, more compatible productive relations, of which there are not an infinite number. But although developing the productive forces makes certain types of society possible, it does not make them inevitable: it is an enabling condition.
But Political Marxists do not believe that anyone under pre-capitalist modes of production has an incentive to develop the productive forces. Why? Wood in particular appeared to believe that saying human beings have the desire and capacity to improve their material conditions is the same as saying that they have always been subjugated by the needs of competitive accumulation. One consequence of this denial that there might have been any positive incentives to embrace capitalist production is a tendency to portray peasant life before capitalism as essentially based on a natural economy of self-governing communities, which have no incentive to develop the productive forces, and into which the lords or the Church only intrude superficially and occasionally in order to acquire their surplus. Developing the productive forces seems to me to be at least as rational a response to the feudal exploitation it so vividly describes as the alternatives of “fight or flight” that are usually posed. People have wanted to do the former since the transition to agriculture; they have only had to do the latter since the transition to capitalism. The wish to better the circumstances in which we live has been one the main impulses behind the attempts to develop the productive forces and it is intimately bound up with class society, not least because in situations where the direct producers have to hand over part of what they have produced to someone else, there is a very real motive – one might almost say, an imperative – to increase their output, a motive that need have initially nothing to do with market compulsion. And in conditions of crisis, such as those that shook European feudalism in the fourteenth century, the pressure on the ruling class to raise the level of exploitation, and consequently on the peasantry to look for ways of escape, was of course heightened still further.
Here again the role of human agency is decisive. Ruling classes are never passive. By successfully preventing people from developing the productive forces to the point where they can lead to changes in productive relations, they have either ensured centuries of relative stagnation or the repetition of developmental phases that never progress beyond a certain point. In other relatively rare cases, this type of blocking maneuver led to outright regression, as it did across Western Europe in the fifth century, in the fourteenth, and again – although on a more regionalized basis – in the seventeenth; but even in these cases, the “anti-development” of the productive forces also led to transformations in productive relations: change does not always go in one direction. The process by which human beings first make progressive changes to the productive forces, then the productive relations and ultimately the superstructures can explain the two greatest social transformations that have occurred in human history: one was the transition from pre-class society (“primitive communism”) to various forms of class society (slave, feudal, tributary); the other was the transition from feudalism to capitalism.
It is when we turn to the contemporary world, however, that the problematic aspects of the Political Marxist definition of capitalism for socialist politics become apparent. Failure to distinguish between the logical development of categories in theory and their development in history leads to the danger of working with platonic or “ideal” conceptions of the capitalist economy and capitalist states which do not correspond to the operation of any actual capitalist economies or capitalist states. In this case, the danger is compounded by convergence with one the key ideological positions of the bourgeoisie, now attaining something like its purest expression under neoliberalism, which is precisely that politics and economics are, or at least should be, separate realms. In fact, capitals can perform some of the functions of states and states can act as capital.
Throughout the history of the system capitalists have employed extra-economic means to recruit, retain, coerce and control labour. The self-expansion of the total social capital can never be completely based on unfree labour, of course, because it assumes and requires general labour mobility; but “general” does not mean “universal”, and individual capitals can employ, have employed and continue to employ unfree labour. Similarly, from the use of private armies by J.D. Rockefeller in America after the Civil War through to the current universal expansion of private security firms, violence has never been the monopoly of the capitalist state. War and preparations for war involving imperialist states throw these issues into the sharpest relief. Political Marxists have two explanations for the World and Cold Wars of the twentieth century.
One is that the world as whole was not completely dominated by the capitalist mode of production: between 1914 and 1945, conflicts were either between capitalist and pre-capitalist powers; between 1945 and 1989, conflicts were between capitalist powers and those which at least claimed to be post-capitalist. In neither period, therefore, were conflicts generated by the pure ‘imperatives’ (to use Wood’s favoured term) of the system itself. Brenner tends to argue that, while states generally act in support of capital, the system of multiple states which capitalism inherited from feudalism means that even the biggest cannot predict or control the outcomes of their actions, since every other state is also acting in a similar way; as a result, counter-productive outcomes can result. At an extreme, these outcomes can involve catastrophes like the First World War, which is presumably why Brenner believes that a “global-state solution” would be in the best interests of capital. Now, if Brenner was simply pointing to the incommensurability of outcomes it would be difficult to disagree. His position goes further than this, however, to suggest that, not only are the consequences of certain actions unpredictable, but that from the point of view of capitalism, they are incomprehensible.
The theoretical difficulty behind these arguments is, yet again, a conception of capitalism as essentially involving market competition on the basis of price, behind which lies the compulsion to achieve cost savings through technical innovation. Brenner famously distinguishes “horizontal” competition between capitals from “vertical” conflict between labour and capital, which is helpful up to a point, but inter-capitalist competition does not take place only through the market. Capitalist competition can be external to markets, but so too can the agents of competition be separate from capitals: they can be states, and competition between states tends to lead to conflict.
There are two kinds of competition between capitals. The first amounts to a form of regulated cooperation in which all benefit from the expansion of trade. The second, however, involves competition in which the profits of one capital are achieved at the expense of another; the situation ceases to be “positive-sum” and becomes “zero-sum’. This type of competition is not restricted to firms, however, but involves states, beginning with the behaviour of the Italian city-states during the Hundred Years War. In this context, the situations which state managers and politicians face are similar to those which face individual capitalists. When a firm invests in new labour-saving technology which will reduce its costs, rival capitalists ultimately must make similar investments, even at the risk that the initial cost of purchase, installation and training will be so great as to threaten to force them out of business before the savings can be realized. Not investing means the virtual certainty of failure; investing means it is only a possibility. State managers and politicians behave similarly to capitalists in relation to national economies. But state managers and politicians also have to take decisions which, on balance, are likely to result in disaster because the alternative exposes them to even greater risk in the longer term, and this does not only apply to only in situations which are directly economic in nature. The trajectory of geoeconomic competition ultimately ends in geopolitical rivalry.
Finally, the narrowness of Political Marxist conceptions of capitalism exclude every aspect which is not directly reducible to “capitalist social property relations”. This is a form of reverse-economism in which, far from “the economic” (i.e. social property relations) determining every aspect of the social totality, those aspects appear to operate in completely contingent ways, at most overlapping with the needs of capital accumulation, in a way oddly similar to the separate jurisdictions allocated to economy, society, politics and culture in Weberian sociology. Against this, we need to integrate activities and relationships into the capital-labour relation such as those involved in, for example, gendered domestic labour, which the capital relation “presupposes” and without which it could not exist. It is, of course, possible to imagine a version of capitalism in which the only inequalities were economically generated, but these dream visions are best left where they belong, among the discarded ideological armoury of social neoliberalism. The persistence of non-economic inequalities as integral to contemporary capitalism as they were at its origin.
 
In 2014 along with other scholars you edited the volume The Long Durée of the Far-right, An International Historical Sociology, which attempts to offer an analysis of far-right movements and politics, challenging the existing literature through the approach of the ‘longue durée’. What does this approach offer to the study of the far-right? What similarities can you detect between the far-right that is now emerging throughout Europe and that of interwar period? Can we call Le Pen and Trump fascists? Is that a legitimate conceptualization?
We were responding to the way in which the revival of thinking about the far-right – itself a response to the rise of right-wing populism – was dominated by comparative methodology, with its positivist and empiricist mode of enquiry grounded in a methodological nationalism. Our concern was that comparative analyses, along with much of the wider discussion of the far-right across most of the academic literature, have tended to explain the far-right through a rather restricted prism of historical development. Through its focus on the “return” of the far-right, existing studies note the specificities of the contemporary era – the socio-economic context generated by neoliberalism and the political one framed by the fracturing and realignment of the left with the end of the Cold War – but largely fail to recognize and discuss the longer-term set of historical structures and processes out of which it has re-emerged. In consequence, much of the extant literature struggles to explain why the contemporary far-right has come to replicate its historical predecessors whilst also remaining significantly different from them.
Assessing the particular manifestation of a political current involves recognizing and explaining how and why the ideas and positions associated with such currents evolve over time, and how such changes are the products of history: the reshaping of the socio-economic, political and cultural contexts from which such ideas flourish or disappear. Comparative analyses do not of course ignore history, but historical references tend to take the form of comparisons between the ideology, social basis and political methodology of the contemporary far-right and parties and movements of the inter-war fascist era. The problem is that inter-war fascism ends up being regarded as the ultimate template of a generic far-right, which in turn serves to obscure those specificities of the far-right as a political movement that are not reducible to “para-militarism” or any of the other unique characteristics of historical fascism. The result is not only that the contemporary far-right is set up to fall short of fascism, thus appearing to question its “far-right” qualities, but also that the longer-term historical and broader political membership of the far-right are overlooked. That subsequent forms and modalities of far-right ideologies and politics may differ from their earlier manifestations during the inter-war period may in fact be explained by the antecedent socio-historical conditions from which the former emerged. That contemporary manifestations of the far-right might be considered “deviant” examples of some undifferentiated template derived from the specificities of the inter-war period simply serves to demonstrate the inherent limitations of such a historically static comparative perspective: one obfuscating the spatio-temporally variegated and interactive patterns of socio-historical development.
To properly understand and explain the far-right, then, we decided to adopt a methodological approach and a theoretical framework that could both recognize and account for the evolution of ideas attached to political groupings as they develop through historical time and space. Comparative analyses do not do this. The upshot is that the contemporary far-right is, effectively, isolated or detached from history, such that the enduring structural connections between politics and economics and the far-right are obscured and the evolving character of the far-right not properly explained. To take only the most obvious example: the type of statism characteristic of fascist regimes during the inter-war years is unlikely to be reproduced if any of the current far-right movements – including their fascist contingents – were to take power under contemporary neoliberal conditions. There are, in other words, structural aspects of the capitalist system at any time which are likely to be adopted by far-right parties: nationalism is a defining characteristic of the far-right, but nationalization is not.
Given the hysteria about Trump’s supposed incipient fascism, it is important to begin by distinguishing between fascist and non-fascist variants of the hard-right. All wings are united by two characteristics. One is a base of membership and support in one or more fraction of the middle-class (i.e. the petty bourgeoisie, traditional middle-class professionals or the technical-managerial new middle class) – although this does not necessarily mean that they necessarily lack working-class support. The other is an attitude of extreme social conservatism, always in relation to race and nation, sometimes in relation to gender and sexual orientation: far-right politicians in the Netherlands, for example, have for example rhetorically invoked the relative freedoms of women or gays in the West as way of denouncing the supposedly oppressive beliefs of Muslims. The political goal is always to push popular attitudes and legal rights back to a time before the homogeneity of “the people” was polluted by immigration, whenever this Golden Age of racial or cultural purity is deemed to have existed, which is usually at some undetermined period before the Second World War.
There are nevertheless large differences between these two types of organization. Non-fascist far-right parties are distinguished from fascism by three characteristics: 1) they are electoral and seek to attain office through the democratic means at local, national and European levels; 2) they do not worship the state and, while they seek to use the state for welfare purposes for their client groups, some (e.g. the Austrian Freedom Party or the Tea Party) have embraced neoliberal small-state rhetoric; 3) they do not seek to “transcend” class. The first of these distinctions, adherence to bourgeois democracy, is crucial since it indicates the fundamental distinction between the fascist and non-fascist far-right, namely that the latter do not threaten to overthrow bourgeois democracy as such. Activists and commentators often draw an absolute distinction between fascism and other forms of right-wing politics, based on the way the former rely on paramilitary organization and violence as part of their strategy for attaining power. In that sense Golden Dawn in Greece is a classic fascist formation in a way that the Northern League in Italy is not. The distinction is important, not least in determining the tactics of their opponents, but fascism is not defined simply by its recourse to extra-parliamentary or illegal activity. Fascism then is revolutionary and the non-fascist far-right is not; but what does “revolutionary” mean in this context? Many Marxists are reluctant to use this term in relation to any modern political movement not of the left, with the possible exception of nationalisms in the Global South. But if we consider fascist seizures of power as political revolutions – in other words as those which change the nature and personnel of the regime without changing the mode of production, then there is no reason why the term should not be applicable.
The second major difference, which flows directly from the first, is their respective attitudes to society which they are trying to build. Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany claimed to be creating “new” men and women with new values. This is a project of transformation. The non-fascist far-right however insists that the people are already the repositories of homogeneity and virtue. The purpose of the non-fascist far-right is to return the people to their formerly happy condition before these twin pressures began to be applied. This is a project of restoration.
The revival of the far-right as a serious electoral force is based on the apparent solutions it offers to what are now two successive waves of crisis, which have left the working class in the West increasingly fragmented and disorganised, and susceptible to appeals to blood and nation as the only viable form of collectivism still available, particularly in a context where the systemic alternative to capitalism – however false it in was – had apparently collapsed in 1989 – 91. The political implications are ominous. The increasing interchangeability of political parties gives the far – right an opening to appeal to voters by positioning themselves as outside the consensus in ways which speak to their justifiable feelings of rage. The potential problem for the stability of the capitalist system is however less the possibility of far – right parties themselves coming to power with a programme destructive to capitalist needs, than their influence over the mainstream parties of the right, when the beliefs of their supporters may inadvertently cause difficulty for the accumulation process – as in the impending withdrawal from the EU in the case of the UK or, potentially at least, a halt to migration from Mexico and Central America at the behest of the Trump presidency in the case of the US. Here we see emerging a symbiotic relationship between one increasingly inadequate regime response to the problems of capital accumulation and another increasingly extreme response to the most irrational desires and prejudices produced by capital accumulation. Again, this is not a new problem for capital.
There is a problem with some left analyses of the hard right and its far right component in particular, which is the assumption that it represents the “real” face of capitalism unmasked (“the naked dictatorship of monopoly capital”, etc., etc.). In fact, in the developed world at least, it is only in very rare situations of dire extremity – and usually after facing the kind of threat from the labour movement that has unfortunately been absent for several decades – that capital has ever relied on the far right to solve its problems. Right-wing social movements can relate to the accumulation strategies of capital in three ways: 1) They are directly supportive; 2) They are compatible with and/or indirectly supportive through strengthening ideological positions which are associated with capitalist rule, but which may not be essential to it; or 3) They are indirectly and possibly unintentionally destabilizing. Until recently at any rate, examples of type 1 have been very rare indeed, since capitalists prefer to use corporate pressure rather than mass movements to achieve their political goals. Examples of type 2 are the most frequent but we are currently seeing, and are likely to see more examples of type 3, which raises the question: what is the relationship between the far-right politics and capitalism? What if a fascist or far-right movement came to power which implemented policies against the needs of capital – not because they were “anti-capitalist” in the way that Strasserite wing of the Nazi Party were (falsely) supposed to be, but simply because their interests lay elsewhere?
The Nazi Regime performed two services for German capital: crushing an already weakened working class and launching an imperial expansionist drive to conquer new territory; but while racism and anti-Semitism were important for the Nazis, but not for German national capitals. The long-term development of German capitalism produced, through a series of mediations, the ideology of Nazism which did contained the possibility of a Holocaust, and when German capitalists turned to the Nazis in its moment of crisis, they were given the opportunity to realize that possibility, however irrelevant and outright damaging it was to German capital’s more overarching imperial project. In other words, the barbaric ideology of Nazism and the socio-economic crisis of Germany to which they provided one solution were already connected as different moments in the mediated totality of capitalism. But if the Holocaust was a barbaric irrelevance – except incidentally – for German capital, the Nazi regime also presents us with examples of policies which were instrumentally irrational from the perspective of the capitalist state.
The contemporary relevance of this experience is limited: the working class is not currently combative enough to inspire fear in the bourgeoisie and the states in which the fascist far-right is closest to achieving power – above all, in Greece – are not imperialist powers capable of attempting continental domination in the way that Germany or even Italy was capable of doing. The point is that in the contemporary situation all that may remain are those aspects of the far-right program which are irrational for capital, particularly in its current neoliberal manifestation. The Brexit vote is a classic example of this.
 
Toni Negri’s recent political writings endorse the European Union, suggesting that it can be reformed into a “social and democratic Europe”, as a political antidote to the emerging nationalisms. Do you think that this “left Europeanism” is the solution to the crisis we are experiencing at the moment? Is it feasible and could this kind of reformism be effective from the inside? How can we approach Negri’s claims on the EU, bearing in mind that even the current leaders of EU do not seem to endorse such a plan as a real possibility?
The EU and its predecessors have always embodied the way capitalism has been organised at any particular time. It is not, in other words a body suspended above shifts in the capitalist system reflecting “European values” or other liberal fantasies. As the transition to neoliberalism was imposed within the constituent nation-states, it was bound to be embedded in the EU’s own policies and rules and the EU accordingly began its own march towards neoliberalism with the Single European Act in 1986. This has been confirmed and deepened by every single subsequent Pact and Treaty from Maastricht on 1991 onwards. What made the process easier than in the individual nation-states was that the EU always lacked most of the democratic constraints which made the transition at least a contested process in Britain or Italy, even in the period when it did more-or-less embody more social democratic conception of ownership and control.
Hayek argued in 1939 that “Interstate Federalism” at the European level would be desirable because it would ensure that economic activity should be removed as far as possible from the responsibility of meddling politicians who interfered with the market order to win electoral support from ignorant voters. The EU has followed Hayek’s advice by centralising power in the hands of appointed officials, above all in the Commission, which alone has the power to initiate legislation, three types of which – regulations, directives and decisions – are binding. The Parliament has a right to be consulted, in certain circumstances, but none to initiate legislation in its own right: in this respect it has far less power than any national government, or for that matter, any devolved government like the Scottish or Catalan. But this is not the only democratic deficit. If the Commission is a supranational body, the Council of Europe is an intergovernmental one. It consists of the heads of state or heads of government of the member states, who are elected in their own countries, but not of course by the inhabitants of the other countries whose fate the Council decides. These structures are one reason why we should reject claims that the EU is as amenable to reform as any nation-state. In fact it is much less so. Capitalist states are permanent structure until they are overthrown, although they can adopt different policies according to the political parties or coalitions which oversee the apparatus at any time, and these can be more or less beneficial to the working class and oppressed groups. The problem with the EU is that, although it is not a nation-state, the balance between unelected state managers and elected representatives is even more heavily weighted in favour of the former in the EU than in its constituent members. Reforms are never easily achieved, particularly under neoliberalism, since it has removed several mechanisms from control of states. Nevertheless, it is not impossible. We can at least realistically imagine Jeremy Corbyn becoming Prime Minister of the UK; there is not the slightest possibility of an equivalent event taking place in the EU – and not just because the office does not exist.
There is also a second Hayekian aspect of the EU: the use of rule-bound policies – on limits to public spending, on debt as a proportion of GDP, on competition – to limit what national politicians can do at the behest of their electorates. Since the rules do not allow for devaluation or the levels of state expenditure or debt which would have been necessary to stimulate the economy, the only remaining response to the crisis of 2008 was austerity. The EU’s embrace of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) – far more enthusiastic than Washington’s, incidentally – and the possibly even more insidious Trade in Services Agreement (Tisa) are only the latest and most extreme examples of this. In this context it is incredible to me how lightly how some Remain supporters are prepared to pass over the experience of Greece. In Yanis Varoufakis’s revelations about his encounters with the Troika, it was the EU institutions – the European Central Bank and the Commission – and not the International Monetary Fund which were the most unbending.
The lack of democracy and presence of binding rules would be reasons enough to leave the EU, but there are least three others, each of which attests, not only to the inherently reactionary nature of the project, but to how it fails to perform even the role for which it is most celebrated by liberal boosters: overcoming national self-interest.
First, the EU is designed to maintain the structure of existing inequalities between European nation-states. Beneath all the talk of “solidarity” this is inescapable: a financial and industrial structure designed to meet the needs of the strongest economies – France and Germany and, since the advent of the Euro, increasingly just the latter – but which forces the weakest to play by the same rules, will always be detrimental to them, particularly when there is no mechanism to transfer funds or resources within the EU in the way that can be done within nation-states.
Second, although the EU is not an imperialist power in its own right, as a collective body it does, however, increasingly act as an adjunct to NATO, and consequently as a support to US interests. This role was inscribed onto the EU’s DNA from the beginning. The US initially encouraged and supported the formation of the EU’s predecessors as part of a Cold War bulwark against its Russian imperial rival, and this is the main reason why there was no war in (Western) Europe between 1945 and 1991: although engaged in in economic competition with each other, the EU member-states were united behind the USA in the same geopolitical alliance. But if the EU itself does not act as an imperial power, the main constituent nation-states increasingly do, and they by no means always bow to Washington’s wishes. Here again we see the more powerful placing their own interests over those of supposed European unity. For some this is externalised, as in the persistently underestimated French presence in Central Africa, but for others it is manifested in the heart of Europe itself – most obviously in the case of Germany, whose recognition of Croatian independence in 1992 contributed to the subsequent Yugoslavian bloodbath.
Third, the EU is structurally racist. The very idea of “Europe” is necessarily exclusionary. The much vaunted “freedom of movement” within the EU is predicated on blocking the movement of those without, as tens of thousands of desperate refugees are currently discovering. The spectacle of these people being trapped in the camps, behind barbed-wire fences and facing the police dogs and tear gas on the borders of European civilization is obscene enough, but it is compounded by the attitude of the constituent states themselves. For here again their individual interests take precedence over even collective barbarity, as the Schengen Agreement collapses into a free-for-all to defend individual borders against the alien hordes. We should note that the EU has ben responsible for many more actual deaths of migrants in the Mediterranean than any of the fascist or far-right parties against which it is supposed to be our last defence.
There is one final positive argument for the EU, which tends to be expressed by sections of the radical left and probably informs Negri’s argument. It is that capitalism rules everywhere, from the EU right down to our individual workplaces. But, so this story goes, at least the EU fulfils one of the few positive functions of capitalism: it brings together workers into one of the largest groups on earth, and their pressure can transform the EU. This is a classic example of confusing our wishes for reality. The EU organises the ruling class, it does not organise workers. As Trotsky once wrote in another context, a brake cannot be used as an accelerator. There are no EU-wide political parties, or trade unions, or movements. Solidarity across borders does not depend on constitutions or institutions, but on the willingness of workers to support each other, even if in separate countries. Instead of invoking imaginary battalions of workers organised at a European level, it would more useful to begin building where we are. The struggle against neoliberal capitalism is unlikely to begin simultaneously across the whole of the EU, or to be confined within its boundaries. What we are likely to see is an uneven series of movements of different intensities, within different nation-states which, if victorious, could form new alliances and ultimately a United Socialist States of Europe. However, this vision cannot be realised within the EU, but only built afresh on its ruins.
 
What then is your take on Brexit? Could it be considered as a potentially progressive development, in the interests of the working classes? How do you think the Scottish Left should deal with it?
As my previous answer probably suggests, I voted to Leave and argued for others to do the same. Let me say, however, that sections of the Leave-supporting left made some extraordinarily misjudged claims about the referendum result along the lines that it constituted a great working class victory. Leaving aside what this says about those sections of the working class, including two thirds of Labour voters, who voted Remain, this interpretation seems to me to be completely untenable. Some Leave voters did indeed do so to reject political elites and members of the ruling class who made the case for the EU; but you cannot uncomplicatedly say that this is some kind of conscious movement from below against neoliberalism. We need ask only one question: did the SWP, SP or any of the other groups arguing for this interpretation call for demonstrations celebrating this class triumph or calling for the immediate triggering of Article 50? Or course not, because everyone is perfectly aware that at least some of the people who would have turned up would be calling for the removal of migrants – and not just EU passport-holders, but British citizens who have been here for decades. Claims that Brexit represents a proletarian insurgency against neoliberalism are attempts to justify taking a Leave position in the first place – quite unnecessarily in my view since the left argument against the EU (which I outlined in answer to the previous question) does not depend on predictions that this result would immediately to an improved balance of forces for the working class.
The class character of both Leave and Remain votes is very complex – except in one respect; the overwhelming majority of the British capitalist class wanted, and still wants to stay in the EU. Once we move beyond the ruling class as such the complexities begin. Some things are clear from relatively limited data that is currently available: the older you were, the less educated you were (in the sense of not attending or having attended University), the poorer and worse housed you were, the more likely you were to vote Leave. And the converse was also the case. On this basis it is easy to caricature the result as primarily a vote by older, more stupid members of the working class, acting against the interests of a younger, better educated generation more attuned to cosmopolitan middle-class values – easy, but wrong. For, although a lot of attention has been paid to the working-class Leave votes in the North of England, equal attention should have been paid to middle-class Leave votes in the South of that country. The middle-classes – the traditional petty bourgeoisie, professionals, and the new middle class (NMC) – were of course themselves divided. The principal support for Leave among them came from the first component, particularly self-employed people who find EU directives difficult to meet because, unlike large corporations, they can less easily afford to meet health and safety standards or regulations about maternity leave. These people, not ‘the white working class’, are central to UKIP. The liberal sections in the public sector, arts and university sectors were generally Remain, and have treated the result as an apocalypse-threatening rejection of their core values. In some cases this is a genuine and absolutely justified revulsion at the racism of the official Leave campaign – although it does tend to forget the more disguised racism of the official Remain campaign, which accepted the premise that there was “too much immigration”, but argued that control could be better achieved by remaining within the EU. In other cases, however, this was more a sense of injured entitlement – an affront to what Craig Calhoun once called “the cosmopolitanism of frequent flyers”. Migration is often treated as what the referendum was ‘really’ about. In particular the Leave vote is seen as a direct response to the supposedly alien presence of migrants changing solid working-class areas out of recognition. However, it is clear that many of the biggest Leave votes were in areas where there was very little migration – and vice-versa. The implication is that it is not necessarily direct personal impact or experience which was decisive in making migration a reason for voting Leave, but rather that migration acted as a synonym for a range of other issues and feelings about unwanted social transformation and even disintegration, which these voters felt were not being addressed or were being too-easily dismissed.
As far as the working class specifically is concerned, there was a spectrum of reasons for voting Leave, many of which overlapped. Moving from left to right, there were people – not only in the revolutionary left, since many more are members or supporters of the Labour Party – who consciously voted to leave because of the inequities associated with the EU. Then there were people who might not have been able to articulate the EU’s exact relationship to neoliberalism, but who understood that they were being told to vote for it by David Cameron, George Osborne and the other politicians who had been imposing austerity on their communities since 2008, and so voted for the opposite of what these people wanted. Next are people who may have no great ideological concerns at all, but who have been badly affected in economic terms by EU regulations and policies – notably workers in the fishing communities of North East England and North East Scotland. Next to them were people who thought that migration was putting pressure on wages, the NHS, and the availability of housing. These people are not necessarily racist – indeed, since some of the people making these arguments are sons of Pakistani shopkeepers or daughters of Afro-Caribbean bus drivers it is difficult to see how they could be, unless you extend the concept of racism so far that it becomes meaningless. They are wrong in their attitude toward migrants, but not for that reason incapable of being won to opposing the EU on a left wing basis. Next to them are the genuine soft racists and, although they also tend to frame their arguments in terms of migrants “stealing our jobs and houses”, the key difference with the previous group is the theme of (white) British culture under threat. Finally, there are the hard racists and outright fascists who were responsible for the attacks which took place mainly in in the weeks immediately before and after the vote. These people were certainly given confidence by the tenor of the Leave campaign, but it is wrong to talk about right-wing “mobilisation” – there were no marches or demonstrations, and fascist parties have not gained support through it. This was a howl of rage, not a project for the future – and the recent result of the General Election suggests that it is not going to become one either.
Working-class Remain voters also occupied a range of positions. There are those who genuinely believe that the EU is a fundamentally beneficent institution, which primarily exists to enshrine trade union and human rights, implement environmental protections and enable university students to study for year abroad. Then there are those who are aware that they benefit directly from EU funding, notably workers in universities and in areas in receipt of Structural Funds. More idealistically, there are those, particularly among the young, who are less sure about what the EU is and what it does, but who feel that support for the idea of ‘Europe’ is to uphold internationalism, cross-border cooperation and a left-wing perspective in general – a position made more plausible of course given the way in which the right have been allowed to virtually monopolise opposition to the EU. Finally, there are those who are perfectly aware of the nature of the EU, but who thought that the need to oppose the racist and anti-migrant discourse of the main Leave position was paramount, even if it meant ignoring the actual question on the ballot paper. Ideologically then, we might say that the pro-EU left has two wings: the ‘idealists’ – or in some cases outright fantasists – who think that the EU exists to prevent war in Europe, bestow rights to workers, implement environmental protections and ensure that travellers are not inconvenienced by border controls – claims which are about as convincing as the notion that the British Raj existed to provide the Indian sub-continent with a railway network; and the ‘lesser-evilists’, who vary enormously in their attitude to the EU, ranging from those who overlap with the idealists to those who are very well aware of the realities of what the EU is and does.
The latter position involves a local variant of a global process – most recently observable in the US and French Presidential elections – in which large sections of the liberal and radical left have effectively turned themselves into cheerleaders for the existing neoliberal order. In the UK, this has meant support for remaining in the EU. We are being asked to put our faith in a “saviour from on high” to deliver us from fascism, and not to utter any criticisms for fear of “playing into the hands of” Farage and co. If persisted with, this reliance on an external power will weaken the ability of the working class and the left to resist on their own behalf. But beyond this, there are two major problems with this argument.
The first is that, as Nancy Fraser has recently pointed out, it relies on ignoring the symbiotic relationship between social neoliberalism and the new hard right, in particular the way in which the former recreates and recreates the conditions for the latter to emerge. If the left avoids the task of opposing both, on the grounds that on this occasion, the latter is really so much worse that we have no alternative, the evasion will never stop, because reactionary populism is not going to vanish: there will always be a Trump or a Le Pen, or a Farage whose defeat requires us to support a Clinton, Marcon or Juncker. Yanis Varoufakis has made this quite explicit in an article supporting Macron: “The imperative to oppose racism trumps opposition to neoliberal policies.” Got that? Our duty is to support the dominant faction of the capitalist ruling class. And once the support has been delivered, the neoliberal saviours will continue with the very policies which produced the racism in the first place. Obviously, if you are in immediate danger then you should deal with it first, before dealing with others which may be equally deadly but less pressing: hence the need during the 1930s to crush the Nazis before turning to the overthrow of existing bourgeois state machine. (Although we should note that this would involve uniting all working-class and social movements, not running to beg for help from the social neoliberals.) No one could possibly disagree with this, but for a parallel with the 1930s Germany to be convincing we have to accept that the threat of fascism, or at least the populist far-right more generally is an immediate danger.
And this is where a second problem flows from the first. Having argued that a majority vote for Leave would have catastrophic consequence, that outcome meant Remainers were logically compelled to demonstrate how we were now living through precisely such catastrophe. Here, the guiding theoretical intelligence is less Nancy Fraser and more Private Frazer from BBC TV series, Dad’s Army – “We’re doomed, doomed!” To say that there cannot be a Left Exit is to announce that we are defeated in advance of the battle, which in my experience is never a winning formula for involving people in political activity. I oppose this kind of fatalism, not because I believe that socialists need to maintain “optimism of the will” regardless of the actual circumstances, but because it massively exaggerates the actual strength of the right, at least in the UK. For some writers (Neil Faulkner springs to mind), we are in the antechamber to fascism, the veritable last Days of Weimar, but these comparisons are ridiculous. The fate of UKIP demonstrates this. In the aftermath of Brexit, the air was thick with predictions that UKIP would sweep all before it, with Nigel Farage perhaps acting as Deputy Prime Minister to a Tory Brexiteer. In the subsequent 12 months, UKIP lost all 145 of its seats in the council elections of May 2017, lost its single parliamentary seat in June 2017 and saw its share of the vote fall from 13% in 2015 to 2% today. It has now lost its third leader in less than a year. Nor have UKIP voters simply moved to supporting the Tories – some certainly have (and many of these are returning working-class Tories), but many moved to Labour. And think only of events in the last month. More generally, if anti-migrant, anti-Islamic racism was genuinely sweeping all before it, the dominant narrative in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks in Manchester and London would not have been solidarity, unity and the excellence of our public services. If politics had moved so decisively to the right, then support for the Labour Party during the General Election campaign would not have risen as relentlessly as it did – including in areas that voted for Leave – to the point where Corbyn is now seriously considered as a potential Prime Minister after having stood on Labour’s most-left wing manifesto for over 30 years. The UK is subject to multiple crises, but the imminent threat of fascism is not one of them.
The problem facing the Tories can be quite simply stated: they are the main party of the British ruling class, yet, because of decision taken for internal party reasons – to see off the threat from UKIP and to resolve their divisions over the EU – they are now responsible for implementing a policy which is opposed by the vast majority of that class. It is unsurprising therefore that the situation has produced dissonances. The class struggle is not a zero-sum game in which the weakness of one side automatically translates into the strength of the other. If the left is divided and the working class is organisationally weak, as they are, then this is obviously to the advantage of the ruling class; but neither of these conditions means that all their other ideological, geopolitical or economic problems have simply vanished. We need to start from this, and not conjure up an invincible enemy which exists in our imagination – that is simply to repeat the errors of the left during the 1980s, when Thatcher and her governments were assumed to have an underlying level of popular support they did not in fact possess.
Brexit is going to happen, in one form or another. Rather than waste time lamenting this, or even worse, trying to reverse it, the left needs to arrive at some common understanding about what needs to be done. One of the reasons for supporting a Leave position was because any nation-state with established bourgeois democratic structures is more democratic than the EU – even the UK: most obviously, because we can actually elect a government. As I’ve suggested, one of the reasons for the left love-in with the EU was the belief that no left government was going to be possible in the foreseeable future and so we had to rely on Brussels to save us. But once the assumption of inevitable defeat is dropped, the picture looks rather different. Following 8th June the political situation remains highly unstable and will become increasingly so as the realities of Brexit become apparent, so that another General Election is unlikely to be five years away. In these circumstances, the task of the radical left (which now includes some members of the SNP and the Greens, as well as in the Labour Party) is not to draw up proposals for (e.g.) what trade deals the UK government should be signing, since the left is unlikely to be in a position to influence the precise terms of any Brexit deal. Instead, we should identify what social outcomes we want, regardless of whether or not they are currently enshrined in EU law. The starting point has to be that we – in other words the current and future members of the British working class – are not going to pay for the disaster which is about to unfold for British capital. If sections of the left think that the labour and social movements are too weak to do this, then by all means let them continue to luxuriate in their despair in the salons of Grand Hotel Abyss: I think that that we have at least to start from the possibility that resistance is possible and will find support.
Take, for example, the free movement of people. Presumably people on both sides of the debate agree that a central goal of the left is to defend the rights of present and future migrants to the UK, without making any concessions to ‘genuine concerns’ which simply concede ground to racism. In the EU, “free movement” is not primarily about holiday makers avoiding the inconvenience of presenting their passport at airports and border crossings, it is about the freedom of labour to move for the benefit of the system, which is why it is enshrined as one of the “four freedoms” along with that for capital, goods and services. But this is not our starting point. We want to open our borders to people as people, including refugees and asylum seekers, and not on the basis of a cost-benefit analysis of what they might contribute to the British economy.
It is also important where these arguments have to be made. It became apparent during the EU referendum, that there were large areas in the UK where left-wing arguments had simply never been put for years and into that vacant space have rushed right-wing populist arguments. (During the EU referendum campaign I took part in seven debates or panel discussions and, at the end of all of them, people came up and said that they simply had never heard a left-wing argument for leaving the EU before.) Yet if the Corbyn campaign demonstrates anything, it is that that there is an audience for what are unambiguously left-wing arguments, since many of the people who are now saying they will vote for Labour will previously have voted Leave for the ‘wrong’ reasons. In this respect the left has to get out the areas where it is already strong and go to where it is currently weak. The experience of the final stages of Scottish independence referendum, when Yes supporters carried the campaign to peripheral housing estates and small towns where political life had been moribund for decades, may hold some lessons about how this could be done, but whatever the model – it has to be done.
This brings me to the Scottish situation. Following the Brexit vote the the SNP argued for a second independence referendum on the basis that the majority of Scots voted for Remain. The fact that many people in Scotland have illusions in the European Union is a major problem but the 38% vote for Leave in Scotland underestimates the extent of anti-EU feeling, as there was a major drop in voter participation in the very poorest and worst-housed working-class areas, like Glasgow East – the very type of area which tended to vote Leave in England. The actual balance of opinion is therefore probably closer than the result suggested, but regardless, it is the duty of socialists to argue from principle, rather than for what gives momentary support to one of our causes. One of the key issues facing the radical left in Scotland is therefore to argue, against the leaderships of the SNP (and the Scottish Greens), that the question of Scottish independence from the UK and Scottish membership of the EU are entirely separate questions and require separate referendums, in which we should respectively argue for Yes in the first and No in the second. The question of Scottish EU membership is absolutely decisive, because it will not be about race and migration; in other words, the ‘lesser evil’ case will no longer be relevant, to the extent that it ever was, and we will have to deal instead with the realities of the EU itself.
 



In part 4 of his series on Uneven and Combined Development Neil Davidson looks at
its relevance in the contemporary world.

4.1.      The Persistence of Uneven and Combined Development
Can we still discern the process of uneven and combined development in contemporary capitalism? A common theme on the left since the late 1980s in particular, more or less coincident with the consolidation of neoliberalism, has been the elimination of the non-synchronous or, in terms of this chapter, the evening-out of unevenness and the stabilisation of combination. Guy Debord, reflecting on his 1967 critique of the Spectacular Society twenty years later, argued that it now had reached a point of total integration in which where all forms predating capitalist modernity had been absorbed and rendered affectless:
Beyond a legacy of old books and old buildings, still of some significance but destined to continual reduction and, moreover, increasingly highlighted and classified to suit the spectacle’s requirements, there remains nothing, in culture or nature, which has not been transformed, and polluted, according to the means and interests of modern industry. [1]
More recently, although rather less comprehensibly, Hartmut Rosa, one of the main proponents of ‘accelerationalism’ has argued:
The ubiquitous simultaneity of late modernity ... is thus, strictly speaking, no longer a simultaneity of the nonsimultaneous, since that presupposes the idea of a temporalized, directed, and moving (though asynchronous) history. Instead, it is, as it were, a static, situational, ‘timeless’, and orderless simultaneity of historical fragments. [2]
It is the theorists of postmodernism, however, how have been most insistent in claiming that the contradictions of capitalist modernity have been overcome. Fredric Jameson, perhaps the most influential of these figures, claims that everything associated with ‘pre-modernity’ had ‘finally been swept away without a trace’:
Everything is now organized and planned; nature has been triumphantly blotted out, along with peasants, petit-bourgeois commerce, handicraft, feudal aristocracies and imperial bureaucracies. Ours is a more homogeneously modernized condition: we no longer are encumbered with the embarrassment of non-simultaneities and non-synchronicities. Everything has reached the same hour on the great clock of development or rationalization (at least from the perspective of ‘the West’). [3]
As is quite often the case with Jameson, it is unclear whether the quoted passage expresses his own view or is simply intended to reflect a widely-held belief, which it certainly does: but in either case, does the belief correspond to reality?
 

4.1.1.   The absence of pre-capitalist survivals
One response to such claims might be to argue that uneven and combined development still persists, but that the mechanisms by which it produces its effects is no longer the same as in Trotsky’s lifetime, precisely because there are no longer any pre-capitalist survivals with which capitalist modernity can combine. ‘Today’, writes Joseph Choonara, ‘uneven and combined development is best conceived as a drawing together of successive phases – including, crucially, capitalist phases – in novel forms within countries of the Global South.’ [4] Choonara stands in the Trotskyist tradition, but similar positions have been taken by writers outside it. Jan Nedervee Pieterse, for example, writes in relation to post-Fordist production that:
the actual options available and directions taken are more likely to be influenced by the interactions among different modes of capitalism than is indicated by merely examining varieties in the North, as if these represent the front end of capitalism (which is not tenable in view of the rise of Pacific Asia) and as if the front end would not be affected by the rear. [5]
In fact, although uneven and combined development can involve what used to be called ‘the articulation of modes of production’ – and actually did so in, for example, pre-revolutionary Russia and pre-Independence India, it need not. [6] Jairus Banaji has argued – possibly deploying a rather over-capacious definition of ‘capitalism’ – that ‘what the world-economy of the nineteenth century threw up was an articulation of forms of capitalism more than a combination of modes of production’. [7] Trotsky himself certainly thought that uneven and combined development was possible in societies where capitalist laws of motion were already dominant, as he thought they were in China by the late 1920s. [8] Regardless of intellectual pedigree, however, it is true that the combination of different phases of capitalist development can produce entirely new social consequences. Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri discover such a process in Latin America, in passages which echo Trotsky’s remarks about the effect of English or French capital being transplanted onto the steppes of the Donets Basin. [9]
From the perspective of stages of development’ one might think that through the contemporary export of industrial production, an auto factory built by Ford in Brazil in the 1990s might be comparable to a Ford factory in Detroit in the 1930s because both instances of production belong to the same industrial stage.
According to these authors such a thought would however be mistaken:
... the two factories are radically different in terms of technology and productive passages. When fixed capital is exported, it is exported generally at its highest level of productivity. The Ford factory in 1990s Brazil, then, would not be built with the technology of the Ford factory of 1930s Detroit, but would be based on the most advanced productive computer and information technologies available. The technological infrastructure of the factory would locate it squarely within the information economy. [10]
But does uneven and combined development today only involve the transplantation of the newest technologies into those areas which had never experienced the older versions, or does it still involve the impact of capitalist modernisation on peasants and rural dwellers? The latter scenario does rather depend on the continued existence of a peasant class to be impacted upon, which several leading Marxists thinkers have suggested is no longer the case. In the final volume of his history of the ‘short’ twentieth century, for example, Eric Hobsbawm identified the most significant social change to have taken place in its second half, the one which broke decisively with the entire previous history of humanity, as ‘the death of the peasantry’:
The peasantry, which had formed the majority of the human race throughout recorded history, had been made redundant by agricultural revolution, but the millions no longer needed on the land had in the past been readily absorbed by labour-hungry occupations elsewhere, which required only a willingness to work, the adaptation of country skills, like digging and building walls, or the capacity to learn on the job. What would happen to the workers in those occupations when they in turn became unnecessary? Even if some could be retrained for the high-grade jobs of the information age which continued to expand (most of which increasingly demanded a higher education), there were not enough of these to compensate. What, for that matter, would happen to the peasants of the Third World who still flooded out of the villages? [11]
If peasants are still ‘flooding’ out of villages then this implies that reports of their death as a class have been greatly exaggerated. As we shall see, however, Hobsbawm was right to point to the consequences for the newly urbanized populations and the cities in which they live. As might be expected from his previously quoted comments, Jameson sees the supposedly disappearing peasantry as an important aspect of how everything which pre-existed capitalist modernity is being obliterated, and is particularly concerned with the effect on our sensibilities:
... people who lived in two distinct worlds simultaneously; born in those agricultural villages we still characterise as medieval or pre-modern, they developed their vocations in the new urban agglomerates, with their radically distinct and ‘modern’ spaces and temporalities. The sensitivity to deep time in the moderns then registers this comparatist perception of the two socio-ecomic temporalities, which the first modernists had to negotiate in their own lived experience. By the same token, when the premodern vanishes, when the peasantry shrinks to a picturesque remnant, when suburbs replace the villages and modernity reigns triumphant and homogenous over all space, then the very sense of an alternative temporality disappears as well, and postmodern generations are dispossessed (without ever knowing it) of any differential sense of that deep time the first moderns sought to inscribe in their writing. [12]
There is a degree of telescoping involved in both accounts. The decline of the peasantry as a proportion of the global population is undeniable, though it has been slower and more varied than expected – indeed, it is possible that peasants still constitute the largest global class. [13] The majority of the world industrial working class – 79% in 2010 – are now based in the Global South, but this does not mean that the majority of people there are industrial workers; by 2010 only 23.1% were. [14] In this respect, proletarianization in the Global South presents a paradoxical picture and one which does not simply repeat earlier patterns:
The historical pattern of capitalist industrialisation in the West and Japan was accompanied by the kind of industrialisation and employment generation there that led to the decline of the rural population to the point that it constitutes, at most between 2 and 8 per cent of the overall population in the advanced countries. For countries like Brazil, India, China and Mexico the rural population is currently a majority. In due course it may well become a minority, but well above the proportions now prevailing in the earlier industrialising countries. [15]
Furthermore, while proletarianization is an ongoing process it is not always simply a case of abandoning the farm and entering the factory in a once-and-for-all break. The move from peasant to worker involves people retaining links, moving back and forth between rural and urban areas, with a correspondingly complex development of class consciousness. The process is also spatially uneven: in some regions the ‘new enclosures’ and other processes associated with the emergence of the neoliberal trade and food regimes push small and middling peasants and their offspring off the land and into the cities (though not necessarily into factory work), while in others a degree of ‘re-peasantisation’ in the form of partial reliance on small-holdings for subsistence/income by urban workers still continues in the formal and informal sectors. [16] In the early 1980s Neil Smith wrote of how:
Pre-capitalist modes of production had been integrated into the world capitalist system as ‘internalized externals’. As such they have not made the complete transition from formal to real integration, and the real integration of the global space-economy is necessarily incomplete. [17]
To say the least, this understates the extent to which real subsumption (or integration) has taken place, even in the countryside. [18] From his studies in rural India, Raju Das argues that one of the ways in which rurality is maintained is where: a) the use of technology is aimed at increasing labor productivity (meaning that the transition to real subsumption has occurred); b) the use of various forms of tied or unfree labor as well as free labor are made to work long hours for very low wages, thus reinforcing the system of formal subsumption; or c) landowners are resorting to hybrid subsumption.
By the latter Das means the ‘mercantile/usury-based exploitation as well as exploitation based on rental payment’ in situations where:
landowners, who were earlier formally subsuming labourers on annual contracts as well as daily labourers, resorted to large-scale casualization: permanent workers became casuals. This situation gradually changed to one where many landowners started renting out their land, often to those who were earlier working as casuals or on permanent contracts, contributing to their partial peasantisation. [19]
These types of complexities in the capital/labour relation, rather than smooth transitions from formal to real subsumption, or straight binary oppositions between capital and labour are of course exactly what uneven and combined development would lead us to expect.
 

4.1.2.   The dual economy
Even if we reject the excessive claims for the untrammelled dominance of capitalist modernity, there are still alternative concepts to uneven and combined development which tend to be deployed rather more frequently in contemporary discussions of the relationship between multiple socio-economic forms. In one of what was – until recently – the very few attempts to marry theoretical consideration of with empirical study of the process, Carole McAllister assessed two of these. Her discussion is a useful starting point for attempting to establish the continued existence of uneven and combined development as a tendency.
One of these concepts is ‘dual economy’, which, as McAllister says
... assumes the existence of two separate economic and social domains in colonial and semi-colonial societies – one organised according to the principles of Western corporate capitalism and the other representing a relatively stagnant subsistence or peasant economy. The society, and especially its economy, is conceptualized as divided into a ‘traditional’ and a ‘modern’ way of life.
The problem in this case, ‘is the lack of attention to the interactions between the two sectors, and the assumption that they are self-contained’ – an assumption that McAllister challenges on the basis of her regional fieldwork in Malaya:
... in fact, the theoretical division of any society into two such distinct and self-contained units is clearly a distortion. In Negeri Sembilan, as well as in other contemporary Third World societies, it is clear that the so-called traditional sector – organized around subsistence agriculture and the principles of matrilinear kinship – is essential to the functioning of international capitalism and that the latter in turn continues to reshape ‘tradition’. [20]
As I wrote Part 1 about China during the 1920s, even in areas subject to uneven and combined development, these absolute separations do exist. Highlighting them is quite a common approach among non-Marxist radicals. Arundhati Roy, for example, writes that:
As Indian citizens, we subsist on a regular diet of caste massacres and nuclear tests, mosque breaking and fashion shows, church burning and expanding cell phone networks, bonded labour and the digital revolution, female infanticide and the Nasdaq crash, husbands who continue to burn their wives for dowry, and our delectable stockpile of Miss Worlds. [21]
McAllister rightly regards uneven and combined development as an alternative to the mere juxtaposition of extreme differences; unfortunately, some of Trotsky’s other modern adherents have tended to see it as constituted by them, as in this passage by Tom Kemp:
India thus remained an example of combined development. Bullock carts and sacred cows existed side by side with advanced capitalist industry and a modern industrial proletariat. Religious fanaticism and superstition abounded; there was an anarchic and distorted land system, stagnation, mass poverty, sloth and filth. On the other hand there were railways, factories, banks, modern city centres and a sophisticated intelligentsia in touch with the most advanced ideas. These contradictions and paradoxes were essential parts of India’s historical legacy of colonial independence. [22]
An example of dualism being invoked to describe a specific situation can be found in the October 2003 announcement by HSBC that it was moving 4,000 call centre and back office jobs from Britain to the Indian state of Hyderabad. The story gave the media an opportunity to recycle the most banal clichés in the repertoire of travel journalism, including the classic, India: Land of Contrasts. The contrasts are scarcely picturesque: ‘The biggest difference between HSBC’s smart Babukhan Chambers and the British centres it is usurping is the grinding poverty that surrounds Babukhan – limbless beggars and families in tents’, wrote one Guardian journalist. [23]
These disparities pre-existed the decisions by British financial institutions like HSBC, Prudential and TSB/Lloyds to transfer part of their telecommunications operations offshore. Indeed, the only reason why these companies were prepared to do so is because India already had a relatively highly-skilled and – by British standards – lowly-paid workforce either already accustomed to the modern office environment or in the process of being trained to enter it. Behind these developments lies the software export industry, which has been the fastest growing sector in the Indian economy since 1991 – not coincidentally the year in which a deeply indebted Indian state sought loans from, the conditions of which were the opening up of the economy to both native and foreign private capital. The education systems of several states like Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu are now adapted to serve the requirements of this sector, which has generated its own contrasts, as Anthony D’Costa explains:
... rural India is characterised by debt bondage, social servitude, extensive poverty, illiteracy, and limited opportunities for social and economic mobility. Culturally there is a massive divide from the highly integrated, glamorous, and globalised software industry. [24]
D’Costa does refer to uneven and combined development in this context, but only to dismiss it as indicative of the problem:
By framing the rise of the Indian software industry as integral to uneven and combined development I have demonstrated that there are serious contradictions with such a development process ... Paradoxically, in attempting to overcome technological barriers through greater international economic integration, the Indian software industry is forging ahead but it is also exacerbating uneven and combined development at the national level. [25]
 

4.1.3.   On hybridity again
We have already seen how uneven and combined development has been assimilated to quite different theories, from positions of both support and opposition; a similar misidentification can be seen here with respect to dual systems theory. The divisions to which D’Costa draws attention are of course never absolute and the situations where it breaks down are exactly where the concept of uneven and combined development might be more usefully applied. Many commentators recognise that there are not unsurmountable barriers between the different temporalities of Indian social life, but regard this too as a problem. Jeremy Seabrook is typical here: ‘The loss of jobs to rich countries is small compared to the cultural hybridisation of hundreds of thousands of young Indians’. [26] D’Costa similarly sees the divisions between ‘hybridised’ Indians and their compatriots as ‘inherently destabilising’ of Indian society. [27] There are a number of issues here.
As I noted earlier, hybridity is an ongoing process which predates not only Western colonialism, but even the earlier division of Europe, then the rest of the world into ‘West’ and ‘East’. The notion that there once existed a pure, unsullied, non-hybrid Indian people – or indeed any other – has been rightly criticised by Said:
If you know in advance that the African or Iranian or Chinese or Jewish or German experience is fundamentally integral, coherent, separate, and therefore comprehensible only to Africans, Iranians, Chinese, Jews or Germans, you first of all posit an essential something which, I believe, is both historically created and the result of interpretation – namely the existence of Africanness, Jewishness or Germanness, or for that matter Orientalism and Occidentalism. And second, you are likely as a consequence to defend the essence or experience itself rather than promote full knowledge of it and its entanglements and dependencies on other knowledges. [28]
As George Lipsitz notes, the world has always been characterised by ‘transformation and change’:
Instead of looking to the past for compensatory stories about cultural uniformity, we need to build the future by learning lessons from individuals and groups whose histories have prepared them to make productive use of contradictions, to embrace the dynamism of difference and diversity.
Music is one of the best examples:
Music that originally emerged from concrete historical experiences in places with clearly identifiable geographical boundaries now circulates as an interchangeable commodity market to consumers across the globe.
The most obvious example of this is the virtual universality of Hip-Hop but, as Lipsitz goes on to say, this is not simply a process through which the original sense of musical ‘place’ is lost or appropriated:
Through the conduits of commercial culture, music made by aggrieved inner-city populations in Canberra, Kingston, or Compton becomes part of everyday life and culture for affluent consumers in the suburbs of Cleveland, Coventry or Cologne. At the same time, electro-techno-art music made in Germany serves as a staple for sampling within African American hip hop; Spanish flamenco and paso doble music provide crucial subtexts for Algerian Rai; and pedal steel guitars first developed by country and western musicians in the USA play a prominent role in Nigerian juju. [29]
The guitar itself is a good example. First developed in Spain, it attained modern form in the music of black Americans who combined the five-tone scale of their West African origins with European harmonies to produce the chord progressions characteristic of the blues. [30] Or take Brazil, where no-one could claim that class politics has been adversely affected by the supposedly debilitating effects of ‘Western’ culture. During the 1990s Brazil became the sixth biggest market for recorded music in the world after the USA, Japan, Germany, the UK and France (and the second biggest market for pirate recordings, after the USA). One of the genres is the mangue beat movement which first developed in the city of Recife.
Hybridity is not new in Brazilian music. Here, as in other nations, what is usually called ‘traditional’ national genres like the samba and the choro mixed modes of the Portuguese colonial settlers, the transplanted African slaves and the indigenous population since the nineteenth century. Mangue is no different in this respect except that it has not existed long enough to receive the respectable aura of tradition conferred by time and familiarity. Worse, it employs rhythms and instruments derived from rock – which is itself of course a hybrid. ‘In fact, Mangue is a metaphor for cultural diversity based on an environment full of diversity.’ Far from submerging what I will call ‘older’, rather than ‘traditional’ musical forms, it has brought them to the surface: ‘One of the most interesting effects of the mangue movement and its offshoots is that instead of suffocating traditional culture, mangue beat is helping local culture to rejuvenate itself.’ [31]
 

4.1.4.   The problem of ‘the West’
Part of the problem here is the very notion of ‘the West’. [32] As Gordon Matthews has written of the equation of global capitalism with Westernisation: ‘One problem with this view is that “Western” is hardly a monolithic category, but encompasses many different societies, ideas, values: are there really any such things as “Western values”, “Western ways of life”?’ [33] National cultures are never homogenous; above all, as Lenin insisted, they are divided on class lines.
The elements of democratic and socialist culture are present, if only in rudimentary form, in every national culture, since in every nation there are toiling and exploited masses, whose conditions of life inevitably give rise to the ideology of democracy and socialism. But every nation also possesses a bourgeois culture (and most nations a reactionary and clerical culture as well) in the form, not merely of ‘elements’, but of the dominant culture. [34]
The point which Lenin is making here is that while there may be no such thing as a proletarian culture, the proletariat does have a culture, which is not identical to that of the bourgeoisie, even though it exists in the context of capitalist society and the dominant bourgeois ideology. Consequently: ‘we take from each national culture only its democratic and socialist elements; we take them only and absolutely in opposition to the bourgeois culture and bourgeois nationalism of each nation.’ What Lenin is thinking of by ‘proletarian culture’ is not the early 20th century Russian equivalent of Eastenders, but something more like internal trade union democracy, or the libraries established by the German Social Democratic party and by the miners of the Rhondda Valley in south Wales for the self-education of working class people.
The object of the socialist movement is not to preserve the ‘proletarian’ aspects of that culture but to create an international culture drawn from all these cases: ‘The slogan of working-class democracy is not “national culture” but the international culture of democracy and the world-wide working class movement.’ [35]
Black workers in South Africa before the fall of apartheid, for example, were heavily influenced by the best aspects of British working class organisation. In 1983 the Federation of South African Trade Unions produced a 72-page pamphlet called The Shop Steward: ‘Half of it is an historical account of the British shop steward movement with upbeat accounts of the strength of shop stewards during the First World War or at Ford plants in Britain in the 1960s.’ [36] Working class movements do not only learn from the experience of the working class, but from those aspects of the dominant culture which the bourgeoisie has subsequently betrayed.
South Africa also gives us an example of this. Early in 2001 a teacher’s committee in Johannesburg advised the provincial education department that several of Shakespeare’s plays should be removed from school reading lists. In the ensuing controversy it became apparent the extent to which these works had been part of the cultural formation of leading activists in the anti-apartheid struggle, particularly Julius Caesar, in which they identified with the conspirators against tyranny.
In 1944 the first manifesto of the Youth League of the ANC, in which Nelson Mandela played his first political role, concluded with the passage from the play that begins: ‘The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars.’ Later, when many of the same activists were imprisoned on Robben Island, they would recite passages from the same text and others which were open to radical interpretation. When Sonny Verkatrathnam secretly circulated his copy of the Complete Works asking his fellow-prisoners to autograph their favourite passages, Mandela chose the speech which begins: ‘Cowards die many times before their deaths.’ [37] And in this respect they were resuming a tradition which had started nearly 200 years before in Britain. As Robert Hughes points out:
When thousands of voteless, propertyless workers the length and breadth of England met in their reading-groups in the 1820s to discuss republican ideas and discover the significance of Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar, they were seeking to unite themselves by taking back the meaning of the dominant culture from custodians who didn’t live up to them. [38]
In this context concerns over the supposed cultural homogenisation resultant on Westernisation’ – which Naomi Klein summarised in 2000 as ‘the idea of everyone eating at Burger King, wearing Nike shoes and watching Backstreet Boys videos’ – is to fixate on the superficial. [39] As Klein herself recounts of the workers she met in the Special Enterprise Zones of Global South:
They are young men and women in Hong Kong and Jakarta who wear Nikes and eat at McDonald’s, and tell me they are too busy organising factory workers to bother with Western lifestyle politics. And while Westerners sweat over what kind of shoes and shirts are the most ethical to buy, the people sweating in the factories line their dorm rooms with McDonald’s advertisements, paint ‘NBA Homeboy’ murals on their doors and love anything with ‘Meekey’ [i.e. Mickey Mouse]. The organisers in the Cavite zone often dress for work in ersatz Disney or Tommy T-shirted – cheap knockoffs from the local market. How do they reconcile the contradiction between their clothes and their anger at the multinationals? They told me they had never really thought about it like that: politics in Cavite is about fighting for concrete improvements in worker’s lives – not about what name happens to be on a t-shirt you happen to have on your back. [40]
The arrival of the new is any case not necessarily experienced as an alien intrusion by people who in most respects adhere to longer-established forms of social and economic life. Electronic media and communications technologies are perhaps the contemporary bearers of capitalist modernity in the way that the railway and the telegram were in the mid-nineteenth century, and like their predecessors, they can also play a role in social organisation. In what – for Seabrook – is a relatively balanced passage, he notes their contradictory impact:
People are not tabula rasa on which the global media inscribes its messages at will. But neither is it an adequate explanation to claim that people interpret the messages after their own fashion and integrate them into their own world-view. It is more complicated. People do assimilate images and information according to their own experience, but, particularly in cultures where until recently people have remained closed to the assault of efficient technologies of cultural dissemination, this is scarcely an encounter of equals. [41]
Seabrook here elides media content and technological form: the former will indeed contain an ideological charge – although it is not clear to me why unfamiliarity should necessarily lead to greater susceptibility – but the latter can be put to multiple uses, with quite different political implications. An illustration of the simplest type of impact is given by the novelist William Dalrymple, who here evokes a mixture of archaic and contemporary forms in the northern Indian state of Himachal Pradesh:
Within a day, I had walked beyond the last metalled road. Along with the tarmac, I left both the telephones and the electricity grid far behind me. Soon I was heading into an apparently pre-modern world: up in the hill villages, the harvest was being cut by hand with sickles and bound in sheaves, stacked one by one into stooks. Oxen ploughed the narrow terraces with wooden ploughs. In the villages, stone houses with wooden fretwork balconies like those in Mughal miniatures tumbled down steep mountainsides, slate roofs alternating with roof terraces where the women were drying apricots and stacking kindling for the winter. You could almost taste the woody resin-scent of the deodars and the warm peach-brandy aroma of the drying fruit. One of the goatherds who wandered past our camp the second evening said he was on his way to consult the local oracle, a shaman who channeled a Pahari deity and was celebrated for the accuracy of his prophecies. It was trekking as time travel: I seemed to have walked up into a Jack-and-the-Beanstalk world about as far as I could imagine from the noise and pollution of New Delhi ... Later that morning, at the top of the pass, I stopped in at the village [of] Shakti Dehra, and fell into conversation with the headman. Within minutes, Joginder Rajput had whipped out a cellphone and begun talking to his younger brother who needed him to send down some bullocks for the ploughing. The government telephone network had failed to get landlines up to the village yet, he explained, but there was a good signal from one of the private cellphone companies and about half the households in the village now had mobiles. [42]
Rajput’s reliance on a private provider certainly indicates the extent to which late uneven and combined development occurs under the sign of neoliberalism, but it is clear that the possession of a mobile phone has made easier aspects of his working life and that of his family.
Technology does not, however, only impact on individuals, but can also be incorporated into forms of social interaction. In Sipsongpanna, the southwestern border region of Yunnan in China, the ‘hills have been levelled to make way for new roads, power lines have replaced the canopy of the rain forest, and new migrants from the coast are building cities in place of villages’. The Buddhist religion practised by the Tai population has been repressed since 1953, but has recently experienced a revival as monks operating across the national borders of Thailand, Laos, Burma and China have attempted to revive the classical Tai ‘though today they carry it not on palm leaves but on floppy disks, videos and CDs’. As Sara Davis says:
Thus we should attend not just to the video itself but to the person who carries the video, who puts it in the machine and presses ‘play’, who explains the images that appear in terms a village teenager can understand. In the right hands, modernity is made to feel, not foreign or alienating, but as familiar, remembered, and natural as old legend. [43]
Both these examples display what I earlier called ‘adaptation’ in the face of capitalist modernity. I will discuss the modernity of political Islamism below, but it has to be seen as a similar response. The familiarity of adherents with the latest means of destruction allows Roger Scruton to contemplate the irony whereby, ‘the techniques and institutions on which Al-Qa’eda depends are the gifts of the new global institutions’: ‘It is Western enterprise with its multinational outreach that produced the technology that bin Laden has exploited so effectively against us.’ [44] Gray extends the argument in a way that points to a more significant aspect of Al Qaeda’s implantation in contemporary capitalism – its reliance on communications media:
It is modern not only in the fact that it uses satellite phones, laptop computers and encrypted websites. The attack on the Twin Towers demonstrates that Al Qaeda understands that twenty-first century wars are spectacular encounters in which the dissemination of media images is a core strategy. Its use of satellite television to mobilise support in Muslim countries is part of his strategy. [45]
Finally, and more positively, communications technologies have also played an important role in facilitating working-class movements. Geoffrey Crothall, editor of China Labour Bulletin, recently pointed out that the spread of strikes was not only due to the increasing volatility of Chinese workers:
One of the key reasons is simply that strikes are much more visible. Just about every factory worker, especially in Guangdong, has a cheap smartphone and can post news about their strike and the response of management and the local government to it on social media and have that information circulate within a matter of minutes. This enhanced visibility has also encouraged more workers to take strike action. They see workers from other factories or workplaces that are in exactly the same position as them taking strike action and they think ‘we can do this too’. [46]
The other dominant alternative to uneven and combined development is syncretism. In one sense this is the more important of the two, since the postmodern argument for the end of the non-synchronous is effectively a ‘super-syncretism’ on a global scale. As McAllister notes, syncretism registers ‘the thorough mingling and mixing of historically separate social and cultural traits’, but: ‘In such a perspective, historically discrete elements merge into a syncretic mixture whose different strands eventually become so tightly woven that they are quite difficult to separate out.’ The difficulty here is that adherents of syncretism fail to recognise the tensions which these mergers produce:
... under the impact of the current process of rapid economic and social change, some of the strands that appeared to be bound together in one ‘rope’ are being dramatically ripped apart and then reinterpreted and rewoven into new patterns. In sum the model presents reality as more static and seamless than it proves to be and as composed of discrete cultural elements that easily combine and recombine rather than fundamental social relations that often wrench as they shift. [47]
 

4.1.5.   Syncretist positions
Some syncretist positions converge with positions which are nominally informed by the concept of uneven and combined development. Mike Davis, for example, argues that Dubai and China have this in common: ‘Starting from feudalism and peasant Maoism, respectively, both have arrived at the stage of hypercapitalism through what Trotsky called “the dialectic of uneven and combined development”.’ What this suggests, however, is that uneven and combined development is a process with an end point at which the specific tensions associated with it are overcome – although obviously not those characteristic of capitalism in general:
In the cases of Dubai and China, all the arduous intermediate stages of commercial evolution have been telescoped or short circuited to embrace the “perfected” synthesis of shopping, entertainment, and architectural spectacle on the most pharaonic scale. [48]
A different case for syncretism has been put by leading former-neoliberal-turned-dissident-conservative, Gray, for whom non-Western societies are free to adapt aspects of Western capitalism to create entirely new formations:
The growth of the world economy does not inaugurate a universal civilisation, as both Smith and Marx thought it must. Instead it allows the growth of indigenous kinds of capitalism, diverging from the ideal free market and from each other ... Karl Marx and John Stuart Mill believed that modern societies throughout the world would become replicas of western societies. The West would necessarily be a model, its imitators secular, Enlightenment cultures ... History has falsified this Enlightenment faith. Modern societies come in many varieties. Like nineteenth-century Japan, China and Russia, Singapore, Taiwan and Malaysia are developing as modern countries today by borrowing selectively from western societies while rejecting western models. [49]
What Gray calls ‘selective borrowing’ is close to what in Part 1 I called ‘debased adaptation’, and carries the same risks for the ruling-classes involved. These have been pointed out by a very different conservative thinker, although one who is similarly sceptical about the prospects for neoliberalism, Edward Luttwak, who has highlighted ‘the perils of incomplete imitation’, whereby developing world ruling classes ‘have been importing a dangerously unstable version of American turbo-capitalism, because the formula is incomplete’. What is missing? On the one hand, the legal regulation to control what he calls ‘the overpowering strength of big business’ and on the other the internal humility by the winners and acceptance of the essential justice of their personal situation by the losers from the system:
So far, however, in too many countries undergoing turbo-capitalist change, the winners enjoy their wealth all too visibly, are enormously eager to enrich their children, and they give away very little, except to the Church. As for the losers, what they feel is not guilt, but bitter resentment. And neither group is filled with the moral certainty required to punish losers who break the rules. [50]
It is possible to consider ‘incomplete adaptation’ in more concrete and explicitly Marxist terms, in relation to growth in specific sectors of the economy, where expansion may be at quite a different level from the rest. Beverley Silver has focussed on the impact of working-class organisation in such situations of sectional growth:
Strong new working class movements had been created as a combined result of the spatial fixes pursued by multinational capital and the import substitution industrialisation efforts of modernising states. In some cases, like Brazil’s automobile workers; labour militancy was rooted in the newly expanding mass production consumer durable industries. In other cases, like the rise of Solidarnosc in Poland’s shipyards, militancy was centred in gigantic establishments providing capital goods. In still others, like Iran’s oil workers, labour militancy was centred on critical natural resource export industries. [51]
As we have already seen, Silver is not the only Marxist effectively to recapitulate elements of uneven and combined development without being aware of the concept, or its relevance. Presenting her particular perspective on the impossibility of complete ‘catch-up’, Silver notes that ‘while spatial fixes tend to erode the North-South divide, technological fixes, product fixes and protectionism tended to reconstitute the divide continually’:
Spatial fixes relocated the social contradictions of mass production (including strong working classes), but they have not relocated the wealth through which high-wage countries historically accommodated these same contradictions. As a result, strong grievances and strong bargaining power go hand in hand, creating the conditions for permanent social crises in much of the post-colonial world. [52]
 

4.1.6.   UCD in the West – an incomplete process
If uneven and combined development still occurs in the Global South, can we at least declare it to be completed process in the West? Clearly, it is less significant there, particularly since the Second World War, but two aspects still remain. One is the continued drawing together of different phases of capitalist development, a process of which we saw examples earlier in the Global South. Hardt and Negri highlight similar combinations in Italy during the 1970s and 1980s:
The transformation of the Italian economy since the 1950s demonstrates clearly that relatively backward economies do not simply follow the same stages the dominant regions experience, but evolve through alternative and mixed patterns. After World War II, Italy was still a predominantly peasant-based society, but in the 1950s and 1960s it went through furious but incomplete modernisation and industrialisation, the first economic miracle. Then, however, in the 1970s and 1980s, when the processes of industrialisation were still not complete, the Italian economy embarked on another transformation, a process of postmodernisation, and achieved a second economic miracle. These Italian miracles were not really leaps forward that allowed it to catch up with the dominant economies; rather, they represented mixtures of different incomplete economic forms. What is most significant here, and what might usefully pose the Italian case as the general model for all other backward economies, is that the Italian economy did not complete one stage (industrialisation) before moving on to another (informatisation). Various regions will evolve to have peasant elements mixed with partial industrialisation and partial informatisation. The economic stages are thus all present at once, merged into a hybrid, composite economy that varies not in kind but in degree across the globe. [53]
Although the concept is not named, the argument here suggests one of the ways in which uneven and combined development (‘hybrid, composite economy’) retains its relevance in the contemporary West.
The other aspect is migration. Again using post-war Italy as our example, we can see the process unfolding as in-migrants from the Mezzogiorno revolted against their living conditions and low pay during the ‘industrial miracle’ of the late fifties and early sixties. [54] We have already noted in the case of Hardt and Negri how many Italian commentators invoke ‘leaping over stages’ without any reference to Trotsky. Here, for example, is former Communist militant Lucio Magri discussing the way in which post-war Italy was the site of both the most highly advanced technologies and forms of labour organisation:
Technological leap did not only mean the application of better equipment and better work organisation to a productive apparatus partly out of use (as in Germany and France). It meant revolutionizing both the one and the other and involving large areas previously excluded from modernity: that is moving quickly from a narrow and sometimes craft based, industrial base to a Fordist industry that was already (at its most advanced) on the threshold of automation, and then extending it to new sectors and new types of production and consumption. It meant leaping over the intermediate stages that other countries had previously crossed with difficulty.
Magri then refers to ‘the social and cultural upheavals induced or anticipated by the Italian economic miracle’ and highlights its ‘novel interlinking of modernity and backwardness, how it fuelled imbalances and regional or class conflict between North and South, capital and labour, and old and new middle layers’. [55]
 

4.2.      New Developments in Urbanism and Ideology
The preceding section indicates some of the enduring characteristics of uneven and combined development; but given that it necessarily involves the unexpected outcomes of drawing together different forms, within a system as dynamic as capitalism, it would be unusual if new combinations did not arise. Two of these are particularly significant.
 

4.2.1.   Mega-Cities
I have stressed throughout this chapter how urbanisation – whether in Lahore or Los Angeles – has played an equivalent role to industrialisation and, in some cases, has been even more significant in generating uneven and combined development. This remains the case but, in the Global South at least, it has taken on new forms. The number of cities with populations of over one million rose from 86 in 1950 to 400 in 2004 and these are expected to account for all future population growth from 2020, until the anticipated peak is reached with a global population of 10 billion in 2050, of which 95 per cent will live in urban areas in the developing world. [56] What kind of urban areas are these?
At one extreme they simply involve adding new streets and buildings of modern design and composed of modern materials onto an older base, as in Thailand: ‘Bangkok is a First World City imposed on the decaying fabric of the original’, writes Seabrook. [57] At the other extreme, it involves constructing entirely new cities in previously uninhabited rural or even desert conditions, as in China. What is perhaps even more startling than the appearance of these monuments to Chinese expansion is their tendency to expand to the point of convergence: the Pearl River Delta was still a rural agricultural area as late as 1973; it now consists of 9 cities, the total population of which is 42 million people. These are already merging, as it were, organically, but the Chinese state plans to consolidate them into one gigantic megacity by 2030, by which point the population should have risen to 80 million. [58]
Between these two extremes lie two other, perhaps more typical developments. One is where the boundaries between the cities and their surrounding hinterlands begin to dissolve, along with their distinction from each other. Gregory Guldin has written of areas in China which are ‘neither rural nor urban but a blending of the two wherein a dense web of transaction ties large urban cores to their surrounding regions’. [59] The other is where cities expand in ways which are genuinely urban, creating peripheral slums quite unlike those which arose during the original process of industrialisation in the West.
Davis describes this as a consequence of ‘urbanization-without-growth’ which has become ‘radically decoupled from industrialisation, even from development per se‘:
The global forces “pushing” people from the countryside – mechanization in Java and India, food imports in Mexico, Haiti and Kenya, civil war and drought throughout Africa, and everywhere the consolidation of small into large holdings and the competition of industrial-scale agribusiness – seem to sustain urbanization even when the “pull” of the city is drastically weakened by debt and depression. [60]
Seabrook describes this process in the capital of Indonesia:
Urbanization in Dhaka is quite unlike any traditional idea of the city. Whole areas remain semi-rural, and there is little high-rise building. Whole tracts of open land become covered with dense grass in the monsoon, lush grazing ground for cattle ... Even so, an invasive industrialization is the reason for their existence. The tension between village and city is made visible in Dhaka, and in the end it is not the village that prevails. The cooking fires may be in traditional clay chulhas, or stoves, in front of the huts, but the cooking fuel proves to be a mixture of waste material from plastics and garment factories, which melts into a foul-smelling liquid. [61]
Quite often, the cities of the global south display elements from all four of the ‘ideal types’ outlined here, which are rarely incarnated in completely pristine form. What they all have in common is that many inhabitants of the new slums can increasingly be characterised as ‘informal workers’, now over a one billion strong and two-fifths of the population of the developing world. Davis reasonably asks:
The labour-power of a million people has been expelled from the world system, and who can imagine any plausible scenario, under liberal auspices, that would reintegrate them as productive workers or mass consumers? [62]
Seabrook imagines the sense of frustration and loss experienced by former peasant transplanted into a city that endlessly denies them what it promises:
Whenever you look at the goods in the shop window – especially in the air-conditioned mall, where you sometimes take few minutes refuge from the heat or the rain – it strikes you afresh how poor you remain in spite of the striving. In the village you knew what you needed for survival; and although you might have wished for some small luxuries, you never allowed your imagination to wander in the realms of the impossible. In the city, you are taunted with the absences in your life every time you pass through the central shopping area, with its glass and marble enclosures, and windows full of thin papier-mÃ¢che models wearing fashionable clothes for a foreign autumn, the array of dazzling white refrigerators and washing machines, the rows of flickering TV screens all showing different channels – ospreys in flight, speedway racing from Minneapolis, Alpine peaks in Switzerland. At night, the street-lamps and advertisements shimmer in the wet road, so that even beneath your feet a chasm of magical colour reflects your own diffuse feelings of inadequacy and dissatisfaction. [63]
This is powerfully evocative, but – typically – has no sense of how experiences of this sort might lead city-dwellers to organise, rather than simply bemoan their fate. In fact, it would be wrong to imagine that the mass of the population live lives of quiescent desperation in the absence of an immediate catalyst. In the Egyptian context, for example, Eric Denis has gone so far as to write of ‘urbanization from below’:
In 1996, the rate of urbanization in Egypt (defined as the part of the population living in the 800 agglomerations greater than 10,000 inhabitants) was calculated at 70 per cent. Today, that figure is around 80 percent. Most of these neo-urbanites, no longer engaged in agriculture, have to earn their living and make settlements habitable by themselves – without services from the state and, indeed, without its recognition. [64]
The middle-class hatred and fear of these populations is palpable. During the 1990s: ‘Commentators warned that the inhabitants of the ‘ashwa’iyat [i.e. ‘random’ or ‘haphazard’] were not urban and hadari (‘civilized’) but rather rural fellaheen – something that didn’t belong in the city and was poisoning its lifeblood.’ As Jack Shenker notes, two decades later, on the eve of the revolution of 2011, the inhabitants of the informal settlements were not simply occupying the wrong space, but living in the wrong time:
These people, went the narrative, are not our flesh and blood; they are not even of our time ... One investigation into the ‘ashwa’iyat’ uncovered ‘carts dating from the time of Methuselah’. [65]
These smug moderns were right to be fearful. Co-existence with Methuselanian modes of transportation would indeed represent an extreme form of uneven and combined development, far beyond even the polarities fused prior to Russia in 1917: but the impacts are quite similar. Shenker rightly points out that, despite the media focus on Tahir Square, the roots of the revolution of 2011 lay elsewhere:
The start of the revolution was ... not truly in the city, but in the non-city – those ever-expanding pools of state abandonment which, for so many decades, had been seeping through the metropolis even as those at the top gazed stubbornly out at sand. [66]
Although defeated, the Egyptian revolution has been the most important of the contemporary social explosions. It was not, however, alone in having its roots in the new urban peripheries. As Colin Mooers points out about Latin America:
Urban neighbourhoods under popular control in Caracas, Santiago, Lima, Buenos Aires and La Paz mobilized around issues of housing, water rights and food distribution; and the recuperation of closed factories was pivotal in bringing down traditional governments committed to neoliberalism and paving the way for the ascendancy of Left governments. [67]
In at least one important case, that of El Alto in Bolivia, an entire city has been the site of new forms of social organisation. In one sense El Alto is an overspill of La Paz, for which it provides much of the workforce and, crucially, through which three of the four supply-routes pass. El Alto is both relatively new – as a city it has only really existed since the Second World War – and also growing exponentially, with inhabitants mostly consisting of those driven from their former occupations or locations. In a way, the population of El Alto is a classic ‘combined’ group, consisting of former peasants forced off their land, former tin miners made redundant following the ‘rationalization’ of the industry, and former inhabitants of La Paz who can no longer afford to stay there. It has also the largest indigenous population of any city in Bolivia.
Sian Lazar has made an important study of the city, conducted around 2003, the year in which the explosion of struggle in El Alto ultimately compelled President Sanchez de Lozada to resign. In her work, Lazar notes that, for both peasants in the surrounding area and urban workers in the informal sector:
Their household model of production allows for fluidity of associational life, but has also allowed them to form alliances and organisations based on territorial location; the street where they sell, the village or region where they live and farm, and, with the addition of the vecino organisational structures in the cities, their zone.
This does not mean that more traditional forms of association have been completely overtaken:
Trade unions are flourishing in the informal economy of El Alto and form a crucial part of the structure of civic organisation that is parallel to the state and shapes multi-tiered citizenship in the city.
The emergence of these complex interactions between forms of organisation based on both place of residence and place of work leads Lazar to conclude that ‘the working class in Bolivia is reconstituting itself as a political subject, albeit not in its traditional forms’. [68] These forms may not resemble those which emerged in Petrograd in 1905 or 1917, but why should this be surprising? [69] In the fusions of the archaic and the contemporary the latter component at least is always subject to change, although as El Alto demonstrates this has not lessened the resulting potential for social explosiveness.
However, as I have emphasised throughout this chapter, it would be wrong to imagine the consequences of contemporary uneven and combined development always tend towards revolutionary or at least left-wing conclusions. The rapid transformation of cities has a dark side exemplified, perhaps, by the rise of urban gendered violence in India, as Manali Desai reports:
For the new, urban, middle-class India, hedonism, voyeurism and sexual prowess are eternally emblazoned on the cities’ and highways’ larger-than-life billboards, in films and, not least, in a vast amount of pornography. India is the world’s fifth largest consumer of online porn – not such a surprise, given the size of its population, yet the relatively poor e-connectivity of rural India compared with China, for example, also needs to be taken into account. All this points to a release of libidinal energy after decades of prudery, leavened only by the occasional glimpse of Bollywood flesh. But this sexual ‘freedom’ is not only circumscribed by sharp gender inequalities, reinforced by caste and ethnic domination; it has also produced a fierce reaction, which is directly threatening to women. The aspirational, gym-toned male body, with distinctly Western consumer tastes – whisky, cigarettes, fast cars – looms large on city billboards, enjoining men to participate in the image, if only vicariously. For India’s surplus men, fantasies fuelled by bootleg liquor are compounded by frustrated mobility and other forms of class desire.
In the Indian case, the recent explosion of sexual violence against women is partly produced by a tension between the contradictory demands of Hindu nationalism for male lIbid.inal restraint and the new temptations and frustrations attendant on new forms of city life. In other areas, however, it is religion itself which has been reshaped by uneven and combined development. Religion represents a consolation or defence against the intrusion of capitalist modernity, but religion is also communicated and celebrated using the techniques and technologies that capitalist modernity has provided. Elsewhere it has formed an alternative to a left politics. Davis has gone as far as to say that in the mega-cities:
Marx has yielded the historical stage to Mohammed and the Holy Ghost. If God died in the cities of the industrial revolution, he has risen again in the post-industrial cities of the developing world ... populist Islam and Pentecostal Christianity (and, in Bombay, the cult of Shiva) occupy a social space analogous to that of early twentieth century socialism and anarchism. [70]
As a general argument this is too pessimistic. What is involved is not simply an unchallenged revival of religious belief, but a contest between radical left and populist religious responses to capitalist modernity. As we have seen, in Latin America it is the former which has tended to dominate, in Central Africa, it is the latter. As Alexander Colas has written, Marxists needs to use the notion of ‘populism’ as it is represented by Islamism,
not as descriptors of accidental, residual forms of mass political mobilisation, but, rather, as structural features of societies – like those in Africa – far more powerfully subject to the vagaries of combined and uneven capitalist development. [71]
The situation in the Middle East is more mixed, although – as the unfolding catastrophe in Syria reminds us – it has to date had no happier an outcome.
 

4.2.2.   Political Islam
I noted in Part 1 that uneven and combined development tended to produce three possible responses in the Muslim world: (1) in which Islam incorporated sufficient elements of capitalist modernity to maintain organisational structures and modes of social interaction, even if this meant inventing novel traditions which allowed it to function in a changed social context (‘renewal’); (2) in which former adherents simply abandoned their beliefs in order to embrace new revolutionary doctrines associated with capitalist modernity (‘adoption’); and (3) which in a sense faces in both directions, where new forms of collective organisation such as trade unions were deployed to defend both material conditions and forms of religious observance (‘adaptation’). This position is, in a sense, the most important, as it represents an unstable situation which ultimately leads to the alternatives represented by either (1) or (2). It is the main terrain of the contest to which I have referred. It is however important to understand that outcome (2) today has two possible variants: revolutionary socialism or radical Islam. These alternatives were brought into opposition for the first time in the Iranian Revolution of 1978–9.
As we saw in Part 1, Tim McDaniel has drawn parallels between the Russian and Iranian Revolutions. He compares the Russian and Iranian working classes before the overthrow of their respective autocracies, but contrasts the roles which they played during these revolutions:
Both were numerically small ... In addition, both industrial labour forces were highly heterogeneous, characterized by large influxes of peasant migrants unacquainted with socialist ideas or traditions of worker struggle. In both too, because of the rapid pace of industrialization, ‘industry’ was very heterogeneous, ranging from traditional craft-type establishments to modern plants with advanced technology. Obviously, these traits shared by the two industrial labour forces were not decisive in shaping labour protest, for they cannot explain the very great differences in militancy and class consciousness. [72]
There are two points to be made here. First, it is not clear that the role of the Iranian working class was less than that of the Russian in the revolutionary process, given that the former – although even smaller as a proportion of the population – was decisive in breaking the regime and even, in the Shoras, threw up forms of organisation which are clearly of the same type as the soviets or factory councils. [73] Second, without reducing the entire difference in outcome to the ‘absence of revolutionary leadership’ beloved of Leninist cliché, it is simply unhistorical to ignore the role of the Bolsheviks and particularly, the distinct political programme which they were able to offer workers, which was at least partly responsible for consolidating class consciousness and providing strategic leadership, the absence of which was telling in Iran.
There is, however, one aspect of McDaniel’s argument which points towards a central issue of state forms. McDaniel rightly affords ‘key significance’ to ‘the contrast between a basically capitalist model of industrialization with pre-twentieth-century styles of political despotism’, as in Russia, and ‘a neopatrimonial model with the most modern technology of repression’, as in Iran. [74] Behind this slightly over-elaborate terminology lies the fundamental distinction between the state in pre-capitalist Russia and the state in capitalist Iran, whatever formal similarities there may have been between the respective titles held by Nicholas Romanov and Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi. [75] This distinction was carried over into the outcomes. Theda Skocpol writes that, ‘the central phalanx of the clergy fused its authority and activities with the state itself’ and claims that this was not:
‘a return to tradition’ in Iran, but rather a strikingly innovative contemporary departure, in which Khomeini and his associates took upon themselves a vanguard, state-building and state-controlling role analogous to that of the Jacobins in revolutionary France and the Communists in revolutionary Russia and China. [76]
Whatever the other differences between the latter three revolutions, in each case the state was overthrown; in the case of Iran, it was only the regime. Consequently, and despite the Western fixation on the supposed singularity of Islamist ideology, the regime of the mullahs inherited the pre-existing state rather than creating its own. Skocpol indicates as much herself later in the same discussion:
Pre-revolutionary Iran was ... a rentier state, where revenues from exports of oil and natural gas were channelled into the state, not so much into truly productive investments, but instead into lavish purchases of modern armaments and into luxury consumption. An Iranian Islamic Republic could remain, for quite some time, another sort of rentier state: a populist, welfare-orientated rentier state, with ulama passing out alms in return for moral conformity on a grander scale than ever before. [77]
If the Islamic Republic resembles the state of the Pahlavi dynasty in its rentier essence, it also has a wider set of affinities with other capitalist states, as Fred Halliday points out:
If one looks at the subsequent history of the Iranian revolution, not as a scriptural but as pragmatic, political one, with ideology used to justify the mundane and universal goal of keeping state power, then much becomes clear. The mullahs have seized and kept control through the mechanisms found elsewhere – mobilization for war, discretionary use of welfare, repression of political opponents, demagogy about foreign threats and conspiracies abroad. [78]
Halliday is right to emphasise the constraining effects on ideology of attempting to successfully manage a capitalist nation-state of any size, but in his understandable desire to resist Islamophobic hysteria, he perhaps underplays the impact the Iranian and other Islamic regimes on social and personal behaviour. Ankie Hoogvelt highlights the real dividing line in relation to state intervention:
The Islamisation of officially secular and moderate regimes targets personal law and penal law, leaving intact the existing economic formation and political model inherited from previous regimes. [79]
The constraints mentioned above apply to regimes, but not to Islamists who have no prospect of achieving state power. Political Islam as a form of adaptation is quite different from the defence of tradition involved in renewal. This dissimilarity has been obscured by the fact that any group of Muslims who happen to be opposed to Western interests tend to be described as ‘Islamic radicals’, no matter how conservative they may be. The Taliban may have allowed Al Qaeda to use Afghanistan as a base, but that did not mean the two organisations were similar in any way other than their shared religious designation: the former was deeply traditional in its desire to return established forms of village organisation; the latter profoundly radical in its ambition to create a regime which had not previously existed on earth. In neither case is ‘religion’ an autonomous force. On the contrary, the motivations of radicals in particular are formed by their material circumstances:
Just because a lack of graduate employment, decent housing, social mobility, food, etc., is explained by an individual through reference to religion does not make it a religious grievance. It remains a political grievance articulated with reference to a particular religious worldview. [80]
Indeed, Olivier Roy has argued that in the French context, Islamism:
is not the revolt of Islam or that of Muslims, but a specific problem concerning two categories of teenagers – mostly immigrants, but also native French citizens. The question is not the radicalization of Islam, but the Islamization of radicalism. [81]
Roy’s question – why does radicalization take this particular form among certain groups – is one that needs to be asked, not only of France or the West more generally, but of the heartlands of the Muslim world itself. Part of the answer lies with the modernizing secular nationalist regimes, which not only failed materially to provide for the majority of their populations, but usually took the form of murderous dictatorships which were – as in the case of Syria – prepared to kill countless people and destroy unquantifiable amounts of property in order to preserve themselves in power. Those lucky enough to escape the attentions of the Assad regime might of course then find themselves victim of the latest incarnations of capitalist modernity in the form of US drone missiles. It is not entirely surprising that those on the receiving end of either or both might be driven to identify their own, quite different, version of what it means to be modern.
The starting point for understanding Islamism in the mirror of uneven and combined development has therefore to be that it is not a traditional rejection of modernity. By this I do not simply mean that Islamists inhabit contemporary culture, although this is how a certain school of conservative thought tends to conceive their relation to modernity, offering, at its most superficial, scenarios such as the one imagined here by Samuel Huntington:
Somewhere in the Middle East a half-dozen young men could well be dressed in jeans, drinking Coke, listening to rap, and, between their bows to Mecca, putting together a bomb to blow up an American airliner. [82]
If, as we have already seen, the techniques and technologies of Islamic radicalism are quintessentially modern; the ideology, and the forms of consciousness to which it corresponds are, as we should by now come to expect, far more ‘combined’. ISIS, which has of course long surpassed Al Qaeda as the incarnation of the Islamist threat, illustrates the ways in which the archaic and the contemporary can fuse under present conditions. After the Charlie Hebdo massacre, Hari Kunzu rightly scorned those who regarded the killers as exponents of a ‘medieval’ ideology:
The jihadi movement is a thoroughly modern beast, which ironically owes much to the French revolutionary legacy of 1789. Though they are religious millenarians, looking to bring about global submission to the will of God, they are also utopian revolutionaries, and have adopted tactical thinking from the various movements that trace their legacy to Paris, and that inaugural moment of modernity. [83]
Gray has argued that, consciously or not, ISIS stands in an even longer revolutionary heritage, in that it has parallels with both millenarian experiments like that of the Anabaptist commune at Munster and modern revolutionary movements, by which he means the entire range from the Jacobins to the Khmer Rouge; but also adduces another aspect, that of transnational crime syndicates:
So what is Isis essentially – violent millenarian cult, totalitarian state terrorist network or criminal cartel? The answer is that it is none of these and all of them. Far from being a reversion to anything in the past, Isis is something new – a modern version of barbarism that has emerged in states that have been shattered by western intervention. [84]
Ultimately, combination of the archaic and contemporary is embedded in the consciousness of individuals who are subject to the process.
The men who planned and carried out the Islamist attacks on America – all but four of them Saudi citizens – have often been depicted in the press as being “medieval fanatics”. In fact, it would be more accurate to describe them as confused but highly educated middle class professionals ... Such figures represent a clash of civilisations occurring not so much between civilisations, as the author Samuel Huntington would maintain, but rather within individuals, products of the same cultural dislocation and disorientation that accompanies accelerating economic change and globalisation. [85]
The journalist Jamie Doward wrote of his encounter with the British jihadi, Mohammed Ezzouek, whom we can take as one example:
The first thing I noticed about him was his size: tiny, birdlike ... The second thing was his beard. Long, black and wispy, it had clearly taken months to grow and was central to his identity. The third was his trainers, Nike, almost box-fresh. This man is a walking contradiction, I thought. He spoke street slang while praising the prophet. He went to Somalia to live under a caliphate and here he was, talking to me in London, complaining about the difficulties getting a mobile phone contract ... The group’s members appear to have existed in a liminal world where east met west and modernity clashed with medieval. Many played five-a-side football together, shared an interest in designer clothes and were at the same schools. But they were also captivated by a London-based Islamist cleric, Hani al-Sibai, who refers to himself as a sheikh and has been named by the US Treasury as a supporter of al-Qaida. Their world is exemplified in the Twitter feeds of Isis fighters who link to speeches by extremist clerics interspersed with rap videos and pictures of themselves posing with fearsome-looking automatic weapons. [86]
To conclude this part of my discussion, it might be useful to stand back from ISIS, the horrors associated with it and the controversies to which it has given rise, and turn to an earlier example of the emergence of modern Islamism. This was centred in the Malaysian state of Negeri Sembilan, and was not dominated by young men with ‘fearsome-looking automatic weapons’ of the sort mentioned by Doward. We are fortunate to have McAllister’s case study of this process, to which I have already referred, as she explicitly treats it as an example of uneven and combined development.
McAllister argues that the Islamic revival or dakwah in Malaysia:
is primarily a reaction against both the economic stress and dislocation and cultural deracination brought by capitalist development; it is in large part an attempt to define a personal and a political alternative.
As in many other, more famous cases, it is essentially modern rather than a retreat to tradition:
Although such resistance might in one sense be interpreted as a return to the past or a strengthening of tradition, it is eminently clear that this wave of Islamic militancy – and the reassertion but also reinterpretation of traditional Malay Islam it promotes – is a contemporary phenomenon, arising from people’s current problems and needs.
But McAllister also draws attention to the contradictions which this reinterpretation involves, not least for the women who were so central to the dakwah movement:
At the same time, immersion in the revival serves to divert attention away from social to primarily religious matters and essentially blunts their critical awareness of economic and political realities; this occurs in spite of the collective choice of so many young women to embrace fundamentalist Islam represents at least an unconsciousness [sic] resistance to the hegemony of capitalist culture. For a minority of Negeri Sembilan devotees, the dakwah movement, however, has a radically different effect. It actually helps them focus and articulate their growing criticism of their country’s course of dependent capitalist development and its impact on their own lives. For these female adherents, conscious resistance and protest are part of their commitment to Islamic revival, even though such commitment is often characterised by a denial of their matrilinear traditions and thus their pre-existing rights and freedoms as women. [87]
The fact that adherents of radical Islam desire a complete transformation of society does not mean that even the successful achievement of state power would necessarily lead to that outcome. Those who do not consciously seek to overthrow capitalism, those who do not even recognize it as the real force shaping the conditions to which they are opposed, will always end up accepting capitalist imperatives, if only because these seem to be natural, God-given processes beyond human intervention. Unlike ISIS, the dakwah movement was not shaped by the catastrophic impact of Western military intervention, but by the type of industrial and urban intrusions which we have now traced for over the two hundred years or so; but it raises the same issue as the emergence of ISIS: the need for an alternative and socialist form of modernity.
* * *
References
[1] Guy Debord [1988], Comments on the Society of the Spectacle (London: Verso), 1998, p. 10.
[2] Harmut Rosa [2005], Social Acceleration: A New Theory of Modernity (New York: Columbia University Press, 2013), pp. 292–293.
[3] Fredric Jameson, Secondary Elaborations, in Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (London: Verso, 1991), pp. 309–310.
[4] Joseph Choonara, The Relevance of Permanent Revolution: A Reply to Neil Davidson, International Socialism, second series, 131 (Summer 2011), p. 182.
[5] Jan Nedervee Pieterse, Globalization North and South: Representations of Uneven Development and the Interaction of Modernities, Theory, Culture & Society, vol. 17, no. 1 (February 2000), p. 135.
[6] The concept of articulation in this sense originates not, as is commonly thought in the work of Louis Althusser and Etienne Balibar, but in that of Pierre-Phillipe Rey, most of whose major works have still not been translated into English. See Aidan Foster-Carter, The Modes of Production Controversy, New Left Review I/107 (January–February 1978), pp. 55–77. For one of the earliest attempts outside of France to use the concept, see John G. Taylor, From Modernization to Modes of Production: A Critique of the Sociologies of Development and Underdevelopment (London: Macmillan, 1979), chapter 13, especially pp. 226–234.
[7] Jairus Banaji, Modes of Production: A Synthesis, in Theory as History: Essays on Modes of Production and Exploitation (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2010), pp. 259–260.
[8] Leon D. Trotsky [1928], The Draft Programme of the Third International – a Critique of Fundamentals, in The Third International After Lenin (London: New Park, 1974), p. 162.
[9] Their failure to recognise the parallels between their own work and Trotsky’s may be simple ignorance of his positions rather than unwillingness to be associated with them. Hardt was once asked whether his failure to consider uneven and combined development in Empire reflected ‘a more general disagreement or critique of [Trotsky’s] view’. He replied: ‘No, I think it’s just a missed opportunity. But I think Toni [Negri] and I are less familiar with Trotsky’s work than we are with Lenin’s work, but, sometimes, those kinds of familiarities are just coincidences of background.’ See Michael Hardt, An Interview with Michael Hardt, Historical Materialism, vol. 11, no. 3 (2003), p. 135.
[10] Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Empire (London: Harvard University Press, 2000), p. 287.
[11] Eric J. Hobsbawm, Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century, 1914–1991 (London: Allen Lane, 1994), pp. 289, 415; see also David Reiff, Los Angeles: Capital of the Third World (London: Jonathan Cape, 1991), p. 179
[12] Fredric Jameson, The End of Temporality, Critical Inquiry, vol. 29, no. 4 (Summer 2003), p. 699.
[13] Chris Harman, Zombie Capitalism: Global Crisis and the Relevance of Marx (London: Bookmarks, 2009), p. 47.
[14] John Smith, Imperialism in the Twenty-First Century: Globalisation, Super-Exploitation, and Capitalism’s Final Crisis (New York: Monthly Review Press, 2016), pp. 101–104.
[15] Achin Vanaik, Emerging Powers: Rise of the South or a Reconfiguration of Elites?, in Shifting Power: Critical Perspectives on Emerging Economies, edited by Nick Buxton and Nicola Bullard (Amsterdam: Transnational Institute, 2014), p. 8.
[16] Henry Bernstein, “The Peasantry” in Global Capitalism: Who, Where and Why?, in The Socialist Register: Working Classes: Global Realities, edited by Leo Panitch and Colin Leys (London: Merlin Press, 2001), pp. 38–40.
[17] Neil Smith [1984], Uneven Development: Nature, Capital and the Production of Space (Third Edition, London: Verso, 2010), pp. 188–189.
[18] Surprisingly perhaps, given his background in the unorthodox Trotskyism of the International Socialist tradition, Smith’s path-breaking book is at its weakest precisely in dealing with combined, as opposed to uneven development. See, for example, Uneven Development, pp. 5–6.
[19] Raju J. Das, Reconceptualizing Capitalism: Forms of Subsumption of Labour, Class Struggle, and Uneven Development, Review of Radical Economics (June 2012), vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 195–196. For Marx’s original discussions of ‘hybrid’ or ‘intermediate’ subsumption, see Karl Marx [1867], Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, vol. 1 (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books/New Left Review, 1976), p. 645; see also Karl Marx [1861–3], Intermediate Forms, in Collected Works, vol. 34 (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1993), pp. 118–20
[20] Carole McAllister, The Uneven and Combined Character of Third World Development: Lessons from Women’s Everyday Forms of Resistance in Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia, Working Paper no. 9 (Amsterdam: International Institute for Research and Education, 1990), p. 7.
[21] Arundhati Roy, The Algebra of Infinite Justice (London: Flamingo, 2002), pp. 167–68.
[22] Tom Kemp, Historical Patterns of Industrialisation (Harlow: Longman, 1978), p. 143.
[23] Julie Finch, In India, Its Service with a Compulsory Smile, The Guardian (17 November 2003).
[24] Anthony D’Costa, Uneven and Combined Development: Understanding India’s Software Exports, World Development 31, no. 1 (January 2003), p. 221.
[25] Ibid., pp. 221–222.
[26] Jeremy Seabrook, Progress on Hold, (24 October 2003).
[27] D’Costa, Uneven and Combined Development, pp. 215–216
[28] Edward Said, Culture and Imperialism (London: Chatto and Windus, 1993), pp. 35–36.
[29] George Lipsitz, Dangerous Crossroads: Popular Music, Postmodernism and the Poetics of Place (London: Verso, 1994), p. 4.
[30] Ibid., p. 177.
[31] Luciana F.M. Mendonca, The Local and Global in Popular Music: the Brazilian Music Industry, Local Culture and Public Policies, in Global Culture: Media, Arts, Policy and Globalization, edited by Diane Crane, Nobuko Kawashima and Ken’ichi Kawasaki (London: Routledge, 2002), pp. 107–9, 110–111. There are even more extreme examples of cultural adoption by Brazilian musicians, notably in the way some embraced British post-punk approaches in the early 1980s. In part this was a reaction to the types of music which were supposed to exemplify Brazilian culture – not only bossa nova and samba, but also such counter-cultural forms such as Tropicalismo. See Eliete Mejorado and Bruno Verner in conversation with Gavin Butt, 40 Degrees in Black, in Post-Punk: Then and Now, edited by Gavin Butt, Kodwo Eshun and Mark Fisher (London: Repeater Books, 2016).
[32] I am also guilty of using ‘the West’ in shorthand ways, not least elsewhere in Part 4 of this article.
[33] Gordon Matthews, Global Culture/Individual Identity: Searching for Home in the Cultural Supermarket (London: Routledge, 2000), p. 182.
[34] Vladimir I. Lenin [1913], Critical Remarks on the National Question, in Collected Works, vol. 20, December 1913–August 1914 (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1964), p. 21.
[35] Ibid., p. 24.
[36] Denis MacShane, Martin Plaut and David Ward, Power! Black Workers, Their Unions and the Struggle for Freedom in South Africa (Nottingham: Spokesman Books, 1984), p. 65.
[37] Anthony Samson O What Men Dare Do, The Observer (22 April 2001). The history of Robben Island prisoners and how they found resources for their struggle in  the English literary tradition has been told in compelling detail in Ashwin Desai [2012], Reading Revolution: Shakespeare on Robben Island (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2014).
[38] Robert Hughes, The Culture of Complaint: The Fraying of America (Revised and Augmented Edition, London: The Harvill Press, 1995), p. 128.
[39] Naomi Klein, No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Bullies (London: HarperCollins, 2000), p. 357
[40] Ibid., p. 429. Or as the Ghanian philosopher Kwame Anthony Appiah put in a related context, ‘what can you tell about someone’s soul from the fact that she drinks Coca-Cola?’ See Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 2007), p. 103.
[41] Jeremy Seabrook, Consuming Cultures: Globalization and Local Lives (Oxford: New Internationalist Publications, 2004), p. 189.
[42] William Dalrymple, After the Blackout, New Statesman (12–18 October 2012), pp. 23–24.
[43] Sara Davis, Premodern Flows in Postmodern China: Globalization and the Sipsongpanna Tais, Modern China, vol. 29, no. 2 (April 2003), pp. 177, 199.
[44] Roger Scruton, The West and the Rest: Globalisation and the Terrorist Threat (London: Continuum Books, 2003), p. 128.
[45] John Gray, Al Qaeda and What It Means to be Modern (London: Faber and Faber, 2003), p. 76.
[46] Patrick Boehler, Q&A: Strikes Peak in China with New Generation of Interconnected Blue-Collar Workers, South China Morning Post (13 August 2014).
[47] McAllister, The Uneven and Combined Character of Third World Development, p. 7.
[48] Mike Davis, Sand, Fear and Money in Dubai, in Evil Paradises: Dreamworlds of Neoliberalism, edited by Mike Davis and Daniel Bertrand Monk (London: Verso, 2007), pp. 53–54.
[49] John Gray, False Dawn: the Delusions of Global Capitalism (London: Granta, 1998), pp. 195–96.
[50] Edward Luttwak, Turbo Capitalism: Winners and Losers in the Global Economy (London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1998), pp. 25–26.
[51] Beverley Silver, Forces of Labour: Workers’ Movements and Globalisation since 1870 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), p. 164.
[52] Ibid., p. 170.
[53] Hardt and Negri, Empire, pp. 288–89.
[54] Paul Ginsborg, A History of Contemporary Italy: Society and Politics, 1943–1988 (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1990), pp. 223–229, 247–253; Lucio Magri [2009], The Tailor of Ulm: Communism in the Twentieth Century (London: Verso, 2011), pp. 141–55.
[55] Magri, The Tailor of Ulm, pp. 142, 148.
[56] Mike Davis, Planet of Slums, New Left Review II/26 (March/April 2004), pp. 5–6; A Planet of Slums (London: Verso, 2006), pp. 13–14.
[57] Jeremy Seabrook, In the Cities of the South: Scenes from a Developing World (London: Verso, 1996), p. 251. He then adds, with typical distaste for anything which might pollute the supposed purity of the non-Western: ‘it exhibits the limits of development, and the unsuitability of Western urban transplants in the South’.
[58] Chris Weller, The world’s largest megacity already has more people than Canada, Argentina, or Australia, Business Insider UK (8 July 2015). http://uk.businessinsider.com/chinese-mega-city-has-more-people-than-canada-argentina-or-australia–2015–7
[59] Gregory Guldin, What’s a Peasant to Do? Village Becoming Town in Southern China (Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press 2000), p. 17.
[60] Davis, Planet of Slums, p. 10.
[61] Seabrook, In the Cities of the South, pp. 176–77.
[62] Davis, Planet of Slums, p. 27.
[63] Seabrook, Consuming Cultures, pp. 251–252.
[64] Eric Denis, Demographic Surprises Foreshadow Change in Neoliberal Egypt, in The Journey to Tahrir: Revolution, Protest and Social Change in Egypt, edited by Jeannie Sowers and Chris Toensing (London: Verso, 2012), p. 241.
[65] Jack Shenker, The Egyptians: A Radical Story (London: Allen Lane, 2016), pp. 89–90. The notion of populations belonging to a different period in history from the present is not, of course, confined to elites in the Global South. As the late Doreen Massey wrote of the Western hostility to migrants from the Global South, ‘it was not merely the arrival of what have frequently been called “the margins” (a spatial concept) but the arrival of people from the past. Distance was suddenly eradicated spatially and temporally’. See For Space (London: Sage, 2005), p. 70
[66] Shenker, The Egyptians, p. 99.
[67] Colin Mooers, Imperial Subjects: Citizenship in an Age of Crisis and Empire (New York: Bloomsbury, 2014), p. 127.
[68] Sian Lazar, El Alto, Rebel City: Self and Citizenship in Andean Bolivia (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010), p. 178.
[69] Although we should remember that in Russia too there were peasant soviets – inevitably based in communities – and in the armed services, in addition to those in workplaces.
[70] Davis, Planet of Slums, p. 29, 30.
[71] Alejandro Cola, The Re-Invention of Populism: Islamist Responses to Capitalist Development in the Contemporary Maghreb, Historical Materialism, vol. 12, no. 4 (2004), p. 257.
[72] Tim McDaniel, Autocracy, Modernization, and Revolution in Russia and Iran (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991), p. 138.
[73] For the classic discussion, see Assef Bayat, Workers and Revolution in Iran (London: Zed Books, 1987), pp. 100–66, but see also Miriam Poya, Long Live Revolution! ... Long Live Islam?, in Revolutionary Rehearsals, edited by Colin Barker (London: Bookmarks, 1987), pp. 143–49.
[74] McDaniel, Autocracy, Modernization, and Revolution in Russia and Iran, p. 138.
[75] There was a period in which revolutionary events in Iran could be directly compared to those in Russia because of the commonality of pre-capitalist state forms, but this was much closer in time to 1917: the ‘constitutional revolution’ between 1906 and 1911. During this period the working class was however too insignificant to play a role of any significance. For a discussion, which situates this revolution with the context of uneven and combined development, see Kamran Matin, Uneven and Combined Development and the “Revolution of Backwardness”: The Iranian Constitutional Revolution, 1906–1911, in 100 Years of Permanent Revolution: Results and Prospects, edited by Bill Dunn and Hugo Radice (London: Pluto Press, 2006).
[76] Theda Skocpol [1982], Rentier State and Shi’a Islam in the Iranian Revolution, in Social Revolutions in the Modern World (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), p. 253. Fred Halliday concurs: ‘The paradox of the Iranian revolution was that it was both the most traditional and the most modern of social revolutions.’ See Two Hours That Shook the World: September 11, 2001, Causes and Consequences (London: Saqi Books, 2002), p. 62.
[77] Skocpol, Rentier State and Shi’a Islam in the Iranian Revolution, p. 254.
[78] Halliday, Two Hours That Shook the World, p. 63.
[79] Ankie Hoogvelt, Globalisation and the Postcolonial World: The New Political Economy of Development (Houndmills: Macmillan, 1997), p. 200.
[80] Jason Burke, Al-Qaeda: the True Story of Radical Islam (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 2004), p. 25.
[81] Olivier Roy, The Islamization of Radicalism, Mada Masr (11 January 2016).
[82] Samuel Huntington, The Clash of Civilisations and the Remaking of World Order (London: Simon and Schuster, 1998), p. 58.
[83] Hari Kunzu, Charlie Hebdo: Understanding is the Least we Owe the Dead, The Guardian (9 February 2015).
[84] John Gray, An Apocalyptic Cult Carving a Place in the Modern World’, The Guardian (26 August 2014).
[85] William Dalrymple, Inside Islam’s “Terror Schools”, New Statesman (28 March 2005), p. 16.
[86] Jamie Doward, My Encounter with Jihadi John’s Friend as they Sought a Radical Path, The Observer (1 March 2015).
[87] McAllister, The Uneven and Combined Character of Third World Development, pp. 12–13.
 






In the third of his five pieces on Uneven but Combined Development, Neil Davidson looks at the application of the theory to England, Scotland, Germany and Japan before looking the Soviet transition to state capitalism. All five pieces are available as a PDF. here.



Introduction
The discussions of modernity, modernism and hegemony in Part 2 of this article might seem to have taken us some distance from uneven and combined development, but in fact they constitute a necessary basis for understanding the full implications for those societies – the vast majority – which have been subject to it. In concrete terms, the concept of uneven and combined development should help us explain why – to pick two wildly different example – former peasants from the Staritski uezd in Tver’ province could become the driving force behind the factory committee of the Baltic shipyard in Petrograd, and why former black sharecroppers from Clarksdale in the Mississippi Delta could create the electric blues in the South Side of Chicago. In this part I will sketch the impact of uneven and combined development in the West which began some decades earlier than in Russia, but for the most part, and in most cases, occurs contemporaneously. There is, of course, one major exception, to which I will turn first: England.
 

3.1.      The English Exception
Memoirs of individuals who lived in England through most of the nineteenth century often reflect on the scale of the transformation which occurred during that period. The historian Godwin Smith, for example, recalled the difference between the town of Reading at the time of his birth in 1823 and on the eve of the First World War. At the former date:
It is a very quiet place. The mail-coaches travelling on the Bath road at the marvellous rate of twelve miles an hour change horses at The Crown and the Bear. So do the travelling carriages and post-chaises of the wealthier wayfarer. The watchman calls the hour of the night. From the tower of old St. Lawrence’s Church the curfew is tolled. My nurse lights the fire with the tinder-box. Over at Caversham a man is sitting in the stocks ... From this state of things I have lived into an age of express-trains, ocean greyhounds, electricity, bicycles, globe-trotting, Evolution, the Higher Criticism, and general excitement and restlessness. Reading has shared the progress. The Reading of my boyhood has disappeared almost over the horizon of memory. [1]
Yet England had completed the transition to capitalism over a century before Smith was born and these changes began. It was not, of course, the only territory to have done so, as it was preceded by both the Italian city-states and the Netherlands. [2] Capitalist relations of production were considerably more highly developed in England than in either of these, but England was also able to absorb their genuine innovations and those of states which failed to make the transition, then put them to more effective use than in their places of origin, a process for which the possession of an effective capitalist state apparatus was essential. As Marx noted in the chapter from Capital on The Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist:
The different moments of primitive accumulation can be ascertained in particular to Spain, Portugal, Holland, France and England, in more or less chronological order. These different moments are systematically combined together at the end of the seventeenth century in England; the combination embraces the colonies, the national debt, the modern tax system, and the system of protection. [3]
This is not ‘combination’ in Trotsky’s sense, however, as all the forms referred to by Marx are ‘contemporary’.
Recognising the uniqueness of England at this time should not lead us to exaggerate the immediate impact of the transition to capitalism in the countryside there. ‘Englishmen and women did not know that they had crossed a barrier that divided them from their own past and from every other contemporary society’, writes Joyce Appleby. [4] For well into the eighteenth century labour in the English countryside under the capitalist mode of production, whether in agriculture or handicraft production, was still carried out in the natural daylight hours and – in the case of the first, at any rate – according to the rhythms of the farming seasons, within the framework of long-established customary rights and traditions. Edward Thompson famously discussed plebeian resistance ‘in the name of custom’ to ‘innovation in the capitalist process’ which is ‘most often experienced by the plebs in the form of exploitation, or the expropriation of customary use-rights, or the violent disruption of valued patterns of work and leisure’: ‘Hence the plebeian culture is rebellious, but rebellious in defence of custom.’ [5]
By the latter half of the eighteenth-century this rebelliousness was therefore not resistance to capitalism, but a reaction to the transition from the ‘formal’ to the ‘real’ subsumption of labour. In this respect, only the Northern states of the US, particularly those on the North-Eastern seaboard, underwent a comparable development to that of England. There too an established agrarian capitalist economy, under an existing bourgeois regime, made the transition to industrial capitalism, initially, as Charles Post has detailed, with industry servicing the farming sector in what was effectively an ‘agro-industrial complex’. [6] It is unsurprising therefore that in these areas within the US the class struggle also took the form of a defence of an earlier form of socio-economic life, although this lasted later into the nineteenth century than it did in England. [7]
The move from field or cottage to the factory as a workplace constitutive of real subsumption is one of the most unsettling and disorientating experiences human beings can collectively undergo. Sydney Pollard has written of the process by which the English were transformed into industrial wage labourers:
The worker who left the background of his domestic workshop or peasant holding for the factory entered a new culture as well as a new sense of direction. It was not only that ‘the new economic order needed ... part humans: soulless, depersonalized, disembodied, who could become members, or little wheels rather, of a complex mechanism’. It was also that men who were non-accumulative, non-acquisitive, accustomed to work for subsistence, not for maximization of income, had to be made obedient to the cash stimulus, and obedient in such a way as to react precisely to the stimuli provided. [8]
To make the experience even more disruptive of previous forms of life, labour increasingly took place in an urban context. As Engels noted in 1845, previously, the workers had been shut off from the towns, which they never entered, their yarn and woven stuff being delivered to travelling agents for payment of wages – so shut off that old people who lived quite in the neighbourhood of the town never went thither until they were robbed of their trade by the introduction of machinery and obliged to look about them in the towns for work – the weavers stood upon the moral and intellectual plane of the yeomen with whom they were usually immediately connected through their little holdings. [9]
In this and preceding passages Engels may be guilty of over-romanticising country life, but his summary of the conditions to which they were subsequently subject in Manchester cannot be accused of exaggeration:
In a word, we must confess that in the working-men’s dwellings of Manchester, no cleanliness, no convenience, and consequently no comfortable family life is possible; that in such dwellings only a physically degenerate race, robbed of all humanity, degraded, reduced morally and physically to bestiality, could feel comfortable and at home. [10]
Thompson noted that ‘industrialization is necessarily painful’ involving as it did ‘the erosion of traditional patterns of life; but adds to this general assessment that ‘it was carried through with exceptional violence in Britain’. [11] Thompson’s reassertion of the ‘cataclysmic’ view of the English industrial revolution is defensible in the context of a discussion which sought to overturn the economistic vulgarity of the ‘standard of living’ debate, but does not require that we regard that country as having undergone a uniquely traumatic experience. Indeed, as Craig Calhoun has pointed out, when we consider the experience of India, Africa the USSR and even the USA, his claim for the singularity of the English experience in relation to both physical and ‘psychic’ violence is extremely difficult to uphold: ‘Where are the mass shootings, for physical violence, and the prison camps and utter defeats, for psychic violence? ’[12] For our purposes, the point of distinguishing the English experience from that of what Thompson used to call Other Countries is not the respective severity of their industrialisations, but why the experience did not lead to the same type of revolutionary upheavals which were to convulse Petrograd and Shanghai a hundred years later. [13] There was certainly a high level of class struggle in Britain between the 1790s and 1840s but, with the possible exception of 1831–2, at no point was there a revolutionary threat to the state.
 
England and the absence of Modernism
Nor did English conditions produce a local modernist movement, as can be seen in we take one of the few painters working in the period of English industrialisation which might plausibly be categorised in this way: J.M.W. Turner (1775–1851). During the last 15 years of his life in particular, Turner made his subject, not industrialisation as such, but rather the fossil-fuel powered transport which made it possible, above all steamboats and trains. A sense of how unusual this was in his national context can be gathered from the assessment by Nikolaus Pevsner – Hungarian-born but in most respects a naturalised Englishman – who described Turner’s world as ‘a fantasmagoria’ and his work as ‘irrational’: ‘Turner’s position in English art is indeed baffling from whatever point of view one considers it – also from that of his Englishness.’ [14]
During the same year (1955) as Pevsner was expressing his bafflement, Greenberg was equally dismissive, albeit for different reasons: ‘Turner was actually the first painter to break with the European tradition of value painting’, he wrote of Turner’s later paintings. Despite describing them as ‘atmospheric’, however, ultimately he regards them as merely ‘picturesque’, a verdict endorsed by their popularity with a public which would not have expected his intangible subject matter – clouds, rain, mist, sea – to be rendered with ‘definite shape or form’: ‘what we today take for a daring abstractness on Turner’s part was accepted then as another feat of naturalism’. [15] Here Greenberg is judging Turner against his own assumptions about the necessity for modernism in the visual arts to necessarily involve an increasing shift from resemblance (‘representation’) towards abstraction.
Turner’s later work is however neither a regression towards naturalism nor a prototype of abstraction, but an attempt to express his response to mechanisation in a way similar to the Italian Futurists, with boats and trains as his subject rather than automobiles. Rain, Steam and Rail – the Great Western Railway (1844) is not primarily about H2O in its various forms, but about the intrusion of modernity into nature in the shape of the train, the rail bridge which it necessitates and the city of London, looming indistinctly in the background of the picture, from which it has emerged. In Turner’s most famous and popular painting, The Fighting Temeraire tugged to her last berth to be broken up (1838), the symbolism could not be more obvious: the steam-powered tug (representing the mundane but functioning modernity) pulls a ghostly ship from the age of sail (representing the heroic but outmoded past) towards its final dismemberment.
Turner’s intimations of modernism are all the more startling for their almost complete isolation. Paul Wood notes the influence Turner had on the French Impressionists:
But in a British context, such artistic radicalism was isolated, even idiosyncratic. Turner’s Rain, Steam and Speed ... a dynamic image of the modern if there ever was one, was painted in the 1840s, 30 years before comparable studies of Gare St Lazare by Claude Monet ... in Paris. But in Britain Turner’s example gave rise to no school.
Wood concludes that ‘something seems to have restrained British artists from the innovations embarked on in France’. [16] Steve Edwards similarly writes of British painters in the latter half of the nineteenth century, that ‘something about English society prevented them from finding a way to make ambivalence and incoherence suggestive of modern experience; from making a moral dilemma from uncertainty’:
Modernity is depicted in the British art of the period, but modernist form doesn’t really break the surface. In France, the ongoing clash between traditional ways of life and the rapid transformations of Paris and other urban centres made these changes available for representation.
As Edwards stresses, the point is not that Britain (or more precisely, England) was free from conflict – we have already seen that this was not the case – but rather that the capitalist modernity was so embedded as to produce a sense of familiarity, it ‘had come to seem natural’ and ‘this made it more difficult to depict modern society as bewildering or awkward, simultaneously exhilarating and horrifying’. [17] The determining nature of context is nicely illustrated by a conversation from the beginning of the twentieth century reported in the biography of Wyndham Lewis (1882–1957). It is important to remember here that Lewis was one of the very few native English modernists. When Filippo Marinetti (1876–1944) tried to claim him for Futurism, Lewis replied:
‘Not too bad,’ I said. ‘It has its points. But you Wops insist too much on the Machine. You’re always on about these driving-belts, you are always exploding about internal combustion. We’ve had machines here in England for a donkey’s years. They’re no novelty to us.
To which Marinetti responded:
‘You have never understood your machines! You have never known the ivresse of travelling at a kilometre a minute. Have you ever travelled a kilometre a minute?’
Lewis had not, nor had he any wish to. [18]
The dominant theme in nineteenth- and early twentieth-century English art and literature – including that produced by socialists – is a rejection of both modernity and modernism. Alasdair MacIntyre once commented:
There have been since the industrial revolution in Britain two main critiques of our form of life. One was the romantic protest against capitalist ugliness whose culmination is in Lawrence and Leavis. The other was the socialist protest. William Morris held them together in his own day: it is a prime victory of bourgeois ideology to have kept them apart ever since. [19]
But if we look at the socialist future envisaged by Morris, it is described in the subtitle of his most famous novel as ‘an epoch of rest’:
‘You see, guest, this is not an age of inventions. The last epoch did all that for us, and we are now content to use as much of its inventions as we find handy, and leaving alone those which we don’t want.’ ... ‘In the half-century that followed the Great Change ... it began to be noteworthy: machine after machine was quietly dropped under the excuse that machines could not produce works of art, and that works of art were more and more called for.” [20]
This constitutes the main exception to the socialist and indeed Marxist conception of socialism representing a new form of modernity. Raymond Williams wrote of Morris that,
... what the representation of discontinuity typically produces is a notion of social simplicity which is untenable. The extent to which the idea of socialism is attached to simplicity is counter-productive. It seems to me that the break towards socialism can only be towards an unimaginably greater complexity. [21]
England, or more precisely, London was a subject of modernist writing – think of Eliot’s Unreal City in The Waste Land (1922) – and a provided a destination for modernist writers from outside Britain, like James, Pound and Eliot himself from the USA, Conrad from Poland or Yeats from Ireland. What Malcolm Bradbury calls, ‘a distinguishable English brand of Modernism’, was much more a literal sense of writing expressive of a new ‘Modern’ era after ‘the era of Victorianism was ending, [and] a new phase in society, art and thought beginning’, than expressive of the tension between the archaic and the modern. [22] The reason why capitalist modernity in England produced neither a social nor artistic revolutionary movement lies with the two unique conditions under which industrialisation and urbanisation took place.
 
Early consolidation of the capitalist state
First, the capitalist state in England was consolidated at the completion of the bourgeois revolution in 1688, at a time when its economy was still dominated by agrarian, mercantile and financial capital. None of the other early capitalist states achieved this. The Italian city-states refused to unite and indeed were involved in ferocious competition with each other which left them exposed to conquest and enforced regression at the hands of local feudal lords and ultimately the Spanish Empire by the beginning of the sixteenth century. The United Netherlands, although formally a unified state even before the revolt against Spain in 1567, did not possess an integrated economy, but rather a highly fragmented one in which competition between cities and provinces was unimpeded.
More importantly, in this context, the state itself remained resolutely decentralised and unable to pursue initiatives in the interest of Dutch capital as a whole, with power lying in regional governments which tended to be dominated by particular capitalist banking and mercantile interests. [23] It was, as Anderson points out, ‘a hybrid between a city-state and a nation-state’. [24] As a result, industrialisation in both areas was largely postponed until nation-states were finally consolidated in the mid-nineteenth century. Industrialisation in England, however, arose within the context of a society where the state was already dedicated to the accumulation of capital, and that state had a far greater capacity for absorption and renovation under pressure than rival pre-capitalist states. As Norman Stone notes of the English – later British – bourgeoisie, in whose interests the state acted:
In Great Britain, that class existed so strongly, even in the eighteenth century, that liberal reforms were introduced piecemeal there, and often without formal involvement of parliament. Existing ancien-régime institutions, such as the old guilds or corporations, would be gradually adapted to suit a changing era. Thus, in form, England (more than Scotland) is the last of the ancien régimes; she did not even have a formal law to abolish serfdom. [25]
In other words, while Britain, or perhaps England, appeared to represent an ancien régime (‘in form’) this concealed what was actually a supremely adaptive modernity, which is only now reaching its limits. [26] As I noted in Part 2, the absorbent character of the English state had had nothing to do with democracy as such: no section of the working class was granted the vote until after industrialisation and urbanisation were well advanced. It is rather that, on the one hand, the different sections of the ruling class were fundamentally united and presided over a series of protective structures and enabling institutions which had developed over a prolonged period of time. This did not simply involve repression or control: confronted by major working class insurgency they were collectively prepared to make gradual compromises over non-essentials rather than risk losing what meant most to them: their capital.
 
The extended timescale of English industrialisation
Second, the internal pressures to which England was subject were in any case more containable than in later-developing states because of the extended timescale in which industrialisation took place. At least in part this was because it faced no real economic competition in capitalist terms until the latter third of the nineteenth century and was therefore not subject to the types of pressure to which all other subsequent developers, with the exception of the United States, were subject.
As Pollard writes: ‘Unlike the experience of the following countries which were faced with a fairly comprehensive package of mutually reinforcing changes, the British [sic] evolution was slow, piecemeal and unconscious, in the sense of being unperceived as a whole.’ [27] Consequently, notwithstanding the significance of industrialisation, even it did not have an immediately transformative impact on every aspect of social life. This is partly because the effects were cumulative and partly because, initially at least, industrialisation took place within a broader pre-existing non-industrial context as Jonathan Crary explains:
Modernity, contrary to its popular connotations, is not the world in a sweepingly transformed state. Rather ... it is the hybrid and dissonant experience of living intermittently within modernized spaces and needs, and yet simultaneously inhabiting the remnants of pre-capitalist life-worlds, whether social or natural ... Factory manufacturing, for example, did not abruptly extinguish the long-standing diurnal rhythms and social ties of agrarian milieus. Instead there was an extended period of coexistence during which rural life was incrementally dismantled or subsumed into new processes. [28]
The gradual, dispersed and unplanned nature of the process in England had implications for both the structure of the working class and the nature of the class struggle, both of which are in stark contrast to the forms these took later under actual conditions of uneven and combined development. Workplaces remained relatively small until very late in the nineteenth century, not least in London. As a result, trade union struggles were typically defensive of traditional or at least transitional forms of labour. [29] This was one of the reasons Trotsky identified for the greater implantation of Marxism among the working classes of Russia than in that of Britain. In the case of Russia itself,
... the proletariat did not arise gradually through the ages, carrying with itself the burden of the past, as in England, but in leaps involving sharp changes of environment, ties, relations, and a sharp break with the past. It was just this – combined with the concentrated oppressions of czarism – that made Russian workers hospitable to the boldest conclusions of revolutionary thought – just as the backward industries were hospitable to the last word in capitalist organization. [30]
Describing the situation prior to the Russian Revolution of 1917, Gareth Stedman Jones has contrasted ‘the revolutionary maturity of the Petrograd proletariat, uniquely concentrated in the most advanced factories of the capitalist world’ with Britain, ‘the most advanced capitalist country’, where ‘the structure of the metropolitan working class still looked back to pre-industrial divisions of skill and status’: ‘A few large plants were lost in an ocean of small workshops’. [31] These conditions were productive of neither Bolsheviks nor Constructivists. Elsewhere in the West the effects of industrialisation and urbanisation would fall between the English and Russian extremes.
 

3.2.      The Western Origins of Uneven
and Combined Development
The most important new capitalist nation-states to follow Britain – the USA, Italy, Germany and Japan – unified (or re-unified) and consolidated themselves between 1848 and 1871. France achieved this slightly earlier – 1830 is the French 1688, in the sense of concluding the era of its bourgeois revolution; but French industrialisation takes place essentially within the same time frame as these later developers. These involved transitions to capitalism which were, as Robert Looker and David Coates put it, ‘virtually contemporaneous’ with industrialisation and urbanisation, rather than preceding them, as had been the case in England. [32]
The very existence of the British imperial state altered both the context for subsequent capitalist development and the pace with which it occurred. The latter was faster, partly because the long period of experiment and evolution characteristic of the Anglo-Saxon pioneer could be dispensed with, but partly because of the urgency involved in acquiring the attributes of capitalist modernity in the face of military and economic competition from Britain. In very compressed timescales these emerging rivals adopted Britain’s socio-economic achievements to the extent that they became recognisably the same kind of societies, without necessarily reproducing every key characteristic – an impossible task anyway, given their very different histories and social structures.
Harry Harootunian writes of Marx’s comments on German uneven development (in the Preface to the First Edition of Capital Volume 1) that he ‘was proposing that capitalist modernization is inevitably destined to produce the co-presence of colliding temporalities, contemporary non-contemporaneities forcing people constantly to navigate their way through different temporal regimes as a condition of becoming modern’. [33] The point is capable of being generalised beyond Germany: in fact, all of the second wave capitalist nation-states simultaneously faced in two directions, although usually inclining more towards one than the other.
 
From uneven and combined to
uneven development: Scotland
One direction was forward to conditions which would later emerge in Russia and to anticipations of permanent revolution. The increased tempo of development meant that the process of capitalist modernisation, and consequently the character of the class struggle, took respectively more intense and explosive forms – first of all in the country which was also geographically closest to England, and which since 1707 had been joined with it in the United Kingdom of Great Britain: Scotland. From the suppression of the last Jacobite attempt at counter-revolution in 1746 through to the end of the Napoleonic wars in 1815, Scottish society was marked by two processes, both in sharp contrast to the English experience: one was the extraordinary speed with which capitalist agriculture and the foundations of industrialisation was introduced in the Lowlands; the other was the concentrated effervescence of the Enlightenment, which was both a programme for agrarian transformation and a theorisation of the process. Even a society accelerating out of feudalism at this speed would however inevitably retain some of the characteristics of pre-existing conditions and Jameson has correctly noted some of the implications, although as usual without identifying them as the results of uneven and combined development:
Enlightenment Scotland is above all the space of a coexistence of radically distinct zones of production and culture: the archaic economy of the Highlanders and their clan system, the new agricultural exploitation of the Lowlands, the commercial vigour of the English ‘partner’ over the border, on the eve of its industrial ‘take-off’. The brilliance of Edinburgh is therefore not a matter of Gaelic genetic material, but rather owing to the strategic yet eccentric position of the Scottish metropolis and intellectuals with respect to this virtually synchronic coexistence of distinct modes of production, which it now uniquely fell to the Scottish Enlightenment to ‘think’ or to conceptualize. Nor is this merely an economic matter: Scott, like Faulkner later on, inherits a social and historical raw material, a popular memory, in which the fiercest revolutions and civil and religious wars now inscribe the coexistence of modes of production in vivid narrative form. [34]
One aspect of what Jameson calls ‘the co-existence of radically distinct zones of production and culture’ is the Highland/Lowland divide. This was not, however, the inert juxtaposition of two mutually sealed societies but their mutual interpenetration, first through the imposition of capitalist social relations on Highland land occupancy, then – a virtually inevitable consequence of this – the migration of now landless Highlanders into the industrialising Lowland towns and cities, above all to Glasgow.
Migration was then and remains now one of the great catalysts for uneven and combined development. ‘Since most Europeans were rural, so were most migrants’, notes Hobsbawm of the latter half of the nineteenth century, and, while pointing out that some migrants exchanged ‘a poor agricultural milieu for a better one’, for the majority the most important fact was ‘their exodus from agriculture’:
Migration and urbanization went together, and in the second half of the nineteenth century the countries chiefly associated with it (the United States, Australia, Argentina) had a rate of urban concentration unsurpassed anywhere except in Britain and the industrial parts of Germany. [35]
In this respect as in many others, Scotland was a forerunner for what was to follow more widely later, as external migration from Ireland was at least as significant as internal migration from the Highlands in providing the labour force for industrialisation.
Although industrialisation took place more or less simultaneously in both England and Scotland, the latter largely ‘skipped the intervening stages’ between peasant self-sufficiency and wage labour which the former had experienced. ‘Scotland entered on the capitalist path later than England,’ wrote Trotsky in 1925, ‘a sharper turn in the life of the masses of the people gave rise to a sharper political reaction’. [36] By the early decades of the nineteenth century, the enormous tensions produced by industrialisation were heightened by the repressive weight of undemocratic state forms retained from the Union of 1707 until the Great Reform Act of 1832. These tensions expressed themselves in moments of sharp class struggle, above all the unsuccessful 1820 general strike for male suffrage, the first such action in history, involving around 60,000 workers – a substantial section of the global working class at the time – and two attempts at armed insurrection. [37] However, because Scotland did make the transition to the ranks of the advanced societies, albeit as a component part of another national formation, the revolutionary moment passed – not because the tensions of uneven and combined development had all been resolved, but because after 1832 a suitably adaptive state form had been extended to Scotland which was able to contain them. Uneven and combined development was resolved as uneven development, with Scotland as a whole ‘catching up and overtaking’ England, within the overall British social formation.
The possibilities for proto-permanent revolution were sometimes retained at a local level even when nation-states (or stateless national territories like Scotland) attained overall ‘developed’ status – particularly where backward areas were deliberately preserved at a level of development below that of society as a whole as a source of labour or raw materials, and then experienced rapid regional industrialisation and urbanisation. In so far as uneven and combined development could be found in the USA, for example, it was mainly in the ex-Confederate states. As Ernest Mandel notes: ‘They functioned as a reservoir of agricultural raw materials and as an “internal colony” in the sense that they formed a steady market for the industrial products of the North and did not develop any large-scale industry within their own territory (this was to change only with the Second World War)’. [38] It is unsurprisingly then, that when forms of industrialization did finally arrive in the South immediately before the First World War, they gave rise to situations more typical of Saint Petersburg or Shanghai than Memphis, Tennessee. One such area was around the Alabama coalfields. According to Brian Kelly:
The region presents an almost classical example of what Marxists have described as ‘combined and uneven development’: the turn-of-the-century South included a number of exceptional areas where large concentrations of industrial workers laboured in mills, foundries, and manufacturing plants on a par with the most advanced in the North, but these stood like frontier outposts of a new age in a region overwhelmingly steeped in primitive agriculture, in some places little-changed from the way it had been conducted in the antebellum period. [39]
 
Contained uneven and combined
development: Japan
The other direction faced by the second wave nation-states was back to the English experience in the sense that they were able to accomplish the bourgeois revolution from above – 1688 being the model rather than 1640 or 1649 – and transform the state, albeit over a much more compressed period of time, in order to direct rapid industrialisation and contain the social tensions which it produced, often within the context of archaic socio-cultural forms.
The process is perhaps best illustrated by the only Asian country to undertake this form of development in the closing decades of the nineteenth century after the bourgeois revolution from above known to history as the Meiji Restoration of 1868. Trotsky wrote in the 1930s, ‘we observe even today ... correlation between the bourgeois character of the state and the semifeudal character of the ruling caste.’ [40] The former outweighed the latter. Mark Elvin argued that ‘Japan does not have to become identical to the present-day West to be ranked as comparably “modern”.’ [41] Indeed – but we should note the similarities between the British and Japanese states after 1868, to which Christopher Bayly has drawn attention. Between 1870 and 1914, both consciously emphasised the role of their monarch-emperors, the preexisting symbolism of the crown being used to represent national unity against two main challenges: external imperial rivalry and internal class divisions. [42] Both were capitalist states that could be strongly contrasted with feudal absolutist Austria-Hungary or Russia, even down to the role of the emperor and empresses: ‘Russia represented the opposite pole to Japan within the spectrum of authoritarian monarchy – no corporate regime strategy, much depending on the monarch himself.’ [43] The state structure was crucial, as in many respects Japanese development was far more rapid than Russia’s, as Trotsky himself noted:
Even late-developing Russia, which traversed the same historic course as the West in a much shorter length of time, needed three centuries to get from the liquidation of feudal isolation under Ivan the Terrible, through the Westernizing of Peter the Great, to the first liberal reforms of Alexander II. The so-called Meiji Restoration incorporated in a matter of a few decades the basic features of those three major eras in Russia’s development. At such a forced pace, there could be no question of a smooth and even cultural development in all fields. Racing to achieve practical results with modern technology – especially military technology – Japan remained ideologically in the depths of the Middle Ages. The hasty mixture of Edison and Confucius has left its mark in all Japanese culture. [44]
The differences were sharply demonstrated by the Japanese victory over Russia in the war of 1904–5. Lenin welcomed the result, arguing that it clearly demonstrated the different class nature of the two states:
Here again, as so often in history, the war between an advanced and a backward country has played a great revolutionary role. And the class-conscious proletariat, an implacable enemy of war – this inevitable and inseverable concomitant of all class rule in general – cannot shut its eyes to the revolutionary task which the Japanese bourgeoisie, by its crushing defeat of the Russian autocracy, is carrying out. [45]
In effect, the post-Meiji Japanese state represented a way of containing the tensions created by uneven and combined development, even though these grew greater during and immediately after the First World War:
The war signalled the transformation of the industrial base from light to concentrated heavy industries and the ceaseless migration of rural populations to the urban sites of factory production ... Critics, along the way, noted the sharp lines of unevenness between the newer, modern capitalist industries and the so-called traditional sectors, which, in the Meiji period, had grown concurrently and even complementarily rather than competitively. But by 1920 and the succeeding years, the sharply silhouetted contrast was widely observed in the uneven relationship between the large metropolitan sites like Tokyo/Yokohama and Osaka/Kobe, which had literally been transformed overnight, and a countryside that supplied the cities with a labour force and capital but ... received nothing in return ... Moreover, it brought new classes and an awareness of new identities and subject positions, and it expanded the possibilities for women in the labour market. [46]
 
Germany and the question of non-synchronicity
If Japan is most extreme example of ‘contained’ uneven and combined development, all the states which emerged at the same time display similar characteristics, to one degree or another. Yet discussions of their trajectories tend to emphasise either the feudal archaism which they retained or the capitalist modernity which they embraced. In relation to the former, it is often suggested that archaism was expressed through military dictatorships (in the case of Japan) or fascist regimes (in the cases of Italy and Germany). Tom Nairn, for example, writes of Germany:
In both situations, hastily created state-nations had dissolved a host of older countries – city and princely states, early-modern or even mediaeval kingdoms – in a way intended to be final, and which indeed still appeared to be so in the in the circumstances of the 1920s ... And yet the liberal-progressive unit, the grandly proclaimed wider identity, had clearly foundered. What way out was there but a drastic reformulation of that identity along illiberal-populist lines, emphasizing the things either denied or side-lined by the former unity regimes?
Later we are reminded that ‘ethno-nationalism has normally had a powerfully rural or small-town foundation’ and ‘how rural the Germany of Hitler and Heidegger was’. [47] From the opposite perspective entirely, Zygmut Bauman argues that to treat the Nazi dictatorship and its dreadful consequences as an aspect of pre-modernity is in effect to avoid confronting our own culpability: ‘The Holocaust was born and executed in our modern rational society, at the high stage of civilization and the peak of human cultural achievement, and for this reason it is a problem of that society, civilization and culture.’ [48]
Neither position captures what ‘combination’ actually meant in Germany – or indeed any of the other countries which underwent comparable trajectories. As Richard Evans has pointed out, despite all that has been written about its ‘supposed backwardness’ on the eve of the First World War, including ‘its alleged deficit of civic values, its arguably antiquated social structure, its seemingly craven middle class and its apparently neo-feudal aristocracy’, it was not regarded in this way by contemporary observers, not least because ‘Germany was the Continent’s wealthiest, most powerful and most advanced economy’. This did not mean that no tensions had been produced by the onset of capitalist modernity:
... beneath its prosperous and self-confident surface, the sheer pace of economic and social change was frightening and bewildering. Old values seemed to be disappearing in a welter of materialism and unbridled ambition. Modernist culture, from abstract painting to atonal music, added to the sense of disorientation ... The old established hegemony of the Prussian landed aristocracy, which Bismarck had tried so hard to preserve, was undermined by the headlong rush of German society into the modern age. Bourgeois values, habits and modes of behaviour had triumphed in the upper and middle reaches of society by 1914; yet simultaneously they were being challenged by the growing self-assertion of the industrial working class, organized in the massive Social Democratic labour movement. Germany, unlike any other European country, had become a nation-state not before the industrial revolution, but at its height; and on the basis, not of a single state but of a federation of many different states whose German citizens were bound together principally by a common language, culture and ethnicity. Stresses and strains created by rapid industrialization interlocked with conflicting ideas about the nature of the German state and nation and their place in the larger context of Europe and the world. German society did not enter nationhood in 1871 in a wholly stable condition. It was riven with rapidly deepening internal conflicts which were increasingly exported into the unresolved tensions of the political system that Bismarck had created. [49]
One way of understanding the tensions within German society after 1871 is through the notion of ‘non-synchronism’, first used by Ernest Bloch in 1932: ‘Germany in general ... is, unlike England, and much less France, the classic land of non-synchronism, that is, of unsurmounted remnants of older economic being and consciousness.’ According to Bloch, this condition was ‘not dangerous to capitalism’:
on the contrary, capital uses that which is nonsynchronously contrary, if not indeed disparate, as a distraction from its own strictly present-day contradictions: it uses the antagonism of a still living past as a means of separation and struggle against the future that is dialectically giving birth to itself in the capitalist antagonisms. [50]
 
Non-synchronism and reactionary politics
We might say that ‘non-synchronism’ is the form taken by uneven and combined development in situations where the state had already been restructured in the interests of capital, but where it was now threatened by the most modern force of all, a potentially revolutionary labour movement, which capital seeks to repulse by mobilising pre-emptive counter-revolution under the banner of a mythical past. We can see this in microcosm in the attitudes of the Japanese sociologist and film theorist, Yasunosuke Gonda, during the inter-war period, here discussed by Harootunian:
With Gonda and others, it was possible to understand how capitalism had led to the present, but what he feared most, and what his own vision of a mixed culture circulating elements from past and present, Japan and the West, revealed, was that continuous march of capitalism that would eventually eliminate unevenness – the culture of difference – for one of evenness, levelling, and the homogenizing of the cultural ground. It was this fear of ‘modern life’, as he and others were calling it in the 1930s, together with the representations of cultural form that led Gonda, and others, to embrace fascism. Gonda’s agenda aimed at halting the very process of deterritorialization that had led to the present conjuncture by transmuting that national consumer into the national community. [51]
The generally conservative or even reactionary politics of ‘non-synchronism’ suggest that what Trotsky called ‘debased adaptation’ is not only a feature of backward societies seeking to preserve themselves with the help of therapeutic inoculations of capitalist modernity. Trotsky saw it as a much more general phenomenon, necessarily caused by the need to maintain bourgeois hegemony over the exploited and oppressed in an era of revolution and which reached its apogee in the United States. In an address to the First All-Union Society of Friends of Radio in 1926 he warned of the counterrevolutionary possibilities of the technological form his listeners had come to celebrate:
It is considered unquestionable that technology and science undermine superstition. But the class character of society sets substantial limits here too. Take America. There, church sermons are broadcast by radio, which means that the radio is serving as a means of spreading prejudices. [52]
Once the notion of combined development was available to him, Trotsky saw this appropriation of advanced technology as the obverse of the ideological advances made by Russian and Chinese workers. ‘In America we have another kind of combined development. We have the most advanced industrial development together with the most backward – for all classes – ideology.’ [53] In a striking passage in an essay of 1933 considering the nature of National Socialism (strikingly similar in many ways to the virtually contemporaneous work of Bloch), Trotsky commented on the persistence of archaic or at least pre-modern ideas, not only in Nazi Germany but also more generally across the developed world:
Today, not only in peasant homes but also in city skyscrapers, there lives alongside of the twentieth century the tenth or the thirteenth. A hundred million people use electricity and still believe in the magic power of signs and exorcisms. The Pope of Rome broadcasts over the radio about the miraculous transformation of water into wine. Movie stars go to mediums. Aviators who pilot miraculous mechanisms created by man’s genius wear amulets on their sweaters. What inexhaustible reserves they possess of darkness, ignorance and savagery! [54]
These are not merely historical observations. As John Gray has written of the contemporary USA:
It has by far the most powerful fundamentalist movement of any advanced country. In no otherwise comparable land do politicians regularly invoke the name of Jesus. Nowhere else are there movements to expel Darwinism from public schools. In truth, the US is a less secular regime than Turkey. [55]
The political implications of this have become apparent at several points in US history, most recently in the religious element within the Tea Party and in (highly regionalised) support for Donald Trump which nevertheless – due to the vagaries of the US Electoral College – delivered him victory in the 2016 Presidential elections. The dominance of religion in public life is not, however, the key element of ‘debased adaptation’ in a US context. For there is a sense in which, more than Germany and Japan, more even than the UK, the US has sustained a pre-capitalist inheritance from its emergence as an independent state which persists to this day: the Constitution. In Bloch’s words this is not only ‘not dangerous to capitalism’, but positively beneficial for it. Daniel Lazare is exaggerating only slightly to describe the USA as ‘an eighteenth-century republic that has come to resemble a democracy in certain respects, but which at its core remains stubbornly anti-democratic’: ‘While the United States might look like a democracy and sometimes even act like one, it was fundamentally a holdover from the days when not even the most radical politicians believed that the people should be free to run the government as a whole.’ [56] This continuing element of archaism at the heart of the most-self-consciously ‘modern’ of societies should caution against claims that that there are no longer any forms pre-dating capitalist modernity with which it can combine, even in the West. But these considerations take us close to the present and will be fully addressed in Part 4 below; before turning to that discussion, however, we need to return to the country whose historical trajectory uneven and combined development was first intended to explain.
 

3.3.      Uneven and Combined Development in Russia after 1917:
from Revolution to Counter-revolution
Russia continued to be marked by uneven and combined development immediately after the October revolution. In a letter to the first issue of the journal Under the Banner of Marxism in 1922, Trotsky wrote:
The Soviet state is a living contradiction of the old world, of its social order, of its personal relations, of its outlooks and beliefs. But at the same time the Soviet state itself is still full of contradictions, gaps, lack of coordination, vague fermentation – in a word, of phenomena in which the inheritance of the past is interwoven with the shoots of the future. [57]
These contradictions continued throughout the 1920s. On a slightly less exalted note than Trotsky, Walter Benjamin observed similar ‘interweaving’ during his visit to Moscow in 1926:
Here the newcomer learns perhaps most quickly of all to adapt himself to the curious tempo of this city and to the rhythm of its peasant population. And the complete interpenetration of technological and primitive modes life, this world-historical experiment in the new Russia, is illustrated in miniature by a streetcar ride. [58]
The Stalinist counter-revolution which began in 1928 transformed the Russian society described in these passages from one undergoing, with great difficulty, the transition to socialism, into something quite different: the first example of the integrated state capitalism that was after World War II to become the typical developmental form in the Global South. [59] This transformation heightened the fusion of archaic and contemporary forms to an unprecedented degree, above all by propelling millions of former peasants into the factories and cities. In England, it took three hundred and fifty years from the emergence of agrarian capitalism to the consolidation of industrialisation, years characterised by enclosure, clearance, repressive legislation and social degradation at home, and slavery, genocide and imperial conquest abroad. In Russia the process was even more greatly compressed than in Scotland, Germany or Japan, taking less than a tenth of the time it did in England, with the same processes magnified in intensity for every reduction in duration.
Despite the atrocities of Stalinism, (state-)capitalist modernity produced new forms of consciousness and perception among formerly agrarian peoples, in ways similar to the process in Western Europe, North America and Japan. During the early 1930s the Russian psychologist Alexander Luria undertook a number of studies of behaviour in Uzbekistan and Kirghizia, both areas of what was then Soviet Central Asia. These were areas where the economy was largely pre-capitalist and the majority of the population were illiterate. The first five-year plan provided for more intensive industrialisation of regions like Central Asia than in the USSR more generally. Accordingly: ‘Industrial production, and numbers of workers employed in industry, expanded more rapidly in Central Asia and Kazakhstan, and in the Urals and West Siberia, than in the rest of the USSR.’ Furthermore, this was from a lower level: ‘While 9.4 per cent of the Soviet population lived in these republics, they contained only 1.5 per cent of those employed in large-scale industry; and most industrial workers were Russians.’ By 1934 this had completely changed, with the number employed in large-scale industry nearly trebling from 53,000 to 158,000:
The increase in the working class in these areas took place against the background of the forcible transfer of a large part of Central Asian agriculture to the production of cotton, and the forcible settlement of the nomadic Kazakhs, many of whom died from starvation in the subsequent famine, or emigrated from Kazakhstan. [60]
Both regions were therefore experiencing what Luria later called ‘a radical restructuring of their socio-economic system and culture’ as a result of Stalinist collectivisation and the industrialisation process. The economy was based on cotton, with some transhumant cattle-rearers who spent part of the year in the mountains. The population were dominated by Islam, in respect of whose tenets women were confined to their own quarters, from which they could only emerge if draped in the veil. ‘The radical changes in class structure were accompanied by new cultural shifts.’ These included the universalisation of literacy and numeracy, but also of agronomy. ‘As a result, people became acquainted not only with new fields of knowledge but also with new motives for action.’ These developments produced new forms of consciousness, in which ‘abstract’ rather than ‘situational’ thinking came to predominate, on the basis of new state capitalist social relations rather than those associated with those of petty commodity production. As Luria notes:
... sociohistorical shifts not only introduce new content into the mental world of human beings; they also create new forms of activity and new structures of cognitive functioning. They advance human consciousness to new levels. We now see the inaccuracy of the centuries-old notions in accordance with which the basic structures of perception, representation, reasoning, deduction, imagination, and self-awareness are fixed forms of spiritual life and remain unchanged under differing social conditions. The basic categories of human mental life can be understood as products of social history – they are subject to change when the basic forms of social practice are altered and are thus social in nature. [61]
Why then did these transformations not produce a revolutionary response similar to those which had erupted in 1905 and 1917? As we by now come to expect, a crucial aspect was the specific character of the emerging state – or perhaps it would be more accurate to say, a crucial aspect was the specific character of the personnel whose relationships constituted the state. Alex Callinicos has noted that the counter-revolution in Russia had four main components: forced collectivisation, rapid industrialisation, systematic coercion and – most important in the context of this discussion – the fact that ‘a minority of the population benefited from the changes it brought’: ‘the social meaning of the changes involved was upward mobility for a minority at a time when the mass of the population was experiencing an appalling decline in its material conditions’. [62] We tend to think of Stalinist Russia primarily as a totalitarian monolith but, near the top, social relations were also flexible enough to allow entry into the new ruling class and for its members to make sharp tactical shifts within what was in many respects a chaotic (and certainly not ‘planned’) accumulation process. As Mike Haynes points out:
The drive to industrialise Russia opened up new possibilities for people to find ‘room at the top’. New enterprises needed managers. So did hospitals, schools, universities and research institutes. The expanding party state needed new layers of senior administrators. Beneath them, intermediate layers of white collar workers, professionals, doctors, teachers and architects had to be filled out ... The fact that capitalism is always in movement creates some capacity for people to move up to the top. But the leap forward begun in Russia in the 1930s vastly expanded these opportunities.
Haynes argues against regarding the ruling class as wholly new, rather: ‘The rapid changes opened up possibilities for mobility alongside those who had already established themselves before 1928.’ [63] At least some talented and potentially rebellious people were elevated into a new ruling class which regarded itself – for the most part quite sincerely at this stage – as a revolutionary force in Russian society; but precisely because ‘Marxism’ was the official doctrine of the state, it was unavailable to the overwhelming majority of the new, urbanised working class as a doctrine of resistance, let alone of revolution, in the way it had for an earlier generation of workers facing the Tsarist state.
The obstacles to revolutionary consciousness were not purely ideological. Moshe Lewin explains some of the reasons why the ‘social cleavages did not turn into political ones’:
Repression and terror alone could not explain the phenomenon. Factors like the cultural level, the relatively short industrial experience of the bulk of the employees (and the upward social mobility for many in the system), the existence inside the working class of large unintegrated segments of newcomers, women, youth, a kind of worker’s aristocracy, too, as well as a large differentiation span, all those explain social tensions, crude language, vodka and hooliganism, tekuchka [i.e. ‘spontaneous mobility of manpower’] and dirt, but may also serve as an explanation for the lack of any direct political challenge to the regime. Such a mass was probably difficult to rule – but easy to control ... [64]
Control was partly exercised by the ways in which the processes of urbanisation and industrialisation were instituted, which was quite different to the pre–1917 period. In relation to urbanisation, the parallels are not so much with the recent growth of mega-cities in the contemporary Global South (which will be discussed in Part 4 of this article) but somewhere rather more unexpected.
At the conclusion of her comparison of industrial cities in the USA and USSR, Kate Brown points out that both states were centrally concerned to suppress the resistance of workers to the dictates of capitalist industrialisation, ‘to fix social relations in place’:
... despite the fact that both the United States and Soviet Union were founded on revolution and grew through rapid urbanization, leaders in both countries distrusted the revolutionary and spontaneous quality of urban space and worked to destroy it. With straight lines and the force of the grid, Soviet and American leaders planned new ‘garden cities’ cut through with wide, rebellion-proof avenues, which negated the unpredictability and anarchy of nineteenth-century cities. As a result, both expanding American corporate power and expanding Soviet party-state power etched an anti-revolutionary conservatism onto twentieth-century urban scapes. [65]
Nor were workplaces themselves conducive to the type of organisation which had been characteristic, above all in engineering, before 1917. Here too there were ironic parallels with Russia’s Cold War rival:
Before 1917 ... there was a high concentration of labour in Russian plants and this helped forge solidarity. But workers then, even under Tsarist repression, had more chance of independent organisations. After 1928 the larger plants operated more like company towns, fiefdoms of the plant managers, which gave them a degree of authority not only over workers in the workplace but outside it as well. [66]
It is in this context that Stalinist Russia’s own versions of ‘debased adaptation’ and ‘non-synchronicity’ emerged. As Smith writes, ‘once the project of achieving Communist modernity got underway, it quickly became apparent that a side-effect of massive social and economic transformation was to revitalize many “neo-traditional” practices and representations’, including ‘the emergence of a charismatic leader, the revival of clientism as a principle of social organization, and reconstitution of social hierarchies more akin to status groups than to modern social classes’. [67] The retreat to pre-existing ideologies was inscribed into the Stalinist experience from the Russian point of origin during the late 1920s, as a form of consolation for a population being subjected to otherwise unendurable social convulsions, both terrorized into submission and mobilized into production for a process of breakneck industrialization. Lewin points out: ‘Institutions and methods which seemed to be entirely new, after deeper insight show the often quite astonishing re-emergence of many old traits and forms.’ Not least of these was the reproduction, the recreation in secular form, of the iconography and values of Russian Orthodoxy:
One telling example of extolling some of the more primitive trends of rural society when state interests seemed to have warranted it, and offering it as a value for the whole nation, is the policy in regard to the family undertaken in the 1930s ...it was clearly the large, archaic rural family, with its high demands on the reproductive faculties of women, authoritarian structure, and apparently solid moral stability, that was presented as a model ... The ‘crusaders’ themselves got trapped in some of the least modern, most orthodox, and most nationalist elements in their tradition, now put to use as ingredients of a renewed worship of the state and its interests. [68]
In cultural terms these regressions are far from the defiant modernism which had characterised the revolutionary years and, not unexpectedly, the consolidation of the Stalinist regime within the USSR saw the institutionalisation of anti-modernism as state policy. John Berger traces the implications for the artists involved:
For a few years after 1921 the condition of Russian art was the very antithesis of that which had preceded it for nearly two centuries. ‘We have taken the Bastille of the Academy’, claimed the students. For a few years artists served the State on their own initiative in a context of maximum freedom. Soon a very similar academicism was to be re-imposed ... They had to abandon their total prophetic claims and resign themselves to becoming good workers in a single productive sector. [69]
This was new form of ‘academic naturalism’ which had, as Macintyre points out, ‘appeared in other times and places and notably in Victorian England, another society dominated by a technically oriented, sexually conservative bourgeoisie’. [70] This is of course an aspect of a wider conservatism shared by British and Soviet societies. [71] It is worth noting, in this connection, that it was not only in Stalinist Russia, but in Fascist Germany that ‘a restoration of former bourgeois cultural forms and relations is instituted’ during the 1930s. [72]
Needless to say the levels of mobilisation associated with break-neck industrialisation could not be sustained for decades on end – but then, they did not need to be. Even before Stalin’s death in 1953 the processes of industrialisation and, to a large extent, urbanisation were essentially complete, and the regime stabilised. Looking back from the nineteen sixties, MacIntyre imagined what Trotsky’s response would have been: ‘The liberalization of Khrushchev would have appeared to him as parallel to the liberalisation which has developed in other capitalisms once primitive accumulation has been accomplished.’ [73] We cannot know what Trotsky would have thought, but this assessment of the shift involved is accurate enough. The relaxation of state repression went hand-in-hand with modest but real improvements in levels of consumption and standards of living more generally, although these were still shadowed by developments in the West, they were by now clearly moving in the same direction. [74] The most familiar image we have of the USSR is as it was at the very end – decaying, hollowed-out and in full disintegration. It is therefore easy to forget that, even as late as the 1970s, serious figures in the West expected it to match or overtake living standards in the USA by early in the twenty-first century. [75] By the time these predictions were being made, however, the era of uneven and combined development in Russian history was long over: it had become at least as much an exemplar of capitalist modernity as its Cold War rival.
* * *
References
[1] Godwin Smith, Reminiscences, edited by Arnold Haultain (London: Macmillan, 1911), pp. 1, 4.
[2] Giovanni Arrighi, The Long Nineteenth Century: Money, Power, and the Origins of Our Times (London: Verso, 1994), pp. 36–47.
[3] Karl Marx [1867], Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, vol. 1 (Harmondsworth: Penguin/New Left Review, 1976), pp. 915–916.
[4] Joyce Appleby, The Relentless Revolution: A History of Capitalism (New York: W.W. Norton, 2010), p. 83.
[5] Edward P. Thompson, Introduction: Culture and Custom, in Customs in Common (London: Merlin Press, 1991), p. 9.
[6] Charles Post [1995], The Agrarian Origins of US Capitalism: The Transformation of the Northern Countryside before the Civil War, in The Agrarian Road to Capitalism: Studies in Class-Structure, Economic Development and Political Conflict, 1620–1877 (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2011), pp. 98–99.
[7] Steve Fraser, The Age of Acquiescence: The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized Wealth and Power (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2015), pp. 88–144
[8] Sydney Pollard, The Genesis of Modern Management: A Study of the Industrial Revolution in Britain (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1965), p. 190; the quotes within this passage are from Werner Sombart’s Modern Capitalism.
[9] Frederick Engels [1845], The Condition of the Working-Class in England: From Personal Observations and Authentic Sources, in Collected Works, vol. 4 (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1975), p. 308.
[10] Ibid., p. 364.
[11] Edward P. Thompson [1963], The Making of the English Working Class (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1980, p. 486.
[12] Craig Calhoun, The Question of Class Struggle: Social Foundations of Popular Radicalism during the Industrial Revolution (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982), p. 52.
[13] Edward P. Thompson, The Peculiarities of the English, in The Socialist Register 1965, edited by Ralph Miliband and John Saville (London: Merlin Press, 1965), pp. 312–313.
[14] Nikolaus Pevsner, The Englishness of English Art (London: The Architectural Press, 1956), pp. 18, 152.
[15] Clement Greenberg [1955], “American-Style” Painting, in The Collected Essays and Criticism, vol. 3, Affirmations and Refusals, 1950–1956, edited by John O’Brian (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), p. 229.
[16] Paul Wood, The Avant-Garde from the July Monarchy to the Second Empire, in The Challenge of the Avant-Garde, edited by Paul Wood (New Haven: Yale University Press in association with The Open University, 1999), pp. 42–43.
[17] Steve Edwards, Victorian Britain: From Images of Modernity to the Modernity of Images, in Art and Visual Culture, 1850–2012: Modernity to Globalisation, edited by Steve Edwards and Paul Wood (Milton Keynes: Tate Publishing in association with The Open University, 2012), p. 60. Edwards specifically refers to uneven and combined development in his introduction to this multi-authored collection. See Introduction: Stories of Modern Art, in Art and Visual Culture, p. 9.
[18] Wyndham Lewis [1932], Blasting and Bombardiering: An Autobiography (London: John Calder, 1982), p. 34.
[19] Alasdair MacIntyre [1961], Culture and Revolution, in Alasdair Macintyre’s Engagement with Marxism: Selected Writings, 1953–1974, edited by Paul Blackledge and Neil Davidson (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2008), p. 178.
[20] William Morris [1890]. News from Nowhere: Or an Epoch of Rest, Being some Chapters from a Utopian Romance (London: Longman, Green, 1920), p. 198.
[21] Raymond Williams, Politics and Letters: Interviews with New Left Review (London: Verso, 1979), pp. 128–129.
[22] Malcolm Bradbury, London: 1890–1920, in Modernism, edited by Malcolm Bradbury and James McFarlane (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1976), 178–179 and pp. 172–179 more generally.
[23] Neil Davidson, How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions? (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2012), pp. 563–64, 580–82.
[24] Perry Anderson, Heirs of Gramsci, New Left Review II/100 (July/August 2016), p. 92.
[25] Norman Stone, Europe Transformed, 1873–1999 (London: Fontana Books, 1983), pp. 18–19.
[26] Non-Marxists have also highlighted the significance of state forms for capital. Despite the business management terminology deployed by Darren Acemoglu and James Robinson (‘virtuous circles’, ‘positive feedback loops’), at the core of their discussion is a defensible argument about the adaptability of the British capitalist state. See Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty (New York: Random House, 2012), pp. 308–18.
[27] Sydney Pollard, The Industrial Revolution – an Overview, in The Industrial Revolution in National Context: Europe and the USA, edited by Mikuláš Teich and Roy Porter (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), p. 377.
[28] Jonathan Crary, 24/7: Late Capitalism and the Ends of Sleep (London: Verso, 2013), pp. 65–66.
[29] Calhoun, The Question of Class Struggle, pp. 60–84, pp. 149–82; Michael Andrew Zmolek, Rethinking the Industrial Revolution: Five Centuries of Transition from Agrarian to Industrial Capitalism in England (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2013), pp. 509–792.
[30] Leon D. Trotsky [1930–32], The History of the Russian Revolution (London: Pluto Press, 1977), p. 33.
[31] Gareth Stedman Jones [1971], Outcast London: A Study in the Relationships between Classes in Victorian Society (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1984), p. 346
[32] Robert Looker and David Coates, The State and the Working Class in Nineteenth-century Europe, in The Rise of the Modern State, edited by James Anderson (Brighton: Harvester, 1986), pp. 98–101, 112–13.
[33] Harry Harootunian, Piercing the Present with the Past: Reflections on Massimiliano Tomba’s Marx’s Temporalities, Historical Materialism 23, no. 4 (2015), p. 62; Marx, Capital, vol. 1, p. 91.
[34] Fredric Jameson, Secondary Elaborations, in Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (London: Verso, 1991), p. 405; [1989], Marxism and Postmodernism, in The Cultural Turn: Selected Writings on the Postmodern, 1983–1998 (London: Verso, 1998), p. 44. See also Neil Davidson, ‘The Scottish Path to Capitalist Agriculture 3: The Enlightenment as the Theory and Practice of Improvement’, Journal of Agrarian Change (January 2005), vol. 5, pp. 1, 29–36.
[35] Eric J. Hobsbawm, The Age of Empire, 1875–1914 (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1975), p. 196.
[36] Leon D. Trotsky [1925], Where Is Britain Going?, in Collected Writings and Speeches on Britain, vol. 2, edited by R. Chappell and Alan Clinton (London: New Park, 1974), p. 37.
[37] Neil Davidson, The Origins of Scottish Nationhood (London: Pluto Press, 2000), pp. 167–186; Class Consciousness and National Consciousness in the Scottish General Strike of 1820, in New Approaches to Socialist History, edited by Keith Flett and David Renton (Cheltenham: New Clarion Press, 2003).
[38] Ernest Mandel [1972], Late Capitalism (London: Verso, 1975), p. 87.
[39] Brian Kelly, Materialism and the Persistence of Race in the Jim Crow South, Historical Materialism (2004), vol. 12, pp. 2, 11
[40] Leon D. Trotsky [1938], Revolution and War in China, in Leon Trotsky on China, edited by Les Evans and Russell Block (New York: Monad Press, 1976), p. 66.
[41] Mark Elvin, A Working Definition of Modernity, Past and Present
113 (November 1986), p. 212.
[42] Christopher A. Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World: 1780–1914 (Oxford: Blackwell, 2004), p. 104.
[43] Michael Mann, Ruling Class Strategies and Citizenship, in States, Wars and Capitalism: Studies in Political Sociology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988), p. 200.
[44] Leon D. Trotsky [1933], Japan Heads for Disaster, in Writings of Leon Trotsky [1932–33], edited by George Breitman and Sarah Lovell (New York: Pathfinder Books, 1972), p. 291.
[45] Vladimir I. Lenin [1905], The Fall of Port Arthur, in Collected Works, vol. 8, January–July 1905 (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1962), p. 52.
[46] Harry Harootunian, Overcome by Modernity: History, Culture, and Community in Interwar Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), pp. 3–4.
[47] Tom Nairn, Reflections on Nationalist Disasters, New Left Review
I/230 (July/August 1998, p. 149, 151. I think Nairn is on firmer ground when he describes Germany, not as irredeemably backward, but as undergoing ‘a moment of rural-urban transition – “moment” here meaning not “instant” but a world-historical phase, possibly multi-generational in duration and yet with a determinable beginning and end’. See Ibid., pp. 151–152
[48] Zygmunt Bauman, Modernity and the Holocaust (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1989), p. x. Bauman’s argument is however convincing in so far as it directed against claims that fascism is unconnected to capitalism. See Neil Davidson [2013–14], Right-Wing Social Movements as a Problem for Capital, in Nation-States: Consciousness and Competition (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2016), pp. 259–269.
[49] Richard J. Evans, The Coming of the Third Reich (London: Allen Lane, 2003), pp. 19–21. See also, Alexander Anievas, Capital, the State and War: Class Conflict and Geopolitics in the Thirty Years’ Crisis, 1914–1945 (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2014), pp. 71–84, for a version of this argument which explicitly situates the German experience with the context of uneven and combined development.
[50] Ernst Bloch [1932], Non-synchronism and the Obligation to Its Dialectics, New German Critique
11 (Spring 1977), p. 29, p. 32. See also Harootunian, Overcome by Modernity, p. 216 and S.A. Smith, Revolution and the People in Russia and China: A Comparative History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008), p. 18.
[51] Harootunian, Overcome by Modernity, pp. 165–66.
[52] Leon D. Trotsky [1926], Radio, Science, Technology and Society, in Problems of Everyday Life: Creating the Foundations for a New Society in Revolutionary Russia (New York: Pathfinder Books, 1973), p. 257.
[53] Leon D. Trotsky [1933], Uneven and Combined Development and the Role of American Imperialism: Minutes of a Discussion, Writings of Leon Trotsky [1932–33], edited by George Breitman and Sarah Lovell (New York: Pathfinder Books, 1972), p. 117.
[54] Leon D. Trotsky [1933], What Is National Socialism?, in The Struggle against Fascism in Germany (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1975), p. 413.
[55] John Gray, Al Qaeda and What It Means to be Modern (London: Faber and Faber, 2003), p. 23.
[56] Daniel Lazare, The Velvet Coup: The Constitution, the Supreme Court and the Decline of American Democracy (London: Verso, 2001), p. 9.
[57] Trotsky, Radio, Science, Technology and Society, p. 271.
[58] Walter Benjamin [1927], Moscow, in Selected Writings, vol. 2, part 1, 1927 – 1930, edited by Michael W. Jennings, Howard Eiland, and Gary Smith (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2003), p. 32.
[59] Neil Davidson, Is Social Revolution Still Possible in the Twenty-first Century?, Journal of Contemporary Central and Eastern Europe, vol. 23, nos. 2–3, Special Issue: 25 Years of Revolution: Comparing Revolt and Transition from Europe 1989 to the Arab World 2014 (2015), pp. 119–128.
[60] R.W. Davies, The Industrialisation of Soviet Russia, vol. 4, Crisis and Progress in the Soviet Economy, 1931–1933 (Houndmills: Macmillan, 1996), pp. 485–488.
[61] Alexander R. Luria, Cognitive Development: Its Cultural and Social Foundations, edited by Michael Cole (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1976), pp. 12–4, pp. 163–4.
[62] Alex Callinicos, The Revenge of History: Marxism and the East European Revolutions (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1991), pp. 34–35 and pp. 29–37 more generally.
[63] Michael Haynes, Russia: Class and Power, 1917–2000 (London: Bookmarks, 2002), pp. 143–144.
[64] Moshe Lewin [1982], Social Relations inside Industry during the Pre-war Five-Year Plans, 1928–1941, in The Making of the Soviet System: Essays in the Social History of Inter-war Russia (New York: Pantheon Books, 1985), p. 257
[65] Kate Brown, Gridded Lives: Why Kazakhstan and Montana Are Nearly the Same Place, American Historical Review, vol. 106 (2001), pp. 1, 46–47.
[66] Haynes, Russia, p. 174.
[67] Smith, Revolution and the People in Russia and China, p. 206.
[68] Moshe Lewin [1977], The Social Background to Stalinism, in The Making of the Soviet System, pp. 274, 275; and see pp. 274–276 more generally.
[69] John Berger, Art and Revolution: Ernst Neizvestny and the Role of the Artist in the U.S.S.R. (London: Writers and Readers, 1969), pp. 47–48.
[70] Alasdair MacIntyre, Marcuse (London: Fontana Books, 1970), p. 57.
[71] Nigel Harris [1968], Beliefs in Society: the Problem of Ideology (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1971), pp. 130–166.
[72] Esther Leslie, Walter Benjamin: Overpowering Conformism (London: Pluto Press, 2000), p. 101.
[73] Alasdair MacIntyre [1963], Trotsky in Exile, in Alasdair Macintyre’s Engagement with Marxism, p. 273.
[74] Haynes, Russia, pp. 179–182; Goran Therborn, European Modernity and Beyond: The Trajectory of European Societies, 1945–2000 (London: Sage Publications, 1995), pp. 133–146, 150–160.
[75] See, for example, Acemoglu and Robinson, Why Nations Fail, pp. 127–128.
 






Trotsky’s theory of Uneven and Combined Development was born out of his experience of the Russian Revolution. To mark the centenary of the revolution, we are publishing a series of five pieces by Neil Davidson that explore the theory’s wider contribution to how we understand capitalist modernity. These articles show how ideas that began life in the revolution continue to inspire new ways of grasping the world, and that we are very much engaging in a living 21st
century world when reflecting on the previous century. The series published here are extracts of his forthcoming book Violating all the Laws of History that will be published in the Haymarket Historical Materialism series in 2018.



*

Introduction
The contemporary debate over uneven and combined development began with Justin Rosenberg’s 1995 Deutscher Memorial Prize Lecture. [1] Since then, opinion among the growing body of those who find the concept useful has broadly divided in two, with both sides able to claim varying degrees support from Trotsky’s writings. One sees uneven and combined development as a relatively recent process which only became possible during the imperialist era of capitalism – usually seen as beginning in the Great Depression of the 1870s – when geopolitical rivalry and colonial expansion partially extended industrialisation and urbanisation from their original capitalist heartlands to the remaining European absolutist states and what we now call the Global South. [2] The other side sees uneven and combined development as a transhistorical or transmodal process which can be found throughout human history, although some adherents of this position accept that it only achieved a truly systematic character during the late nineteenth century. [3] I have recently tried to assess the relative merits of these positions, from the perspective of the former, and will not repeat that discussion here. [4]
What I will address in this chapter is whether uneven and combined development can indeed be extended, not backwards through time, but sideways through space: in other words, whether the process has been generated in every society which has experienced capitalist modernity, rather than being confined to backward or underdeveloped areas. It may be useful to begin the discussion by reminding ourselves of the famous passage from The History of the Russian Revolution where Trotsky introduced the concept:
The privilege of historic backwardness – and such a privilege exists – permits, or rather compels, the adoption of whatever is ready in advance of any specified date, skipping a whole series of intermediate stages. From the universal law of unevenness thus derives another law which for want of a better name, we may call the law of combined development – by which we mean a drawing together of the different stages of the journey, a combining of separate steps, an amalgam of archaic with more contemporary forms. [5]
Alongside this passage, however, we also need to consider another by Trotsky, written shortly before his murder in 1940: ‘Only a minority of countries has fully gone through that systematic and logical development from handicraft through domestic manufacture to the factory, which Marx subjected to such detailed analysis.’ [6] In fact, the minority consisted of only one country, England, although there were also a handful of territories within countries (the North-East of the USA, Catalonia before its incorporation into Spain) which had similar trajectories. The very shortness of the list does, however, support the argument I intend to make. For if the overwhelming majority of even the advanced capitalist states did not undergo the ‘systematic and logical development’ to which Trotsky refers, then surely they too must have ‘skipped intermediate stages’ and ‘drawn together the different stages of the journey’? Before turning to these issues, we need to explore Trotsky’s original argument in more detail.
 

1.1.      The ‘Law’ of Uneven and Combined Development
Trotsky first formulated what he called the ‘law’ of uneven and combined development in 1930, in order to explain the conditions of possibility for a particular strategy, that of permanent revolution, which he had first proposed twenty-five years earlier in relation to Russia. In this scenario, capitalist relations of production had been established and were perhaps even in the process of becoming dominant, but the bourgeois revolution had still to be accomplished. The existence of a militant working class, however, made the bourgeoisie unwilling to launch such a revolution on their own behalf for fear that it would get out of their control. The working class, on the other hand, could accomplish the revolution against the pre-capitalist state which the bourgeois itself was no longer prepared to undertake and – in Trotsky’s version of permanent revolution at any rate – move directly to the construction of socialism, providing of course that it occurred within the context of a successful international revolutionary movement:
The irrevocable and irresistible going over of the masses from the most rudimentary tasks of political, agrarian and national emancipation and abolition of serfdom to the slogan of proletarian rulership, resulted ... from the social structure of Russia and the conditions of the worldwide situation. The theory of Permanent Revolution only formulated the combined process of this development. [7]
The societies which Trotsky originally identified as subject to uneven and combined development and to which he devoted most attention, were ruled by absolutist or tributary states which had been forced to partially modernise under pressure of military competition from the Western powers. As he noted, ‘the Great War, the result of the contradictions of world imperialism, drew into its maelstrom countries of different stages of development, but made the same claims on all the participants’. [8] Combined development in Russia was therefore generated by attempts on the part of the absolutist state to overcome the backwardness attendant on uneven development; but as Trotsky pointed out:
Historical backwardness does not imply a simple reproduction of the development of advanced countries, England or France, with a delay of one, two, or three centuries. It engenders an entirely new ‘combined’ social formation in which the latest conquests of capitalist technique and structure root themselves into relations of feudal or pre-feudal barbarism, transforming and subjecting them and creating peculiar relations of classes. [9]
The former levels of stability typical of feudal or tributary societies are disrupted by the irruption of capitalist industrialisation and all that it brings in its wake: rapid population growth, uncoordinated urban expansion, dramatic ideological shifts. ‘When English or French capital, the historical coagulate of many centuries, appears in the steppes of the Donets Basin, it cannot release the same social forces, relations, and passions which once went into its own formation.’ [10]
Other Marxists had noted the coexistence of different temporalities within the same social formations. Antonio Labriola, perhaps Trotsky’s most important philosophical influence, wrote that Russian industrialization ‘seems destined to put under our eyes, as in an epitome, all the phases, even the most extreme, of our history’. [11] Even here, however, Labriola is drawing attention to the coexistence of forms rather than their mutual interpenetration. Trotsky, however, was interested in the process by which these forms were fused, the result permeating every aspect of society, ideology as much as economy. The archaic and the modern, the settled and disruptive overlap and merge in all aspects of the social formations concerned, from the organization of arms production to the structure of religious observance, in entirely new and unstable ways, generating socially explosive situations. It is tempting to describe these as mutations, except that the inadequacy of the language involved led Trotsky to reject the biological metaphors in which stages of development had been described from the Enlightenment through to the Third International in its Stalinist phase – and which is continued in the present-day notion of ‘hybridity’: ‘The absorptive and flexible psyche, as a necessary condition for historical progress, confers on the so-called social “organisms”, as distinguished from the real, that is, biological organisms, an exceptional variability of internal structure.’ [12] Trotsky himself pointed to the existence of such forms in general terms in his notebooks on dialectics from the mid–1930s:
Some objects (phenomena) are confined easily within boundaries according to some logical classification, others present [us with] difficulties: they can be put here or there, but within stricter relationship – nowhere. While provoking the indignation of systematisers, such transitional forms are exceptionally interesting to dialecticians, for they smash the limited boundaries of classification, revealing the real connections and consecutiveness of a living process. [13]
Trotsky’s position is often misunderstood, albeit in diametrically opposite ways. On the one hand, Razmig Keucheyan writes:
The theory of uneven and combined development, which is found in particular in Trotsky, refers to the idea that the development of ‘advanced’ countries has as its inevitable counterpart the under-development of ‘laggard’ countries. In other words, the lag in question is not in fact a lag, but strictly contemporaneous with the ‘advance’ of the western countries. In this sense, the underdevelopment of some is the direct result of the development of others – hence the idea of ‘combined’ uneven development. This thesis has significant strategic consequences. Among other things, it assumes breaking with the idea that a country must be ‘mature’ for socialist forces to unleash a revolution in it. Such maturity is impossible to achieve, since under-developed countries are maintained in a state of underdevelopment. This idea has been developed by ‘world-systems’ theorists, among them Wallerstein and Arrighi. [14]
On the other hand, Gurminder Bhambra complains:
We were all seen to be headed in the same direction and Europe, or the West, simply provides the model of where it is that the rest of the world would arrive ... The narrative of historical transition, in this case of ‘uneven and combined development’, is reified as the narrative of history – where ‘unevenness’ points to difference and ‘development’ to the universal framework within which those differences are to be located – and the histories of the rest of the world are understood within the problematics of this narrative. [15]
From one perspective then, uneven and combined development sees the non-West permanently trapped in a subordinate role, while from the other, the Rest of the World slowly ascends the developmental ladder towards the same level as the West, without ever arriving. Keucheyan assimilates Trotsky’s position to another (World Systems) of which he approves; Bhambra does likewise to another which she rejects (Eurocentrism). In fact, Trotsky held neither position. It is true that he emphasizes the partial nature of their adoptions from the advanced countries:
Russia was so far behind the other countries that she was compelled, at least in certain spheres, to outstrip them. ... the absence of firmly established social forms and traditions makes the backward country – at least within certain limits – extremely hospitable to the last word in international technique and international thought. Backwardness does not, however, for this reason cease to be backwardness. [16]
Within these spheres and limits, however, backward societies could however attain higher levels of development than in their established rivals: ‘At the same time that peasant land-cultivation as a whole remained, right up to the revolution, at the level of the seventeenth century, Russian industry in its technique and capitalist structure stood at the level of the advanced countries, and in certain respects even outstripped them.’ [17]
These adoptions had, however, did not in themselves necessarily undermine the state, since: ‘The [backward] nation ... not infrequently debases the achievements borrowed from outside in the process of adapting them to its own more primitive culture.’ [18] Indeed, initially at least, ‘debased adaptation’ helped preserve the pre-capitalist state in Russia. From 1861 tsarism established factories using the manufacturing technology characteristic of monopoly capitalism in order to produce arms with which to defend feudal absolutism. [19] The danger for the state lay in what these factories required in order to run, namely workers – and workers more skilled, more politically conscious than that faced by any previous absolutist or early capitalist state. [20] Uneven and combined development in Russia created a working class which, although only a small minority of the population, was possessed of exceptional levels of revolutionary militancy. ‘Debased adaptation’ was intended to preserve the existence of the undemocratic state; but to the extent that the former was successful it helped provoke the working class into destroying the latter. Thus, for Trotsky, the most important consequence of uneven and combined development was the enhanced capacity it potentially gave the working classes for political and industrial organization, theoretical understanding, and revolutionary activity: ‘when the economic factors burst in a revolutionary manner, breaking up the old order; when development is no longer gradual and “organic” but assumes the form of terrible convulsions and drastic changes of former conceptions, then it becomes easier for critical thought to find revolutionary expression, provided that the necessary theoretical prerequisites exist in the given country’. [21] S.A. Smith describes the trajectory of one Russian worker who had his mind opened in this way to ‘critical thought’:
For Kanatchikov, discovery of evolutionary theory came like a lightning bolt ... His discovery of Darwin was soon complimented by his discovery of Marx: by 1902, aged 23, he had painfully mastered the first volume of Capital. This furnished him with a scientific understanding of society and the determination to dedicate himself to the cause of overthrowing capitalism. [22]
Kanatchikov exemplifies a general tendency identified by Tim McDaniel, namely that the militancy of Russian workers was ‘the product of leadership by a militant proletarian core of advanced workers employed in modern industry’, not of ‘disorientated workers of peasant origin and to young recruits into industry’. In his view, with which I agree, accounts ‘which emphasise the ‘”spontaneity” and unpredictability of worker militancy’ end up ‘denying to it the coherence and ultimate rationality ascribed by Trotsky’. [23]
Trotsky was not alone in seeing the possibilities for Russia to avoid supposedly necessary stages of development; but those who shared his vision tended not belong to the ranks of his fellow-Marxists, but to be among the community of modernist writers and artists whose work – as we shall see in the Part 2 – was in many ways a response to or cultural expression of uneven and combined development. In his novel Petersburg, completed on the eve of 1917, Andrei Biely wrote of Russia needing to accomplish ‘a leap over history’ in order to escape the tensions caused by its multiple temporalities, even though he envisaged this occurring in quite a different way than Trotsky did. [24]
 

1.2.      Eastern Variations
Trotsky began to identify uneven and combined development in countries other than Russia from the late 1920s. Some modern writers like Fouad Makki have argued that this involved overestimating ‘the significance for the non-Western world of the specific political experience and pattern of development of early twentieth century Russia’ on the grounds that ‘Russia was a major territorial empire in its own right, and its absolutist state was able to relate to the geo-political and economic exigencies of its Western capitalist milieu from a position of relative political autonomy.’ [25] This is true, but of limited significance, since the key point is not whether particular states are able to compete externally in geopolitical terms, but the internal relationships and experiences produced by the processes of industrialisation and urbanisation – whatever the reasons for which they were undertaken.
A stronger case for Russian exceptionalism has been made by McDaniel, who argues that the Tsarist Empire tended to produce a revolutionary labour movement in four ways. First, it eliminated or at least reduced the distinction between economic and political issues. Second, it generated opposition for both traditional and modern reasons – the defence of established religious practices on the one hand, and of wages and conditions on the other. Third, it simultaneously reduced the fragmentation of the working class and prevented the formation of a stable conservative bureaucracy, thus leading to more radical attitudes. Fourth, it forced a degree of interdependence between the mass of the working class, class conscious workers and revolutionary intellectuals. [26] McDaniel claims that, since the emergence of the Russian labour movement under tsarism, a comparable set of conditions has only arisen in Iran during the 1970s. [27] It is true that the Pahlavi state bore some similarities to that of the Romanovs, although these are largely formal since – as we shall see in Part 4 – the former was a capitalist state and the latter was not; but more importantly, McDaniel ignores the way in which working class movements comparable to and contemporary with those in Russia arose in societies with quite different state formations. What then were these other types of society identified by Trotsky as subject to uneven and combined development?
One was exemplified by China and the post-Ottoman Arab Middle East after the First World War – formerly analogous state forms now past the point of collapse and disintegrating under Franco-British imperialist pressure. Here it is the absence of any centralised state which forms the context. Instead of being directly colonized, these newly fragmented territories saw agents of foreign capital establish areas of industrialization under the protection of either their own governments or local warlords, both of which presented the same blocks to overall development. The result in relation to China was made by one of Trotsky’s then-followers, Harold Isaacs: ‘The pattern of Chinese life is jagged, torn, and irregular. Modern forms of production, transport and finance are superimposed upon and only partially woven into the worn and threadbare pattern of the past.’ [28] As this suggests, even where industrialisation and urbanisation did occur, uneven and combined development did not necessarily follow, as sometimes the archaic and modern may be too distant from each other to fuse. Smith quotes an assessment of conditions in Beijing in 1918 by a founding member of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), Li Dazhao, in which he describes how ‘the gap in time between old and new is too big, that the spatial juxtaposition is too close’:
Wheels and hooves move side by side, sirens hoot, there is the sound of cars and horses, of rickshaw pullers spitting and cursing each other. There is diversity and confusion, complexity to an extreme degree. ... The new resents the obstacles posed by the old. The old resents the dangers posed by the new. [29]
It was Shanghai, rather than Beijing, where the different temporalities fused to such an extent such that the city became both a centre of capitalist modernity and of the opposition to it, serving as the venue for the launch of the CCP: ‘Shanghai thus served as a polyvalent symbol; an emblem of consumer affluence and of class exploitation, of foreign imperialism and patriotic resistance, of individualism and mass society.’ [30] Combined development was experienced throughout the entire texture of urban life where capitalism took hold. Shanghai was in the vanguard in terms of both production and consumption, as J.G. Ballard recalls from his childhood in the 1930s:
... Shanghai was a waking dream where everything I could imagine had already been taken to its extreme. The garish billboards and nightclub neon signs, the young Chinese gangsters and violent beggars watching me keenly as I pedalled past them, were part of an overlit realm more exhilarating than the American comics and radio serials I so adored. Shanghai would absorb everything, even the coming war, however fiercely the smoke might pump from the warships of the Whangpoo River. My father called Shanghai the most advanced city in the world, and I knew that one day all the cities on the planet would be filled with radio-stations, hell-drivers and casinos. [31]
These were not simply childhood impressions. The city had textile mills before anywhere in the Southern states of the USA and by 1930 was home to the largest mill in the world; the first cinema in Shanghai opened only five years after the first large cinema opened in San Francisco. [32]
The most dramatic changes affected the working class. After 1918, workers were mainly former peasants or rural labourers, who were now subject to the very different and unaccustomed rhythms of industrial urban life without intervening stages. Jean Chesneaux writes that the main characteristics of the Chinese proletariat were ‘its youth, its instability, its swollen lower ranks and its lack of a developed labour elite’. [33] In this respect the Chinese working class closely resembled its Russian forerunner, not least in the openness to Marxism which these conditions tended to produce: ‘The fact that the students and workers ... are eagerly assimilating the doctrine of materialism’, wrote Trotsky, ‘while the labour leaders of civilized England believe in the magic potency of churchly incantations, proves beyond a doubt that in certain spheres China has outstripped England.’ In these cases ideology outstrips economy, for ‘the contempt of the Chinese workers for the mediaeval dull-wittedness of [Ramsay] MacDonald does not permit the inference that in her general economic development China is higher than Great Britain’. [34]
Trotsky also identified a third type of society as experiencing uneven and combined development: these were among the actual colonies, although not every colony did so. ‘Commercial, industrial and financial capital invaded backward countries from the outside’, he wrote, ‘partly destroying the primitive forms of native economy and partly subjecting them to the world-wide industrial and banking system of the West.’ [35] What Peter Curtin calls ‘defensive modernization’ was not enough to protect these societies from Western incursions. In the case of the Merinian monarchs of Madagascar, for example: ‘They not only failed to modernize beyond adopting Christianity and superficial European fashions, they failed to build a kind of society and government administration that would perpetuate their own power.’ [36] Once the race for imperial territory began in earnest during the closing decades of the nineteenth century, it became strategically necessary for the Western powers to seize territories which were often of no value in themselves – indeed, which were often net recipients of state expenditure – but which it was necessary to retain in order to protect those territories which were of economic value, like India. [37] Colonial rule could of course throw societies backward, as in the case of British-occupied Iraq. Ruling through the Hashemite monarchy after 1920, the regime deliberately rejected any attempts at modernization, except in the oil industry. Instead, it reinforced disintegrating tribal loyalties and semi-feudal tenurial relationships over the peasantry. Peter Gowan describes the British initiatives as:
‘the creation of new foundational institutions of landownership in order to revive dying traditional authority relations, resulting in economically and socially regressive consequences, undertaken for thoroughly modern imperialist political purposes – namely, to create a ruling class dependent upon British military power and therefore committed to imperial interests in the region.’ [38]
Nevertheless, even in this type of colonial context, some industrialisation took place. The British in India, for example, were unwilling to allow full-scale industrialization in case it produced competition for its own commodities, but was prepared to sanction it in specific circumstances for reasons of military supply or where goods were not intended for home markets – a form of ‘licenced industrialisation’, particularly in textiles. [39] This could not lead to general economic development, it is true, but as Jürgen Osterhammel writes, ‘even at the end of the nineteenth century, the socially and economically “backward” regions of Europe were certainly not ahead of the more dynamic ones of India or China’. [40]
As in the case of absolutist states like Russia, there were examples among the fragmented former empires and the outright colonies of how it was possible to pull ahead in particular areas or industries of all but the most developed areas of the West. Here too the outcomes were not always straightforwardly revolutionary, but leaving aside complete rejection of capitalist modernity, there were three possible responses to it, all of which I illustrate here with examples from the history of modern Islam.
One was renewal, where capitalist modernity led to existing cultural practices being maintained in new ways which were then assimilated to tradition. Eric Hobsbawm has written of ‘the invention of tradition’ that ‘we should expect it to occur more frequently when a rapid transformation of society weakens or destroys the social patterns for which “old” traditions had been designed, producing new ones to which they were not applicable, or when such old traditions and their institutional carriers and promulgators prove no longer sufficiently adaptable and flexible or are otherwise eliminated’. [41] Here is one, highly pertinent, example of this process from the late nineteenth century:
In the Muslim world, the Islamic burkah, the full body covering of Muslim women, was growing in popularity. Often wrongly regarded as a mark of medieval obscurantism, the burkah was actually a modern dress that allowed women to come out of the seclusion of their homes and participate to a limited degree in public and commercial affairs. Even in this insistence on tradition, therefore, one glimpses the mark of growing global convergence. [42]
Indeed, as even one of the arch-defenders of the ‘clash of civilizations’ thesis points out of another innovation: ‘The office of ayatollah is a creation of the nineteenth century; the rule of Khomeini and of his successor as “supreme Jurist”, an innovation of the twentieth.’ [43]
These examples illustrate one extreme. At the other we find adoption, a similar embrace of modernity – or at least one version of it – and rejection of tradition that we have already encountered in Russia and China, here in 1940s Iraq:
The impact of the [Marxist] theory, particularly on minds that lived on ancient ideas – ideas that assumed that poverty and wealth were something fated, unalterable features of life – can be imagined. An Iraqi of a religious family, who had been brought up according to the traditional Shi’ite precepts and became a member of the Politbureau of the Communist party in the forties, recalled in a conversation with this writer how when reading a forbidden book he first came across the idea that distinctions between men were not God-given but were due to human and historical causes, the idea was to him ‘something like a revelation’. There was nothing in his previous experience to suggest anything different. He had taken for granted the Koranic injunction: ‘And as to the means of livelihood we have preferred some of you to others’. [44]
A third response lies between these extremes, all the more interesting because it can be seen as a potential bridge from one to the other – adaptation, where ‘contemporary’ forms of class struggle were deployed in order to defend ‘archaic’ forms of religious observance, as occurred around the jute weaving industry in Bengal during the 1890s. During this period the Scottish mill managers both introduced night working and attempted to prevent workers – many of whom had only recently arrived from the countryside – from attending religious festivals, to which the mainly, but by no means exclusively Muslim weavers responded by rioting and striking. Anthony Cox writes of their motivations: ‘In part, this growing militancy was encouraged, if not fostered, by notions of fairness and honour held by Indian workers.’ In particular, they held to notions of customary rights (Dasturi), fairness (Instaf) and social honour (Izzat):
For many Julaha weavers, the imposition of night working and the attack on their rights of worship, as well as challenging concepts such as dasturi and insaf, also challenged their sense of honour as Muslims and must have underlined the alien, colonial character of the mill managers and supervisors, making them more receptive to the nationalist and Pan-Islamic rhetoric of Indian nationalism and Muslim reform organisations respectively. The militancy of the workers, though, went much further than was thought politic by many nationalists and Pan-Islamic leaders. [45]
Much the same spurs to action can be found in the great strike wave of 1920–22 in which individual disputes were often responses to assaults by supervisors on children or women:
The patriarchal character of social relations within the jute workforce, encompassing ideas of personal honour or Izzat, undoubtedly contributed towards male workers coming to the defence of women and child workers. It is also clear that the heightened political atmosphere that accompanied, and contributed towards, the labour upsurge of the time played a major role in the jute workers’ willingness to challenge paternal despotism. [46]
Thus far, I have drawn examples from the areas identified by Trotsky as experiencing uneven and combined development and having the potential for permanent revolution, roughly from the period encompassed by his own lifetime. Ankie Hoogvelt speaks for many commentators when she describes the process outlined by Trotsky as leading to a ‘historically unique situation which is ripe for socialist revolution’. [47] How ‘unique’ was the situation though? Peter Thomas writes of one important case: ‘Italy, along with much of Western Europe, had experienced a “belated” modernity not qualitatively dissimilar from that which preceded the Russian Revolution’. [48] Indeed, in the case of Italy – one of the established, imperial capitalist powers – these developments were occurring contemporaneously with those in Russia. As Gail Day notes:
In Italy and especially in Russia the peasant-based life ‘of the past’ and the urban life ‘of the present’ co-existed side-by-side on the cities’ borders ... It seems to have been that the existence of sharp contrasts between the old ways of life and new ones that gave the [artistic] movements in Italy and Russia their sense of greater urgency – an urgency that was bound up with the social and political crises that both countries faced. [49]
Despite the diametrically opposite political affiliations of the Constructivists in Russia and the Futurists in Italy – themselves indicative of the different outcomes to the crises in these countries – their artistic practices were comparable, suggesting similar responses to a common experience. How could a virtually universal socio-economic process generate such similar cultural responses while simultaneously leading to such different political results?
* * *
References
[1] Justin Rosenberg, Isaac Deutscher and the Lost History of International Relations, New Left Review I/215 (January-–February 1996).
[2] Samantha Ashman, Capitalism, Uneven and Combined Development, and the Transhistoric, Cambridge Review of International Affairs, vol. 22, no. 1 (March 2009); Neil Davidson, Putting the Nation back into the ‘International', Cambridge Review of International Affairs, vol. 22, no. 1 (March 2009), pp. 16–18.
[3] Alexander Anievas and Kerim Nişancıoğlu, How the West Came to Rule: The Geopolitical Origins of Capitalism (London: Pluto Press, 2015), pp. 57–63; Justin Rosenberg, Why is there no International Historical Sociology? European Journal of International Relations, vol. 12, no. 3 (September 2006); Justin Rosenberg, “Philosophical Premises” of Uneven and Combined Development, Review of International Studies, vol. 39, no. 3 (July 2013); for the argument that uneven and combined development takes on a qualitatively different aspect towards the end of the nineteenth century, see Alexander Anievas, Capital, the State and War: Class Conflicts and Geopolitics in the Thirty Year’s Crisis, 1914–1945 (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2014), p. 53.
[4] Neil Davidson, The Conditions of Emergence for Uneven and Combined Development, in Alex Anievas and Kamran Matin (eds.), Historical Sociology and World History: Uneven and Combined Development over the Longue Durée (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2016).
[5] Leon D. Trotsky [1930–32], The History of the Russian Revolution (London: Pluto 1977), pp. 27–28
[6] Leon D. Trotsky, Karl Marx, in Leon Trotsky Presents the Living Thoughts of Karl Marx (London: Cassell, 1940), p. 41.
[7] Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution, p. 907. For the trajectories of both the strategy of permanent revolution and the law of uneven and combined development, see Neil Davidson, How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions? (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2012), pp. 214–236, 284–308.
[8] Leon D. Trotsky [1924], In Defence of the Russian Revolution, in Leon Trotsky Speaks (New York: Pathfinder Books, 1976), p. 249. Or, in the words of a distinctively non-Marxist historian: ‘Industrialization was, from the start, a political imperative.’ See David Landes, The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1969), p. 139.
[9] Leon D. Trotsky, [1938], Revolution and War in China, in Leon Trotsky on China, edited by Les Evans and Russell Block (New York: Monad, 1976), p. 583.
[10] Leon D. Trotsky [1908–1909/1922], 1905 (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1972), p. 68.
[11] Antonio Labriola [1896], Historical Materialism, in Essays on the Materialist Conception of History (Chicago: Charles H. Kerr, 1908), p. 133.
[12] Leon D. Trotsky [1932], In Defence of the Russian Revolution, p. 251.
[13] Leon D. Trotsky [1933–5], The Notebooks in Translation, in Trotsky’s Notebooks, 1933–1935: Writings on Lenin, Dialectics, and Evolutionism (New York: Columbia University Press, 1986), p. 77.
[14] Razmig Keucheyan [2010], The Left Hemisphere: Mapping Critical Theory Today (London: Verso, 2013, p. 114; see also Warwick Research Collective, World Literature in the Context of Uneven and Combined Development, in Combined and Uneven Development: Towards a New Theory of World Literature (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2015), p. 8 for similar parallels with World Systems theory.
[15] Gurminder K. Bhambra, Talking among Themselves? Weberian and Marxist Historical Sociologies as Dialogues without “Others”, Millennium: Journal of International Studies, vol. 39, no. 3 (May 2011), p. 678.
[16] Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution, p. 906; my emphasis.
[17] Ibid., p. 30; my emphasis.
[18] Ibid., p. 27.
[19] Clive Treblicock, The Industrialisation of the Continental Powers, 1780–1914 (London: Longman, 1981), pp. 281–284.
[20] Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution, p. 55.
[21] Trotsky, For the Internationalist Perspective, in Leon Trotsky Speaks, p. 199.
[22] S.A. Smith, Revolution and the People in Russia and China: A Comparative History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008), p. 78.
[23] Tim McDaniel, Autocracy, Modernization, and Revolution in Russia and Iran (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1991), p. 125.
[24] Andrei Biely [1913–16], Petersburg (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1983), p. 65. Trotsky’s own assessment of Biely was deeply unsympathetic and, while not entirely misconceived, is so fixated on demonstrating that the latter was uncomplicatedly embedded in Russia’s pre-revolutionary past that he misses Biely’s contradictions and consequently the parallels with his own position. See Leon D. Trotsky [1923], Literature and Revolution (London: Bookmarks, 1991), pp. 79–87.
[25] Fouad Makki, Reframing Development Theory: The Significance of the Idea of Uneven and Combined Development, Theory and Society, vol.  44, no. 5 (2015), p. 486.
[26] Tim McDaniel, Autocracy, Capitalism and Revolution in Russia (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), pp. 41–47.
[27] Ibid., p. 407.
[28] Harold R. Isaacs [1938], The Tragedy of the Chinese Revolution (Second revised edition, Stanford CA: Stanford University Press, 1961), p. 1.
[29] Smith, Revolution and the People in Russia and China, p. 18. These comments reflect unevenness within cities of the Global South, but unevenness also existed quite as starkly between cities. During a visit to Brazil in 1963, Eric Hobsbawn contrasted Recife, the impoverished capital of the north east with São Paulo: ‘It is astonishing to think I am in the same country as Recife. The skyscrapers spout, the neon lights glow, the cars (mostly made in this country) tear through the streets in their thousands in typically Brazilian anarchy. Above all there is industry to absorb the 150,000 people who stream into this giant city every year – north-easterners, Japanese, Italians, Arabs, Greeks.’ See Eric J. Hobsbawm [1963], South American Journey, in Viva la Revolucion: On Latin America, edited by Leslie Bethell (London: Little, Brown, 2016), p. 35.
[30] Smith, Revolution and the People in Russia and China, p. 18.
[31] J.G. Ballard, The Kindness of Women (London: HarperCollins, 1991), pp. 18–19. This passage, from one of his more autobiographical novels, is effectively an unreconstructed memoir, as can be seen by comparing the relevant sections of his actual autobiography. See J.G. Ballard, Miracles of Life: Shanghai to Shepperton, an Autobiography (London: HarperCollins, 2008), pp. 3–36.
[32] Lucien W. Pye, Foreword, in Shanghai: Revolution and Development in an Asian Metropolis, edited by Christopher Howe (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), p. xv.
[33] Jean Chesneaux, The Chinese Labor Movement, 1919–1927 (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1968), p. 50.
[34] Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution, p. 1220
[35] Trotsky, Karl Marx, p. 41.
[36] Peter Curtin, The World and the West: The European Challenge and the Overseas Response in the Age of Empire (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), p. 150.
[37] Eric J. Hobsbawm, The Age of Empire, 1975–1914 (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1987), pp. 67–69.
[38] Peter Gowan [1991], The Gulf War, Iraq and Western Liberalism, in The Global Gamble: Washington’s Faustian Bid for World Dominance (London: Verso, 1999), p. 167.
[39] Christopher A. Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World: 1780–1914 (Oxford: Blackwell, 2004), p. 182; Jürgen Osterhammel [2009], The Transformation of the World: A Global History of the Nineteenth Century (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2014), p. 663.
[40] Osterhammel, The Transformation of the World, p. 664.
[41] Eric J. Hobsbawm, Introduction: Inventing Traditions, in The Invention of Tradition, edited by Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983), pp. 4–5.
[42] Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, p. 15.
[43] Bernard Lewis, What Went Wrong? Western Impact and Middle Eastern Response (London: Phoenix, 2002), p. 127.
[44] Hanna Batatu, The Old Social Classes and the Revolutionary Movements of Iraq: a Study of Iraq’s Old Landed Classes and of Its Communists, Ba’thists, and Free Officers (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978), p. 481.
[45] Anthony Cox, Empire, Industry and Class: The Imperial Nexus of Jute, 1840–1940 (Abingdon: Routledge,  2014), p. 57
[46] Ibid., p. 119.
[47] Ankie Hoogvelt, Globalisation and the Postcolonial World: The New Political Economy of Development (Houndmills: Macmillan, 1997), p. 38.
[48] Peter D. Thomas, The Gramscian Moment: Philosophy, Hegemony and Marxism (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2009), p. 202.
[49] Gail Day, The Futurists: Transcontinental Avant-Gardism, in The Challenge of the Avant-Garde, edited by Paul Wood (New Haven: Yale University Press in association with The Open University, 1999), p. 209.
 






In this last of five pieces on Uneven and Combined Development, Neil Davidson looks at its applicability for China today and concludes on how we think about revolutionary conjunctures in the 21st Century. The PDF file for all five pieces is available here.



*

5.1       China in the Neoliberal World Order
My argument in the preceding parts of this article has been that uneven and combined development is not only a universal phenomenon under conditions of capitalist modernity, but an ongoing one which will only cease when the last peasant has been pushed or pulled off their land into wage labour and city life. Nuclear holocaust, environmental collapse or even the socialist revolution are likely to have occurred long before humanity ever reaches that point: it is a process which will never conclude while capitalism subsists. In this final part, I conclude my discussion by returning to a country which has appeared at several points in the discussion so far, notably in Parts 1 and 4, and which is currently experiencing uneven and combined development in its most intense form.
China was the first country outside of Russia for which Trotsky argued that a strategy of permanent revolution was possible. As in the Russian case, this was because the process of uneven and combined development had produced – among other things – a working class which was small relative to the overall population, but possessed of an exceptional degree of revolutionary militancy. Even the dramatic changes which occurred in China during the first three decades of the Twentieth century have, however, been overshadowed by the contemporary impact of uneven and combined development, which resumed late in 1978, when the party-state began to reinsert China into the world economy.
The subsequent transformation of China has been interpreted in several different ways. For some bourgeois commentators, such as Ian Bremmer, it represents perhaps the most advanced form of a transition to what he calls state capitalism, which he defines as ‘not the reemergence of socialist central planning in a twentieth-century package’ but rather ‘a form of bureaucratically engineered capitalism particular to each government that practices it’ and one ‘in which the state dominates markets primarily for political gain’. [1] Most commentators, however, have taken quite the opposite view. For Christian Caryl, the date at which the Chinese ‘reform era’ began means that it must be regarded as one of five founding moments of a new historical era:
The forces unleashed in 1979 marked the beginning of the end of the great socialist utopias that had dominated so much of the twentieth century. These five stories – the Iranian Revolution, the start of the Afghan jihad, Thatcher’s election victory, the pope’s first Polish pilgrimage, and the launch of China’s economic reforms – deflected the course of history in a radically new direction. It was in 1979 that the twin forces of markets and religion, discounted for so long, came back with a vengeance. [2]
For David Harvey, the ‘force of markets’ is the more significant, to the point where he sees the Chinese reforms as a key component of the global neoliberal turn. [3] I agree that China is currently part of the neoliberal world order, but this was scarcely the intention of the Party leadership when it initiated the reform programme, which preceded not only the consolidation of neoliberalism, but the elections of Thatcher and Reagan which signalled, in their respective ‘isms’, its initial forms. The individual components of the neoliberal order were first assembled into a coherent package in the UK and USA, in both vanguard neoliberal form during the premiership of Margaret Thatcher and social neoliberal form during that of Tony Blair. [4] These forms were the most advanced, but precisely for that reason were not necessarily the most typical of the phenomenon, nor did they necessarily reveal the future pattern of development elsewhere in the world, since neoliberalism has reinforced rather than undermined the inherent unevenness of capitalism. But the era of neoliberalism, like the era of state capitalism (in the Marxist rather than Bremmerian sense) which preceded it, contains a spectrum of different positions, some more extreme than others.
In fact, as Bob Jessop has pointed out, neoliberalism has always been characterised by spatial differentiation in which several varieties operated simultaneously. His typology involves four geographically demarcated moments, each reflecting the structured inequality of the global capitalist system. Two of these forms can be found in the developed capitalisms of the West. The first involved neoliberal regime shifts, above all in the English-speaking world, where the institutional characteristics of the Great Boom – Social or Liberal Democracy in politics, Keynesianism in economic management, and Fordism in industrial organisation – were replaced during the dominance of parties belonging to the New Right. The second involved neoliberal policy adjustments, for example in the Scandinavian and Rhenish countries, where partial adaptations to neoliberalism were made while retaining some elements from the former period. The third involve neoliberal system transformation in the former Stalinist states of Russia and Easter Europe, and to a lesser extent in South-East Asia, where the existing state capitalist economies (although Jessop prefers the terms ‘state socialist’) were transformed with varying degrees of abruptness into particularly extreme versions of the Western multinational capitalist model. The fourth involves neoliberal structural adjustment programmes in the Global South, which are essentially an aspect of contemporary imperialism as exercised by Western-dominated transnational institutions like the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. [5] In a sense, the Chinese experience is closest to the second type, even though as a state and a society it had more in common with it those which experienced the third.
As this suggests, the initial adoption of market solutions was slower and more cautious than appears in retrospect. As Claudio Katz points out:
From 1978 to 1992, this path [i.e. ‘its transition to capitalism’ – ND] was limited by the pre-eminence of a model of commercial reforms which were subordinated to central planning. Under this scheme, rural communes were converted into agro-industrial units guided by the profit principle, but without opening to widespread privatisations. Managers appeared with the power to reorganize industrial plants, but they did not have the power to enforce mass layoffs or to sell enterprises ... The turn to capitalism was consummated at the beginning of the 1990s, starting with the privatisations carried out by the old directors of the state enterprises with the intention of forging a capitalist class. The members of this group were transformed into the main investors in the new companies. Private accumulation was also accelerated through exploitation of the agricultural producers. [6]
Now, it is important not to ‘bend the stick’ too far in response to an exaggerated accounts of the extent of the immediate post–1978 transformation. Nigel Harris identified as early as 1986 the direction of travel: ‘The changes in the People’s Republic of China – selling public companies to private shareholders, privatizing housing and medicine, opening sectors to competitive joint ventures with foreign companies – were not only remarkable in the speed with which the changes were introduced and the contrast with past Chinese history; the Chinese were part of an apparently universal move back to a private capitalist world.’ [7] What one can say is that while neoliberalism led to deindustrialisation in large parts of the West, it led in China to previously unimaginable levels of industrialisation, to which we now turn.
 

5.2       Three Aspects of Uneven and Combined Development
in Contemporary China
As I noted in a previous survey, originally published in the mid–2000s, almost anything one says about China is out of date before it appears in print, but it is possible to discern continuities with earlier manifestations of uneven and combined development. [8] Here, I want to briefly discuss three: the instabilities caused by migrant flows into the cities; the actuality of working-class resistance and self-organisation; and the capacities of the state to ‘contain’ these instabilities.
 

5.2.1    Internal Migration
As in the aftermath of the First World War, there is currently a massive influx of workers into the cities, but now on a much greater scale. Many of these cities did not pre-exist the migration but, as we saw in Part 4, are being constructed solely for the purposes of containing new factories and distributions hubs. Previously, the household registration or hukou system was designed to ‘to limit rural-to-urban migration’ as part of the process by which ‘the growth of cities was curtailed’: ‘Within the Maoist city, the economic and social landscape was carved into repetitive, cellular units made up of danwei compounds.’ [9] Is it too much to assume that at some unconscious level Mao understood that the growth of the cities would threaten precisely the kind of social upheaval that might endanger the Party’s rule? [10]
There have, however, been changes since 1991 in particular in both the composition of the migrant population and the relationship new migrants have to their point of origin. The three great areas of neoliberal industrialisation are the Pearl River delta, the Yangtze River delta and what might be called the Beijing-Tianjin corridor. Richard Walker and Daniel Buck note: ‘There are three major routes to proletarianization in China: from the farming countryside, out of collapsing state companies in the cities, and through the dissolution of former village enterprises.’ [11] The new workforce has certainly been formed from these three groups, but these had different relationships to the working class. The second group listed by Walker and Buck, employees in state-owned enterprises (SOEs), were surely already ‘proletarians’ in their former jobs, unless one subscribes to the curious view that wage labourers employed by the state do not count as ‘workers’. In fact, their fate resembles that of workers in the privatised industries in the West, although workers in SOEs had better social protections and employment guarantees until they were dismantled in the 1980s and 1990s.
The third group, workers in the rural township and village enterprises (TVES) which both supported the rural infrastructure and subcontracted to the SOEs, occupied a more ambivalent position. These were of course located in ‘the farming countryside’ but, as Walker and Buck suggest, their employees occupied a transitional position, being former peasants ‘nominally protected by the obligations of local government’. However, as many SOEs were dismantled and the survivors looked for cheaper subcontractors, the TVES themselves went into crisis, shedding the majority of workers who were now reduced ‘to proletarians subject to the full force of the market’, an experience which the authors rightly describe as ‘Marx’s shift from “formal” to “real” subsumption of labour’.
Finally, the first group, the peasantry proper, have undergone the classic process of proletarianization: ‘rural displacement to the cities is vast, numbering [by 2007] roughly 120 billion since 1980 – the largest migration in world history’. [12]
In the 1920s, migrants intended to move on a permanent basis, but this was not necessarily so in the 1980s and 1990s, as Kevin Lin explains:
The first generation [of migrant workers] were rural peasants who, pushed by rural poverty and pulled by the burgeoning urban economy, migrated to China’s urban centres in the 1980s. Their city wages were meagre but still higher than their rural incomes. For young women, factory work and urban life also brought a new sense of freedom. But the household registration system and their own rural roots meant that the first-generation migrant workers have been predisposed to eventually returning to their villages. [13]
This ‘dual’ identity was possible because the state maintains a landholding system that allows members of a family to work in urban industry while retaining links to the small holding. One factor which helped slacken the tensions which would otherwise have built up uncontrollably in the cities was therefore the link many workers continued to have with the countryside, both as a place of refuge in periods of unemployment or non-payment of wages, and as a source of subsistence through farming:
It is the family farm that lends the migrant worker away from home a substitute for the benefits he or she is not getting from urban work, as well as security in the event of dis-employment or unemployment or in old age, while this same worker helps supplement the otherwise unsustainably low incomes of the auxiliary family members engaged in underemployed farming of small plots for low returns. So long as substantial surplus labour remains in the countryside, the key structural conditions for this new half-worker half-cultivator family economic unit will prevail. [14]
By contrast, the second generation of migrant workers, who were mainly born in the 1980s and 1990s, and who might amount to as many as 58% of the total, have weaker links to the countryside:
Most of them, like the first-generation, have come directly from farms and small cities, but a small percentage were born or raised by their first-generation migrant parents. In general this group’s link to the countryside is weaker, and they are more accustomed to urban living.
This does not mean, however, that they have completely ceased to identify themselves as peasants or inhabitants of their rural hometowns:
These migrant workers are living in a societal limbo seeing themselves as neither urban or rural; their urban residency and youthful aspirations clash with social and institutional barriers to permanent settlement. [15]
There is of course a gendered aspect to the situation in which migrants find themselves. Julia Chuang’s fieldwork among women migrants working in the export-processing zones suggests that they are far more likely than men to return to their villages of origin, in part because of pressure from female family members: ‘Some older women in Fa-Ming expect young migrant women to adhere to traditional values and practices even as they are exposed to modern, urban values in destinations.’ [16]
The pressures are not simply about upholding traditions, but are a means of dealing with a practical issue: the effective absence – after nearly 70 years of ‘communism’ – of a welfare state in the countryside and the consequent reliance on women to provide or at least pay for support:
In the sending community, women face a double bind: they are expected to support husbands who engage in precarious and high-risk migrations; and they are expected to negotiate with those husbands to channel a portion of remittance income to their aging parents, who lack access to welfare or social support. [17]
One of Chuang’s interviewees (‘Golden Flower’) from Fa-Ming village in Sichuan province had been a temporary migrant to the city before her marriage:
But Golden Flower chafed at the uneven bargain that marriage represented. She saw domestic work as a form of bondage, intolerable specifically in comparison to the life she had known during migration. She envisaged her near future: ‘In the end I’ll be alone raising pigs in the village while he is out in the city working. At least he can go out and work, have some space for a real life out in the city’. [18]
What kind of situation do the migrants face in the workplaces that await them in the cities? Ching Kwan Lee argues that what prevails across the board are forms of ‘disorganised despotism’ involving ‘workers’ institutional dependence on management for livelihood, managerial power to impose coercive modes of labour control, and workers’ collective apprehension of such control as violations of their interests and rights’, and that ‘varying degrees’ of such despotism can be found ‘across industrial firms of different ownership types’ on a contingent basis:
For example, the generally long working hours and more intensive labour processes in private firms than in state firms are due more to the volume and nature of orders they respectively receive, not due to any difference in management’s institutional power and its imperative to impose discipline in these two types of firm. [19]
Additionally, migrant workers, who are referred to as ‘peasant workers’ (nongmingong) in Chinese, tend to be looked down on as uneducated and generally lacking in culture by urban resident workers, and naturally are resentful of this condescension: clearly, this is a barrier to class unity. The official union federation, the All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU), only proclaimed that it had a responsibility to ‘represent’ migrant workers in 2003. Given that the ACFTU is primarily an instrument of state and management control, this is something of a mixed blessing, but is at least partly a response to the reality of migrant worker militancy. [20]
 

5.2.2.   Worker Resistance
The fact that migrant workers tend to be employed in the private sector and are consequently subjected to the harsher conditions prevailing there, together with the declining availability of the countryside as a means of escape, however temporary, may have contributed to their being more militant than workers in the older state-owned sector, where closures and lay-offs have tended to be the central problems. The relative difference in degrees of militancy is not necessarily reflected in the explanatory framework within which Chinese workers seek to understand their own situation. If anything, Lee’s research found that those still employed by the state indict their oppressors within ‘a cognitive framework of “class” and he refers to one worker’s ‘spirited critique of the degeneration of the official union into a “yellow union” and the transformation of enterprise cadres into a capitalist class’, while others ‘deploy Marxist concepts to understand and evaluate market socialism’, reporting one who ‘condemns as unfair the unequal distribution of income by appealing to Marx’s labour theory of value’.
Migrant workers, however, tend to express their opposition in different terms:
Migrant peasant workers’ encounter with market and capitalist forces bring about a critique alluding to ‘alienation’, grounded more in terms of denial of human dignity, loss of personal autonomy, and dishonesty, not in terms of exploitation. [21]
This is not as surprising as it might seem. Marxism was available to newly radicalized workers in the 1920s as a new and unsullied doctrine, filtered through the Bolshevik experience, which helped them make sense of their own exploitation and oppression; but, as in Stalinist Russia itself, where the ideology of the bureaucratic ruling class has supposedly been ‘Marxism-Leninism’ for nearly 70 years, it cannot play the same role. At best, workers in the state sector can draw attention to the inconsistencies of neoliberal ‘socialism’, while those in the private sector, for whom Maoist rhetoric has been less significant, express their opposition through a form of moral economy. ‘The two groups of workers, traditional and new, are merging in a common search for class subjectivity.’ [22]
Much therefore depends on whether a genuine Marxism capable of explaining the trajectory of ‘Marxist’ China becomes available to large numbers of Chinese workers. If it ever does, it should find as ready an audience as in the 1920s.
In their introduction to Hao Ren’s important collection of interviews with migrant workers involved in industrial struggle across the Pearl River Delta, Zhongjin Li and Eli Friedman note that:
nominally ‘socialist’ China presents in hyperbolic form many of the problems that those of us in the capitalist world experience: low wages, no benefits, lawlessness in the workplace, anti-union employers and governments, a broken system of political representation. [23]
Fortunately, the response of Chinese workers has also been ‘hyperbolic’, at least episodically. The absence of what might be termed formal or institutionalised class struggle through worker’s parties, free trade unions, or legal social movements has not precluded the existence of class struggle, as has been so clearly demonstrated by rapidly growing industrial struggle and what Lee calls ‘the staggering increase’ in Chinese workers turning to existing legal mechanisms to seek redress. [24]
The level of ‘mass incidents’ increased after 2003 and particularly after 2008, as Chinese workers and peasants responded to the downturn and the introduction of the new Labour Contract Law and Labour Dispute Mediation and Arbitration Law with an acceleration of struggle.
Contrary to the impression that the lack of formal freedoms precludes any changes from above precipitated by struggle from below, Chinese workers, through their quasi-legal and illegal actions, usually without formal organisation, had forced a nervous ruling class to concede major legal changes which have had a real impact and, at a local state level, forced a turn from a sole reliance on repression to a more mixed approach involving both repression and conciliation.
The implementation of new labour laws led to a huge increase in disputes submitted to official labour dispute mechanisms and to the courts. At the same time far from damping down militant labour struggle these concessions seem to have encouraged them as instanced by the rise in labour protests. Ironically it seems that information on the new legislation has acted as catalyst for struggle especially as employers have tried to circumvent the new laws. One observer described the situation in the Longgang division of Shenzhen:
At the end of 2007, strikes broke out almost every day. And the participants came from all kinds of industries and jobs. They did not go to work, gathering around the gate or wandering in the square. The strikes were all in large factories with at least two hundred or three hundred workers. Such factories as Yunchang, Dahua, and Jingchang employed thousands of workers. At that time, the new Labour Contract law had just been implemented. Workers lost their seniority after the bosses terminated their existing labour contracts, so workers went on strike. [25]
The actions taken involve more than strikes (whose status is currently in a legal limbo in China), but also blockades of streets, demos and sit-ins. The pressure from below has had an impact just as it did during rapid periods of industrialisation and urbanisation in other states.
The level of struggle is all the more extraordinary given that it is expressed outside of official trade union structures, although the ACFTU may now be becoming more responsive to workers’ demands at a local level. [26]
The most spectacular recent example has been the March–April 2014 strike at footwear manufacturer Yue Yuen in Dongguan over non-payment of social security contributions, perhaps the biggest to date in the Chinese private sector. It climaxed in production being completely shut down across three factories for 11 days, with around 30,000 workers or about 80% of the workforce on strike and 10,000 of them taking part in street protests and demonstrations. In the end, the strike was only ended by the intervention of Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security ordering the company to pay up. [27]
 

5.2.3.   State Transformations
In the face of facts like these, Mike Davis is surely correct to say: ‘Two hundred million Chinese factory workers, miners and construction labourers are the most dangerous class in the planet.’ [28]
What the outcome also suggests, however, is that the state has developed the adaptability to absorb or ‘contain’ the effects of uneven and combined development, just as earlier capitalist states had done. Ironically – given the persistence of Western leftist fantasies about the socialist nature of the regime – one reason for this ability is that it continues to perform what has historically been one of the main functions of the capitalist state, but one which has been weakened in the West by both decades of neoliberalism and more recently by experiments in right-wing populism: representing and managing the interests of national capital as a whole. [29]
Why the CCP? Slavoj Žižek writes that,
arguably the reason why (ex-)Communists are re-emerging as the most efficient managers of capitalism: their historical enmity towards the bourgeoisie as a class fits perfectly with the progress of contemporary capitalism towards a managerial system without the bourgeoisie. [30]
There is an element of truth in this, but even so, the adaptability of the state involved what Charlie Hore refers to ‘a fundamental shift in power inside the ruling class’ following the neoliberal turn:
The government deliberately decentralised economic power, allowing lower levels of the state to keep a greater proportion of profits and taxes. The expectation was that this would lead to greater efficiency, but what local officials actually did was follow their own interests. This is why Chinese economic development has been both so dynamic and so unstable: economic growth has been state-led, but by the lower levels of the state, leading to enormous duplication of investment and assets ... Although China remains a repressive police state, it is far less so than 25 years ago. The government deliberately scrapped many of the controls on everyday life to make economic reforms work. Freedom of movement had to be allowed if markets were to flourish; some freedom of speech was necessary if officials were to tell the truth about the economy and debate policy options ... [31]
Walker and Buck note how neoliberal developments since 1978 (or ‘the transition’ as they describe it) ‘has reconfigured the form of the state in a way that has unleashed the powers of capitalism’. One aspect of this has been the devolution of power to the metropolitan and prefectural levels, giving local governments the ability to annex territory and existing urban areas, and to raise revenue through local taxes and rents. The authors draw an audacious parallel:
Altogether, the Chinese situation reminds one of the American federal system and its urban growth politics, from which an array of public and private players profit handsomely. Backroom payoffs are far from unknown in the US, but the exchange of favours and rewards is done to the mutual advantage of many. What the Chinese call guanxi is very like what Americans call horse-trading. Regional government competition in China is also reminiscent of American federalism. It is pointless to complain, in this context, about the duplication and inefficiency of local boosterism. The evidence in both the US and China is that this kind of wide-open alliance between state and capital for regional development works very well indeed ... One would not expect the State Council to play midwife to the birth of capitalism in the same way as local governments. China’s ‘developmental dictatorship’ is more in line with continental European experience in this regard.
The entirely correct view that China has followed a path not so distant from those of Europe and North America’ leaves Walker and Buck with ‘a final question’ which is why China’s polity has not liberalised in line with the neoliberalisation of its economy. [32]
The obvious answer is that there is no necessary connection between capitalism – certainly not the neoliberal variant – and democracy. In China what David Goodman calls the ‘intermediate middle classes’ are not yet demanding reform, let alone overthrow of the state:
On the contrary ... [they] are fundamental supporters of the contemporary Party-state, even if at times some are also the most articulate critics of specific actions and policy settings of the Party-state, particularly wanting it to be more efficient and just. [33]
If an insurgent working class is one central problem facing the Chinese party-state then the other is precisely whether the devolution of power to individual capitalists and bureaucrats has begun to undermine its ability to perform its role as central authority for the system as a whole. In one sense President Xi Jinping’s current campaign against corruption is an attempt to force actors to perform their roles with an eye to the overall interests of national capital rather than their particular section of it, and behave accordingly:
One of Xi’s most pressing concerns since becoming president of the largest one-party state in the world has been re-establishing the CCP’s authority over its nearly 90 million members. The central government can issue laws and formulate policy, but given factionalism and competition for power among officials at all levels, it has struggled to get the rank and file to implement those policies or uphold those laws. Local governments, for example, often collude with businesses to enrich themselves at the expense of the people, soliciting backlash in the form of mass protest and social unrest, and threatening the party’s power.
And, as these authors note: ‘These problems are made more urgent by a slowing economy.’ [34]
 

In Place of a Conclusion
In a sense this brings us back to our starting point, for the situation does resemble that of Russia with which I began this series of articles – not because a bourgeois revolution is still to be accomplished, but because fundamental social change can only come at the hands of the working class.
Our end, however, is not entirely in our beginning. Paul Mason has written that: ‘Shenzhen’s workers are to global capitalism what Manchester’s workers were 200 years ago.’ [35] Mason’s desire to establish the continuities within the global history of the working class is commendable, but there are limits to the parallels which can be drawn.
The Marxist science-fiction author, Kim Stanley Robinson, has one of his characters say that ‘historical analogy is the last refuge of people who can’t grasp the current situation’. [36] That seems to be appropriate here. The Mancunian workers who marched to Saint Peter’s Fields in 1819 and the Glaswegian workers who struck for the vote the following year had available to them neither socialism as a goal nor Marxism as a theory.
It is a great, if bleak historical irony that, after the material and ideological devastation wrought by Stalinism, the same is true for most workers today, and not only in China. There are therefore no analogies entirely adequate to describe our current situation and we should therefore not expect to find strategic or organisational models ready-made for use. What we can predict from our experience until now is that uneven and combined development will continue to play a role in throwing up revolutionary conjunctures, the outcomes of which, as always, cannot be predicted in advance.
* * *
Notes
[1] Ian Bremmer, The End of the Free Market: Who Wins the War Between States and Corporations? (New York: Portfolio Books, 2010), p. 23; for his substantive discussion of China, see ibid., pp. 128–145.
[2] Christian Caryl, Strange Rebels: 1979 and the Birth of the 21st Century (New York: Basic Books, 2014), p. xiii.
[3] David Harvey, A Brief History of Neoliberalism (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 120–135.
[4] Which is why Perry Anderson’s decision to omit Britain (‘whose history since the fall of Thatcher has been of little moment’) from his study of the European Union is mistaken. Blair’s ‘social’ variant on the neoliberal regime has been far more insidiously influential than that of Thatcher. See Foreword, The New Old World (London: Verso, 2009), pp. xii–xiii.
[5] Bob Jessop, From Hegemony to Crisis? The Continuing Ecological Dominance of Neoliberalism, in The Rise and Fall of Neoliberalism: the Collapse of an Economic Order?, edited by Kean Birch and Vlad Mykhnenko (London: Zed Books, 2010), pp. 172–174.
[6] Claudio Katz, Capitalist Mutations in Emerging, Intermediate and Peripheral Neoliberalism, in BRICS: An Anti-Capitalist Critique, edited by Patrick Bond and Ana Garcia (London: Pluto Press, 2015), p. 72.
[7] Nigel Harris, The End of the Third World: Newly Industrializing Countries and the End of an Ideology (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1986), p. 167.
[8] Neil Davidson [2006], China: Unevenness, Combination, Revolution?, in We Cannot Escape History: States and Revolutions (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2015), p. 175.
[9] Richard Walker and Daniel Buck, The Chinese Road, New Left Review
II/46 (July/August 2007), pp. 42, 59.
[10] Davidson, China, p. 178.
[11] Walker and Buck, The Chinese Road, p. 42.
[12] Ibid., pp. 42–44.
[13] Kevin Lin, Recomposing Chinese Migrant and State-Sector Workers, in Chinese Workers in Comparative Perspective, edited by Anna Chan (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2015), p. 71.
[14] Phillip C.C. Huang, Gao Yuan and Yusheng Peng, Capitalization without Proletarianization in China’s Agricultural Development, Modern China, vol. 38, no. 2 (2012), p. 164; see also, Ching Kwan Lee, Against the Law: Labour Protests in China’s Rustbelt and Sunbelt (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007), chapter 6.
[15] Lin, Recomposing Chinese Migrant and State-Sector Workers, pp. 71–72.
[16] Julie Chuang, Factory Girls after the Factory: Female Return Migrations in Rural China, Gender and Society, vol. 30, no. 3 (June 2016), p. 479.
[17] Ibid., 2016, p. 484.
[18] Ibid., p. 481. This is of course not unique to China or indeed the Global South. J.D. Vance writes of the Appalachian grandparents, relocated to Ohio: ‘The sense that they had abandoned their families was acute, and it was expected that, whatever their responsibilities, they would return home regularly.’ See Hillbilly Elegy: A Memoir of a Family and Culture in Crisis (New York: HarperCollins, 2016), p. 30.
[19] Ching Kwan Lee, From the Spectre of Mao to the Spirit of the Law: Labour Insurgency in China, Theory and Society, vol. 31, no. 2 (2002), pp. 197–198 and pp. 197–206 more generally.
[20] David S.G. Goodman, Class in Contemporary China (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2014), p. 183; Eli Friedman, Insurgency Trap: Labour Politics in Postsocialist China (Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press, 2014), p. 51.
[21] Lee, From the Spectre of Mao to the Spirit of the Law, p. 204. See also Lin Chun, The Language of Class in China, in Socialist Register 2015: Transforming Classes, edited by Leo Panitch and Greg Albo (London: Merlin Press, 2014), pp. 41–42
[22] Chun, The Language of Class in China, p. 42.
[23] Zhongjin Li and Eli Friedman, Introduction to the English Edition, in China on Strike: Narratives of Worker’s Resistance, edited by Hao Ren (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2016), p. xiv.
[24] Lee, Against the Law, p. 43
[25] Quoted in Li and Friedman, Introduction to the English Edition, p. 16.
[26] China Labour Bulletin, Going it Alone: the Workers’ Movement in China (2007–2008) (Hong Kong: China Labour Bulletin, 2009), pp. 5–7, 14, 21–22, 23–24, 36.
[27] Immanuel Ness, Southern Insurgency: The Making of the Global Working Class (London: Pluto Press, 2016), pp. 135–144.
[28] Mike Davis, Spring Confronts Winter, New Left Review II/72 (November/December 2011), p. 15.
[29] Neil Davidson, Crisis Neoliberalism and Regimes of Permanent Exception, Critical Sociology, published on-line 4 August 2016.
[30] Slavoj Žižek, The Year of Dreaming Dangerously (London: Verso, 2012), p. 11.
[31] Charlie Hore, China’s Century?, International Socialism, second series, 103 (Summer 2003, pp. 8, 25.
[32] Walker and Buck, The Chinese Road, p. 65.
[33] Goodman, Class in Contemporary China, p. 155.
[34] Macabe Keliher and Hsinchao Wu, What China’s Anti-Corruption Campaign is Really About, The Atlantic (7 April 2015).
[35] Paul Mason, Live Working or Die Fighting: How the Working Class Went Global (London: Harvil Secker, 2007), p. 7 and chapter 1 more generally.
[36] Kim Stanley Robinson [1993], Red Mars (London: Harper Voyager, 2009), p. 543. But for those who need to have the point established by Authority, see this warning, in Trotsky’s first iteration of the strategy of permanent revolution: ‘Historical analogies, by which liberalism lives and is nurtured, cannot take the place of social analysis.’ Leon D. Trotsky [1906], Results and Prospects, in The Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects (Third edition, New York: Pathfinder Books, 1969), p. 36; see also [1908–1909/1922], 1905 (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1972), p. 6.
 



INTRODUCTION

1. THE CLASSIC FORMS OF UNEVEN
AND COMBINED DEVELOPMENT
1.1. The ‘Law’ of Uneven and Combined Development
1.2. Eastern Variations

2. CAUSES, CONSEQUENCES, CONSTRAINTS
2.1. Capitalist Modernity: Industrialisation and Urbanization
2.2. Modernism: The Cultural Logic of Uneven
and Combined Development
2.2.1. Theories of Modernism: Lukács, Greenberg, Jameson
2.3. Capitalist States and Bourgeois Hegemony

3. CARTOGRAPHIES AND CHRONOLOGIES
3.1. The English Exception
3.2. The Western Origins of Uneven and Combined Development
3.3. Uneven and Combined Development in Russia after 1917:
from Revolution to Counter-revolution

4. CONTINUITIES AND CHANGES
4.1. The Persistence of Uneven and Combined Development
4.1.1. The Absence of Pre-capitalist Survivals?
4.1.2. ‘Dual economy’, ‘Hybridity’, ‘Syncretism’
4.1.3. Uneven and Combined Development in the West –
An Incomplete Process
4.1.4. The problem of ‘the West’
4.1.5. Syncretist positions
4.1.6. UCD in the West – an incomplete process
4.2. New Developments in Urbanism and Ideology
4.2.1. Mega-Cities
4.2.2. Political Islam

5. CHINA: WHERE ALL ROADS MEET
5.1 China in the Neoliberal World Order
5.2 Three Aspects of Uneven and Combined Development
in Contemporary China
5.2.1. Internal Migration
5.2.2. Worker Resistance
5.2.3. State Transformationsa/a>

IN PLACE OF A CONCLUSION
 






In this second part to his series of five pieces for revolutionary reflections Neil Davidson explores the aesthetic and political dimensions of the theory of Uneven and Combined Development. A PDF version of all five articles is available here.



*

2.1.      Capitalist Modernity: Industrialisation and Urbanisation
Defining the Modern
I wrote in Part 1 that uneven and combined development was a consequence of ‘capitalist modernity’, but how does the meaning of this composite term differ from those of ‘capitalism’ on the one hand and ‘modernity’ on the other? Perry Anderson once dismissed the very notion of modernity on the grounds that it is so ‘extensive’ that it risks ‘dilution and banalization’: ‘If the modern is simply the new, and the passing of time assures its progress, everything in recent or current experience has acquired equal validity and meaning.’ [1] Jack Goody has expressed similar views, but extends the indictment from ‘modernity’ to encompass ‘pre-modernity’ and ‘post-modernity’: ‘From the viewpoint of everyday usage, these terms do not make much sense, since modern, like contemporary, is a moving target and cannot represent a periodization or a style, except in a fleeting or ambiguous sense.’ [2] There would be more force in these criticisms if the term was generally used in the relative sense of indicating that every successive era in human history was equally modern in relation to those which preceded them. This was of course the original meaning of the term and continued to be so from the fifth century CE down to the dawn of the Enlightenment. [3]
It is also true that even some of the classic nineteenth-century discussions of modernity carry this meaning. During the 1860s, for example, Baudelaire wrote that ‘every old master has his own modernity’ and asserted the necessity for any ‘modernity’ to be worthy of one day taking its place as ‘antiquity’. [4] Like most contemporary commentators, however, I do not intend to deploy the notion of modernity in this way, but rather to indicate a break in temporal continuity, a way of dividing history into ‘before’ and ‘after’. In other words, it is not the case that every age has its own modernity; the modern age begins after a certain point in historical time. ‘The Middle Ages were interested in eternity, the Renaissance was interested in the past’, writes Boris Groys: ‘modernity was interested in the future.’ [5] At what point did it become possible to imagine a future in which one could be interested because it was radically different from the past?
One obvious historical turning point would be the emergence of capitalism. As Peter Osborne points out:
There is a widespread tendency to counterpose the categories of ‘capitalism’ (Marx) and ‘modernity’ (Durkheim and Weber) as competing alternatives for the theoretical interpretation of the same historical object. Yet there is no obligation to continue to use terms in the way in which they have been most consistently abused. [6]
On this reading, the concept of ‘modernity’ is a way of avoiding references to capitalism while effectively describing the same reality. Accordingly, Fredric Jameson argues that ‘the only satisfactory semantic meaning of modernity lies in its association with capitalism’ and recommends, in order to demonstrate this, ‘the experimental procedure of substituting capitalism for modernity in all the contexts in which the latter appears’. [7] Derek Sayer has similarly argued that capitalism and modernity are identical and furthermore claims that this was Marx’s position. [8] There are however, two reasons why a simple identification of capitalism with modernity is untenable. [9]
One concerns the future. As Jameson himself writes elsewhere in the work cited above, we should ‘entertain the possibility that modernity is incomplete because it could never be completed by the middle class and its economic system’, which suggests that modernity could continue to exist after the overthrow of capitalism. [10] Anderson is more definitive: ‘The energies of modernity, once generated by capitalism, are now ever more trapped and compromised by it.’ [11] In other words, modernity may owe its existence to capitalism, but is not necessarily confined to it. David Frisby notes that ‘Marx himself was not a modernist in the sense of identifying himself with the experience of modernity that he outlined’. [12] Instead, Marx saw modernity, not only as characterising the capitalist present, but also pointing towards the socialist future. Perhaps more than any other interpreter, Marshall Berman has emphasised this dual aspect of Marx’s attitude:
The basic fact of modern life, as Marx experienced it, is that this life is radically contradictory at its base ...... miseries and mysteries fill many moderns with despair. Some would ‘get rid of modern arts, in order to get rid of modern conflicts’; others will try to balance progress in industry with neofeudal or neoabsolutist regression in politics. Marx, however, proclaims a paradigmatically modernist faith ...... a class of ‘new men’, men who are thoroughly modern, will be able to resolve the contradictions of modernity, to overcome the crushing pressures, earthquakes, weird spells, personal and social abysses, in whose midst all modern men and women are forced to live. [13]
 
The Equivalence of Capitalism and Modernity
With the exception of Deep Green advocates, or related ‘back-to-hunter-gathering’ anarcho-primitivist tendencies, most left-wing movements since Marx’s time have accepted that socialism will complete modernity. [14] ‘The socialist and communist movements were fully set within the framework of the cultural program of modernity, and above all the framework of the Enlightenment and of the major revolutions’, writes Shmuel Eisenstadt: ‘Their criticism of the program of modern capitalist society revolved around their concept of the incompleteness of these modern programs.’ [15] We can imagine the balance of continuity and change that a socialist modernity might involve: the majority of people would not abandon the cities for rural communes, although the cities would now be fully habitable for their denizens; they would not revert from industrial to artisanal production, although industry would be designed with the needs of the workers and their environment; we would not cease to use electricity, although this would no longer be produced by fossil fuels or nuclear power, but by wind or solar power. [16] We will continue to be modern after the revolution.
The second reason for questioning the equivalence of capitalism and modernity – and the one most relevant to this chapter – concerns the historical past. For modernity did not emerge with the capitalist mode of production in its original mercantile, financial or agrarian forms, but only with the beginnings of capitalist industrialisation and the related, but partially distinct process of urbanisation in Europe, North America and Japan. In other words, it is associated with a particular stage in capitalist development. Political Marxists in particular have stressed that capitalism, as a set of (what they call) ‘social property relations’, is radically different from all pre-existing exploitative modes of production: ‘Only in capitalism is the dominant mode of appropriation based on the complete dispossession of direct producers, who (unlike chattel slaves) are legally free and whose surplus labour is appropriated by purely “economic” means.’ [17] This is true, but less significant than is sometimes claimed, since the establishment of capitalism as a mode of production does not in and of itself immediately transform the lives of subaltern classes. There are two reasons for this.
One concerns the labour process and is outlined by Marx in Capital vol. 1, in his discussion of the difference between the ‘formal’ and ‘real’ subsumption of labour. In the case of the former, rather than ‘a fundamental modification in the real nature of the labour process ... the fact is that capital subsumes the labour process as it finds it, that is to say, it takes over an existing labour process, developed by a different and more archaic modes of production’:
For example, handicraft, a mode of agriculture corresponding to a small, independent peasant economy. ... The work may become more intensive, its duration may be extended, it may be more continuous or orderly under the eye of the interested capitalist, but in themselves these changes do not affect the character of the labour process, the actual mode of working. This stands in striking contrast to the development of a specifically capitalist mode of production (large-scale industry, etc.); the latter not only transforms the situations of the various agents of production, it also revolutionizes their actual mode of labour and the real nature of the labour process as a whole. [18]
In other words, the pre-existing ways of working can remain in place even during the initial phases of capitalist development. It may be possible for historians to retrospectively identify when the transition from feudalism was complete, but this does not mean that direct producers at the time understood that they had entered a new historical period.
The other concerns outputs, and particularly the productive capacities of the first fully capitalist states compared with the great Eastern empires which had once been impossibly more wealthy and civilised than the poverty-stricken lands of European feudalism. Peer Vries notes: ‘The type of growth that became normal in the industrial world had simply not existed in the past.’ [19] The industrial world was in the West, but it only arose there relatively late, and certainly not the latest-manifestation of Western superiority, claims for which would have for most of history produced mocking laughter from the East. Indeed, as Kenneth Pomeranz notes, down to around 1800:
Far from being unique ... the most developed parts of Western Europe seem to have shared crucial economic features – commercialization, commodification of goods, land, and labour, market-driven growth, and adjustment by households of both fertility and labour allocation to economic trends – with other densely populated core areas in Eurasia. [20]
It is possible that Pomeranz is being insufficiently attentive to the difference between capitalist and non-capitalist social property relations here, but the central point is accurate: even after the transition to capitalism the formerly backward Western European states, above all England, did not immediately catch-up and overtake those of the hitherto more advanced East. Our estimations of GDP for both areas were similar and, in the Chinese Empire at least, standards of living may have even been higher than in Western Europe and North America. It took until 1880 for per capita income there to reach double that of the East, and until the eve of the First World War for it to reach three times the size. [21]
In fact, it was the advent of industrial capitalism which initiated ‘the great divergence’ between West and East, and the overwhelmingly uni-directional impact of the former on the latter. As Justin Rosenberg points out:
Imperial China sustained its developmental lead over several centuries; yet the radiation of its achievements never produced in Europe anything like the long, convulsive process of combined development which capitalist industrialization in Europe almost immediately initiated in China. [22]
It is important to understand, however, that the decline of Imperial China was not simply an effect of direct or indirect Western intervention, but of its own internally generated limits to development:
After 1800, things changed very fast. Conditions in Asia deteriorated sharply, as continuing population growth ran into the traditional energy and land limits that constrain all organic societies. Indeed, it is reasonable to think that Europe and Asia had similar material conditions because prior to industrialization all societies were limited in what they could produce by the ability of farmers to produce food with organic inputs and muscle power, and of manufacturers to produce products with organic raw materials and wind and water power. [23]
For both reasons then, ‘it seems reasonable to argue that it was only with the British Industrial Revolution of the late eighteenth century that modernity received its material form’, as Krishan Kumar explains:
Partly this is because of the very explosiveness of the development – a speeding up of economic evolution to the point where it took on revolutionary proportions. Modernity therefore has a before-and-after quality that is also the hall-mark of revolution. With the Industrial Revolution, such a quality increasingly became evident to contemporaries, to the extent that for many of them the only significant division in human history appeared that between pre-industrial and industrial civilization. [24]
For Ronald Hartwell too, industrialisation is ‘the great discontinuity of modern history’.[25] Indeed, if we accept the notion that we have entered into a new epoch of geological time known the Anthropocene, then the discontinuity is even greater than these writers could have imagined. Paul Crutzen and Eugene Stoermer argued in 2000 that the epoch of the Holocene – the 11,500-year era contiguous with human civilization – had come to an end as a result of industrialisation, which they date as symbolically beginning in 1784, when James Watt patented the steam engine and began the use of fossil energy as the basis for economic activity. [26]
 
The City
Yet it was not industrialisation alone which impacted on members of the new factory proletariat, but the fact that many of their new workplaces were situated in towns and cities. Indeed, as Osterhammel notes, ‘urbanization was a much more widespread process than industrialisation: cities grew and became more dense even where industry was not the driving force’. After noting that many of the greatest European cities, including London, had never been truly industrial, but administrative and commercial, he concludes: ‘Urbanization is a truly global process, industrialization a sporadic and uneven formation of growth centres.’ [27] Osterhammel’s point about London can be generalised to some other historic cities whose existence long predated capitalism, let alone industrialisation. ‘In a very important sense Vienna and Berlin were much more typically “modernist” cities, almost along the lines of American cities like Chicago, than were cities like London and Paris which underwent slower and more organic growth’, writes Scott Lash. [28] But Vienna and Berlin were not equivalent either: of the two, Berlin was far closer to the American model – although the latter too need to be differentiated: ‘If Vienna is not Berlin, neither is Boston Chicago.’ [29] There is unevenness between the cities of capitalist modernity as well as combination within them.
Even those cities which remained administrative and commercial rather than industrial centres were shaped by the requirements of industrialisation, not least the necessity for railways. Berman has identified ‘the unease and uncertainty that comes from constant motion, change, and diversity’ with ‘the experience of modern capitalism‘; Wood however claims that this is merely ‘the age-old fear and fascination aroused by the city‘, and what Berman has to say ‘about the experience of “modern life” could have been said by the Italian country-dweller arriving in the ancient city of Rome’. [30] Now, it is certainly the case that Berman’s specific example (Paris in the 1760s) could be challenged on the grounds that capitalism was not highly developed in France at this time, but Wood is making a general argument that rural populations encountering the city are essentially the same at any point in history. At one level it is obviously true that the size, noise and populousness of cities has often been bewildering for rural populations forced to cross their boundaries (although for some rustics they also provided a welcome relief from the narrowness and conformity of the countryside); but Berman is drawing attention to a qualitatively different situation.
In fact, the experience of urban life under industrial capitalism was quite different from any predecessor: ‘In comparison with the village or “pre-modernist” city, not just the sense of time but the experience of space was altered’, writes Scott Lash.’ [31] There is evidence for this from first-hand observations of the English industrial cities. Here is Engels reporting on the changed forms of human interaction in Manchester during the 1840s:
The very turmoil of the streets has something repulsive, something against which human nature rebels. The hundreds of thousands of all classes and ranks crowding past each other, are they not all human beings with the same qualities and powers, and with the same interest in being happy? And have they not, in the end, to seek happiness in the same way, by the same means? And still they crowd by one another as though they had nothing in common, nothing to do with one another, and their only agreement is the tacit one, that each keep to his own side of the pavement, so as not to delay the opposing streams of the crowd, while it occurs to no man to honour another with so much as a glance. The brutal indifference, the unfeeling isolation of each in his private interest, becomes the more repellent and offensive, the more these individuals are crowded together, within a limited space. And, however much one may be aware that this isolation of the individual, this narrow self-seeking, is the fundamental principle of our society everywhere, it is nowhere so shamelessly barefaced, so self-conscious as just here in the crowding of the great city. [32]
Engels is here registering the destructive impact of city life on the first generations of the industrial working class, but as urban development stabilised and living conditions slowly improved, it began to take on a more multi-faceted aspect for new arrivals in particular. Beyond positive or negative experiences, life in the city was simply, vastly different from what inhabitants had previously known, creating new forms of consciousness. Some inhabitants still found this deeply disturbing. Writing in the early 1870s, the Scottish poet James Thompson drew on his personal experience of Glasgow earlier in the century to invoke a city constructed from ‘ruins of an unremembered past’:



           The City is of Night, but not of Sleep;
There sweet sleep is not for the weary brain;
The pitiless hours like years and ages creep,
A night seems termless hell. This dreadful strain
Of thought and consciousness which never ceases,
Or which some moments’ stupor but increases,
This, worse than woe, makes wretches there insane. [33]



For every nay-sayer like Thompson, there were others for whom the modern city of ‘thought and consciousness which never ceases’ was not a source of ‘dreadful strain’ but something to be willingly embraced for providing experiences which were simply unimaginable earlier in human history. George Simmel, writing in Germany before the First World War, described the impact of urbanism on city-dwellers in this evocative passage from his essay, The Metropolis and Mental Life:
The psychological foundation, upon which the metropolitan individuality is erected, is the intensification of emotional life due to the swift and continuous shift of external and internal stimuli. Man is a creature whose existence is dependent on differences, i.e., his mind is stimulated by the difference between present impressions and those which have preceded. Lasting impressions, the slightness in their differences, the habituated regularity of their course and contrasts between them, consume, so to speak, less mental energy than the rapid telescoping of changing images, pronounced differences within what is grasped at a single glance, and the unexpectedness of violent stimuli. To the extent that the metropolis creates these psychological conditions – with every crossing of the street, with the tempo and multiplicity of economic, occupational and social life – it creates in the sensory foundations of mental life, and in the degree of awareness necessitated by our organisation as creatures dependent on differences, a deep contrast with the slower, more habitual, more smoothly flowing rhythm of the sensory-mental phase of small town and rural existence. [34]
These are experiences which would simply not have been available to an Italian country-dweller visiting first-century Rome, or, for that matter, an English one visiting sixteenth-century London. How were these experiences represented in culture?
 

2.2.      Modernism: The Cultural Logic of Uneven
and Combined Development
Hybridity and Fusion
It is difficult to disagree with the Warwick Research Collective that ‘the cultural aspects of Trotsky’s initiating formulation concerning the “amalgamation of archaic with more contemporary forms”‘ have received little attention – certainly in comparison with current interest levels in International Relations and the social and political sciences more generally. [35] The authors of this assessment apart, applications of uneven and combined development in the field of culture have often involves attempts – like those of Bhambra and Keucheyan in other disciplinary contexts – to treat it as synonymous or at least compatible with more contemporary notions, above all, ‘hybridity’. Take, for example, this sentence by Gareth Williams:
The radically hybrid bearing of Latin American literary expression – a hybridity that emerges as a result of the historical realities of uneven and combined development; as a result of the disjunctive simultaneity of its subaltern/metropolis articulations; and ultimately as a result of Latin America’s profoundly non-unitary geopolitical location within world history – embodies and reproduces (perhaps) the discursive tensions (the encounters and disencounters) that are capable of opening up the supply-lines of reflection to a certain kind of futurity. [36]
Amid the general incomprehensibility of this passage, one relatively clear statement presents hybridity as a function of uneven and combined development; but the former was characteristic of human societies long before the emergence of capitalism, let alone capitalist industrialisation. [37] As Eric Wolf has demonstrated, the notion that the Americas consisted of self-contained, indigenous societies was false at least a hundred years before Columbus inadvertently ‘discovered’ them:
Conquest, incorporation, recombination, and commerce ... marked the New World. In both hemispheres populations impinged upon other populations through permeable social boundaries, creating intergrading, interwoven social and cultural entities. If there were any isolated societies these were but a temporary phenomenon – a group pushed to the edge of a zone of interaction and left to itself for a brief moment of time. Thus, the social scientist’s model of distinct and separate systems, and of a timeless ‘precontact’ ethnographic present, does not adequately depict the situation before European expansion; much less can it comprehend the worldwide system of links that would be created by that expansion. [38]
Of course, once capitalism had emerged it increased the number and intensified the extent of these encounters, mainly through moving people, often forcibly, around the globe, by slavery, colonialism and migration. ‘Partly because of empire, all cultures are involved in one another; none is single and pure, all are hybrid, heterogeneous, extraordinarily differentiated, and unmonolithic’, writes Edward Said, who also notes that this is as ‘true of the contemporary United States’ as it is of the Global South. [39] But even within the context of multiple oppressions resulting from conquest and colonization, at least some of the populations which inhabited both North and South America were able to draw on techniques and styles of European origin in their own forms of cultural production, as Peter Wollen explains:
... the flow from core to periphery and its appropriation by artists on the periphery is nothing new. The rich nineteenth-century tradition of Haida soapstone carving developed directly because of the new market of sailors and travellers, who began to visit the Northwest Coast [of North America] for trade or tourism ... Spanish baroque was appropriated by indigenous artists in Mexico, and increasingly complex forms emerged (as we can see in the work of Frida Kahlo and, more recently, artists on both sides of the Mexican-United States frontier). Indeed this new baroque once again is beginning to redefine Americanness, in a complex composite of differential times and cultures. [40]
The direction of fusion has by no means been all one way. If Kahlo absorbed aspects of Spanish Baroque in Mexico, then her contemporary, Jackson Pollock, absorbed those of the Mexican muralists – which were themselves hybrids – and the Native America Navajo tribes in the USA. [41] It is the temporal and not merely geographical distance between the elements which are brought together that differentiates the cultures of uneven and combined development from those of pre-existing forms of hybridity.
The experience of capitalist modernity was one of the conditions for the emergence of modernism, of which Kahlo and Pollock were leading representatives. Trotsky himself was alert to the relationship between modernism and the experience of capitalist modernity in its urban form, as in these remarks on Futurism: ‘Urbanism (city culture) sits deep in the subconscious of Futurism, and the epithets, the etymology, the syntax and the rhythm of Futurism are only an attempt to give artistic form to the new spirit of the cities which has conquered consciousness.’ [42] He did not, however, explicitly link modernism as a general movement with uneven and combined development except in a handful of passing comments. Reporting on the Balkan Wars of 1912 and 1913 he wrote:
Like all backward countries, Bulgaria is incapable of creating new political and cultural forms through a free struggle of its own inner forces: it is obliged to assimilate the ready-made cultural products that European civilization has developed in the course of history.
However, in addition to referencing technological and political forms, Trotsky then goes on to mention ‘other spheres’: ‘Bulgarian literature lacks traditions, and has not been able to develop its own internal continuity. It has had to subordinate its unfermented content to modern and contemporary forms created under a quite different cultural zenith.’ [43] Ten years later, he similarly noted how ‘the backward countries which were without any special degree of spiritual culture, reflected in their ideology the achievements of the advanced countries more brilliantly and strongly’. Eighteenth and nineteenth German philosophy was one example of this, but so too was Futurism, ‘which obtained its most brilliant expression, not in America and not in Germany, but in Italy and Russia’. [44]
 

2.2.1.   Theories of Modernism: Lukács, Greenberg, Jameson
Few discussions of modernism have, however, attempted to explicitly relate it to Trotsky’s concept. One writer who might have been expected to do so was Clement Greenberg, doyen of post-war American art critics and himself a former Trotskyist sympathiser. In a late interview from 1967 Greenberg actually invoked combined development to explain why New York took over from Paris as the world centre of Modernist painting in the 1940s:
... we Americans felt so much further behind the French, or behind Paris, that we tried much harder to catch up – just catch up. Then what Marx called the law of combined development came into operation: the strenuous effort you make to catch up sends you ahead in the end; you don’t just catch up, you overtake. [45]
Marx had no theory of combined development and the process to which Greenberg refers (‘catch up and overtake’) is in any case an example of uneven development. Nevertheless, Greenberg’s rather more cogent earlier writings constitute, along with those of Georg Lukács and Fredrick Jameson, one of the three most important Marxist attempts to periodise and define modernism. Reviewing these in order of their appearance will allow us to see how uneven and combined development offers a more general and comprehensive alternative to them.
 
Lukács
For Lukács, modernism is indicative of bourgeois decline. Realism, from Shakespeare and Cervantes onwards, had been the literary tendency most expressive of the bourgeois world view during its prolonged struggle against the feudal nobility and the absolutist state. The realist novel in particular was the form which played that role between the French Revolution in 1789 and the failure of the revolutions of 1848 – 9.
Lukács held consistently to the position that the connection between class position and aesthetic form remains even after the revolutionary phase of bourgeois history is over, but to different effect, for the art of the subsequent period is therefore the obverse of that produced earlier. Lukács is absolutely explicit about the date after which this reversal takes place, writing that ‘the decline of bourgeois ideology set in with the end of the 1848 revolution’. [46] From around that date – and certainly no later than 1871 – the bourgeoisie are said to have abandoned the struggle to reconstruct society in its own image, and settled instead for an alliance with their former aristocratic enemies against a now infinitely more threatening proletariat. In other words, the bourgeoisie had gone from a class challenging for power and anxious to reveal the workings of the society they were in the process of conquering, to one in control, all too aware of the class threatening their position, and as anxious to conceal the reality of this new situation as they had been to confront the old.
The realist novel therefore enters a decline after 1848: ‘The evolution of bourgeois society after 1848 destroyed the subjective conditions which made a great realism possible.’ In the first place, these changes affected the novelists themselves: ‘The old writers were participants in the social struggle and their activities as writers were either part of this struggle or a reflection, an ideological and literary solution, of the great problems of the time.’ [47] Dissatisfied with the world which the bourgeoisie had made, but unable to embrace the alternative, the novelists first retreated to reporting the surface of events, to mere naturalism: ‘As writers grew more and more unable to participate in the life of capitalism as their sort of life, they grew less and less capable of producing real plots and action.’ [48] Then, in a further declension, came the retreat inwards signalled by the rise of modernism. ‘Modernist literature thus replaces concrete typicality with abstract particularity.’ [49] Lukács does allow, however, that this shift did not take place uniformly. In societies which had neither experienced the bourgeois revolution nor completed the transition to capitalism, the conditions still obtained for great realist writing to take place. In particular he refers to the work of Heinrich Ibsen (1828–1906) in Norway and, in particular, Leo Tolstoy (1828–1910) in Russia, but this could only be a temporary salvation for the form. [50] Lukács thus accounts for some late exceptions in a manner compatible with his general thesis. In the case of others which are clearly associated with the triumphant bourgeois world, however, he simply – and not very convincingly – cites uneven development without any attempt at explanation: ‘Of course we can find many latecomers – especially in literature and art – for whose work this thesis by no means holds good (we need only mention Dickens and Keller, Courbet and Daumier).’ [51]
Largely consistent up till this point as a purely historical argument, Lukács now shifts ground and asserts that, far from being tied to a bourgeoisie which no longer has any need for it, realism has the potential instead to become a method appropriate to the cultural politics of the working class. Thus, in one of his contributions to the debates of the 1930s, he wrote that:
Through the mediation of realist literature the soul of the masses is made receptive for an understanding of the great progressive and democratic epochs of human history. This will prepare it for the new type of revolutionary democracy that is represented by the Popular Front ... Whereas in the case of the major realists, easier access produces a richly complex yield in human terms, the broad mass of the people can learn nothing from avant-garde literature. Precisely because the latter is devoid of reality and life, it foists on to its readers a narrow and subjectivist attitude to life (analogous to a sectarian point of view in political terms). [52]
Is realism a method destined to decline with the revolutionary potential of the bourgeoisie which gave it birth then, or one which, detached from its origins, still represents a resource for critical artists today? And the contradictions do not stop there. ‘Lukács asserts that realistic literature has been produced by both bourgeois and socialist writers’, notes George Parkinson:
That he should assert this of socialist writers is not surprising, but may seem strange that he should grant the existence of bourgeois realists. We have seen that realism implies a grasp of reality; but in History and Class Consciousness ... Lukács argues that the bourgeoisie, by virtue of its very nature as a class, is incapable of grasping a totality, which is something that only the proletariat can achieve.
Does Lukács, as this would suggest, therefore expect realist literature to be produced, if not by proletarians, then by writers who adopt ‘the perspective of the proletariat’, those whose sense of totality is informed by Marxist theory? no. ‘Lukács’ explanation of the existence of bourgeois realism is that some bourgeois writers were capable of grasping a totality after a fashion, though their knowledge of this totality was class – limited and their dialectics were only instinctive.’ [53] In fact, the later Lukács goes out of his way to argue that realism can be produced by writers who are neither Marxists nor even socialists. These contradictions flow from the Stalinist political tradition within which Lukács stood during the period when his major works of criticism were written and they shatter the coherence of his historical argument, with which there are nevertheless two serious difficulties.
One is that the definition of realism which Lukács gives is quite specific to literature and this raises the question of the extent to which it can be generalised across the entire spectrum of artistic production. Some ill-considered comments on Schönberg apart, Lukács usually restricted himself to the discussion of writers, yet despite this refusal to engage with disciplines outside his professional specialism, he nevertheless made sweeping general statements about realism and modernism on the basis of literary developments alone.
Now, while it is at least possible to compare Thomas Mann’s novel The Magic Mountain with James Joyce’s novel Ulysses on a formal level; it is not possible to compare The Magic Mountain with Jackson Pollock’s painting Autumn Rhythm. Considerations on the realist novel cannot be the basis of a discussion of modernist art – which includes not only literature, but painting, sculpture, architecture and cinema. A modernist painting can scarcely be expected to fulfil the same function as a realist novel; indeed, a realist painting cannot be expected to fulfil the same function as a realist novel – and in some key modernist disciplines – architecture, for example – there are styles which precede it, but no ‘realist’ school with which comparisons can be made.
Music is perhaps the most obvious example. As Adorno wrote:
If we listen to Beethoven and do not hear anything of the revolutionary bourgeoisie – not the echo of its slogans, the need to realise them, the cry for that totality in which reason and freedom are to have their warrant – we understand Beethoven no better than does the listener who cannot follow his pieces’ purely musical content, the inner history that happens to their themes. [54]
Beethoven’s work is surely as expressive of bourgeois ascendancy as Scott or Balzac, but in what sense can it be described as ‘realist’? In other words, even if we accept for the moment that Lukács makes a coherent case (which is not the same as a convincing case) for the decline of literature after the bourgeois revolution, the very way in which his categories are drawn from literature make that case difficult to extend to other mediums other than by assertion.
The other difficulty with Lukács’s position is summarised in a statement from late in his life: ‘The author of these essays subscribes to Goethe’s observation: “Literature deteriorates only as mankind deteriorates.”’ [55] As Anderson writes: ‘The basic error of Lukács’s optic here is its evolutionism: time, that is, differs from one epoch to another, but within each epoch all sectors of social reality move in synchrony with each other, such that decline at one level must be reflected in descent at every other.’ [56] Anderson rightly rejects this, arguing that transformations in culture do not simply occur in lockstep with those of the economic or the political; to imagine that they do is to ignore the distinction between the ‘immediate and mediated effects of the “economic structure” upon the various social institutions’ under capitalism to which Lukács himself had earlier drawn attention. [57] At one point in his later work Lukács still appeared to recognise this, quoting a passage from the Grundrisse in which Marx argues that uneven development means developments in art do not necessarily coincide with those of the economy: ‘In art it is recognised that specific flourishing periods hardly conform to the general development of society, that is, of the material base, the skeleton, so to speak, which produces them.’ [58] The point endorsed here by Lukács is perfectly correct, but he ignores what Marx then goes on to say, which is not at all compatible with his general position:
Is the view of nature and of social relations on which Greek imagination and hence Greek [mythology] is based possible with self – acting mule spindles and railways and locomotives and electrical telegraphs? What chance has Vulcan against Roberts and Co., Jupiter against the lightning rod and Hermes against the Credit Mobilier? ... From another side: is Achilles possible with powder and lead? Or the Iliad with the printing press, not to mention the printing machine? Do not the song and the saga and the muse necessarily come to an end with the printer’s bar, hence do not the necessary conditions for epic poetry disappear? [59]
There are two aspects to what Marx is saying here, one concerned with form and the other with technology; it is the former which is most relevant to Lukács’ arguments. Marx does indeed reject the idea that art must change in lockstep with socio-economic development, but the disjunction between the two is not infinitely extendable to the point of complete autonomy: some forms of artistic practice are so specific to a particular time that they cannot be practised outside it to any serious effect. As Jameson writes: ‘We cannot ... return to aesthetic practices elaborated on the basis of historical situations and dilemmas which are no longer ours.’ [60] James Wood points out that one of the functions of the novelist is to explore consciousness, yet there are greater difficulties in doing so today than at the height of the historical novel:
For consciousness and the construction of consciousness has changed, and is changing, rapidly. In fact, the rapidity of that change is one of the new challenges for writers. The reason that historical novels are nowadays almost always failures or of no artistic merit has to do with the speed of change. Tolstoy was able to reach back 60 years to the Napoleonic Wars because he had a confidence that those 60 years had made hardly any difference to the kind of humans he was writing about ... [61]
But this is not now the case, and has not been since decades before Tolstoy died. As Henry James wrote to one practitioner of the historical novel over a hundred years ago:
The ‘historical novel’ is, for me, condemned ... to a fatal cheapness ... You may multiply the little facts that can be got from pictures and documents, relics and prints, as much as you like – the real thing is almost impossible to do, and in its essence the whole effect is as nought: I mean the invention, the representation of the old CONSCIOUSNESS, the soil, the sense, the horizon, the vision of individuals in whose minds half the things that make our, that make the modern world were non-existent. You have to think with your modern apparatus a man, a woman – or rather fifty – whose own thinking was intensely otherwise conditioned, you have to simplify back by an amazing tour de force – and even then its all humbug. [62]
In other words, Lukács is right that the realist novel (as he conceived it, at least) could not survive indefinitely, but not for the reasons he gives.
 
Greenberg
For Greenberg, unlike Lukács, modernism is not an unmediated expression of bourgeois cowardice and vulgarity, but rather a hostile reaction to these characteristics: ‘It was no accident ... that the birth of the avant-garde coincided chronologically – and geographically too – with the first bold development of scientific revolutionary thought in Europe’. Greenberg argues that the revolutionary movements of the time allowed the avant-garde both to ‘isolate their concept of the “bourgeois” in order to define what they were not’ and gave them ‘the courage to assert themselves as aggressively as they did against the prevailing standards of society’. However, although avant-garde artists shared with Marxists a revulsion at the bourgeoisie, this was mainly on aesthetic rather than socio-economic grounds; and they was as much removed from the working class movement it was from the philistinism of the Moneybags. However, while they could remain aloof from the former, they could not entirely escape the latter; having abandoned aristocratic patronage, ‘the avant-garde remained attached to bourgeois society precisely because it needed its money’: ‘No culture can develop without a social basis, without a source of stable income. And in the case of the avant-garde, this was provided by an elite among the ruling class of the society from which it assumed itself to be cut off, but to which it remained attached by an umbilical cord of gold.’ [63] This contradictory relationship with the bourgeoisie was unprecedented for an artistic movement, although it was to become the norm as the 19th century went on:
Romanticism was the last great tendency following directly from bourgeois society that was able to inspire and stimulate the profoundly responsible artist – the artist conscious of certain inflexible obligations to the standards of his craft. By 1848, Romanticism had exhausted. After that the impulse, although indeed it had to originate in bourgeois society, could only come in the guise of a denial of that society, as a turning away from it. It was not to be an about – face towards a new society, but an emigration to Bohemia which was to be art’s sanctuary from capitalism. It was to be the task of the avant-garde to perform in opposition to bourgeois society the function of finding new and adequate cultural forms for the expression of that same society, without at the same time succumbing to its ideological divisions and its refusal to permit the arts to be their justification. [64]
Greenberg pointed out that where there is an ‘advance-guard’ there is usually also a ‘rear-guard’. Industrial capitalism sucked the rural masses into the new urban centres of production, obliterating or making irrelevant the folk culture they had known in the countryside. What would replace it? ‘To fill the demand of the new market, a new commodity was devised: ersatz culture, kitsch, destined for those who, insensible to the values of genuine culture, are hungry nevertheless for the diversion that only culture of some sort can provide.’ Kitsch, as Greenberg describes it is ‘mechanical’, formulaic, relies on ‘vicarious experience’ and ‘faked sensations’: ‘Kitsch pretends to demand nothing of its customers except their money – not even their time.’ But there was nevertheless a connection between kitsch and the avant-garde: ‘The precondition for kitsch, a condition without which kitsch would be impossible, is the availability close at hand of a fully matured cultural tradition, whose discoveries, acquisitions, and perfected self-consciousness kitsch can take advantage of for its own ends.’ But there is a central difference: ‘If the avant-garde imitates the processes of art, kitsch ... imitates its effects.’ [65]
Greenberg insists that only by crossing the divide between aesthetic and political rejection of capitalism – by the mutual embrace of avant-garde and vanguard, if you like – was there any possibility of defending what was of value in culture against the remorseless advance of kitsch. [66]
Timothy Clark has described Greenberg as being an advocate of ‘Eliotic Trotskyism’ in which the defence of the artistic values of the bourgeoisie in the period of its ascendancy are necessary for the continuation of culture as such:
They are the repository, as it were, of affect and intelligence that once inhered in a complex form of life but do so no longer, they are the concrete form of intensity and self – consciousness, the only one left, and therefore the form to be preserved at all costs and somehow kept apart from the surrounding desolation. [67]
Greenberg’s attachment to Trotskyism was however considerably weaker than Lukács’ adherence to Stalinism, and by the late 1940s at the latest the former had abandoned his earlier revolutionary commitments, a shift which did not leave his theory of modernism untouched. From being a defence against appropriation by the bourgeoisie, modernism becomes an internally-generated process of disciplinary self-purification.
The differences from his earlier positions can be seen most clearly in the essay Modernist Painting (1960). Greenberg argues that before the Enlightenment, art functioned in a similar way to religion; indeed, it usually functioned as an extension of religion. With the triumph of rationalist consciousness much of religion’s explanatory role was removed and it was reduced to the level of entertainment and, as Greenberg has it, therapy. ‘The arts could save themselves from this levelling down only by demonstrating that the kind of experience they provided was valuable in its own right and not to be obtained by any other kind of activity.’ But the Enlightenment not only posed this problem, it also offered a solution. Beginning with the work of Kant, modernism declared itself as a self-critical tendency in Western culture:
The essence of Modernism lies, as I see it, in the use of characteristic methods of a discipline to criticise the discipline itself, not in order to subvert it but in order to entrench it more firmly in its area of competence ... Realistic, naturalistic art had dissembled the medium, using art to conceal art; Modernism used art to call attention to art ... Whereas one tends to see what is in an Old Master before one sees the picture itself, one sees a Modernist picture as a picture first ... Modernist painting in its latest phase has not abandoned the representation of recognisable objects in principle. What it has abandoned in principle is the representation of the kind of space that recognisable objects can inhabit ... To achieve autonomy, painting has had above all to divest itself of everything it might share with sculpture, and it is in its efforts to do this, and not so much – I repeat – to exclude the representational or literary, that painting has made itself abstract. [68]
Unlike Lukács, Greenberg does not use a single style within a single discipline as a model for all contemporary artistic production, although, as an art critic, he is obviously most concerned with painting. In 1960 he began Modernist Painting with a declaration of the universal significance of modernism: ‘Modernism includes more than art and literature. By now it covers almost the whole of what is truly alive in our culture.’ [69] If Greenberg’s conception of modernism avoids confining it to a particular discipline, he does reduce it to a particular style or approach, and in this, at least, the later Greenberg was consistent with the earlier. In 1944 he had declared that:
Poetry is lyric and ‘pure’; the serious novel has become either confessional or highly abstract, as with Joyce or Stein; architecture subordinates itself to function and the construction engineer; music has abandoned the programme. Let painting confine itself to the disposition pure and simple of colour and line, and not intrigue us by association with things we can experience more authentically elsewhere. [70]
This was the basis of his rejection of Surrealism – it was figurative, and no matter how bizarre the juxtapositions involved in Surrealist painting, it was consequently a literary form. [71]
Is this the sum total of modernism though? Eugene Lunn argues that there were four features of modernism common to all art forms: ‘aesthetic self-consciousness or self-reflexiveness; ‘simultaneity, juxtaposition, or “montage”‘; ‘paradox, ambiguity and uncertainty’; and ‘“dehumanisation” and the demise of the integrated individual personality.’ [72] Yet only the first features in the Greenberg’s conception of modernism, here expressed in relation to Joyce: ‘Ulysses and Finnegan’s Wake seem to be, above all ... the reduction of experience to expression for the sake of expression, the expression mattering more than what is being expressed.’ [73] But as George Orwell noted of the first of these novels:
Ulysses could not have been written by someone who was merely dabbling in word – patterns; it is the product of a special vision of life, the vision of a Catholic who has lost his faith. What Joyce is saying is “Here is life without God. Just look at it!” and his technical innovations, important though they are, are primarily to serve this purpose. [74]
More recent commentators like Colin McCabe have suggested that the content of certain chapters in the novel is specifically related to Irish politics: ‘The resonances and allusions of [the Aeolus section] indicate that the paralysis of Irish politics is a result of the illusions about class antagonisms that were fostered by nationalist ideology.’ [75]
But even if we accept that one tendency within modernism has indeed been towards what we can refer to in shorthand as ‘abstraction’, there is more than one reason why this should be the case. One might be that artists were attempting to transcend their own historical moment. Boris Groys argues that the avant-garde had set themselves the following questions:
How could art continue under the permanent destruction of cultural tradition and the familiar world that is a characteristic condition of the modern age, with its technological, political and social revolutions? Or, to put it in different terms: How can art resist the destructiveness of progress? How does one make art that will escape permanent change – art that is atemporal, transhistorical?
This was written in relation to the Russian pre-revolutionary Constructivism, but the point is of general application: one way of producing an ‘art for all time’ might be to remove from it any of the recognisable markers of history or contemporaneity. [76] Another reason might be the one that Greenberg himself had given earlier in his career. He was not alone in doing so. In 1931 Walter Benjamin wrote a letter in which he commented on the attitude a committed writer should take to his work, faced with the prospect that it might be used in unintended ways by the class enemy: ‘Should he not ... denature them, like ethyl alcohol, and make them definitively and reliably unusable for the counter – revolution at the risk that no one will be able to use them?’ [77] Although none of the Abstract Expressionists would have known Benjamin’s name, let alone his work, during the late 1940s, the strategy he outlined was the one which some of them, at least, pursued as the Cold War intensified. Serge Guilbaut writes that:
Rothko tried to purge his art of any sign that could convey a precise image, for fear of being assimilated by society. Still went so far as to refuse at various times to exhibit his paintings publicly because he was afraid critics would deform or obliterate the content embedded in his abstract forms. [78]
In fact, the danger would not come from critics misrepresenting the content of his work but from critics – of whom Greenberg was in the, as it were, advance-guard – misrepresenting his work as having no content. There are two issues here.
The first is the distinction between ‘subject’ and ‘content’. The early Greenberg was aware of the difference: ‘Subject matter as distinguished from content: in the sense that every work of art must have content, but that the subject matter is something the artist does or does not have in mind when he is actually at work.’[79] The later, not so much:
‘I, who am considered an arch-“formalist”, used to indulge in ... talk about “content” myself. If I do not do so any longer it is because it came to me, dismayingly, some years ago that I could always assert the opposite of whatever it was I did say about “content” and not get found out; that I could say almost anything I pleased about “content” and sound plausible.’ [80]
Now, at one level this is a necessary caution against ‘reading-in’.[81]
Because one cannot say just ‘anything’ about content does not mean that there is nothing to say. David Caute once noted the confusion which exists in the minds of some critics (he was thinking particularly of Susan Sontag) with regard to these terms ‘subject’ and ‘content’:
The Anzin miner’s strike of 1884 is the subject of Zola’s novel Germinal; the content of the novel is what emerges through Zola’s literary treatment of the subject. It is not, therefore ... a matter of choosing between form and content because every work of art, however ‘abstract’, however formalistic, has a content. Content always refers to the world (material, mental, associative or whatever) outside the work of art mediated and reshaped by artistic form. The fact is grasped once we cease to identify content with the mimetic representation of a subject or theme. [82]
Jameson too has criticised precisely the fallacy ‘that works of art ... are conceivable that have no content, and are therefore to be denounced for failing to grapple with the “serious” issues of the day, indeed distracting from them ...’ If this is understood, then the supposedly ‘abstract’ aspects of modernism take on a new meaning: ‘Modernism would then not so much be a way of avoiding social content ... as rather of managing and containing it, secluding it out of sight in the very form itself, by means of specific techniques of framing and displacement which can be identified with some precision.’ [83] Pollock, the doyen of abstract impressionism whose reputation was at least partly constructed by Greenberg, was himself was unambiguous on the question. In an interview in 1950 he said:
It seems to me that the modern painter cannot express his age, the airplane, the atom bomb, the radio, in the old forms of the Renaissance or of any other past culture. Every age finds its own technique ... method is, it seems to me, a natural growth out of a need, and from the need the modern artist has of expressing the world about him. [84]
This brings us to the second distinction, between ‘representation’ and ‘resemblance’. In everyday usage ‘represents’ is taken to mean ‘something which stands in for something else’. In Greenberg’s hands, it appears to mean ‘something which resembles something else’. But representation can take place without resemblance. The Art and Language group (i.e. as far as this text is concerned, Michael Baldwin, Charles Harrison and Mel Ramsden) draw precisely this distinction: ‘Those features of a picture according to which we are able ... to see it as resembling a person or etc. compromise ... the descriptive content of the picture, although these features are in general neither necessary nor sufficient for descriptive or representational content.’ They conclude: ‘We cannot infer realism from resemblance.’ [85]
Both aspects of this question were discussed in a brilliant article by Meyer Schapiro, one of Greenberg’s contemporaries and a fellow Trotskyist, in 1937:
The logical opposition of realistic and abstract art ... rests on two assumptions about the nature of painting, common in writing on abstract art: that representation is a passive mirroring of things and therefore essentially non – artistic, and that abstract art, on the other hand, is a purely aesthetic activity, unconditioned by objects and based on its own eternal laws ... These views are thoroughly one – sided and rest on a mistaken idea of what representation is. There is no passive, ‘photographic’ representation in the sense described. ... All renderings of objects, no matter how exact they seem, even photographs, proceed from values, methods and viewpoints which somehow shape the image and often determine its contents. On the other hand there is no ‘pure art’, uncontaminated by experience; all fantasy and formal construction, even the random scribbling of a hand, are shaped by experience and non – aesthetic concerns. [86]
 
Jameson
The final conception of modernism is that of Jameson. In his foundational essay on postmodernism, Jameson follows Ernest Mandel in arguing that there have been three stages (‘fundamental moments’) in capitalism: ‘These are market capitalism, the monopoly stage or the stage of imperialism, and our own, wrongly called postindustrial, but what might better be termed multinational, capital.’ As he goes on, ‘my own cultural periodization of the stages of realism, modernism, and postmodernism is both inspired and confirmed by Mandel’s tripartite scheme’. [87] There are in fact differences in the chronologies deployed by Mandel and Jameson; for the purposes of this discussion, however, they are secondary. [88] The key point is that Jameson sees particular periods in the history of capitalism as possessing distinct ‘cultural logics’ and that of modernism is associated with the period which begins after 1848.
He therefore retains the element of periodization characteristic of Lukács, but identifies realism and modernism as ‘cultural logics’ corresponding respectively to the market and imperialist stages in the development of capitalism, rather than indices of totality or fragmentation in the bourgeois world-view. This is free from both the moralism with which Lukács judged modernism and the narrowness with which Greenberg defined it, but is misleading in a different way. Jameson is right, in my view, to associate modernism with a period in capitalist development, but wrong about the nature of that period.
It is remarkable that Jameson and Anderson, his most persistent interlocutor, both recognise that modernism does not emerge from monopoly capitalism as such, but rather from the fusion of the ‘contemporary’ and the ‘archaic’, which it initiates. Yet neither man ever invokes the concept specifically intended to illuminate these juxtapositions. Indeed, Anderson has rarely discussed uneven and combined development at all, except for a very brief reference to Germany, post-Unification, although he has discussed uneven development, but not in the context of modernism. [89] Jameson, as we shall see, tends to refer to uneven development, even when he is discussing uneven and combined development. The latter concept therefore forms a ghostly unacknowledged presence in the background of their more concrete discussions, to which we now turn.
In his early work, Marxism and Form (1971), Jameson noted of Surrealism that the juxtaposed objects which it depicted are ‘places of objective chance or preternatural revelation ... immediately identifiable as the products of a not yet fully industrialised and systematized economy’. [90] Although written of one specific school of Modernism, the essential point – that it involved the representation of a world in which old and new co-existed and inter-penetrated each other – was capable of generalisation to the entire field. Over a decade later, in his assessment of Berman’s All That is Solid Melts into Air, Anderson took this step, quoting Jameson on Surrealism but in order to illustrate a much more general argument. [91]
In my view, ‘modernism’ can best be understood as a cultural field of force triangulated by three decisive coordinates. The first ... was the codification of a highly formalized academicism in the visual and other arts, which itself was institutionalized within official regimes of states and society still massively pervaded, often dominated, by aristocratic or landowning classes: classes in one sense economically ‘superseded’, no doubt, but in others still setting the political and cultural tone in country after country of pre-First World War Europe ... The second coordinate is then a logical complement of the first: that is, the still incipient, hence essentially novel, emergence within these societies of the key technologies or inventions of the second industrial revolution: telephone, radio, automobile, aircraft and so on. Mass consumption industries based on the new technologies had not yet been implanted anywhere in Europe, where clothing, food and furniture remained overwhelmingly the largest final-goods sectors in employment and turnover down to 1914. The third coordinate of the modernist conjuncture, I would argue, was the imaginative proximity of social revolution. [92]
In summary, Anderson argues that, in Europe at least, modernism ‘arose at the intersection between a semi-aristocratic ruling order, a semi-industrialised capitalist economy, and a semi-emergent or insurgent labour movement.’ [93] This was the situation, not only in Russia, but across most of Europe, down to 1945.
In the conclusion to his first collection of essays on postmodernism, Jameson, deployed what he called ‘uneven development’ to reach very similar conclusions to those of Anderson:
... in an age of monopolies (and trade unions), of institutionalized collectivization, there is always a lag. Some parts of the economy are still archaic, handicraft enclaves; some are more modern and futuristic than the future itself. Modern art, in this respect, drew its power and possibilities from being a backwater and an archaic holdover within a modernizing economy: it glorified, celebrated, and dramatized older forms of individual production which the new mode of production was elsewhere on the point of displacing and blotting out.
Jameson then refers to Joyce creating his version of Dublin alone in his rooms in Paris, but the point is clearly intended to be of wider application than literature, or any specific form of artistic production, almost an explanation for modernism itself. ‘Modernism must thus be seen as uniquely corresponding to an uneven moment of social development’ – but here Jameson refers specifically to Bloch and ‘non-synchronicity’ rather than Trotsky and uneven and combined development, before going on to describe ‘the coexistence of realities from radically different moments in history – handicrafts alongside the great cartels, peasant fields with the Krupp factories or the Ford plant in the distance’. [94] It was left to one of Jameson’s admirers, Julian Stallabrass, to draw out the connection with Trotsky’s concept:
Jameson has convincingly argued that the most systematic works are produced in circumstances where, due to combined and uneven development, thinkers are faced with extreme contrasts of scene, as if they lived in an environment where it is easy to step from one historical period to another. Peasants in paddy fields may raise their eyes from their work to glimpse a new neighbour, a high rise postmodern office complex. Such variegated environments, argues Jameson, foster systematic and totalising thinking about historical change. [95]
 
Modernism as the cultural logic of UCD
Modernism must be seen then, not as a conjunctural moment in the history of capitalism, but as a form of artistic production generated by the triumph of capitalism as the globally dominant socio-economic system. The significance of 1848, in this perspective, is not the failure of the revolutions of that year, but as a marker indicating the when that system became definitively established.
If the argument of this chapter is correct, however, then the form taken by that triumph was precisely the sudden onrush of capitalist modernity into long-established pre-capitalist societies: modernism is not the cultural logic of monopoly capitalism, but of uneven and combined development, which is one of the reasons why countries as politically distinct as Italy and Russia could both manifest such similar versions. Modernism is the way in which the experience of that transformation has been transmitted and understood through culture. In this, modernism would appear not as a set of artistic practices related to the historic decline of the bourgeoisie – or indeed to the fortunes of any particular class – but to the contemporary reality of class society itself; the rhythms of capitalist industrialisation, the stimuli associated with urban life and the patterns of social conflict during the epoch of Classical Imperialism – an epoch which, like modernism itself, apparently climaxed with the Second World War.
Modernism is obviously not an unmediated expression of experience. Lukács argues that the key distinction between realist authors (such as Mann) and their modernist contemporaries (such as Joyce) is the ability of the former to convey the totality of the social world and the inability of the latter to convey anything but the fragmented experience of that world. [96] As Terry Eagleton has pointed out, however, the view that modernist work simply embodies subjective ‘experience’ is untenable: ‘Expressionist and surrealist art, need it be said, are every bit as much constructed as Balzac; we are judging (if we need to) between two different products of ideological labour, not between “experience” and the “real”’. [97]
I began this section by quoting Trotsky’s views on Futurism. Here, Day shows three different ways in which that branch of modernism was able to translate the experience of capitalist modernity into the forms of art:
First, it can refer to a range of modern motifs (cars, aeroplanes, telephones) or their associated qualities (speed). Second, it can refer to the experiential ‘sensations’ of life in modern cities (experiences of speed and of ‘simultaneity’ across time and space, as new methods of transport and communication make the world seem smaller, or the feeling of exhilaration produced by competing sensations in the city). Third, it might refer to the technical and formal devices used by artists to ‘represent’ any of the above (the fragmentation and fracturing of picture space, the juxtaposition or collaging of different materials/elements as a way of ‘expressing’ sensations of speed or simultaneity). [98]
One final issue remains in this connection: the attitude of modernists to capitalist modernity. ‘Generally it is right to stress that modernism was no simple rejection of modernity; it was rather a reaction, a critical response to it,’ writes Krishan Kumar. As we have already seen, it was possible to critically embrace modernity from diametrically opposed political positions. According to Kumar, for the Futurists and Constructivists, ‘modern society was not modern enough‘: ‘It was ‘inauthentically’ modern. It was too cautious, too cowardly, to accept all the implications of modernity. It preferred to harbour past relics, so preventing the realization of modernity’s full potential.’ [99] These attitudes extended beyond the Italian and Russian representatives of modernism: they could be found in Weimar Germany, for example: ‘What Gropius taught, and what most Germans did not want to learn, was the lesson of Bacon and Descartes and the Enlightenment: that one must confront the world and dominate it and that the cure for the ills of modernity is more, and the right kind of modernity.’ [100]
Not every modernism embraced modernity and wished to extend it. Modernists in nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Ireland – in every sense the most ‘Western’ society in the colonial world – took a quite different perspective. Eagleton describes it as ‘stratified ... made up of disparate time scales. Its history was differentiated rather than homogenous, as the anglicised and atavistic existed side by side, and a commercialised agriculture still bore a few quasi-feudal traces.’ This is a by-now-familiar exercise in identifying an example of uneven and combined development without using the actual concept; for, as Eagleton makes clear, the two temporalities of Irish life did not simply co-exist in separate life worlds: ‘ ... what is afoot in nineteenth-century Ireland, with the cataclysm of the Famine, the agricultural revolution, the sharp decline of the language and the sea changes in popular culture, is the transformation within living memory of a social order in some ways quite traditional, and so a peculiarly shocking collision of the customary and the contemporary.’ The intrusion of capitalist modernity was associated with British colonial power and its local agents, and as a consequence: ‘The modernist sensibility [in Ireland] is not of course synonymous with modernity. On the contrary, it is its sworn enemy, hostile to that stately march of secular reason which was precisely, for many a nineteenth-century Irish nationalist, where a soulless Britain had washed up.’ Modernism in this context was ‘a last ditch resistance to mass commodity culture’. [101] Or to put it in Greenberg’s terms, the struggle between avant-garde and kitsch expressed in terms of nationalist resistance to imperialism.
What this example suggests is that the attitude of modernists to modernity is less to do with left-right oppositions within nation-states, but where these nation-states (actual or aspirant) are situated within the structured inequality of the capitalist system in its imperialist stage. And that, in turn, inevitably leads us to the question of the state.
 

2.3.      Capitalist States and Bourgeois Hegemony
The applicability of UCD and its challenges
All societies which have undergone the impact of factories and cities have experienced uneven and combined development to some degree, with the important exception of England, which completed the transition to capitalism before these processes began. Why then have they had such different outcomes, above all with respect to their propensity for revolution?
According to David Armstrong, uneven and combined development:
has no real explanatory power when it comes to understanding why some societies experience revolution while others, apparently very similar societies do not; why some quite different societies experience fairly similar revolutions and why some similar societies had rather different revolutionary experiences. [102]
I think the concept can be defended against these challenges. First, Trotsky never claimed that all revolutionary situations were or would be the result of uneven and combined development: the working class insurgencies which convulsed Britain in 1919, France in 1968 and Poland in 1980–1 do not require the concept in order to be understood. Second, even where revolutionary situations were made more likely by the existence of uneven and combined development, it is scarcely the only relevant factor; some decisive trigger event such as wartime defeat (Germany 1918), military coup (Spain 1936), external aggression (Hungary 1956), or economic crisis (Egypt 2011) is usually necessary to detonate the socially combustible material. Whether these situations develop into actual revolutions, and whether these revolutions are subsequently successful is partly dependent on subjective factors – such as the existence and quality of leadership – on both sides. Equally important, however, is the political context in which revolutionary situations arise; in particular, whether the state is pre-capitalist or capitalist or in nature and, if the latter, whether or not the ruling class is capable of exercising hegemony. These questions make reference to another, overlapping discussion in the Classical Marxist tradition unavoidable.
 
East and West
Between the victory of the Russian Revolution in 1917 and the defeat of the Chinese Revolution in 1927 Trotsky tended to treat the question of permanent revolution as an essentially historical one, relevant only to Russia, which he seems to have considered as sui generis, uniquely situated exactly half-way between West and East, as he explained in this speech from early in the 1920s:
We Russians find ourselves – in terms both of sociology and geography – on the border-line between those countries which possess colonies and those which are themselves colonies. We are a colony in the sense that our largest factories in Petrograd, in Moscow and in the South were obtained by us ready-made from the hands of European and American finance capital which formerly drew off the profits. That a Russian industrial capitalist was merely a third-rate agent of world finance capitalism – this fact tended immediately to invest the struggle of the Russian worker with an international revolutionary character. Russian workers had before their eyes: on the one hand, the combined money-bags of Russia, France, Belgium, etc.; and on the other – the backward peasant masses, entangled in semi-feudal agricultural relations. At one and the same time we thus had in our country both London and India. This, despite all our backwardness, brought us flush up against European and world tasks in their most developed historical forms. [103]
Permanent revolution was unnecessary in the West where the bourgeois revolution had been accomplished and inapplicable in the East where the working class was not yet of sufficient size or militancy to move directly to the socialist revolution; in the East, Lenin’s original formula for Russia, the bourgeois-democratic – now rechristened ‘national-democratic’ – revolution was still relevant. Stalin’s disastrous adherence to this supposedly necessary stage of the revolution in China led Trotsky to generalise the strategy of permanent revolution beyond Russia, but also provoked him into formulating uneven and combined development as an explicit ‘law’, rather than an implicit but untheorized set of conditions which made permanent revolution possible. [104]
Thereafter, he tended to regard countries where some level of capitalist industrialisation had occurred, but which were still subject to pre-capitalist states of one sort or another, as subject to uneven and combined development and consequently as possible sites of permanent revolution. He did not, however, ever consider whether uneven and combined development might also exist in the West, except perhaps as a historical phenomenon long since surpassed; he wrote, for example, of the consequences ‘when the productive forces of the metropolis, of a country of classical capitalism . . . find ingress into more backward countries, like Germany in the first half of the nineteenth century’. [105]
At one level this geographical delimitation was unsurprising. One of the major debates in the Communist International, while it was still a forum for genuine debate (1919–1924), was the extent to which the more advanced countries – above all, Germany – required different strategy and tactics from those which had proved successful in Russia. The initial view of the Bolshevik leadership was that assumptions about the universal applicability of the Russian experience were deeply problematic. Karl Radek, for example, wrote in The Development of the World Revolution and the Tactics of the Communist Parties in the Struggle for the Dictatorship of the Proletariat (1919): ‘The illusion of a quick victory arose from the incorrect interpretation of the lessons of the Russian Revolution, the conditions of which, although within an identical historical framework, were by no means the same as those of the European revolution.’ [106] The West was different from Russia in two key respects: on the one hand, it lacked a revolutionary peasantry, but on the other hand it possessed a more confident, experienced bourgeoisie and a far stronger reformist tradition. The conclusions were drawn by Lenin the following year in Left-Wing Communism – an Infantile Disorder (1920):
The whole difficulty of the Russian revolution is that it was much easier for the Russian revolutionary working class to start than it was for the West-European classes, but it is much more difficult for us to continue. It is more difficult to start a revolution in West-European countries because there the revolutionary proletariat is opposed by the higher thinking that comes with culture, and the working class is in a state of cultural slavery. [107]
 
De-differentiation and the Russian Model
However, from around the time Lenin’s article was published, the direction of Bolshevik and Comintern leaderships began to move firmly away from this kind of differentiation towards an ever-greater emphasis on the universal significance of the Russian experience, including, in Lenin’s own work. [108] There seems to have been two reasons for this reversal.
One was the need to counter the twin problems of centrism and ultra-leftism within the Comintern. The former downplayed or the need for a revolutionary strategy on the grounds that Western parliamentary democracy rendered an insurrectionary overthrow of the state unnecessary; the latter tended to reject Bolshevik tactics – above all the united front and participation in parliamentary elections – on opposite grounds, namely that under Western conditions these would simply lead to a strengthening of reformism; both in their different ways started from the differences between the West and Russia, which in turn led the Bolsheviks to minimise them. This was justified in relation to centrist vacillations, but the problem was that the Dutch, German and Italian ‘ultra-left’ had a serious point, however misguided were the political conclusions they drew from it. [109] Here, for example, is Pannekoek:
The German experience brings us face to face with the major problem of the revolution in Western Europe. In these countries, the old bourgeois mode of production and the centuries-old civilisation which has developed with it have completely impressed themselves upon the thoughts and feelings of the popular masses. Hence, the mentality and inner character of the masses here is quite different from that in the countries of the East, who have not experienced the rule of bourgeois culture; and this is what distinguishes the different courses that the revolution has taken in the East and the West. [110]
A second reason for Bolshevik denial of Western difference was the conflation of the issue with another: the universal need for Communist Parties on the Russian model. This was a powerful argument, since the only country to have developed this kind of organisation was also the only one to have achieved a successful revolution, but it did not require pretending that there were no significant differences between Russia and the West. Indeed, in the absence of the socially explosive situation produced by uneven and combined development in Russia, it might have been argued that the revolutionary party is actually more important in the West, not least in developing and maintaining working class consciousness. The point is rather that organisational forms and revolutionary strategies have to be appropriate to the situations in which the former have to operate and the latter have to be advanced.
 
Gramsci
In any event, even before the consolidation of Stalinism in the late 1920s, there were no longer serious attempt within the ‘official’ Communist movement to argue for different strategy and tactics in the West than in Russia. When the argument did revive, it did so from the inside of the fascist prisons in which Trotsky’s great contemporary, Antonio Gramsci, was incarcerated from late 1926. Gramsci was aware of the similarities between Italy and Russia, as he wrote the year of his arrest: ‘The proletariat has even greater importance in Italy than in other European countries, even of a more advanced capitalist nature: it is comparable only to that which existed in Russia before the Revolution.” [111] Gramsci shifted his position to one which, while not retreating from his estimation of Italian working-class militancy, was instead concerned with explaining why the outcome of the class struggle had been so different from that in Russia – and not only in Italy.
Around the same time that Trotsky was formulating the law of uneven and combined development, Gramsci was criticising the very strategy of permanent revolution which it was designed to explain, in lines which have perhaps become the most famous in the Prison Notebooks, and which summarise his revised position:
In the East, the State was everything, civil society was primordial and gelatinous; in the West, there was a proper relationship between State and civil society, and when the State trembled a sturdy structure of civil society was at once revealed. The State was only an outer ditch, behind which there was a powerful system of fortresses and earthworks: more or less numerous from one State to the next, it goes without saying – but this precisely necessitated an accurate reconnaissance of each individual country. [112]
In his critique of this passage, Anderson accepted the distinction between East and West but argued that it was not in fact the greater strength of civil society which distinguished the West from the East, but nature of the state. According to Anderson, it was Gramsci’s comrade Bordiga – another of the ‘ultra-lefts’ – who more accurately understood ‘the essential twin character of the capitalist state’:
... it was stronger than the Tsarist State, because it rested not only on the consent of the masses, but also on a superior repressive apparatus. In other words, it is not the mere ‘extent’ of the State that defines its location in the structure of power (what Gramsci elsewhere called ‘Statolatry’), but also its efficacy. The repressive apparatus of any modern capitalist State is inherently superior to that of Tsarism, for two reasons. Firstly, because the Western social formations are much more industrially advanced, and this technology is reflected in the apparatus of violence itself. Secondly, because the masses typically consent to this State in the belief that they exercise government over it. It therefore possesses a popular legitimacy of a far more reliable character for the exercise of this repression than did Tsarism in its decline, reflected in the greater discipline and loyalty of its troops and police – juridically the servants, not of an irresponsible autocrat, but of an elected assembly. [113]
As we shall see, Anderson was right to draw attention to the extent of the differences between capitalist and pre-capitalist states (and ‘Tsarism’ can act as a synonym for all the different varieties of the latter) and these have to be incorporated into any discussion of uneven and combined development. He is at least partly wrong, however, about the nature of those differences. [114]
 
Democracy
First, capitalist states do indeed have greater repressive powers than their pre-capitalist forerunners or contemporaries. One of Gramsci’s more accurate recent admirers, Ranajit Guha, has pointed to ‘the absurdity of an uncoercive state’. [115] This is not, however, their only distinguishing characteristic. Equally important is their flexibility, which enables them to make gradual structural reforms in ways that pre-capitalist states, of the sort which existed in Trotsky’s lifetime and for several decades after his death, were not; the latter consequently had to be either overthrown by revolution, or destroyed in war. The same type of flexibility is also constitutive of contemporary capitalist states, even those in the Global South or former ‘East’. However backward they may be in many other respects, they have a far greater capacity for absorption and renovation under pressure. Jeff Goodwin’s ‘state-centred’ approach identifies a number of ‘practices’ or ‘characteristics’ which can make the emergence of revolutionary movements or situations less likely. The most relevant to our discussion is ‘political inclusion’, which:
... discourages the sense that the state is unreformable or an instrument of a narrow class or clique and, accordingly, needs to be fundamentally overhauled. ... Accordingly, neither liberal populist polities nor authoritarian yet inclusionary (for example) ‘populist’ regimes have generally been challenged by powerful revolutionary movements. [116]
If the states in question need not be ‘democratic’, then this suggests a second difficulty with Anderson’s argument, namely his claim that representative institutions in and of themselves form a second ‘bulwark’ against overthrow. The role of democracy had been emphasised during the debates in the early 1920s. Here, for example, is Paul Levi responding to the idiocies of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Germany (KPD), one of which was to assume a false identity between German and Russian conditions:
Here the proletariat faces a fully developed bourgeoisie, and confronts the political consequences of the development of the bourgeoisie, i.e. democracy, and under democracy, or what is understood as democracy under the rule of the bourgeoisie, the organisational form of the workers takes different forms from the state-form of agricultural feudalism, which is absolutism. [117]
The significance of democracy is, however, not so great as it might first appear.
In fact, if we take bourgeois democracy to involve, at a minimum, a representative government elected by the adult population, where votes have equal weight and can be exercised without intimidation by the state, then it is a relatively recent development in the history of capitalism. [118] Indeed, in the context of his discussion of modernity, Anderson himself noted that down to the close of the Second World War: ‘In no European state was bourgeois democracy completed as a form, or the labour movement integrated or co-opted as a force.’ [119] Far from being intrinsic to bourgeois society, representative democracy has largely been introduced by pressure from the working class and extended by pressure from the oppressed. The authors of an important study of the relationship between capitalism and democracy are therefore right to reject any automatic correspondence between the two:
It was not the capitalist market nor capitalists as the new dominant force, but the contradictions of capitalism that advanced the cause of democracy ... The relationship between working-class strength and democracy may be summarised in the following way: a diachronic analysis within each of the Western European countries reveals that the growth of working-class organizational strength led to increased pressure for the introduction of democracy; a synchronic analysis reveals that these pressures led to the development of stable democratic regimes where the working class found allies in other social groups. [120]
It is true that that mass suffrage has not proved as dangerous to capitalism as the bourgeoisie initially feared it would; but recognizing this does not involve accepting the much more sweeping claim that it is the main source of popular legitimacy for the capitalist state. Most capitalist states in the West and the system over which they presided were afforded legitimacy by their working classes before the vote was extended to them. In the case of Britain, the Representation of the People Act which finally introduced suffrage for all men and women over the age of 21 was only passed in 1928, two years before Gramsci composed his note.
 
Hegemony
The key factor in securing the adherence of the subaltern is surely not democracy, but the concept most closely associated with Gramsci, hegemony, which may include democratic institutions, but not necessarily so. Above all, it is not exercised solely through the state, as Peter Thomas explains:
A class’s hegemonic apparatus is the wide-ranging series of articulated institutions (understood in the broadest sense) and practices – from newspapers to educational organisations to political parties – by means of which a class and its allies engage their opponents in a struggle for political power. This concept traverses the boundaries of the so-called public (pertaining to the state) and the private (civil society), to include all initiatives by which a class concretizes its hegemonic project in an integral sense. [121]
These are some of the mechanisms through which hegemony is maintained; its content need not be wholehearted endorsement of capitalism. As Jeremy Lister notes:
Capitalism is not maintained by a mass popular affirmation or affection for what the system objectively produces for society as a whole; it is maintained by the way it has hitherto marginalised alternatives against it, a “better the devil you know” kind of common sense attitude, which in turn promotes a notion of apathy and disinterestedness in the very possibility of change.
In this context all that capitalism requires to do is maintain a majority of the working class in circumstances which are bearable compared to the imaginable alternatives, and as Lister points out, those for whom it is not bearable, ‘often lack the conceptual and linguistic tools to understand their position in this system, let alone do anything about it.’ [122] One reason why an irreplaceable component of capitalist hegemony is nationalism, both as a source of psychic compensation and means of political mobilisation, is to prevent the most oppressed and exploited from acquiring the tools of which Lister writes. [123]
 
Concluding remarks
The social and cultural experiences produced by uneven and combined development were similar across East and West, albeit to different degrees, but the class adversary and consequently the nature of the state was quite different. Guha once described colonial India as a situation involving ‘dominance without hegemony’, but this could be found throughout the East. [124]
In a sense, it is where uneven and combined development is present but hegemony is absent that the conditions for permanent revolution arose.
To conclude: there is no necessary connection between uneven and combined development and permanent revolution, as the former existed throughout much of the West, outside of North-Western Europe, even into the era of the Russian Revolution.
* * *
References
[1] Perry Anderson [1985], Postscript to Modernity and Revolution, in A Zone of Engagement (London: Verso, 1992), p. 47. Anderson oscillates between two positions. The remarks quoted here are from the Postscript to his review essay, Modernity and Revolution, but there it is modernism rather than modernity which is denounced as ‘a portmanteau concept whose only referent is the blank passage of time itself’. See Perry Anderson, Modernity and Revolution, New Left Review
I/144 (March–April 1984), p. 113.
[2] Jack Goody, Capitalism and Modernity: The Great Debate (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2004), p. 6.
[3] Krishan Kumar, From Post-Industrial to Post-Modern Society: New Theories of the Contemporary World (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995), pp. 67–75; Peter Osborne, The Politics of Time: Modernity and the Avant-Garde (London: Verso, 1995, pp. 9–13.
[4] Charles Baudelaire [1863], The Painter of Modern Life, in The Painter of Modern Life and Other Essays, edited by Jonathan Mayne (London: Phaidon Press, 1964), p. 13.
[5] Boris Groys, Modernity and Contemporaneity: Mechanical vs.
Digital Reproduction, in In the Flow (London: Verso, 2016), p. 137.
[6] Osborne, The Politics of Time, pp. 199–200.
[7] Fredric Jameson, A Singular Modernity: An Essay on the Ontology of the Present (London: Verso, 2002), pp. 13, 215.
[8] Derek Sayer, Capitalism and Modernity: An Excursus on Marx and Weber (London: Routledge, 1991), p. 24.
[9] It is of course possible to argue, as Ellen Wood does, that modernity – which she narrowly identifies with Weberian ‘rationality’ – had no necessary connection with capitalism at all. Wood argues that this form of rationality could not be detected in seventeenth-century English countryside, where capitalist social property relations prevailed, but could be found in eighteenth-century urban France under the absolutist regime, which leads Wood to further conclude that the Enlightenment itself had no connection with capitalism – like apparently everything else in history not immediately reducible to ‘capitalist social property relations’. See Ellen Meiksins Wood [1999], The Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View (London: Verso, 2002), p. 187. For a critique, see Neil Davidson [2006], Enlightenment and Anti-Capitalism, in Nation-States: Consciousness and Competition (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2016), pp. 129–141 and How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions? (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2012), pp. 589–594.
[10] Jameson, A Singular Modernity, p. 11. Here Jameson is partly endorsing the description of modernity as ‘unfinished’ given in Jürgen Habermas [1981], Modernity – an Incomplete Project, in Postmodern Culture, edited by Hal Foster (London: Pluto Press, 1985), p. 5.
[11] Anderson, Postscript to Modernity and Revolution, p. 55. Note, as an example of the inconsistency to which I have already referred, that this argument assumes modernity is a historical phenomenon. For a more recent ‘accelerationist’ argument for ‘socialist modernity’, see Nick Srnicek and Alex Williams, Inventing the Future: Postcapitalism and a World without Work (London: Verso, 2015), pp. 69–83, 178–181.
[12] David Frisby, Fragments of Modernity: Theories of Modernity in the Work of Simmel, Kracuer and Benjamin (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1985), p. 27.
[13] Marshall Berman, All that is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity (London: Verso, 1983), pp. 19–20. The identification of Marx as a modernist was more common in continental Europe than the USA before Berman’s seminal work appeared, although still relatively rare. But see Henri Lefebvre [1962], Introduction to Modernity: Twelve Preludes, September 1959–May 1961 (London: Verso, 1995), pp. 169–175, 231–238, which also invokes the same speech by Marx. See Karl Marx [1855], Speech at the Anniversary of the People’s Paper, in Surveys from Exile, vol. 2 of Political Writings, edited David Fernbach (Harmondsworth: Penguin/New Left Review, 1974).
[14] See, for example, Aric McBay, Derrick Jensen and Lierre Keith, Deep Green Resistance: Strategy to Save the Planet (New York: Seven Stories Press, 2011), p. 439 and John Zerzan [1993], Postscript to Future Primitive
re the Transition, in Running on Emptiness: The Pathology of Civilization (Los Angeles: Feral House, 2002), p. 117.
[15] Shmuel N. Eisenstadt, Multiple Modernities, Daedalus 129 (Winter 2000), p. 11.
[16] Michael Löwy, The Revolution is the Emergency Brake: Walter Benjamin’s Political-Ecological Currency, in On Changing the World: Essays in Political Philosophy, from Karl Marx to Walter Benjamin (Second expanded edition, Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2013), pp. 186–189.
[17] Wood, The Origin of Capitalism, p. 96 and pp. 94–105 more generally. Central to this conception of capitalism is the notion of ‘market dependence’ (or even ‘market compulsion’) and the claim that this only emerged as the result of a purely internal process in England, and even there only in the countryside. I have discussed the problems with this approach elsewhere (Davidson, How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions?, chapter 17), but one point needs to be made here. This definition is an ‘ideal type’, not one which has actually existed in pure form anywhere – a point which Robert Brenner, the founder of this school, has himself made: ‘I do not contend that such economies ever existed in pure form, though rough approximations can be found in seventeenth-century England and seventeenth-century northern Netherlands.’ See Robert Brenner, Competition and Class: A Reply to Foster and McNally, Monthly Review, vol. 51, no. 7 (December 1999), p. 44.
[18] Karl Marx [1867], Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, vol. 1 (Harmondsworth: Penguin/New Left Review, 1976, p. 1021 and pp. 1019–1038 more generally.
[19] Peter Vries, Via Peking to Manchester: Britain, the Industrial Revolution, and China (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2003), p. 4.
[20] Kenneth Pomeranz, The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the Modern World Economy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), p. 107.
[21] Eric J. Hobsbawm, The Age of Empire, 1975–1914 (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1987), p. 15.
[22] Justin Rosenberg, International Relations – the “Higher Bullshit”: A Reply to the Globalization Theory Debate, International Politics, vol. 44, no. 4 (2007), pp. 44–45.
[23] Jack Goldstone, Capitalist Origins, the Advent of Modernity, and Coherent Explanation: A Response to Joseph M. Bryant, Canadian Journal of Sociology, vol. 33, no. 1 (2008), pp. 125–126.
[24] Kumar, From Post-Industrial to Post-Modern Society, pp. 82–83.
[25] Ronald Max Hartwell, The Industrial Revolution and Economic Growth (London: Methuen, 1971), p. 57.
[26] Paul Crutzen and Eugene Stoermer, The ‘Anthropocene', International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) Global Change Newsletter 41 (May 2000); see also Christophe Bonneuil and Jean Baptiste Fressoz, The Shock of the Anthropocene: The Earth, History and Us (London: Verso, 2016), p. 3, p. 50 and Robert Macfarlane What have we done?, The Guardian (2 April 2016). The Anthropocene has itself subdivided into three stages, respectively beginning around 1750, 1945 and 2000, for which see Bonneuil and Fressoz, The Shock of the Anthropocene, pp. 50–53.
[27] Jürgen Osterhammel [2009], The Transformation of the World: A Global History of the Nineteenth Century (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2014), pp. 149–50.
[28] Scott Lash, Sociology of Postmodernism (London: Routledge, 1990), p. 207.
[29] Frisby, Fragments of Modernity, p. 177 and pp. 165–177 more generally.
[30] Berman, All That is Solid Melts into Air, pp. 17–18; Wood, The Origin of Capitalism, p. 187.
[31] Lash, Sociology of Postmodernism, p. 207.
[32] Frederick Engels [1845], The Condition of the Working-Class in England: From Personal Observations and Authentic Sources, in Collected Works, vol. 4 (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1975), p. 329.
[33] James Thompson [1874], The City of Dreadful Night (Edinburgh: Canongate Press, 1993), p. 30, lines 36–37; p. 31, lines 71–77.
[34] George Simmel [1903], The Metropolis and Mental Life, in On Individuality and Social Forms, edited by Donald N. Levine (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971), p. 325.
[35] Warwick Research Collective, World Literature in the Context of Uneven and Combined Development, in Combined and Uneven Development: Towards a New Theory of World Literature (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2015), p. 6.
[36] Gareth Williams, The Other Side of the Popular: Neoliberalism and Subalternity (Durham NC: Duke University Press, 2002), p. 155. Anyone looking examples of bad writing with which to update George Orwell’s discussion of the subject should start with this quotation. For his original examples, see [1946]. Politics and the English Language, in The Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell, vol. 4, In Front of Your Nose, 1945–1950, edited by Sonia Orwell and Ian Angus (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1970), pp. 157–158.
[37] For examples dating back to the fifth millennium BCE, see Jerry H. Bentley, Cross-Cultural Interaction and Periodization in World History, American Historical Review, vol. 101, no. 3 (June1996).
[38] Eric R. Wolf, Europe and the Peoples without History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982, p. 71. It is only fair to note that Rosenberg draws on this and other passages from Wolf to support his case for a transhistoric interpretation of uneven and combined development; but although the latter is here surveying the world around 1400 CE, the type of social interpenetration he describes can be found much further back in history. If every type of human group interaction can be encompassed by the notion of uneven and combined development, however, then the term is virtually co-extensive with history itself, at which point it has lost any analytic specificity. See Justin Rosenberg, Why is there no International Historical Sociology?, European Journal of International Relations, vol. 12, no. 3 (September 2006), pp. 314–316.
[39] Edward Said, Culture and Imperialism (London: Chatto and Windus, 1993), p. xxix.
[40] Peter Wollen, Raiding the Icebox: Reflections on Twentieth-Century Culture (London: Verso, 1993), p. 209.
[41] Leanhard Emmerling, Pollock (Los Angeles: Taschen, 2007), pp. 14, 18–22; Steven Naifeh and Gregory Smith, Jackson Pollock: An American Saga (New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1989), pp. 285–289; pp. 298–302; pp. 337–338; Kirk Varnedoe with Pepe Karmel, Jackson Pollock (London: Tate Gallery Publishing, 1998), pp. 25–27, 32–33.
[42] Leon D. Trotsky [1923], Literature and Revolution (London: Bookmarks, 1991), p. 195.
[43] Leon D. Trotsky [1912], In a Backward Country, in The Balkan Wars, 1912–13: The War Correspondence of Leon Trotsky (New York: Monad Press, 1980), p. 49.
[44] Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, p. 158.
[45] Clement Greenberg [1967], Interview Conducted with Lily Leino, in The Collected Essays and Criticism, vol. 4, Modernism with a Vengeance, 1957–1969, edited by John O’Brian (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), p. 304.
[46] György Lukács [1952], The Destruction of Reason (London: Merlin Press, 1980), p. 309.
[47] György Lukács [1950], Studies in European Realism: A Sociological Survey of the Writings of Balzac, Stendhal, Zola, Tolstoy, Gorki and Others (London: Merlin Press, 1972, p. 140.
[48] Ibid., p. 169.
[49] Ibid., p. 43.
[50] Ibid., pp. 134–137.
[51] Lukács, The Destruction of Reason, p. 309.
[52] György Lukács [1938], Realism in the Balance, in Aesthetics and Politics: Debates between Bloch, Lukács, Brecht, Benjamin and Adorno (London: New Left Books, 1977), pp. 56–57.
[53] George Parkinson, Georg Lukács (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1977), p. 89.
[54] Theodor W. Adorno [1962], Introduction to the Sociology of Music (New York: Seabury, 1976), p. 62.
[55] György Lukács [1965/1970], Preface, in Writer and Critic and Other Essays, edited by Arthur Kahn (London: Merlin Press, 1970), p. 9.
[56] Anderson, Modernity and Revolution, p. 103.
[57] György Lukács [1923], The Changing Function of Historical Materialism, in History and Class Consciousness: Essays in Marxist Dialectics (London: Merlin Press, 1971), p. 235.
[58] György Lukács, Marx and Engels on Aesthetics, in Writer and Critic and Other Essays, p. 67.
[59] Karl Marx [1857–8], Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy (Rough Draft) (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books/New Left Review, 1973), pp. 110–111. The passage quoted by Lukács above comes from an earlier and inferior translation.
[60] Fredric Jameson [1984], The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, in Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (London: Verso, 1991), p. 50.
[61] James Wood, Life Just Isn’t Like That, The Guardian (8 January 2000.
[62] Henry James [1905], James to Sarah Orne Hewlett, October 5, 1905, in Henry James Letters, vol. 4, 1895–1916 edited by Leon Edel (London: Macmillan, 1984), p. 208.
[63] Clement Greenberg [1939], Avant Garde and Kitsch, in Collected Essays and Criticism, vol. 1, Perceptions and Judgements, 1939–1944, edited by John O’Brian (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,1986), pp. 7, 10–11.
[64] Clement Greenberg [1940], Towards a Newer Laocoon’, in Collected Essays and Criticism, vol. 1, p. 28.
[65] Greenberg, Avant Garde and Kitsch, pp. 12, 17.
[66] For anticipations of this position, see Walter Benjamin [1938], The Paris of the Second Empire in Baudalaire, in Selected Writings, vol. 4, 1938–1940, edited by Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2006), pp. 64–66. A similar account of the origins of the modern artist outlined by Greenberg was given, nearly 50 years later, by Raymond Williams, without reference of the earlier thinker. Given the academic specialisation which means that literary critics are unlikely to be acquainted with the work of art critics, this was probably not plagiarism on the part of the latter, but it is indicative of how little Greenberg’s work has been absorbed into the intellectual culture of the Left. See Raymond Williams [1987], When was Modernism?, in The Politics of Modernism: Against the New Conformists, edited by Tony Pinkney (London: Verso, 1989).
[67] Timothy J. Clark [1982], Clement Greenberg’s Theory of Art, in Pollock and After: the Critical Debate, edited by Francis Frascina (London: Harper and Row, 1985), p. 54. See also p. 50.
[68] Clement Greenberg [1960], Modernist Painting, in in The Collected Essays and Criticism, vol. 4, pp. 85–88.
[69] Ibid., p. 85.
[70] Clement Greenberg [1944], Abstract Art, in Collected Essays and Criticism, vol. 1, p. 203.
[71] Clement Greenberg [1944], Surrealist Painting, in Collected Essays and Criticism, vol. 1.
[72] Eugene Lunn, Marxism and Modernism: An Historical Study of Lukacs, Brecht, Benjamin, and Adorno (London: Verso, 1982), p. 39 and pp. 34–42 more generally. As Alex Callinicos points out, the characteristics identified by Lunn as constitutive of modernism have subsequently been ascribed to postmodernism by figures like Charles Jenks, which one of many reasons why the existence of the latter as a distinct set of artistic practices should be in doubt. See Alex Callinicos, Against Postmodernism: A Marxist Critique (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1989), pp. 12–14. On the specific question of how the modernist device of Collage has been wrongly claimed for postmodernism, see Brandon Taylor, Modernism, Post-Modernism, Realism: A Critical Perspective for Art (Winchester: Winchester School of Art Press, 1987), pp. 53–65
[73] Greenberg, Avant Garde and Kitsch, p. 10.
[74] George Orwell [1940], Inside the Whale, in The Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell, vol. 1, An Age Like This, 1920–1940, edited by Sonia Orwell and Ian Angus (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books 1970), p. 557.
[75] Colin McCabe, James Joyce and the Revolution of the Word (Houndmills: Macmillan 1978), p. 140.
[76] Boris Groys, Becoming Revolutionary: On Kazimir Malevech, in In the Flow, p. 65.
[77] Benjamin to Scholem, April 17, 1931, in Gershom Scholem, Walter Benjamin: The Story of a Friendship (London: Faber and Faber, 1982), pp. 232–233.
[78] Serge Guilbaut 1980], The New Adventures of the Avant-Garde in America: Greenberg, Pollock, or from Trotskyism to the New Liberalism of the ‘Vital Centre’, in Pollock and After, p. 160.
[79] Greenberg, Towards a Newer Laocoon, p. 28.
[80] Clement Greenberg, Complaints of an Art Critic, in The Collected Essays and Criticism, vol. 4, p. 270.
[81] Orwell too noted the same tendency among literary critics to use words which were ‘almost completely lacking in meaning’: ‘When one critic writes, “The outstanding features of Mr X’s work is its living quality”, while another writes, “The immediately striking thing about Mr X’s work is its peculiar deadness”, the reader accepts this as a simple difference of opinion. If words like black and white were involved, instead of the jargon words dead and living, he would see at once that language was being used in an improper way.’ See Orwell, Politics and the English Language, pp. 161–162.
[82] David Caute, The Illusion: An Essay on Politics, Theatre and the Novel (London: Harper and Row, 1971), p. 151.
[83] Fredric Jameson, Reflections in Conclusion, in Aesthetics and Politics, pp. 201–202.
[84] Jackson Pollock [1950], Interview with William Wright, in Art in Theory, 1900–1990, edited by Paul Wood and Charles Harrison (Oxford: Blackwell, 1992), pp. 575–576.
[85] Art and Language [1980], Portrait of V.I. Lenin, in Modernism, Criticism, Realism, edited by Charles Harrison and Fred Orton (London: Harper and Row, 1984), pp. 148, 167. The title of this essay is reference to the series of paintings by Art and Language called Portraits of V. I. Lenin in the Style of Jackson Pollock.
[86] Meyer Shapiro [1937], Abstract Art I: The Nature of Abstract Art, in Modern Art: 19th and 20th Centuries (London: Chatto and Windus, 1978), pp. 195–196.
[87] Jameson, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, pp. 35–36.
[88] Jameson misrepresents Mandel in two respects. First, the latter identifies four periods in the history of capitalism, down to the early 1970s, not three, each characterised by different forms of technology, in which the stage of ‘market capitalism’ is preceded by an earlier one extending from ‘the end of the 18th century up to the crisis of 1847’. See Ernest Mandel [1972], Late Capitalism (London: Verso, 1975), pp. 120–121. Second, where Jameson sees the period of multinational capital and postmodernism continuing from the post-war period until the present, Mandel regarded that period as definitively ending with the crisis which opened in 1973–4, a point with which I am in agreement. This difference in periodization is highlighted in Mike Davis, Urban Renaissance and the Spirit of Postmodernism, New Left Review I/151 (May/June 1985), pp. 107–108.
[89] Perry Anderson, Lineages of the Absolutist State (London: New Left Books, 1974), pp. 236, 276; Perry Anderson, Brief Remarks on the Notion of “Uneven Development”, in Criteria and Indicators of Backwardness: Essays on Uneven Development in European History, edited by Miroslav Hroch and Luďa Klusáková (Prague: Variant Editors for Faculty of Arts, Charles University, 1996).
[90] Fredric Jameson, Marxism and Form: Twentieth Century Dialectical Theories of Literature (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971), p. 103.
[91] Anderson, Modernity and Revolution, pp. 106–107.
[92] Ibid., p. 104.
[93] Ibid., p. 105.
[94] Fredric Jameson, Secondary Elaboration, in Postmodernism, p. 307.
[95] Julian Stallabrass, Art Incorporated: The Story of Contemporary Art (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), p. 71.
[96] See, for example, Lukács, Realism in the Balance, pp. 33–36.
[97] Terry Eagleton, Walter Benjamin, or Towards a Revolutionary Criticism (London: Verso, 1981), p. 88.
[98] Gail Day, The Futurists: Transcontinental Avant-Gardism, in The Challenge of the Avant-Garde, edited by Paul Wood (New Haven: Yale University Press in association with The Open University, 1999, p. 206.
[99] Kumar, From Post-Industrial to Post-Modern Society, p. 98.
[100] Peter Gay, Weimar Culture: The Outsider as Insider (New York: Harper and Row, 1968), p. 101.
[101] Terry Eagleton, Heathcliff and the Great Hunger (London: Verso, 1995), pp. 278–280.
[102] David Armstrong, On Revolutionary Chickens and International Eggs, Review of International Studies, vol. 27, no. 4 (October 2001), p. 671.
[103] Leon D. Trotsky [1920], On the Policy of the KAPD: Speech Delivered at the Session of the ECCI, November 24, 1920, in The First Five Years of the Communist International, vol. 1 (London: New Park Publications, 1973), p. 176.
[104] Davidson, How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions?, pp. 242–247, 284–308.
[105] Leon D. Trotsky [1924], For the Internationalist Perspective, in Leon Trotsky Speaks (New York: Pathfinder Books, 1972), p. 199.
[106] Pierre Broué [1971], The German Revolution, 1917–1923, edited by Ian Birchall and Brian Pearce (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2005, pp. 308–309 and pp. 307–313 more generally.
[107] Vladimir I. Lenin [1918], Fourth Conference of Trade Unions and Factory Committees of Moscow: Report on the Current Situation, June 27, 1918, in Collected Works, vol. 27, February–July 1918 (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1965), p. 464.
[108] Neil Harding [1977/1981], Lenin’s Political Thought: Theory and Practice in the Democratic and Socialist Revolutions, vol. 2 (Houndmills: Macmillan, 1983), pp. 235–243.
[109] From 1920 Bolshevik leaders often responded to ultra-left arguments by making fundamentally dishonest debating points that refused to accept even those aspects of their opponent’s case which were accurate, such as the implications of a non-revolutionary peasantry – a point which, as we have seen, Radek had acknowledged only a short time before. Trotsky himself responded to Gorter by arguing that the British revolution would involve a peasant uprising – not in Britain itself, but in India. To say the least, this is not one of Trotsky’s finest polemical interventions: the point is correct, but irrelevant, since it was the social role of the peasantry within the imperialist countries which was at stake, not that of the oppressed peasantry in their overseas territories. See Hermann Gorter [1920], Open Letter to Comrade Lenin: an Answer to Lenin’s Pamphlet, Left-wing Communism: an Infantile Disorder, in International Communism in the Era of Lenin: a Documentary History, edited by Helmut Gruber (New York: Anchor Books, 1972), p. 223 and Trotsky, On the Policy of the KAPD, p. 176.
[110] Anton Pannekoek [1920], World Revolution and Communist Tactics, in Pannekoek and Gorter’s Marxism, edited by D.A. Smart (London: Pluto Press, 1978, p. 103.
[111] Antonio Gramsci and Palmiro Togliatti [1926], The Italian Situation and the Tasks of the PCI (“Lyons Theses”), in Selections from Political Writings, edited by Quintin Hoare (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1978), p. 345.
[112] Antonio Gramsci [1929–35], Selections from the Prison Notebooks, edited by Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1971), p. 238, Q7§16.
[113] Perry Anderson, The Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci, New Left Review
II/100 (November–January 1976–7), p. 55.
[114] Peter Thomas has in any case argued that Gramsci’s position was more complex than Anderson suggests, in that his emphasis on the dominance of the state in the East was not intended to suggest strength but rather vulnerability, in the absence of a fully functioning civil society. More importantly, in his actual concrete analysis of Western societies, Gramsci was perfectly aware that they were by not uniform in the extent to which civil society had developed and – a more unusual point to make at the time – that the more advanced constituted a ‘hegemonic centre’ which produced ‘the peripheral zones’: ‘West and East are comparable, just as variations in the West itself, because both participate in the dynamic of an expansive political and economic order that is fundamentally and essentially internationalist in character.’ See Peter Thomas, The Gramscian Moment: Philosophy, Hegemony and Marxism (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2009), pp. 200–203.
[115] Ranajit Guha, Dominance without Hegemony: History and Power in Colonial India (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1997), p. 23.
[116] Jeff Goodwin, No Other Way Out: States and Revolutionary Movements, 1945–1991 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), pp. 44, 46–47.
[117] Paul Levi [1921], What is the Crime: the March Action or Criticising it? Speech at the Session of the Central Committee of the German Communist Party on 4 May 1921, in In the Steps of Rosa Luxemburg: Selected Writings of Paul Levi, edited by David Fernbach (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2011), p. 182.
[118] Goran Therborn The Rule of Capital and the Rise of Democracy, New Left Review I/103 (May–June 1977), pp. 4, 17.
[119] Anderson, Modernity and Revolution, p. 105.
[120] Dietrich Rueschemeyer, Evelyne Huber Stephens and John D. Stephens, Capitalist Development and Democracy (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1992), pp. 7, 142–143.
[121] Thomas, The Gramscian Moment, p. 226. Although Thomas writes ‘a class’ throughout this passage, what he describes here is only comprehensible as the modus operandi of a single class: the bourgeoisie.
[122] Jeremy Lester, Dialogue of Negation: Debates on Hegemony in Russia and the West (London: Pluto Press, 2000), p. 72; see also Kate Crehan, Gramsci’s Common Sense: Inequality and its Narratives (Durham NC: Duke University Press, 2016), p. 60.
[123] Neil Davidson [2000], From National Consciousness to Nation-States, in Nation-States, pp. 67–76 and [2009/2010/2012], The Necessity of Nation-States for Capital, in Ibid., pp. 235–243, 250–257.
[124] Guha, Dominance without Hegemony; see also Giovanni Arrighi, Adam Smith in Beijing: Lineages of the Twenty-First Century (London: Verso, 2007), pp. 150–151, 175–210.
  





With both the Labour Party and the Conservatives having launched their manifestos in recent days, Britain’s snap general election is gathering momentum. Jeremy Corbyn’s program has been widely described as Labour’s most radical and left-wing for decades; meanwhile, the Tories continue their sharp shift to the right under Theresa May. Added to this, Brexit and renewed calls for Scottish independence mean that the election is taking place in a context of profound change and uncertainty. Haymarket Books’ Duncan Thomas interviewed Neil Davidson, British socialist and author of How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions?, to glean some meaning from the madness.



*
Duncan Thomas: To start off, let’s give some background for readers outside the UK. Theresa May insisted that she wouldn’t call an election before 2020, which is when her parliamentary term was set to end. Her change of heart has been widely hailed as demonstrating a ruthless political savvy. What does she hope to achieve with a snap election, and do you think she’ll be as successful as many people assume?
Neil Davidson: First and most clearly, May wants an endorsement in advance for whatever happens with Brexit – for whatever deal there might be with Brussels, or indeed if there’s no deal at all. However, she must know that Brexit is going to be a disaster for a lot of the people who voted for it. By calling an early election, she hopes to win a strong majority before those effects begin to kick in or negotiations unravel.
All of this is happening in a context in which Labour is seen to be in deep disarray. Despite making some gains, they are still far behind in the polls, which also show very low approval ratings for Jeremy Corbyn as a leader. This is why people think that it’s an advantageous time for the Tories to call an election.
Most importantly though is what May herself said about strengthening her hand in Brexit negotiations. Everyone thought that meant this in relation to facing down the EU, but I think it’s actually intended to bolster her against the Brexit ultras in her own party. The EU doesn’t care about the size of her mandate – there’s no need for them to be generous, or make concessions, or anything like that.
I think she’s probably hoping to pad out the number of MPs and gain enough popular support to increase her room for maneuver against the extreme Tory Brexiteers. However, that seems quite futile – if she does get the huge majority predicted, it’s likely to produce a parliament more extreme on Brexit. And of course, if she doesn’t get that huge majority, it will be seen as a failure – a disaster even, given all the talk of her matching Thatcher’s landslide in 1983.
So the Tories have real problems, and the left has to understand that. In some ways, the election is a desperate move from them. Far from having a coherent plan, they haven’t a clue what they’re doing. They’re deeply divided, and they’re carrying out a policy which is opposed by the majority of the class they are supposed to represent.
That’s not a good situation for a party to be in, even one as historically successful as the Conservatives. This should be our starting point: not our own weakness, but theirs.
 
I want to come back to some of these bigger themes later, but staying with the two main parties for now, I don’t think I’ve ever seen two more contrasting approaches to electoral campaigning. Labour’s only hope is surely to have an unprecedented ground game, while the Tories seem to be doing and saying as little as possible.
There are two sides to the Tory campaign. The first is Lynton Crosby’s [the Conservatives’ chief campaign manager] strategy of shutting up, saying “strong and stable” over and over again, and avoiding the public as much as possible to reduce their chances of making a mistake. That isn’t a strategy of a strong party that knows exactly what it’s doing. Notably, a lot of the hardcore Brexiteers have been kind of hidden away. Boris Johnson is nowhere to be seen, and for good reason.
The other side is their attempt to appeal to working-class voters, with their proposal for a years’ (unpaid) leave from work to care for a sick relative, or the pledge to have workers on company boards. Of course, it’s a sham, but their need to appear to be acting in favor of workers indicates that they recognized that this constituency won’t be won over exclusively through banging on about leaving the EU.
So while the Conservatives are picking up right-wing support from UKIP [the right-populist United Kingdom Independence Party, whose major purpose is to take Britain out of the EU] voters – with UKIP looking dead electorally as a result – their recent announcements are signs that Labour is making an impression on the terms of the election.
Regarding Labour itself, a lot of the liberal media – never mind the right-wing media – is extremely hostile to Corbyn and his project. You can almost hear the sniggering of Guardian journalists as they talk about the impossibility of Corbyn winning.
But they do have hundreds of thousands of new activists, making them the biggest social-democratic party in Europe. That this is still a recent influx probably makes it more likely that these people will actually go around knocking on doors and handing out leaflets. And as we’ve seen from the huge meetings across the country, Corbyn does have considerable support.
And then there’s the manifesto. Taxing the rich, renationalizing the railways ... these are all very popular policies. I don’t think they’ve got enough momentum for Corbyn to become prime minister, but the campaign has certainly energized left-wing politics in England.
In Scotland, things are very different. Labour is in a perilous condition there, and probably won’t take any seats from the Scottish National Party (SNP). They’ve also lost sections of the working class who support the (British) union to the Tories. But certainly in England, there is a revival of left politics and a genuine argument over the politics of austerity, nationalization of key industries, and so on, which hasn’t really been heard since Blair’s New Labour became dominant.
There’s a mountain to climb for Labour, as everyone knows, but I don’t think the picture is as bleak for them as parts of the media would have you believe, or as rosy for the Tories.
 
Something you touched on then was the degree to which both of the main parties are undergoing quite serious political realignments. That these tensions are playing out within existing institutions is in large part due to Britain’s electoral system, which makes it far harder for new political formations to emerge, as we’ve seen elsewhere. How much instability does that create within the major parties and in the overall political context?
The first thing to say about the party situation in Britain is that currently no single party can represent capital across the whole country. In Northern Ireland now the DUP [Democratic Unionist Party] and Sinn Féin have pretty equal support; in Scotland the SNP is totally dominant; in England we’re told that the Conservatives are in control, but I’m not sure that’s necessarily true; and in Wales, Labour [traditionally the major party] is being challenged by the Tories and Plaid Cymru [the Welsh nationalist party]. So there isn’t one party that can govern the whole of Britain and easily represent capital on that scale.
In terms of Labour, there is a deep antagonism between the parliamentary wing and the mass membership, which has existed more or less acutely throughout the party’s history. However, we are not simply seeing a repeat of that – due, as you say, to the difficulty in creating a new political formation. Many of the people in Labour’s recent influx would otherwise have been attracted to a new party like Podemos. As such, this support base is not really like the old Labour left, which makes the dynamic at play now quite different from the 1980s, for example, when Corbyn himself was part of the Bennite wing of the party.
Transforming Labour remains a big challenge. And while we are seeing something unprecedented, there have been endless attempts by the left to turn Labour into a proper socialist party, and the structural blocks in the way of that have not disappeared.
But as I’ve said, this doesn’t mean the Tories’ rightward shift is stable either. The fact that the main party of capital is falling into positions (primarily their support of Brexit) associated with the petit bourgeoisie or very small sections of capital creates great tension, especially with the City of London which, alas, is central to the British economy.
I think there are people in the Tory Party who are genuinely deluded about Brexit. It’s quite clear that the likes of Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson and Minister for Brexit David Davis haven’t got a clue what they’re doing, as they stumble from one blunder to another. They are totally incompetent, and it’s a serious problem for British capital that these are the people meant to be negotiating on its behalf. The Conservatives might be able to pick up working-class and petit-bourgeois votes with a very right-wing program, but that’s in tension with the overall interests they represent.
Just as it’s hard to create a new party of the left, it’s difficult to imagine a new party of big capital forming in the British context. So these tensions will continue to play out in the party, and managing them will be difficult now that the Tories are ideologically wedded to leaving the EU.
 
Let’s talk more in-depth about Scotland. The SNP, as you’ve said, is very dominant today, and they’re broadly seen as quite progressive. Yet they used to be known as the “Tartan Tories.” How would you account for their transformation?
The SNP, as you say, has changed their politics quite significantly. The “Tartan Tory” label was once pretty much accurate. It was quite a right-wing, heavily Presbyterian, small-town party with a petit-bourgeois base, rather hostile to Irish Catholic workers in Scotland, and very hostile to the EU. Gradually, it became a much more mainstream, centrist nationalist organization.
The peculiarities of Scottish politics explain its transformation. When Scotland voted massively against Thatcher, the Labour Party was the first to benefit, and enjoyed a long period of dominance. But this split with the rest of the country also gave rise to the idea that if Scotland votes differently, it should be represented differently and follow different policies. Clearly, this logic leads pretty directly to demands for a separate parliament, and ultimately for many people to independence.
Labour accepted the premise of this logic by granting devolution just as it moved into its Blairite phase. The SNP quite cleverly repositioned itself as the inheritors of some of the social-democratic traditions that Labour was distancing itself from under Blair.
But it’s important to understand that it didn’t do so in a way that really broke with neoliberalism. Alex Salmond [the former leader of the SNP] used to say that he agreed with Thatcher’s economic policies, for example, but disagreed with her social policies. As such, the SNP should be seen as one of the classic parties of social neoliberalism – not that far, in fact, from Blair’s Labour, but with a more effective left patina over a fundamentally neoliberal framework. This explains why the SNP is now so thoroughly attached to the EU, as the latter embodies a similar kind of social neoliberalism.
While the SNP has passed some positive policies, the impression of its progressive credentials is enhanced as long as it is able to counterpose itself to a right-wing Westminster government. This image was also boosted during the 2014 independence referendum campaign, when the SNP was quite adept in associating itself with some of the more radical grassroots campaigns without actually concretely adopting much of their ideas.
All this means that the SNP is an odd formation. Many socialists are members, and they see it as a social-democratic party and the best vehicle currently available, but its policies remain very moderate and are certainly not anti-capitalist. The party is something of a battleground, and whatever else we might say about, it can’t be ignored. It has to be taken on in a way that is not simply denunciatory, but that recognizes its influence in Scottish society and talks about its actual politics.
 
This election, and the decision to leave the EU, has spurred talk of another Scottish independence referendum. If this happened, do you think the radical, grassroots politics we saw last time would be able to exert the same influence?
The last referendum ran for about two years before any of the grassroots stuff around the Radical Independence Campaign got going. The left often denigrates itself as a failure, but this was an undoubted success, as the entire debate shifted in a way that the SNP certainly did not intend.
That obviously can’t be sustained without an actual campaign, and currently we’re nowhere near the level of engagement we saw then. We’d have to re-create a lot of the structures and groups that we had before, and that would take time. It’s possible, but I don’t think we should obsess over immediately having another independence referendum.
Interestingly, the SNP has also rowed back a bit on claims that this election is a proxy vote for another referendum. While there may be a small majority in favor of holding another referendum, this doesn’t tell us how those people would actually vote. In addition, Brexit is not as clear cut an issue as was first assumed. The SNP initially pushed back very strongly against the Brexit vote. Scotland of course largely voted in favor of staying in the EU, but it has since transpired that quite a large minority of SNP supporters, around 30 percent, voted to leave the EU, as did some of their own MSPs [Members of the Scottish Parliament].
This has meant they haven’t been so vocal about calling another independence referendum, which I think is probably a good thing. It would have been an absolute disaster if another campaign was called on the basis of rejoining the EU. It’s an enormously divisive issue. Recent polling by John Curtice at Strathclyde University suggests that 25 percent of people in Scotland want to leave the EU, and another 40 percent or so are very suspicious of it and think it should be less powerful, so the situation is not as clear cut as we’re led to believe. Making EU membership the basis of a campaign would be counterproductive and might actually see it lose, which is why I think it's essential for the left to separate these issues out into two questions: “Should Scotland be independent?” and “should Scotland be part of the EU?”
The leadership of the SNP are fairly sharp, and they probably realized that this might not be the most opportune moment to hold a referendum after all, despite what was initially thought.
 
The fact that no single party can represent capital across the territory of Britain, as you mentioned, indicates that the 2008 crash is finally having major repercussions in the field of politics. Of course, Britain is not unique in this regard. Do you think, as some do, that we’re seeing an “end of neoliberalism?” If so, what might come next? If not, how might a still fundamentally neoliberal order adapt itself to new circumstances?
This is a very interesting question. I spent many years trying to convince people that neoliberalism even existed; now people seem to think it will go on forever.
But every major crisis of capitalism has led to a new phase of development. After 1873, we saw imperialism and the rise of finance capital; after 1929, state capitalism and embedded liberalism; after 1973, neoliberalism. So you would expect the 2007–2008 crash to herald another major transformation, allowing for an inevitable period of lag.
That this hasn’t really happened yet might indicate that capitalism is running out of tricks to overcome what David Harvey calls its “limits,” and so the countervailing tendencies to the falling rate of profit seem rather weak. There are still populations around the world who can be sucked into capitalist labor processes, but there’s no reserve on the scale of China, and I think returns from this will be diminishing. The other major option for restoring profitability would be the writing off of large sections of capital, which for various political, social, and economic reasons is not going to happen.
In the absence of a new paradigm, people are going back to older ones, with talk of protectionism, tariffs, industrial strategies and so on. People like Martin Wolf in the Financial Times, who was a big cheerleader of globalization for many years, has moved with apparent ease into arguing for developmental strategies carried out by the state. This is significant: if people like Martin Wolf are saying it, then there are probably some people within the capitalist class who support this turn as well. Perhaps there’s a recognition that, although neoliberalism has massively enriched members of the ruling class, as an actual strategy of accumulation it’s becoming less effective.
Another retrograde development has been the return of the racist discourse characteristic of the earlier “vanguard” phase of neoliberalism under Thatcher and Reagan. This has fed into the rise of alt-right or far-right figures like Trump and Le Pen, and given force to their supposed alternatives to neoliberalism. Of course, such politicians are dangerous for workers and migrants, but also to a degree to the capitalist class itself due to the instability and unpredictability they bring. The rational strategy for the trusted representatives of capital would be to work out a post-neoliberal strategy that didn’t depend on such right-wing mavericks. I don’t know what that alternative would be though, or who would be capable of formulating it.
In any case, while we shouldn’t predict some kind of inevitable “end of capitalism,” capitalism obviously ages. With this, there is a diminishing effectiveness and range to the various countervailing tendencies to the falling rate of profit. As capitalism has aged, it has become more difficult for it to find a new regime of accumulation to overcome crises, and it may be that it is not able to overcome certain features of the present crisis.
 
This all underlines how the British elections are taking place in a wider context of instability and flux. Concretely though, what do you think socialists should be doing in the run-up to the election, and what should we prepare to be doing afterwards?
Well, answering this question in full would bring us back to the old question of organization. As everyone knows, it’s the one hundredth anniversary of the Russian Revolution. We urgently need to think through what we should keep and what we have to abandon from our own historical tradition.
In the short term, people in England should work for the biggest Labour vote with, as we say, “no illusions.” It’s possible to do that now in a way that it wasn’t, say, under Blair. Clearly, Corbyn is a socialist standing on a left-wing program that we would all support, and we need to do everything to minimize the Tory vote.
In Scotland, it’s more complex. I don’t think you can call for a vote for the SNP in the same way that you can for Labour, but RISE is arguing for an anti-Tory vote to keep them out of as many seats as possible. Practically, this means working with people both in the SNP and the Labour Party.
But as I said, there is longer-term organizational work to be done. We need to create forms of organization that are habitable for people and don’t simply reproduce the old Trotskyist models of one sort or another, despite the contributions these made. We need to think of how we can relate to large groups of people in a way that is principled, that has a program – dare I say it, a “transitional program,” not of purposefully impossible demands formulated to “expose” the true nature of the system, but of demands that if implemented would strengthen the working class and therefore the possibility of socialism.
 






With growing memberships across the world, many political parties of the left are claiming the popular appetite is for radical change. Neil Davidson situates these claims in a historical context, examining the mainstream shift across the years. In this new configuration, support to mainstream parties of the left must be made tactically alongside work to organise a mass revolutionary party. This article is reproduced with permission from New Socialist.



*
The debates currently taking place in Canada over Niki Ashton’s bid to lead the New Democratic Party (NDP) have parallels elsewhere in the developed world, as several contributors to the New Socialist discussion have pointed out. The most obvious, and the one which offers the greatest hope to Ashton’s supporters, is Jeremy Corbyn’s almost totally unexpected election as leader of the British Labour Party in 2015 and his re-election with an enlarged majority in 2016, followed by the party’s relatively strong result in the 2017 General Election – a result which also took the majority of media commentators completely by surprise. Even if Ashton wins, the NDP is unlikely to be in a position to form a government after the next federal elections in 2019; but taking a longer view, should revolutionaries support Ashton’s attempt and even join the NDP as part of a strategy to strengthen the left and perhaps transform it as an organisation? The reflections on recent British experience which follow may suggest some new opportunities, but also familiar problems in common.
It would be absurd to argue that revolutionaries should never be members of Social-Democratic organisations: there were several periods over the last century when they had little choice but to do so. During the 1930s, when virtually everyone seeking a left alternative to Social Democracy would have been drawn to the by-now Stalinized communist parties, Trotskyists in Britain had no choice but to join the Labour Party simply in order to find an audience prepared to listen to them and not automatically denounce them as counter-revolutionaries. Different considerations prevailed during the post-war boom, at least down to 1968, but there was similarly no possibility of building independent revolutionary organisation outside of the Labour Party.
These examples, however, refer back to periods of political defeat or capitalist boom. We are now in a situation where substantial sections of the working class have been turning left since the economic crisis of 2007–08, particularly since the social upheavals of 2011, and are seeking organizations capable of offering a solution. These have tended to be whichever were available, regardless of their specific form. In Spain and Greece, Podemos and SYRIZA either emerged as or were turned into viable electoral organisations by the ‘Movements of the Squares’; but in other contexts existing parties were the beneficiaries. In Scotland, for example, the intense radicalization of the last nine months of the independence referendum campaign (January–September 2014) led to an extraordinary growth in Scottish National Party (SNP) membership from 20,000 to 120,000. Yet the SNP is a classic social neoliberal formation (quite similar to New Labour in many respects), which is nevertheless currently able to deploy the rhetoric of Social Democracy more effectively than the ailing Scottish Labour Party.
The situation of the Labour Party in England is obviously different; but the impulses which led to its resurgence under Corbyn – membership has increased from 317,000 to 500,000, making it the largest Social Democratic party in the world – are part of the same phenomenon. Many of these new members would in a Spanish context have been attracted to Podemos, and in Scotland they have joined the SNP or the Greens rather than Labour. Under neoliberalism, politics has moved so far to the right, in economic terms at least, that policies such as nationalization, which 40 years ago would have been virtually mainstream, now appear to be the height of radicalism. Corbyn’s programme is closer to mainstream Labour policies c. 1974 than many of his supporters realize, but many of them – especially young people, who were highly mobilized during this campaign – have simply never heard these arguments before and find them extremely attractive. This is not, in other words, a traditional Labour left, which makes the dynamic at play now quite different from the 1980s, for example, when Corbyn himself was part of the Bennite wing of the party (named for Tony Benn, longtime Labour Party MP and self-identified democratic socialist).
The question is how the radical left, outside of the party, is able to work with these young, very motivated people and build a relationship with them, which has not been an issue since the 1980s. One way is of course for activists on the left, individually or in groups, to join the Labour Party, which always involves two political dangers: one is that revolutionaries may hide their real politics in order to ensure continued membership of the reformist organisation; the other is that revolutionaries may begin to adapt to their environment, finding reasons to argue first that the party can be transformed, then that the capitalist state could indeed be reformed out of existence. These cases are not imaginary. What it comes down to is whether the Labour Party can become an organization that allows people on the radical left to organize openly; the historical precedents are not promising, even under a left-wing leadership, and Corbyn has already begun to compromise with Labour’s right wing on freedom of movement for workers outside the UK and on membership of the EU Single Market.
I suspect that the reality or possibility of left-wing leadership is only one of the reasons why the option of joining Social Democratic parties has begun to look like an attractive proposition. The other is the failure of anyone, anywhere, to successfully build a mass revolutionary party since 1968, through a variety of different periods and situations. Given this failure, it is understandable that some socialists have begun to regard it as impossible, and to draw organizational conclusions. I think that conclusion about revolutionary parties is wrong, and stems from the conflation of two separate issues: one is the need for revolutionaries to operate together in a common interventionist organisation; and the other is the construction of a mass revolutionary party. The problem, in my view, is that while the first is possible, the experience of the last half century suggests that the latter is not, outside of a revolutionary situation, and imagining that it is has led to some of the difficulties we currently face. I am not opposed in principle to joining the Labour Party, provided revolutionaries who do so can be open about their politics, but until we resolve the central issue of revolutionary organisation, this can only be a tactical issue.
Neil Davidson lectures in Sociology at the University of Glasgow. He is a member of rs21 in the UK, and of RISE and the Radical Independence Campaign in Scotland. Neil is the author of six books, including the Deutscher Prize-winning Discovering the Scottish Revolution (2003) and, most recently, the abridged version of How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions? (2017).
 






In the decade following the banking crash, the protracted crisis in neoliberal governance is taking a number of striking forms. In this piece Neil Davidson sets out the case for ‘rejecting the lesser evil’ option when faced with a choice between the radical right and the neoliberal centre. This piece was originally published over two issues of the US journal, International Socialist Review (104, Spring 2017 and 106, Fall 2017).



*
Introduction
Two events during 2016 – the UK referendum on membership of the European Union (EU) and the US presidential election – raised the question of whether or not socialists should take sides in situations where there are two alternatives, both opposed, in different ways, to working class interests. The most obvious answer would be to abstain from the vote, argue against both options, and make the case for a socialist alternative capable of forcing its way onto the ballot in the future. But if one of the existing alternatives represents the politics of the populist hard right, as it did in both these cases, can socialists avoid supporting the other, however unpalatable doing so might be?
Faced with the xenophobia and outright racism which respectively dominated and constituted the Leave and Donald Trump campaigns, sections of the left in both countries argued that, whatever problems there may be with the EU as an institution or with Hillary Clinton as a candidate, a vote to remain within the former and to elect the latter were the lesser of two evils. After Trump’s victory, commentators who had backed Hillary Clinton could barely control their rage at how an uncomprehending left had failed to understand their duty to support the local embodiment of social neoliberalism. Here, for example, is the British journalist and author Laurie Penny, writing shortly after Trump’s inauguration about the supposedly unique dreadfulness of his presidency:
In the nine days since he took office, Donald Trump has effected an aggressive corporate takeover of the most powerful nation on earth, thrown the entire political system into chaos, made a laughing stock of the Presidency and trampled over the lives of millions. Does anyone else have anything to say about ‘legitimate concerns?’ Does anyone want to explain how Hillary Clinton would have been an equivalent threat to Western democracy? No? Didn’t think so. [1]
The same argument was raised again in the 2017 French presidential election where, first the Thatcherite François Fillon of the Republicans, then Emmanuel Macron of the newly formed party En Marche! were proclaimed the lesser evil compared to Marine Le Pen of the Front National, just as Jacques Chirac was the lesser evil in the run-off against Le Pen’s father Marie in 2002. In some respects these are more plausible cases than those of the UK and USA since, unlike Nigel Farage or Trump, the Le Pens are actual fascists. Consequently, days after the first round had seen the elimination of both Fillon and the radical left candidate, Jean-Luc Mélenchon, French journalist Natalie Nougayrède denounced the latter in The Guardian, the house-journal of the British liberal middle-classes, for his bewildering and disgraceful refusal to act as a recruiting sergeant for Macron:
Conflating Macron and Le Pen as two equally unacceptable propositions, because Macron is a former banker supposedly beholden to evil capitalism, is ridiculous. The centre needs to hold, when the alternative is the far-right. At such a defining moment in French and European politics, surely there can be nothing more important than making sure a key democracy resists the sirens of the Front National, which would restore values from of the darkest eras of French history. Anti-establishment sentiment can be understandable, but if it’s indifferent to the outcome it produces, then that’s chaos and nihilism – not renewal. Believing that a political catastrophe must unfold for a utopia to rise from the ashes is a line of thought no one can afford. Not if they care about what makes democracy possible. [2]
France is unlikely to be the last place where the left is faced with this type of choice, which indicates the urgency with which it needs to establish an independent position. I will address the concrete question of what basis we should make such choices later in this article; but first I want to explore the nature of what is usually regarded as the greater evil: the populist right, in both its fascist and non-fascist variants. [3] But first, it is perhaps worth briefly discussing why it has become – temporarily at least – the main alternative to the current orthodoxies of capitalist governance.
 
The crisis of neoliberalism, right-wing populism
and the ‘lesser-evil’
The crash of 2007/9 was at one and the same time a general crisis of capitalism comparable to those of 1873, 1929 and 1973, and a crisis of a particular form of capitalist organisation which we have come to know as neoliberalism. But the latter has occurred at a particular phase in its history, that of social neoliberalism, which emerged after 1989, first within the EU, then in administrations of Bill Clinton in the US (from 1992) and of Tony Blair in the UK (from 1997). Perhaps the greatest ideological success of social neoliberalism was to turn the categories of left and right to essentially cultural concepts. When everyone – or at least, everyone who mattered – came to accept neoliberal economics, then the only terrain on which debate was permissible was that of identity: the so-called culture wars. So, to be on the left was (e.g.) to be in favour of gay marriage and migration, to be on the right was to oppose them: the legitimacy of capitalism was never in doubt on either side. In reality what had happened was that right-wing politics – that is, politics openly supportive of the capitalist system – had effectively split in two, or perhaps returned to the classic pre-socialist conservative versus liberal division of the nineteenth century, with both sides supporting the same economic model, but the latter being more willing to accept rights for what were usually (and in the case of women, inaccurately) referred to as minorities. To be clear: the problem with the latter position is not, as Mark Lilla and others are arguing, that the Democrats became obsessed with identity at the expense of economics, but that their policies did nothing to stop the oppression of these groups, or at least their working-class members, since under the Obama administration in which Hillary Clinton served, women continued to sexually assaulted with impunity, people of colour continued to be incarcerated and migrants continued to be deported in record numbers. [4]
Two changes have taken place since 2007, both associated with shifts in the position of a faction within the conservative wing of the ruling class – the populist hard right. One is that it has also adopted a politics of identity, in this case a majoritarian identity based on that most pernicious of invented categories, the white working class, whose interests have supposedly been sacrificed to those of the minority populations. However, perhaps realising that the plight of unemployed coal miners in Pennsylvania is hard to blame on government hand-outs supposedly being showered on black lesbians in North Carolina, it has also adopted another position, which is – rhetorically at least – to abandon many neoliberal shibboleths and argue for protectionism and government investment in infrastructure. Ironically, it was under Bill Clinton rather than Reagan or Bush the First that the US finally abandoned protectionism, which had been used to protect the steel industry during the 1980s, but this simply added to the case for Democrats having abandoned workers to the ravages of the market. Now, whether Trump is serious about implementing his economic policies is indiscernible, and he may not even know himself; but what is perhaps more interesting is not only that a break with neoliberalism is being articulated within the ruling class, but that many of the proposals associated with it would actually be detrimental to US capitalism, which is one of the reasons why so many of them were opposed to his candidacy.
One consequence of these changes is that previous arguments against choosing the lesser evil have to be revised, although not, I will argue, the stance itself. The classic discussion is generally thought to be a much reprinted piece by Hal Draper, first published in 1967. [5] The context was the presidential election of the following year, in which it was expected that the incumbent Lyndon Johnson would stand for the Democrats against an as yet unknown Republican candidate. As it turned out, Johnson refused to stand and Hubert Humphrey ultimately won the Democratic nomination only to lose the presidency to Richard Nixon. Johnson had, of course, been the lesser evil against Barry Goldwater in 1964, although, as Draper pointed out, the former subsequently unleashed far greater violence against the Vietnamese than the latter had ever contemplated – and was able to get away with it precisely because he knew that most of the left were paralysed by their fear of the greater evil. But although Draper was primarily concerned with the USA, he did examine the most extreme example possible in order to demonstrate where the lesser evil argument could lead: the rise of Nazism in Germany.
In the presidential elections of March and April 1932, both the Social Democratic Party and Centre parties had refused to stand their own candidates, but called on their members and supporters to vote for the incumbent, the independent but deeply conservative candidate Paul von Hindenburg, in an attempt to block the greater evil represented by Adolf Hitler. Once re-elected with the help of the left, Hindenburg appointed Hitler as Chancellor, in the misplaced expectation that he would be constrained by the responsibilities of office. Draper rather foreshortens the actual process, as Hitler was not appointed immediately, but the following January, on the grounds that the Nazis were the largest Party in the Reichstag; his central point, however, remains valid: support the lesser evil and you might well end up getting the greater evil too. Draper was careful to point out the extremity of the situation in Germany during the early nineteen thirties, both in relation to the extent of the crisis and the nature of the Nazi program, but argued that if the lesser evil argument was wrong in these conditions, it was far more so in the relatively stable context of the USA in the late nineteen sixties.
Draper made two general points. First, the left has to create to create its own political alternative or it will endlessly be faced with choices ultimately determined by defenders of capitalism. Second, even though serious differences remained between parties and candidates – such as had also existed between Hindenburg and Hitler – these were becoming less significant in practice: the increasing centrality of state intervention, ownership and control after the crisis of 1929 meant that all political formations (other than those committed to the overthrow of capitalism) were effectively forced to follow the same core policies, whatever their beliefs or electoral rhetoric. The retreat of state capitalism in the West began after the return of economic crisis in 1973, but Draper’s argument was still relevant as the subsequent neoliberal era involved as a great a convergence around economic policy as there had been between 1929 and 1973, albeit in the opposite direction. But as I have suggested, since the onset of a further crisis in 2007, this agreement has begun to break down. In other words, anyone wanting to oppose arguments for supporting the lesser-evil can no longer simply argue that supporting one alternative rather than another will lead to the same result: it would scarcely be credible to argue that it makes no difference whether the UK is in or out of the EU, or to claim that Clinton would have pursued the same foreign policy as Trump. But before turning to the alternative posed by the populist hard right, we need to understand the nature of political leadership under capitalism, which it seeks to command.
 
The Political Incapacities of the Capitalist Ruling Class
Under all pre-capitalist modes of production, exploitation took place visibly through the extraction of a literal surplus from the direct producers by the threat or reality of violence: economics and politics were fused in the power of the feudal lord or the tributary state. Under the capitalist mode of production, exploitation takes place invisibly in the process of production itself through the creation of surplus value over and above that required in reproducing the labor force. The late Ellen Wood identified a resulting division of labor in which the two moments of capitalist exploitation – appropriation and coercion – are allocated separately to a ‘private’ appropriating class and a specialized ‘public’ coercive institution, the state: on the one hand, the ‘relatively autonomous’ state has a monopoly of coercive force; on the other hand, that force sustains a private ‘economic’ power which invests capitalist property with an authority to organize production itself. Furthermore, unlike previous exploiting classes, capitalists exercise economic power without ‘the obligation to perform social, public functions’: ‘Capitalism is a system marked by the complete separation of private appropriation from public duties; and this means the development of a new sphere of power devoted completely to private rather than social purposes.’ [6]
The implications of this division for capitalists as a ruling class were noted by earliest social theorists to concern themselves with the emergent system. Since Adam Smith is – quite unfairly – treated as the patron saint of neoliberalism it may be worth reminding ourselves of his actual views on capitalists and the narrowness of their interests:
As their thoughts ... are commonly exercised rather about the interest of their own particular branch of business, than about that of the society, their judgment, even when given with the greatest candour (which it has not been upon every occasion) is much more to be depended upon with regard to the former of those two objects than with regard to the latter. [7]
For the purposes of our discussion, the interest in this passage lies not in Smith’s still-refreshingly candid views about the capacity of business interests for deception and oppression, but their inability to see beyond their own immediate interests. This was one of the reasons why he also wrote (thinking of the East India Company): ‘The government of an exclusive company of merchants is, perhaps, the worst of all governments for any country whatsoever.’ [8]
Nearly a century later in the 1860s, Smith’s greatest successor, Karl Marx, was able to point in Capital to the example of the British Factory Acts as an example of how the state had to intervene to regulate the activities of capital in the face of initial opposition from the capitalists themselves:
It is evident that the British Parliament, which no one will reproach with being excessively endowed with genius, has been led by experience to the conclusion that a simple compulsory law is sufficient to enact away all the so-called impediments opposed by the nature of the process to the restriction and regulation of the working-day. [9]
Reflecting on the entire legislative episode, Marx noted: ‘But for all that, capital never becomes reconciled to such changes—and this is admitted over and over again by its own representatives—except “under the pressure of a General Act of Parliament” for the compulsory regulation of the hours of labor.’ [10]
The thesis concerning bourgeois incapacity was not only restricted to critics like Marx, but to supporters of capitalism, and even of fascism. Carl Schmitt, for example, complained after the First World War that, unlike working-class ideologues, members of the bourgeoisie no longer understood the friend-enemy distinction, which was central to his concept of ‘the political’; the spirit of Hegel, he thought, had moved from Berlin to Moscow. [11] Joseph Schumpeter argued a more general case during the Second World War. Yielding to no-one in his admiration for the heroic entrepreneur, he nevertheless also noted that, with the possible exception of the United States: ‘The bourgeois class is ill equipped to face the problems, both domestic and international, that normally have to be faced by a country of any importance’; the bourgeoisie needs ‘protection by some non-bourgeois group’; ultimately, ‘it needs a master’. [12] Without the kind of constraints provided by this pre-capitalist framework, the more sober instincts of the bourgeois would be overcome by the impulse towards what Schumpeter called creative destruction. Trump is a living textbook example of how correct these great social theorists were in their views. Consequently, as Charles Post rightly predicted, the state managers actually responsible for the day-to-day running of the USA are attempting to block what they regard as Trump’s inadvertently system-damaging decisions. [13]
The delegation of power to the state therefore exists because of what Draper calls ‘the political inaptitude of the capitalist class’ compared to other ruling classes in history. It is not only that feudal lords combine an economic and political role while capitalists perform only the former; it is also that the necessity for capitalists to devote their time to the process of accumulation and their own multiple internal divisions militates against their functioning directly as a governing class. [14] More broadly, Bernard Porter notes that capitalists ‘tend to be hostile to “government” generally, which they see mainly as a restraint on enterprise and, on a personal level, don’t find “ruling” half so worthwhile or satisfactory as making money’. [15] This arrangement is quite compatible with the exercise of bourgeois hegemony over society as a whole, although even in this respect, some sections of the bourgeoisie tend to play a more significant role than others; but politically, as Fred Block has written, ‘the [capitalist] ruling class does not rule’. [16]
As a result, two other forces have tended to rule jointly in place of the capitalists themselves: politicians and state managers, in other words the senior component of the permanent state bureaucracy. In both cases the very distance of the groups involved from direct membership of the capitalist class allowed them to make assessments of what was required by the system as a whole. Politicians need not belong to the same class as the capitalists: indeed, it was landed aristocracies who played this role for much of modern European history down to 1945. ‘A plainly bourgeois society – nineteenth-century Britain – could, without serious problems, be governed by hereditary peers’, noted Eric Hobsbawm. [17] Social democracy – originally a working-class political tendency at least nominally committed to overturning capitalism – has intermittently done so afterwards, and similar patterns can be found in most other Western nation-states.
Throughout the Golden Age the capitalist class had called to order social democratic politicians when their policies were perceived, however unreasonably, as being too concerned with defending the interests of their supporters. Their normal methods for disciplining disobedient politicians involved currency speculation, withholding investment and moving production – or at least threatening to do so, which was often sufficient to achieve the desired effect. These police actions by capital were often aided by state managers who tended to be more conscious of what capital would find acceptable or permissible than mere elected representatives of the people. But economic or bureaucratic resistance to government agendas is a blunt instrument, capable of blocking or reversing one set of policies and making others more likely, not of bringing about a complete reorientation in policy terms. Capitalist states are sets of permanent institutions run by unelected officials who act in the interests of capital more or less effectively; parliamentary government is a temporary regime consisting of elected politicians who act in the interests of capital, more or less willingly. But in times of crisis capital requires politicians who will decide on a particular strategy and fight for it with absolute conviction, if necessary against individual members of the capitalist class themselves. During the 1930s, Antonio Gramsci discussed this type of ruling class response to crisis as ‘an organic and normal phenomenon’: ‘It represents the fusion of an entire social class under a single leadership, which alone is held to be capable of solving an overriding problem of its existence and of fending off a mortal danger.’ [18] Gramsci was thinking of Italian fascism, but a similar shift took place during what I call the vanguard phase of neoliberalism under Thatcher and Reagan. [19] It would be quite wrong, however, to imagine that new strategic initiatives are necessarily beneficial to the operation of capitalism.
Contrary to extreme functionalist or economic determinist positions, representatives of the dominant classes are not infallible or all-knowing. As Gramsci once noted, we have to allow for the possibility of error, but ‘error’ is not reducible to a ‘mistake’: ‘The principle of error is a complex one: one may be dealing with an individual impulse based on mistaken calculations or equally it may be a manifestation of the attempts of specific groups or sects to take over hegemony within the directive grouping, attempts which may well be unsuccessful’. [20] In one sense, however, neoliberalism has been too successful. For it has weakened, to varying degrees, the capacity of capitalist states to act in the interest of their national capital as a whole. The relationship between neoliberal regimes and capital has since the 1970s prevented states from acting effectively in the collective, long – term interest of capitalism and leading instead to a situation where, according to Robert Skidelsky, ‘ideology destroys sane economics’. [21] It is true that neoliberal regimes have increasingly abandoned any attempt to arrive at an overarching understanding of what the conditions for growth might be, other than the supposed need for lowering taxation and regulation and raising labour flexibility. Apart from these, the interests of the total national capital is seen as an arithmetical aggregate of the interests of individual businesses, some of which, to be sure, have rather more influence with governments than others. These developments have led to incomprehension among remaining Keynesians of the liberal left. [22] But their assessments are correct in noting that, in so far as there is a ‘strategic view’, it involves avoiding any policies which might incur corporate displeasure, however minor the inconveniences they might involve for the corporations, which of course includes regulation.
The weakening of the labour movement and consequent rightward shift by social democracy may therefore ultimately prove self-destructive for capital since, as we have seen, one of the inadvertent roles which it historically played was to save capitalism from itself, not least by achieving reforms in relation to education, health and welfare. These benefited workers, of course, but also ensured that the reproduction of the workforce and the conditions for capital accumulation more generally took place. But with the weakening of trade union power and the capitulation of social democracy to neoliberalism, there is currently no social force capable of either playing this ‘reformist’ role directly or by pressurizing non – social democratic state managers into playing it. That leaves the state apparatus itself, but the necessary distance between the state and capital (or between state managers and capitalists), to which I earlier alluded has been minimized. Any longer-term strategy in the overall interests of capital would have to address the dysfunctionality of the financial system, the refusal of firms to invest in productive capacity and low levels of tax intake attendant on a fiscal system massively skewed towards the wealthy, but state managers are no longer prepared to do this and neither are most politicians – with the exception of one tendency: right-wing populism.
 
Varieties of Right-Wing Populism
Given the hysteria about Trump’s supposed incipient fascism, it is important to begin by distinguishing between fascist and non-fascist variants of the hard-right. All wings are united by two characteristics. One is a base of membership and support in one or more fraction of the middle-class (i.e. the petty bourgeoisie, traditional middle-class professionals or the technical-managerial new middle class) – although as we shall see, this does not mean that they necessarily lack working-class support. The other is an attitude of extreme social conservatism, always in relation to race and nation, sometimes in relation to gender and sexual orientation: far-right politicians in the Netherlands, for example, have for example rhetorically invoked the relative freedoms of women or gays in the West as way of denouncing the supposedly oppressive beliefs of Muslims. The political goal is always to push popular attitudes and legal rights back to a time before the homogeneity of ‘the people’ was polluted by immigration, whenever this Golden Age of racial or cultural purity is deemed to have existed, which is usually at some undetermined period before the Second World War.
There are nevertheless large differences between these two types of organization. As Jan-Werner Müller has pointed out, ‘National Socialism and Italian Fascism need to be understood as populist movements – even though, I hasten to add, they were not just populist movements but also exhibited traits that are not inevitable elements of populism as such: racism, a glorification of violence, and a radical “leadership principle”’. [23] More specifically, Michael Mann argues that non-fascist far-right parties are distinguished from fascism by three characteristics: 1) they are electoral and seek to attain office through the democratic means at local, national and European levels; 2) they do not worship the state and, while they seek to use the state for welfare purposes for their client groups, some (e.g. the Austrian Freedom Party or the Tea Party) have embraced neoliberal small-state rhetoric; 3) they do not seek to ‘transcend class’: ‘These three ambiguities and weaknesses of principle and policy make for instability, as either extremists or moderates seek to enforce a more consistent line that then either results in splits and expulsions, such as the makeover of the Italian MSI and the disintegration of the German Republikaner in the mid-1990s.’ [24]
The first of these distinctions, adherence to bourgeois democracy, is crucial since it indicates the fundamental distinction between the fascist and non-fascist far-right: the latter, as Peter Mair notes, ‘do not claim to challenge the democratic regime as such’. [25] Activists and commentators often draw an absolute distinction between fascism and other forms of right-wing politics, based on the way the former rely on paramilitary organization and violence as part of their strategy for attaining power. In that sense Golden Dawn in Greece is a classic fascist formation in a way that the Northern League in Italy is not. The distinction is important, not least in determining the tactics of their opponents, but fascism is not defined simply by its recourse to extra-parliamentary or illegal activity. Here, Trotsky’s analysis remains relevant:
When a state turns fascist ... it means, primarily and above all, that the workers’ organizations are annihilated; that the proletariat is reduced to an amorphous state; and that a system of administration is created which penetrates deeply into the masses and which serves to frustrate the independent crystallization of the proletariat. Therein precisely is the gist of fascism. [26]
Fascism then is revolutionary and the non-fascist far-right is not; but what does ‘revolutionary’ mean in this context? Many Marxists are reluctant to use this term in relation to any modern political movement not of the left, with the possible exception of nationalisms in the Global South. But if we consider fascist seizures of power as political revolutions – in other words as those which change the nature and personnel of the regime without changing the mode of production, then there is no reason why the term should not be applicable. [27]
The second major difference, which flows directly from the first, is their respective attitudes to society which they are trying to build. As Roger Griffin points out, the revolution from the right in both fascist Italy and Nazi Germany claimed to be using the state to socially engineer a new man and woman with new values. [28] This is a project of transformation. The non-fascist far-right however insists that the people are already the repositories of homogeneity and virtue:
By contrast, the enemies of the people – the elites and others – are neither homogeneous nor virtuous. Rather, they are accused of conspiring together against the people, who are depicted as being under siege from above by the elites and from below by a range of dangerous others.
The purpose of the non-fascist far-right is to return the people to their formerly happy condition before these twin pressures began to be applied: This is not a Utopia, but a prosperous and happy place which is held to have actually existed in the past, but which has been lost in the present era due to the enemies of the people. [29] This is a project of restoration.
The revival of the far – right as a serious electoral force is based on the apparent solutions it offers to what are now two successive waves of crisis, which have left the working class in the West increasingly fragmented and disorganised, and susceptible to appeals to blood and nation as the only viable form of collectivism still available, particularly in a context where the systemic alternative to capitalism – however false it was – had apparently collapsed in 1989–91. The political implications are ominous. The increasing interchangeability of political parties gives the far – right an opening to appeal to voters by positioning themselves as outside the consensus in ways which speak to their justifiable feelings of rage. [30] The potential problem for the stability of the capitalist system is however less the possibility of far – right parties themselves coming to power with a programme destructive to capitalist needs, than their influence over the mainstream parties of the right, when the beliefs of their supporters may inadvertently cause difficulty for the accumulation process – as in the impending withdrawal from the EU in the case of the UK or, potentially at least, a halt to migration from Mexico and Central America at the behest of the Trump presidency in the case of the US. Here we see emerging a symbiotic relationship between one increasingly inadequate regime response to the problems of capital accumulation and another increasingly extreme response to the most irrational desires and prejudices produced by capital accumulation. Again, this is not a new problem for capital.
There is a problem with some left analyses of the hard right and its far right component in particular, which is the assumption that it represents the ‘real’ face of capitalism unmasked (‘the naked dictatorship of monopoly capital’, etc., etc.). In fact, in the developed world at least, it is only in very rare situations of dire extremity – and usually after facing the kind of threat from the labour movement that has unfortunately been absent for several decades – that capital has ever relied on the far right to solve its problems. Right-wing social movements can relate to the accumulation strategies of capital in three ways: 1) They are directly supportive; 2) They are compatible with and/or indirectly supportive through strengthening ideological positions which are associated with capitalist rule, but which may not be essential to it; or 3) They are indirectly and possibly unintentionally destabilizing. Until recently at any rate, examples of type 1 have been very rare indeed, since, as I have argued above, capitalists prefer to use corporate pressure rather than mass movements to achieve their political goals. Examples of type 2 are the most frequent but, as I will argue below, we are currently seeing, and are likely to see more examples of type 3, which raises the question: what is the relationship between the far-right politics and capitalism? What if a fascist or far-right movement came to power which implemented policies against the needs of capital – not because they were ‘anti-capitalist’ in the way that Strasserite wing of the Nazi Party were (falsely) supposed to be, but simply because their interests lay elsewhere?
The Nazi Regime performed two services for German capital: crushing an already weakened working class and launching an imperial expansionist drive to conquer new territory. But while racism and anti-Semitism were important for the Nazis, notes Ulrich Herbert, but not for German national capitals:
Any attempt to reduce the Nazi policy of mass annihilation solely or largely to underlying economic, rational interests, however, fails to recognize that, in the eyes of the Nazis, and in particular the advocates of systematic racism among them, the mass extermination of their ideological enemies was itself a rational political goal. It was supported by reference to social, economic, geopolitical, historical and medical arguments, as well as notions of racial hygiene and internal security. Racism was not a mistaken belief serving to conceal the true interests of the regime, which were essentially economic. It was the fixed point of the whole system. [31]
It is therefore true, as Alex Callinicos points out, that ‘the extermination of the Jews cannot be explained in economic terms’. He sees the connection between the Holocaust and German capitalism as an example of an interpenetration of interests, in this case between ‘German big business’ and ‘a movement whose racist and pseudo—revolutionary ideology drove it towards the Holocaust’. [32] The position which Callinicos is articulating here was first expressed by Peter Sedgwick in 1970: ‘German capitalism did not need Auschwitz; but it needed the Nazis, who needed Auschwitz.’ [33] But where did the Nazi racist and pseudo-revolutionary ideology come from in the first place? Callinicos only sees a connection with capitalism as arising from the immediate needs of the economy at a time of crisis; but the ideological formation of the Nazi worldview took place over a much longer period, which saw the combination of a series of determinations arising from the contradictions of German and European capitalism, and including the authoritarian character of subordinate middle-class which had never successfully developed its own political identity; extreme right-wing nationalism first formed in response to the French Revolution, racism in its anti-Semitic form, disappointed imperialism, a taste for violence acquired in the trenches, and so on. [34] Adapting Sedgwick then, we might say that German capitalism didn’t need the Holocaust, but the long-term development of German capitalism produced, through a series of mediations, the ideology of Nazism which did contained the possibility of a Holocaust, and when German capitalists turned to the Nazis in its moment of crisis, they were given the opportunity to realize that possibility, however irrelevant and outright damaging it was to German capital’s more overarching imperial project. In other words, the barbaric ideology of Nazism and the socio-economic crisis of Germany to which they provided one solution were already connected as different moments in the mediated totality of capitalism.
But if the Holocaust was a barbaric irrelevance – except incidentally – for German capital, the Nazi regime also presents us with examples of policies which were instrumentally irrational from the perspective of the capitalist state. As Detlev Peukert writes: ‘To see fascism as an effective answer to the weakness of the bourgeois democratic state, i.e. as a functional solution to the crisis in the interests of capital, is to be taken in by the self-image of National Socialism created by its own propaganda.’ For one thing, it led to the creation of a deeply fragmented and incoherent institution:
The equipping of state bodies with economic functions, and of business enterprises with quasi-state powers, led not to a more effective and rationally functioning ‘state monopoly capitalism’, but to a welter of jurisdictions and responsibilities that could be held in check only by short-term projects and campaigns ... The splintered state and semi-state managerial bodies adopted the principle of competition. The nationalization of society by Nazism was followed by the privatization of the state. This paradox meant that, on the one hand, there were huge concentrations of power as a result of internal and external Blitzkrieg campaigns, while, on the other hand, inefficiency, lack of planning, falling productivity and general decline prevailed. [35]
This had the most serious implications in relation to German war-making. Götz Aly claims that the plundering of conquered territories and externalization of monetary inflation undertaken by the Nazis as the Second World War progressed served to bind the German masses to the regime by raising their living standards. [36] The thesis is massively exaggerated and ignores such opposition and resistance that did take place. [37] Nevertheless, it inadvertently identifies a central problem for the regime: the provision of material resources for German industry and provisions for the German population would have been impossible without territorial expansion through war; yet this was precisely what the nature of regime undermined. As Tim Mason noted, ‘the racial-ethical utopia ... was taken so seriously by the political leadership, in particular by Hitler and by the SS, that in decisive questions even the urgent material needs of the system were sacrificed to it’. [38]
Germany had higher rates of female participation in the workforce than either Britain or the USA at the beginning of the war, although many of these jobs were in roles considered suitable for women and which would not be detrimental to their roles as wives and mothers. [39] Yet, despite a desperate shortage of labour, Hitler resisted female conscription until after German defeat at the battle of Stalingrad, apparently for ideological concerns over a potential decline in the birth-rate (and hence to the strength of the Aryan race) and the threat to female morals; but even then it was applied half-heartedly and was widely evaded. [40]
Thus, there can be situations where there is a genuine ‘non-identity of interest’ between capitalists and what are – from their point of view – the irrational demands made by the social base of the political party which they prefer to have custody of the state. This may appear to be sheer stupidity, but as Theodor Adorno once pointed out specifically in relation to the Nazi regime, ‘stupidity is not a natural quality, but one socially produced and reinforced’. Hitler failed to invade the UK when he had the chance and invaded the USSR when he did not need to:
The German ruling clique drove towards war because they were excluded from a position of imperial power. But in their exclusion lay the reason for the blind and clumsy provincialism that made Hitler’s and Ribbentropp’s policies uncompetitive and their war a gamble ... Germany’s industrial backwardness forced its politicians – anxious to regain lost ground and, as have-nots, specially qualified for the role – to fall back on their immediate, narrow experience, that of the political façade. They saw nothing in front of them except cheering assemblies and: this blocked their view of the objective power of a greater mass of capital. [41]
The contemporary relevance of this experience is limited: the working class is not currently combative enough to inspire fear in the bourgeoisie and the states in which the fascist far-right is large enough even conceive of achieving power, like Greece or Hungary, are not imperialist powers capable of attempting continental domination in the way that Germany or even Italy was capable of doing. The point is that in the contemporary situation all that may remain are those aspects of the far-right programme which are irrational for capital, particularly in its current neoliberal manifestation.
 
The Appeal of the Populist Right
Fascist movements cannot base themselves on working class organizations, since one of their defining characteristics is to seek the destruction of such movements. This is why a movement like Ulster Loyalism in Northern Ireland, based as it was on the skilled Protestant working class, cannot be described as fascist, however reactionary and divisive as it may otherwise have been. But if fascist movements are incompatible with working-class organization, they can and do draw support from individual members of the working class, as can the far-right more generally. This is the real threat posed by Trump in the US.
Chip Berlet and Matthew Lyons observe that, in the context of the US, there are ‘two versions of secular right-wing populism’, each drawing on a different class base: ‘one centred around “get the government off my back” economic libertarianism coupled with a rejection of mainstream political parties (more attractive to the upper middle class and small entrepreneurs); the other based on xenophobia and ethnocentric nationalism (more attractive to the lower middle class and wage workers)’. [42] As the reference to wage-workers in relation to the second version suggests, the reactionary role played by sections of the middle classes does not exhaust the social basis of right-wing social movements. Since the majority of the population are exploited and oppressed, such movements must draw at least some support from their ranks.
Unfortunately, the spectacle of the working-class or the oppressed more generally mobilizing against their own interests alongside members of other social classes has produced a number of inadequate responses from socialists. One is the claim that working-class demands or actions which might appear reactionary actually contain a rational core which renders them defensible by the left: in relation to migration this is sometimes expressed as the need for socialists to pay heed to the ‘genuine concerns’ of the working class, as if the sincerity of the belief rendered it valid. The other inadequate response is the argument that, even if working-class people participate in them, right-wing movements are illegitimate because they are funded or led by wealthy corporation or individuals.
This argument inverts the classic conservative theme that popular unrest against the established order is never, as it were, natural, but always orchestrated by external forces (‘outside agitators’), inventing or at most manipulating grievances in order to further their own ends. [43] Some of the people who supported Trump may well be morally wrong and politically misguided, but it is patronizing – and above all politically useless – to pretend that they are simply being manipulated by elite puppet masters. Sara Diamond is therefore correct that left critics of the US Christian Right are wrong to adopt what she calls ‘a view of conspiracies by small right-wing cliques to stage-manage what was truly a mass movement’. She is also right to emphasize the complexity of right-wing populism towards ‘existing power structures’, being ‘partially oppositional and partially ... system supportive’. [44] This begs the question of why working class people might be predisposed to respond positively to right-wing arguments. The answer combines general reasons applicable to all periods in the history of capitalism and specific reasons relevant to the present neoliberal conjuncture.
Marxists, above all Gramsci, have shown that most members of the subordinate classes have highly contradictory forms of consciousness. [45] Nevertheless, the capitalist system could not survive unless it was accepted at some level, most of the time, by the majority of the people who live under it. The implications of this are darker than is sometimes supposed. A characteristic form of contradictory consciousness involves a reformist inability to conceive of anything beyond capitalism, while opposing specific effects of the system.
But the alternatives are not restricted to active rejection at one extreme and passive acceptance at the other. There can also be active support, the internalization of capitalist values associated with the system to the point where they can lead to action. Marxists and other anti-capitalist radicals frequently point out that, rather than men benefitting from the oppression of women, whites from the oppression of blacks, or straights from the oppression of gays, it is capitalism and the bourgeoisie which do so. This is a useful corrective to the argument, common in many left-wing movements, that each form of oppression is separate from the others and that none has any necessary connection to the capitalist system.
Nevertheless, it fails to take seriously the distinction made by Lukács between ‘what men in fact thought, felt and wanted at any point in the class structure’ and ‘the thoughts and feelings which men would have in a particular situation if they were able to assess both it and the interests arising from it in their impact on immediate action and on the whole structure of society’. [46] For we cannot assume that members of the working class are not only capable of having, but actually have the thoughts and feelings ‘appropriate to their objective situation’. Of the workers do not attain this level of consciousness, a significant minority take positions supportive of, for example, racial oppression, which may not have benefited them compared with the benefits they would have received by struggling for racial equality, let alone full social equality. Without some degree of class consciousness, however, they need not ever consider this alternative: in the immediate context of their situation a stance which is detrimental to working class interests as a whole may make sense to particular individual members of the working class.
The victories of neoliberalism have left the working class in the West increasingly fragmented and disorganized, and, for some workers, appeals to blood and nation appear as the only viable form of collectivity still available, particularly in a context where any systemic alternative to capitalism – however false it may have been – had apparently collapsed in 1989-91. Dismissing their views on grounds of irrationality is simply an evasion. As Berlet and Lyons write: ‘Right-wing populist claims are no more and no less irrational than conventional claims that presidential elections express the will of the people, that economic health can be measured by the profits of multimillion dollar corporations, or that US military interventions in Haiti or Somalia or Kosovo or wherever are designed to promote democracy and human rights.’ [47] Yet these beliefs, which are accepted by many more people than those who believe in, say, the literal truth of the Book of Genesis, are not treated as signs of insanity. The issue, as Berlet has argued elsewhere, is not personal pathology but collective desperation. [48]
The increasing interchangeability of mainstream political parties, including those on the social-democratic left, gives the far-right an opening to voters by positioning themselves as outside the consensus in relation to social policy. [49] Michael Kimmel points out that, although it would be absurd to claim that ‘women or gay people or people of colour are being treated equally’, it is true that ‘we have never been more equal than we are today’; but ‘at the same time ... economically we are more unequal than we have been in about a century’:
So it’s easy to think these phenomena are related – that the greater class inequality is somehow attendant upon, even caused by, greater social inequality. Perhaps we can be convinced that the reason for the dramatic skewing of our country’s riches is somehow that these newly arrived groups are siphoning of the benefits that were supposed to be tricking down to middle- and lower-middle-class white men.
Kimmel follows the characteristic everyday discourse in the USA, in which working class people are described as, or contained within the categories of, ‘middle- and lower-middle-class’, but his conclusion is apt: ‘To believe that greater social equality is the cause of your economic misery requires a significant amount of manipulation, perhaps the greatest bait and switch that has ever been perpetuated against middle- and lower-middle-class Americans.’ [50]
A majority of the people involved in right-wing social movements do so because of underlying economic concerns; the more relevant point is perhaps whether, in the absence of any left-wing solution to those concerns, they continue to demand the implementation of their social program as a condition of support for politicians who claim to represent them. In these circumstances, a deeper problem for the stability of the capitalist system than the possibility of far-right parties themselves coming to power with a program destructive to capitalist needs, might be their influence over the mainstream parties of the right, when the beliefs of their supporters may inadvertently cause difficulty for the accumulation process, as Müller writes, from the perspective of the liberal left:
... it’s hard to deny that some policies justified with reference to ‘the people’ really can turn out to have been irresponsible: those deciding on such policies did not think hard enough; thy failed to gather all the relevant evidence; or, most plausibly, their knowledge of the likely long-term consequences should have made them refrain from policies with only short-term electoral benefits to themselves. One does not have to be a neoliberal technocrat to judge some policies as plainly irrational. [51]
The clearest examples of this type of irrationality are to be found in the Anglo-Saxon heartlands of neoliberalism: the US and Britain. Take an important area of Republican Party support in the USA. Since the late sixties Republicans have been increasingly reliant on communities of fundamentalist Christian believers, whose activism allows them to be mobilized for voting purposes. The problem, and not only for the Republicans, is that the extremism of fundamentalist Christianity may alienate the electoral ‘middle-ground’ on which the result of American elections increasingly depend, but that politicians are constrained from undertaking policies which may be necessary for American capitalism. Unwanted outcomes for capital need not be the product of a coherent religious worldview, simply one which no longer believes anything produced outside its own experience – or the way in which that experience is interpreted by their trusted sources of information.
But it is not only religious belief which can cause difficulties for US capital; so too can overt anti-migrant racism. One concrete example of this is the Tea Party-inspired Beason-Hammon Alabama Taxpayer and Citizen Protection Act – HB56 as it is usually known – which was passed by the State legislature in June 2011, making it illegal not to carry immigration papers and preventing anyone without documents from receiving any provisions from the state, including water supply. The law was intended to prevent and reverse illegal immigration by Hispanics, but the effect was to cause a mass departure from the many of the agricultural businesses which relied on these workers to form the bulk of their labour force: ‘In the north of the state, the pungent smell of rotting tomatoes hangs in the air across huge tranches of land that have been virtually abandoned by workers who, through fear or anger, are no longer turning up to gather the harvest.’ [52] But the effects went deeper. Before the laws introduced it was estimated that 4.2 percent of the workforce or 95,000 people were undocumented but paying $130.3 million in state and local taxes. Their departure from the state or withdrawal to the black economy threatened to reduce the size of the local economy by $40 million. Moreover, employers had to spend more money on screening prospective employees, on HR staff to check paperwork, and on insuring for potential legal liabilities from inadvertent breaches of the law. [53]
These developments are not equivalent to the type of policies with which social democracy occasionally (and decreasingly) attempts to ameliorate the excesses of capitalism. On the one hand, social democratic reforms are usually intended to enable the system in general to function more effectively for capitalists and more equitably for the majority, however irreconcilable these aims may be. But far-right reforms of the type just discussed are not even intended to work in the interests of capitalists, nor do they: they really embody irrational racist beliefs which take precedence over all else.
To sum up the argument so far, I have tried here to set out a general argument about the nature populist hard-right and, specifically, to show that it plays a contradictory role: always opposed to the actual interests of the working class, but sometimes also undermining – albeit unintentionally – the interests of capital. I will now use this discussion as a basis for analysing one of the two episodes with which I began this article: the UK vote to leave the EU and the election of Trump as President of the US. These required different responses: a choice in one and a refusal to choose in the other, despite the presence of the populist hard-right in both. In one, socialists were faced with a particular outcome, UK withdrawal from the EU, which was indeterminate in its effects (there are both left and right-wing reasons for leaving) and in which the pro-Leave sections of the bourgeoisie were (in Gramsci’s terms) in error over what it meant for British capital. In the other, socialists were being asked to support a party (the Democrats) which had engineered the exclusion of the only genuine left-winger from the ballot and a particular candidate (Clinton) standing on a platform of maintaining the very neoliberal policies which the left is opposed. This, I will argue, is the difference between a situation in which socialists can at least attempt to shape events and one in which they are effectively their prisoners. The key is being able to tell which is which.
I will focus here on the former. On June 23, 2016, 17.5 million British people, or 51.9 percent of the turnout, voted to leave the EU, making their country the first to do so. Most predictions were for a narrow victory for Remain and the result seemed to surprise everyone, including the leaders of the Leave campaign. In the cases of both the US and France, the accusation thrown at the left was that of failing to support the lesser evil. In this case, the charge was even more serious: socialists who had voted Leave were effectively supporting the greater evil in the form of local manifestations of populist far-right. Given the extremity of this claim, the starting point of any discussion has to be what the EU is, and what it does.
 
The European Union: Origins, Developments, Structures
The EU grew out of post-war European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), but the decisive turning point in its development was the 1958 Treaty of Rome, which established the European Economic Community (EEC). As Guglielmo Carchedi has pointed out, there were four interlocking determinants leading to this outcome. [54]
The first was the need to end the entrenched geopolitical rivalry between France and Germany, which had resulted in three wars over the previous 80 years. After World War II, there was general agreement amongst most of the Western ruling classes that this rivalry, which had caused such devastation in Europe, could not continue – a conclusion which, for obvious reasons, the French were particularly keen to support. Even had it wished to resist, Germany was in no position to do so, following its catastrophic defeat in World War II and subsequent division into Eastern and Western states. West Germany was initially at the mercy of the Western powers and its politicians had little choice but to agree to membership first of the ECSC and then the EEC. (Incidentally, what does it say about European values that leading politicians and bureaucrats across that continent believed France and West Germany would end up at war yet again without mutual integration into these supra-state institutions?)
The second determinant was the broader context of the Cold War. US hegemony involved both NATO and the EEC, and strengthening the latter involved a degree of self-sacrifice on the part of the US ruling class, for the greater good of the system. The US undertook the task of restoring economic health to Western Europe (and Japan), partly to re-establish them as customers for US goods, but also as part of facing down the Stalinist regimes in the East. The US therefore encouraged the emergence of the EEC, knowing that it would eventually be an economic competitor, but would remain politically subordinate. The relationship between the EU and US geopolitical strategy did not, however, end with the fall of the USSR: it is no accident that, before the Eastern European states were allowed to join the EU, the US insisted they first of all join NATO.
The third determinant was the need for Western European capital to seek markets and sources of investment beyond the territorial boundaries of the individual nation-states, during a period (roughly 1948-1973) which saw the biggest and most sustained growth the system has ever undergone, and is ever likely to undergo again. And this expansion was of course occurring as the Western powers were losing their colonies, meaning that the classical imperialist strategy of exporting capital to India or Algeria was no longer going to be feasible. The original six countries of the EEC became the initial terrain of investment and expansion for capital needing a home, which then expanded further outwards as new members joined.
The fourth determinant was the need to avoid protectionism, which was widely, if not entirely accurately believed to have prolonged the crisis of the 1930s. But while the EEC did remove protectionist tariff barriers within Europe, it maintained tariff barriers against the Global South and its member states continued to dump highly-subsidised goods and destroy industries there, a strategy enshrined in the Common Agricultural Policy, which Nigel Harris once memorably described as ‘a criminal conspiracy against humanity’. [55]
The creation of the EEC was dependent on one condition: that actual or potential member states possessed approximately the same level of capitalist development, with broadly the same kind of Social or Christian Democratic welfare regimes. Unsurprisingly then, the original EEC embodied, at a supra-state level, the Keynesian liberal democratic policies characteristic of most of the member states of the time. But, as this affinity suggests, the EEC was not an entity floating disconnected above the capitalist system and, as the turn to neoliberalism began to be implemented through the late 1970s and early 1980s, it began to reflect that change. The neoliberal turn took place in two phases.
The first occurred in the early 1980s. Britain joined in 1973 and voted to remain in 1975, altering the balance of power within the EEC. Thatcher’s subsequent election in 1979 was followed by her successful attempt to push the EEC to the right. From the moment that the Commission published the 1985 White Paper, Completing the Internal Market, the direction of travel has been increasingly in what we would now regard as a neoliberal direction: ‘National markets should be deregulated and liberalized; national companies were to be privatized. An emerging common competition policy was to secure that the market was no longer disturbed through state intervention or ownership even in areas such as telecommunications, public procurement and energy.’ [56] Yet the shift of the labour movement and its reformist representatives behind what was now the EU begins to cohere precisely at this time, gathering momentum after 1987 and the adoption of the Single European Act.
Most of the British left had originally been hostile to the EU and in 1975 revolutionaries and most left reformists argued for the UK to leave; but following the electoral consolidation of the Thatcher regime during the 1980s a remarkable change in attitude took place. In the British case, this was clearly a response to the defeats suffered by the trade unions, above all in the Miners’ Strike (1984–5), but it was emblematic of a wider process. The French case is particularly significant as the Socialist Party government that came to power in 1981 was the last serious reformist experiment in Europe before that of SYRIZA in 2015. Within two years it had abandoned all its promises to achieve positive reforms for the working class and began to implement neoliberal policies. The person mainly responsible was Jacques Delors, the Finance Minister, who later became the president of the European Commission. As a supposed socialist, he was able to sell the outlandish notion of the EU as an essentially social-democratic, solidaristic institution to the British Trade Union Congress and the Labour Party in the late 1980s. In this context, it is worth noting just how minimal most of the so-called protections offered by the EU actually are:
The EU has adopted a number of directives that deal with social-policy issues. But these directives hardly harmonise existing social-policy legislation: instead, they introduce an absolute minimum level which has no effect in most member states, because it is well below the national standards. And in the case of more ambitious policy initiatives such as those in the field of employment, failure to meet their respective targets is not threatened by sanctions, as failure to meet the convergence criteria has been. [57]
The second phase of the neoliberal transition began in 1991 and set the EU on course towards the current austerity regime. There were three components to this, two of which were direct consequences of the fall of the Stalinist regimes. The first, and most decisive, was the reunification of Germany, introducing a massive new state in the middle of Europe, the largest in both territory and in population – in other words, the outcome which the European project was originally initiated to avoid. The second component was the centrepiece of the entire project: the introduction of the Euro. The French insisted on this as their price for allowing Germany to reunify, acting on the assumption that the only way to curtail German ambition was by making it adhere to a new currency along with all the other member-states. This was a huge miscalculation, as Germany has far greater economic power than any other member-state. The third component was the accession of most of the East European states, which changed the composition of the EU in a fundamental way, from a cabal of richer countries with more less the same level of development to a formation with a much higher level of unevenness, but in which all members were nevertheless expected to follow the same rules. Following the 1991 Maastricht Treaty the convergence criteria required member states to control inflation, maintain deficits of no more than 3 percent of GDP, and limit national debt to 60 percent of GDP. For those intending to adopt the Euro, interest rates have to be no more than 2 percent higher than the average of the three countries with the lowest inflation rates. [58] Individual member-states are unable to increase the money supply (‘quantitative easing’) in response to recessionary pressures, but neither can they alter interest rates or devalue. The only ways to achieve competitiveness is unemployment and/or wage cuts, leading to a permanently low level of growth, massive unemployment. This is why, as two critics point out, the convergence criteria ‘do not include a criterion on unemployment’, an issue regarded as being ‘of secondary importance’. [59] The impact on the young in particular has been devastating and youth unemployment is as high as 50 percent in some areas, with mass emigration the inevitable result.
In addition to maintaining the neoliberal order there are at least three other aspects of the EU which make its existence impossible for socialists to support. First, the EU is designed to maintain the structure of existing inequalities between European nation-states, although this has only become entirely obvious since the enlargement process after 1992, when the poorer areas of Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean were allowed to join. As Michael Roberts writes, ‘the Eurozone countries are more different from each other than countries in just about any currency union you could name’. [60] Beneath all the talk of ‘solidarity’ this is inescapable, as the EU has a financial and industrial structure designed to meet the needs of the strongest economies – France and Germany and, since the advent of the Euro, increasingly just the latter. It is a half-way house between the original Common Market and the ‘ever-closer’ political union which the Treaties envisage, and consequently experiences the worst of both worlds: it forces the weakest members to play by the same rules as the stronger, which will always be detrimental to them; but there is no mechanism to transfer funds or resources within the EU in the way that can be done within actual nation-states. [61]
Second, although the EU is not an imperialist power in its own right, as a collective body it does increasingly act as an adjunct to NATO, and consequently as a support to US geopolitical interests. [62] I have already noted how the US initially encouraged and supported the formation of the EU’s predecessors as part of a Cold War bulwark against its Russian imperial rival, and this is the main reason why there was the much-boasted no war in (Western) Europe between 1945 and 1991: although the EU member-states were engaged in economic competition with each other, they were simultaneously united behind the USA. But if the EU itself does not act as an imperial power, the main constituent nation-states increasingly do, and they by no means always bow to Washington’s wishes. Here again we see the more powerful placing their own interests over those of supposed European unity. For some this is externalised, as in the persistently underestimated French presence in Central Africa, but for others it is manifested in the heart of Europe itself – most obviously in the case of Germany, whose recognition of Croatian independence in 1992 contributed to the subsequent Yugoslavian bloodbath.
Third, the EU is structurally racist. The very idea of ‘Europe’ is necessarily exclusionary. It is little remembered now that Morocco applied for EU membership in September 1987, one imagines to the hilarity of the Commissioners, who turned it down on the grounds that Morocco ‘did not meet the criteria for membership’. [63] The much-vaunted freedom of movement within the EU is predicated on blocking the movement of those without, as tens of thousands of desperate refugees are currently discovering. ‘While the EU removes internal borders to encourage the free flow of people, goods and services, it erects more extensive borders around its outer edges, to further separate and delink Europe from natural networks and transnational flows that have developed over the course of history.’ [64] Further, as Phillip Cunliffe points out, there are consequences for people attempting to overcome these barriers: ‘The EU has drowned tens of thousands of Africans in the Mediterranean – a record of racial mass murder that outdoes any of the far-right populist parties that have never wielded national power, whether that be in Austria, Britain, France or Germany.’ [65] The spectacle of these people being trapped in the camps, behind barbed-wire fences and facing the police dogs and tear gas on the borders of European civilization is obscene enough, but it is compounded by the attitude of the constituent states themselves. For here again, their individual interests take precedence over even collective barbarity, as the Schengen Agreement collapses into a free-for-all to defend individual borders against the alien hordes. There are clearly evils here, but it is not apparent to me that they are ‘lesser’.
Can the EU be transformed as the left Remain camp claim? Is ‘another European Union possible’? [66] In reality, the EU is structured in such a fashion that it is impossible to reform it in any meaningful or serious way. As the sociologist Colin Crouch noted: ‘The EU is hardly a shining example of democracy’:
Although the original European Economic Community came into existence during the high period of post-war democracy, it was itself conceived as a technocratic institution. Its internal democracy has developed since the 1980s, a time when post-democratic approaches to governance have been dominant among elites ... These elements, together with the fact that most national governments have been concerned to ensure that European democracy is in no position to rival that of nation states, have produced extremely weak parliamentary structures, cut off from the real life of most of the population. [67]
Crouch identifies a central paradox: during the entire period of the post-war boom, when popular participation in politics was at its height, the predecessors of the EU made no pretence of being anything other than a technocracy; EU ‘democracy’ is a product of the neoliberal era – indeed, in many ways it was the first manifestation of the social neoliberalism that we associate with first with Bill Clinton in the US and then with Tony Blair in the UK. And, as in these national cases, the democracy serves as a cover for the neoliberalism. In 1939, neoliberalism’s greatest theoretical forerunner Freidrich von Hayek wrote an article in which he argued that Interstate Federalism at the European level would be desirable. Why? Mainly because it would ensure that economic activity should be removed as far as possible from the responsibility of meddling politicians who interfered with the market order to win electoral support from ignorant voters. [68] And in this respect at least, the EU has attempted to implement his programme by centralising power in the hands of appointed officials. For, as Claus Offe points out, ‘it is precisely those EU institutions that have the greatest impact on the daily life of people which are the farthest removed from democratic accountability: the European Central Bank the European Court of Justice, and the European Commission’. [69] The three institutions mentioned by Offe are worth describing in slightly more detail.
The European Central Bank (ECB) is run by unelected bankers. The conservative, but on this issue highly acute commentator, Edward Luttwak, made several extremely accurate predictions about how the ECB would operate three years before it came into existence in January 1999:
... it is to receive no instructions either from member counties or from any institution of the European Union. Such is the sovereign status of the institution ... Beyond the enormous leverage of interest across the entire spectrum of economic life, beyond its control of credit in general, the ECB will be empowered to invigilate quite a few specific rules, including the three sacrosanct prohibitions: no financing of state debts by central banks ... no financing loans on favourable terms to any public body or state-owned company ... no guarantees by any member country of any other member country’s debt, the no bail out rule. [70]
And so it has proved. The European Central Bank was essentially modelled on the Bundesbank – even down to its obsession with fighting inflation. Now, inflation has not been a general problem for capitalism in over twenty years, and for the last 7 years – with the partial exceptions of fuel and energy – deflation has been a bigger issue; nevertheless, this non-existent danger has been used to constrain state spending and, since 2008, to promote the austerity agenda. The policies of the ECB are perhaps the most extreme example of what Luttwak calls ‘central-bankism’, but with this difference; unlike the Bundesbank or any equivalent national body, the ECB is not part of a state apparatus and is even further removed any form of democratic accountability.
The European Court of Justice (ECJ) is often – and in the UK, quite deliberately – confused with the European Court of Human Rights, even though they are totally different institutions. The ECJ is made up of – readers may be detecting a theme here – unelected judges tasked with interpreting EU law and ensuring that the legislation passed by individual countries is compatible with the EU’s overall positions. Wolfgang Streeck has set out the function it currently performs
The main player in this integration through supranational liberalization, or liberalization through international integration, was the European Court of Justice, whose rulings became increasingly unassailable for member states and their citizens, especially as majorities for social protection measures could no longer be found following the accession of Eastern Europe. Whereas in the 1990s it was mainly the Commission that successfully propelled the privatization of large parts of the public sector, using the tool of competition law, in the following decade the European Court of Justice handed down judgements in the name of the free movement of services and capital that questioned the right of workers to strike and threatened to curtail workforce participation. [71]
The European Commission is at the core of the EU. Needless to say, it is also unelected. Members are nominated by the national governments of individual member states and appointed for a fixed period of time. Typical of the appointees are New Labour architect Peter Mandelson and Jean-Claude Junker, who was for 20 years the president of Luxemburg, a country that primarily exists to act as the world’s biggest tax haven. The Commission alone has the power to initiate legislation, three types of which – regulations, directives and decisions – are binding. It mediates between member states, upholds treaties against attempts by any member states to break them, and represents the supposedly collective interests of member states externally. It is occasionally argued in response to criticisms of ‘bureaucracy’ that the number of staff employed by the Commission is relatively small compared to that of most nation-states. This is true, but irrelevant, since the issue at stake is not the size of officialdom, but the untrammelled power which it wields.
We should note that these institutions show as little regard for infringements of democracy in member states as they do in relation to their own practice. Agata Pyzik notes that Hungary ‘met with criticism from the EU not when its human rights were abused’ but ‘when Victor Orban’s government threatened the EU with a ban on imports’:
The European Union didn’t react to President Orban marginalising the opposition’s legal rights. It didn’t react to a government minister’s recent racist comments on Jews and Roma, comparing them to animals and bringing back the rhetoric of Nazism. It did intervene, though, when Hungary started to limit free trade. The message is: we don’t care about your politics, unless you’ll mess with our economic requirements. [72]
Do any of the institutions have democratic legitimacy? The European Council has been claimed as a democratic body, but a closer inspection reveals illusionary nature of such an assessment. If the Commission is a supranational body, the Council is an intergovernmental one. It consists of the heads of state or heads of government of the member states, who are of course elected in their own countries, but as Offe writes: ‘Its democratic legitimacy is limited by the fact that members, while certainly being elected into their offices of prime minister etc., are thereby mandated to serve the good of the country in which they have been elected, not that of the European Union. Members of the EC thus rule over and make decisions binding populations that have not elected them nor can they vote them out of office.’ [73] Yet they do come together to act as a governing body over Europe. It proceeds by ‘consensus’ – in other words what is acceptable to France and German axis, and increasingly, to Germany alone. No votes are conducted or minutes taken, and decisions are signalled by the President arriving at ‘a conclusion’.
But surely the European Parliament at least can be truly described as democratic? It is of course made of elected representatives, but their power is severely limited. Perry Anderson’s summary of its lack of power concludes with an appropriately contemptuous analogy:
... formally the ‘popular element’ in this institutional complex, as its only elective body. However, in defiance of the Treaty of Rome, it possesses no common electoral system: no permanent home ... being confined to simple yes/no votes on the community budget as a whole; no say over executive appointments, other than the threat in extremis to reject the whole Commission; no right to initiate legislation, merely the ability to amend or veto it. In all these respects, it functions less like a legislative than a ceremonial apparatus of government, providing a symbolic façade not altogether unlike, say, the monarchy in Britain. [74]
These structures are one reason why we should reject claims that the EU is as amenable to reform as any nation-state. In fact, it is much less so. This is not, as is sometimes claimed, an argument for British or any other form of nationalism. [75] It is an argument for democracy – or at least for as great a degree of democracy as can be achieved under bourgeois rule. Capitalist states are permanent structures until they are overthrown, although they can adopt different policies according to the political parties or coalitions which oversee the apparatus at any time, and these can be more or less – usually less – beneficial to working class and oppressed groups. In the case of the EU, the balance between unelected state managers and elected representatives is even more heavily weighted in favour of the former than in its constituent members. Reforms are never easily achieved, particularly under neoliberalism, since it has removed several mechanisms from control of states. Nevertheless, it is not impossible – even in Britain. It is at least conceivable that Bernie Sanders could have become President of the US and that Jeremy Corbyn might yet become Prime Minister of the UK; it is not conceivable that any comparable figure could play a comparable role in the EU, not least because these offices do not exist. In any event, it would be easier to achieve reforms in Washington or at Westminster than in the EU, where it requires winning unanimity in the Council, and there is more possibility of simultaneous revolutions in all soon-to-be-27 member states than of this happening.
Given its ferocious commitment to maintaining the capitalist order, it is unsurprising that the overwhelming majority of the British capitalist class wanted to stay in the EU. 85percent of Confederation of British Industry members supported Remain while 5 percent supported Leave. ‘Britain has long had a mid-Atlantic policy’, noted Tony Norfield before the referendum, ‘being drawn to continental Europe for much of its business, but maintaining a wide range of non-European interests, including political, military and spying arrangements with the US.’ His conclusion was: ‘The last thing the UK’s large corporations would want to do is leave the EU, with the risk that trade and investment relationships might be affected, and with a knock-on effect for the City’s business.’ [76] British companies are currently part of the so-called passporting system whereby a bank or other financial institution deemed to have met EU regulatory standards is authorised to trade in one member state of the EU or European Economic Area (EEA – i.e. the EU plus Norway, Iceland and Lichtenstein) and is thereby also authorised to trade in any other state; if this is withdrawn – which it almost certainly will be when Brexit eventually begins – they may have to move to other bases on the European mainland. Similarly, Britain has currently over $1 trillion stock in foreign direct investments and is the site of nearly 500 multinational headquarters, mostly in London and the South-East of England: in large part this is because of easy access to Europe.
 
Social neoliberalism versus right-wing populism:
‘component parts of one and the same system’
Given the nature of the EU outlined above, what could possibly persuade socialists that it was worth defending? Yanis Varoufakis wrote shortly before the French Presidential election that, ‘the decision of many leftists to maintain an equal distance between Macron and Le Pen is inexcusable. The imperative to oppose racism trumps opposition to neoliberal policies’. [77] Leaving aside the extraordinary notion that neoliberalism does not itself generate racism, we should be grateful to the former Greek Finance Minister for stating the position so clearly and unambiguously: our duty is to defend the mainstream positions of the capitalist ruling class. And he applies the same logic to the EU itself – even after all that Greece has been subjected to by the Troika – arguing in the introduction to a recent pro-EU collection of essays that: ‘The disintegration of this frustrating alliance [i.e. the EU] will create a vortex that will consume us all – a postmodern replay of the 1930s.’ [78] Now the stakes have been raised: the threat is not simply racism, but fascism.
These arguments do not necessarily involve fantasies that the EU is institution capable of advancing working-class interests, or even that it can be transformed into one; indeed, some have no illusions in the EU at all. A principled Labour left-winger like Ed Rooksby, for example, was able to put the case for Remain in its strongest form, precisely because he takes seriously the word ‘evil’ in the phrase ‘lesser evil’, and eschews any claims for progressiveness such as those made by cheerleaders for Clinton or Macron. He argues that it is only because the alternative was even worse that we should have cast our votes to stay in the EU:
Any realistic assessment on the part of the radical left of the likely consequences of a victory for either side had to conclude that neither a victory for Remain nor for Leave would constitute a positive outcome. The real question was not so much which side we should want to win, but which of them we should desire most to lose. For many of us, except a small band of Left Exit (‘Lexit’) campaigners, it was very clear which of the two was the least worst option. For while Remain promised little other than business as usual (neoliberalism, austerity, ‘sensible controls on immigration’) under the aegis of continued membership of the EU, Leave represented something much darker and more dangerous. In the end the worst worst option emerged victorious. We have to be absolutely clear about this and indeed about how bad things now are. The Brexit vote is a major triumph for forces of national chauvinism, xenophobia, racism and the hard right. As such it is a catastrophe for workers – particularly immigrant workers – and the left. [79]
Others went still further, arguing in effect for abstention. The editors of the journal Salvage have as few illusions in the EU as Rooksby, and the bulk of their statement on the eve of the referendum was weighted towards explaining exactly why that EU should not be supported by the left, before setting out what they saw as the respective implications – negative in different ways – for left supporters of both Leave and Remain: ‘Any left pro-Brexiter who believes a Brexit vote is a triumph for them is deluding themselves: it will inaugurate a crowing reaction. Any radical Bremainer celebrating a future win is celebrating the success of Cameron’s strategy of Europe-wide neoliberalism in the service of British capital and the state.’ [80] However, the perfectly balanced judgement contained in these two sentences indicates what I see as the problem with the editorial position, that of false equivalence.
Take the very title of the editorial, which is a variant of the ‘neither Washington nor Moscow’ slogan first raised by Max Shachtman’s Worker’s Party and later adopted by the International Socialist tradition. ‘Neither Westminster not Brussels’ is in fact subtly different from the original refusal to take sides in the Cold War. In a British context, the latter meant opposing the US-dominated West while rejecting claims that that the USSR-dominated East represented a better alternative: exiting from one camp did not mean entering the other. But this is not what is involved in the Salvage reworking. Unless you are lucky enough to live in Scotland, there is no mechanism by which to reject both Westminster and Brussels: whether one abstained or not, there was always going to be an outcome involving one or the other, staying or leaving. So: which? Unlike Rooksby, the editors would not call for a Remain vote, but their reasons for refusing to support Leave are the same as his: the domination of the campaign by the hard right:
If [the left] lines up now behind Brexit, given the massive and overwhelming centre of gravity of the debate, what it is supporting is the actually-existing-Brexit, which has been defined by the racist, nationalist right. In the case of a win for this Brexit, it is those forces that have won, and those forces that stand to gain. This is not to say that a movement for left-Brexit could never be built – and there is an argument that that is a task that must, with immense care, begin. What is certain, however, is that at this moment, in the context of a public debate in which the running for exit is being made by the baying Europhobe right, there is no space for a radical position to be anything but utterly marginal. To join the campaign for this Brexit now would grant a life-long free pass to the Carnival of Reaction. If Britain votes for exit, the universe will not know or care of the impeccable socialist reasoning behind the small proportion of radical Brexit votes. It will know that Farage, IDS, and the pro-borders hard right have got what they wanted. [81]
There are a number of sleights-of-hand in this passage. No-one on the left argued for joining the right-wing Brexit campaign, but rather organised their own; and the emphasis on perceptions and narratives comes uncomfortably close to post-modern claims that reality has no existence outside of its media representations – or worse, that reality is actually created by them. These excesses aside, however, Rooksby and the Salvage editors represent, respectively, the strongest cases for supporting the lesser evil and for abstention in the face of equivalent evils. Nevertheless, if we look at the range of arguments for either Remaining in the EU or at least not arguing to Leave, from those with illusions in the EU to those which are militantly hostile to it, there are a number of reasons why they are wrong.
 
Misunderstanding and indeterminacy
The first and most abstract point is the Voting for a right-wing individual (like Trump) or party (like UKIP) is, in effect, to support the entirety of their programme, however incoherent it may be. No-one on the left could seriously advocate this: ‘the worse the better’ has never been a serious strategic orientation. But voting for a demand which a right-wing individual or party happens to support is not the same. It is perfectly possible for two groups of people to support the same outcome in the expectation that it will have, not only different, but diametrically opposite effects. When this happens, it is usually for one of two reasons: either one group has simply misunderstood the situation – in other words, the two opposing groups cannot both be right and the meaning of the outcome will be different from what one of them expects; or because the situation is genuinely indeterminate – in other words, the outcome will be decided by what the different groups do, both in the process leading up to it and in the aftermath. I will illustrate this with an example from the history of the Russian Revolution, recently the subject of an entire book, which combines both misunderstanding and indeterminacy.
When the February Revolution broke out, Lenin and several members of his immediate circle were in exile in Switzerland. Desperately worried that the revolutionary crisis would conclude with the formation of a Provisional government committed to continuing Russia’s role in the war, Lenin wanted to return to Russia to argue that socialist revolution was now on the agenda, but was unable to do so because of the barriers to cross-border travel imposed by the conflict. There was only one realistic way of reaching Russia, but this involved requesting and then accepting the assistance of one of the imperialist powers then engaged in devastating Europe: Germany.
Catherine Merridale notes that when the idea was first mooted, ‘Lenin’s initial response to the idea was dismissive’, for ‘to accept the assistance of an enemy in time of war would have been to expose himself to charges of treason’. [82] These charges were indeed raised in July 1917, but ultimately Lenin had no choice; his only solution was to approach the German Embassy. The General Staff does not appear to have previously considered sending Lenin back to Russia, but agreed once his proposal had been made. As a result, the Bolshevik leader and thirty-one of his comrades were provided with the famous ‘sealed train’ which took them from Switzerland, though Germany and Sweden to Finland and hence to Petrograd where he shortly afterwards unveiled the April Theses. While in Stockholm, Lenin told his Swedish hosts,
... it was imperialist Britain, fragrantly blocking all the obvious routes from Switzerland, that bore responsibility for forcing him to go through Germany at all. It was true, he granted, that the Germans hoped to benefit from his return, but they were making a mistake. ‘The Bolshevik leadership of the revolution’, he concluded, ‘is much more dangerous for German imperial power and capitalism than the leadership of Kerensky and Miliukov.’ [83]
Yet the day after Lenin’s arrival at the Finland Station, the German Foreign Ministry Liaison Officer Grunau at the imperial court forwarded a note from the political section of the General Staff at Stockholm: ‘Lenin’s entry into Russia successful. He is working exactly as we would wish.’ [84] Misunderstanding or indeterminacy?
Erich Ludendorff and the other members of the German High Command facilitated the return of Lenin to Russia, knowing that this was likely to lead to the greater radicalisation of the revolutionary process. In effect, they were prepared to see socialist revolution take place in Russia, because it would mean the withdrawal from the War by one of the Triple Entente, thus freeing up military resources which had been pinned down on the Eastern Front and allow them to be reallocated to the struggle with Britain and France. A further consideration was that Germany would be able to take advantage of Russian weakness to seize part of the former Tsarist Empire – which it did by briefly securing control of the Baltic States in March 1918 following the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. As S.A. Smith writes in his recent history of the revolution, the eventual terms were ‘punitive’ and meant that ‘the Baltic states, a large part of Belorussia, and the whole of the Ukraine were excised from the former empire, with the result that Russia lost one-third of its agriculture and railways, virtually all its oil and cotton production, three quarters of its coal and iron. The Treaty effectively made Germany dominant throughout eastern and central Europe’. [85] German State Secretary Hintz wrote shortly after the Treaty was signed:
What do we want in the East? The military paralysis of Russia. The Bolsheviks are taking care of this better than any other Russian party, without our contributing a single man or a single penny. We cannot demand that they ... should love us for squeezing the country like an orange ... We are not cooperating with the Bolsheviks, we are exploiting them. That is what politics is about. [86]
It is obvious why Lenin accepted help from the military wing of the German ruling class: he had no other realistic prospect of getting back to Russia and consequently of influencing events. He did not, of course, give political support to the German war aims, but did bringing down the Provisional Government not ‘objectively’ contribute to strengthening one imperialist alliance over another? Was Lenin not ‘playing into the hands’ of the German High Command? For Lenin, short-term German advantage was acceptable because his analysis led him to believe that the whole of Europe was on the verge of revolution, regardless of which imperialism had achieved momentary supremacy. In these circumstances the creation, survival and example of the Soviet republic took precedence over all else. Tariq Ali summarises both expectations of German militarists and Russian revolutionaries: ‘“Even if these madmen succeed [said the Kaiser] once we’ve won the war we’ll crush them.” Lenin’s response to this remark was swift: a German revolution was on the way that would permanently settle accounts with the Hohenzollerns.’ [87] In his History of the Russian Revolution Trotsky records Ludendorff’s final judgement on the decision to allow Lenin back to Russia: ‘“I could not suppose” so he justifies himself, speaking of the Russian revolution, “that it would become the tomb of our own might.” This merely means that of the two strategists, Ludendorff who permitted Lenin to go, and Lenin who accepted his permission, Lenin saw farther and better.’ [88]
Trotsky here highlights Ludendorff’s misunderstanding what the outcome (Russia’s revolutionary departure from the war) would involve; but it seems more accurate to emphasise the indeterminacy of that outcome. For the Russian Revolution did initially allow Germany to transfer troops from the former Eastern Front to the Western Front and, although total victory was never going to be possible after the failure to achieve it early in the conflict, a negotiated peace could have been achieved which left Germany in a stronger position than before August 1914. What rendered this impossible, and led to German defeat, was the policy of submarine warfare which led to the sinking of US ships, which in turn provided the excuse for US entry into the war. [89] Smith writes that: ‘Lenin’s calculation that the treaty [of Brest-Litovsk] would be short-lived proved to be correct, albeit not for the reason – a socialist revolution in Germany – on which he banked.’ [90] By this he means that German territorial gains were lost following defeat in the field and not overturned by revolution at home; but this is an extraordinarily foreshortened analysis. The German Revolution that Lenin anticipated had been building throughout the later stages of the war and broke out on 6 November with the mutiny of sailors who refused to be sent on a suicidal attempt to reverse Germany’s impending military defeat. [91] And, if not this precise event, then something of the sort, was what Lenin had rightly argued was going to take place.
I am obviously not comparing the Russian Revolution to the UK referendum on leaving the EU, but in both cases there were issues of misunderstanding and indeterminacy involved. Indeed, you could argue that the German High Command had a far more plausible argument for supporting the Russian Revolution that the right-wing Brexiteers had for exiting the EU, since the former event at least had the possibility of delivering their geopolitical goals, but the latter was never going to work to the benefit of British capitalism.
 
Lesser evils and immediate dangers
In a sense Draper’s argument about how Social-Democratic acceptance of the doctrine of the lesser evil in Germany during the early 1930s led to disaster did not go far enough. Trotsky’s writings on Germany are central to any discussion of this subject, but he rejected the notion of the lesser evil:
We Marxists regard Brüning and Hitler ... as component parts of one and the same system. The question as to which one of them is the ‘lesser evil’ has no sense, for the system we are fighting against needs all these elements. But these elements are momentarily involved in conflicts with one another and the party of the proletariat must take advantage of these conflicts in the interest of the revolution ... When one of my enemies sets before me small daily portions of poison and the second, on the other hand, is about to shoot straight at me, then I will first knock the revolver out of the hand of my second enemy, for this gives me an opportunity to get rid of my first enemy. But that does not at all mean that the poison is a ‘lesser evil’ in comparison with the revolver. [92]
Trotsky is making two points here. One is to draw a connection between fascism and the representatives of ‘everyday’ capitalist exploitation – a point of the utmost relevance to this discussion. As Liz Fekete points out:
Neoliberalism is not just an economic project. It is also deeply political, an attempt to transform the state from within, merging nation states into interconnecting market states. To date, the EU supranational entity, with its weak parliament and unaccountable European Commission, has been central to that process. Through subordinating ‘social Europe’ (social protection and equality) to the interests of global corporations and global finance (competition law and market efficiencies), those who drive the European Commission may have created the conditions for the EU’s nemesis – nationalism and, following Brexit, potential dissolution. [93]
What Fekete identifies here is the symbiotic relationship between social neoliberalism and the new hard right, in particular, the way in which the former recreates the conditions for the latter to emerge. ‘The cosmopolitan identitarianism of the leaders of the neoliberal age ... calls forth by way of a reaction a national identitarianism’, writes Streeck, ‘while anti-national re-education from above produces an anti-elitist nationalism from below.’ [94] Varoufakis himself recognises the relationship, as he recalls in his memoirs:
During my discussion I often warned them that crushing us was not in their interests. If our democratic, Europeanist, progressive challenge was strangled, the deepening crisis would produce a xenophobic, illiberal, anti-Europeanist nationalist international. This is exactly what happened after the crushing of the Greek Spring. [95]
The tragedy here is that Varoufakis still imagines that his opponents were making a choice, rather than following the logic of their position.
There is a genuine parallel with the rise of fascism here, but not the one that is usually imagined. In his classic account Robert Paxton notes that one of the preconditions for fascism to emerge was:
The Left ... had to lose its position as the automatic recourse for all the partisans of change – the dreamers and the angry, among the middle class as well as the working class ... Indeed, fascists can find their space only after socialism has become powerful enough to have had some share in governing, and thus to have disillusioned part of its traditional working-class and intellectual clientele. [96]
The parallel is this: the liberal and reformist left have, until relatively recently at any rate, ‘had some share in governing’ the social neoliberal order – and more than simply a share: as I have argued here, the EU, Clinton and Blair were to large extent responsible for imposing it. The populist reaction is therefore not simply a displaced one against the depredations of capitalism-in-general but a capitalism which has been guided and defended by politicians and their ideological supporters purporting to be of the left. To continue supporting these forces, however ‘critically’ or reluctantly, is simply to perpetuate this dance of death, as Nancy Fraser explains:
Although [neoliberalism and reactionary populism] are by no means normatively equivalent, both are products of unrestrained capitalism, which everywhere destabilizes lifeworlds and habitats, bringing in its wake both individual liberation and untold suffering. Liberalism expresses the first, liberatory side of this process, while glossing over the rage and pain associated with the second. Left to fester in the absence of an alternative, those sentiments fuel authoritarianisms of every sort ... Thus, far from being the antidote to fascism, (neo)liberalism is its partner in crime.
Fraser’s conclusion is that ‘the left should refuse the choice between progressive neoliberalism and reactionary populism’. [97] So important is this point that I will take the extraordinary step of agreeing with Slavoj Žižek, who writes of the way in which ‘the threat of a new fascism embodied in anti-immigrant Rightist populism’ is ‘perceived as the principal enemy against which we should all unite, from (whatever remains of) the radical left to mainstream liberal democrats (including EU administrators ... )’. Against this, he writes that we need to ‘persist in the basic Marxist insight: this “fascism” is strictly a secondary phenomenon engendered by its apparent opposite, the “open” liberal-democratic universe, so the only way to truly defeat it is to overcome the immanent limitations of the latter’. [98] But what if fascism in not a ‘secondary’ phenomenon?
This question brings us to the second point which Trotsky made: the need for a sense of priority. If you are in immediate danger then you should deal with it first, before dealing with others which may be equally deadly but less pressing: hence the need to crush the Nazis before turning to the overthrow of existing bourgeois state machine. No one could possibly disagree with this, but for a parallel with the 1930s Germany to be convincing we have to accept that the threat of fascism, or at least the populist far-right more generally is an immediate danger. As we have seen, Varoufakis hints at this, but the point is made more explicitly by Marxist historian Neil Faulkner. Here, fascism is not a possible risk, but an imminent threat: we are living through a re-run of the Last Days of Weimar:
... comparison with Weimar Germany is not misplaced. The example is more extreme, but that enables us to see underlying tendencies more clearly. The German Communists welcomed the terminal crisis of Weimar Germany in 1932 with the notion ‘after Hitler, our turn’. They failed to identify the main threat and the urgent need for a defensive battle by a united working class. The crisis is not yet of this kind, but the mistake of dogmatic Lexiteers is identical: an inability to understand that the rise of the far right across Europe is a clear and present danger, and that Brexit Britain is a project driven by the right, not the left.
Faulkner does not see this danger arising from classical fascist movements, which are no longer necessary due to the weakness of the labour movement and the left:
Hitler and Franco [?] faced great working-class movements created during the revolutionary upsurge of 1917–23. By contrast, contemporary proto-fascist politicians like Donald Trump, Nigel Farage, Marine Le Pen, Viktor Orban, Milos Zeman, and others face a labour movement hollowed out by 30 years of defeat and retreat ...... the far right does not need an army of Brownshirts to make headway in early twenty-first century Europe (or America). [99]
It is tempting here to paraphrase sci-fi writer Kim Stanley Robinson and say that the Weimar Republic analogy has become the last refuge of people incapable of grasping the current situation. [100] In relation to the UK in 2016, these comparisons are ridiculous.
On the one hand, they lack all historical perspective. There was a serious upsurge in both physical and verbal attacks on minority groups in Britain, including white EU immigrants, in the immediate aftermath of the vote. But the racism and xenophobia on display in those days were not caused by the result; they long preceded it and have now been given legitimacy by the demagoguery of the official Leave campaign. However, even if the result had gone the other way, I think it is likely that similar attacks would have taken place. These racists would still have regarded themselves as justified, but in defeat would have been vengeful rather than triumphant. We have to look this racist reality in its face but also be sober about its extent: most of the perpetrators will have been hard-core racists and fascists, not mainstream Leave voters. In any event, this was a spike in racist violence, not a new norm. Contrast that with the situation forty years ago.
Anyone who was politically active in the late 1970s or early 1980s will member from those years genuine no-go areas controlled by the fascist right in Birmingham and London, regular assaults on people of Asian and African-Caribbean heritage which often led to fatalities, repressive and openly racialist policing, and anti-fascist meetings or concerts which were liable to be attacked by squads of actual Nazis. [101] Here is the testimony of one writer of Asian heritage who lived through the period:
Racism in the 1970s was woven into the fabric of British society in a way unimaginable now. ‘Paki bashing’ was a national sport. Stabbings were common, firebombings of Asian houses almost weekly events, murders not uncommon. I attended largely white schools. My main memory is of being involved almost daily in fights with racists and of how normal it seemed to come home with a bruised lip or a black eye. And if you reported a racist attack to the police, they were as likely to arrest you as they were the racist. From union leaders conspiring with management to keep out black and Asian workers to immigration officers conducting ‘virginity tests’ on Asian women, racism was open, vicious and raw. [102]
None of this is true today, at least on anything like the same scale.
On the other hand, it assumes that because the ‘dominant media narrative’ is that Brexit is driven by racism and anti-migrant feeling this must be the case. As I have argued elsewhere, there were a series of complex and often opposed motivations for voting Leave. [103] One journalist recounts the variety of reasons he was offered in a West Midlands town which voted heavily for leave:
Speaking to Smethwick friends from white British and second-generation immigrant backgrounds, you hear support for Brexit from a diverse range of perspectives: there is the ‘Fortress Europe’ argument (people of Commonwealth origin not being able to move to the UK, because preference is given to EU citizens); British Asian shopkeepers who don’t like the Polish shops stealing business; an objection to the Thatcherite capitalist structure enshrined in the EU. Underlying all these things is a powerful revolt against what is perceived to be a self-serving political elite. [104]
Yet Smethwick is part of the parliamentary constituency of Warley which returned a Labour MP in June 2017 with over 67 percent of the vote. In other words, it is simply not the case that everyone who voted Leave had bought into a populist right agenda. The fate of UKIP demonstrates this. In the aftermath of Brexit, the air was thick with predictions that UKIP would sweep all before it, with Nigel Farage perhaps acting as Deputy Prime Minister to a Tory Brexiteer. In the subsequent 12 months, UKIP lost all 145 of its seats in the council elections of May 2017, lost its single parliamentary seat in June 2017 and saw its share of the vote fall from 13 percent in 2015 to 2 percent today. Nor have UKIP voters simply moved to supporting the Tories – some certainly have (and many of these are returning working-class Tories), but many moved to Labour. More generally, if anti-migrant, anti-Islamic racism was genuinely sweeping all before it, the dominant narrative in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks in Manchester and London would not have been solidarity, unity and the excellence of our public services. If politics had moved so decisively to the right, then support for the Labour Party during the General Election campaign would not have risen as relentlessly as it did – including in areas that voted for Leave – to the point where Corbyn was being seriously considered as a candidate for Prime Minister has on the basis of Labour’s most-left wing manifesto for over 30 years. The UK is subject to multiple crises, as we shall now see – but the imminent threat of fascism is not one of them.
 
The Triple Crisis
As we have seen, Brexit involved both misunderstandings on the part of the right-wing Brexiteers and indeterminacy in relation to the outcome – and following the UK General Election of 2017 that outcome has still very much to be decided. The class struggle is not a zero-sum game in which the weakness of one side automatically translates into the strength of the other. If the left is divided and the working class is organisationally weak, as they are, then this is obviously to the advantage of the ruling class; but neither of these conditions means that all their other ideological, geopolitical or economic problems have simply vanished. We need to start from this, and not conjure up an invincible enemy which exists in our imagination, which supposedly require us to endorse a supposedly ‘lesser evil’ – that is simply to repeat the errors of the British left during the 1980s, when Thatcher and her governments were assumed to have an underlying level of popular support they did not in fact possess – and the present Tory Government is far weaker than any of hers.
Brexit is both a product and an accelerant of three specific crises currently facing the British ruling class. In ascending order of seriousness, these are the crises of party, of strategy, and of state. Historically, these crises have tended to occur separately. In relation to strategy, obvious examples would be British ruling class miscalculations over Suez in 1956 or Iraq in 2003. In relation to party, we think of the divisions within the Conservative Party over the Corn Laws in 1846 or the Liberal Party over Irish Home Rule in the 1880s. But these types of crises are relatively common; state crises are relatively rare and tend to be local manifestations of a wider global upheaval. And there have only been three in the last century. The first ran from 1916 to 1921, from the Easter Rising in Ireland to the defeat of the Triple Alliance, with 1919 being the key year. The second one extended from 1968 to 1975, again involving massive working-class insurgency and war in Ireland, but also the anti-Vietnam War campaign, the women’s liberation movement, and other struggles against oppression: here, 1972 was the decisive year. The third state crisis opened in 2011 and was signalled by a series of disparate manifestations which were all ultimately connected by opposition to the austerity regime of the then ruling Coalition: inner-city riots in London sparked by police shooting of a black youth, student demonstrations and riots against tuition fees, public sector mass strikes and the election of a majority Scottish National Party (SNP) government to the Holyrood Parliament. In some ways, the last named was the least obviously radical, but it made holding a referendum on Scottish independence inevitable and hence threatened the territorial integrity of the British state in a way the others did not.
Take the crisis of strategy first. The inability of the political leadership of the British ruling class to think in strategic terms has been clearly demonstrated by Theresa May’s decision to call a snap General Election. This was, of course, the third major gamble taken by the Tory Party leadership in five years, following the Scottish independence referendum, where it narrowly succeeded, and the EU referendum, where it even more narrowly failed. The problem facing the Tories after the Brexit vote can be quite simply stated: they have been the main party of the British ruling class for over a hundred and fifty years, yet, because of a decision taken for internal party reasons – to see off the threat from UKIP and to resolve their divisions over the EU – they are now responsible for implementing a policy which is opposed by the vast majority of that class. This is one horn of the Tory dilemma. Some analysts have argued that this hostility on the part of business will derail the Brexit process. At the conclusion of a useful account of the relationship of British capital to the EU, Christakis Georgiou writes:
That most big business executives – in the City or otherwise – as well as the most important departments of state including the Eurosceptic Treasury (let alone the Foreign Office, despite its diminished standing) are opposed to it not only indicates that a simple referendum result would be insufficient for the strategy to be implemented but also that the British ruling class is aware of its limitations. British capitalism has come to depend on membership of the EU and the latter is not going to go away. [105]
But it is not clear that the vote can simply be ignored. One way of resolving the situation would be to try and negotiate what is sometimes called a ‘soft’ Brexit – in other words one which the UK’s relationship with the EU is as close to membership status as possible, above all through access to the single market. The remaining member states and the institutions will only grant such an arrangement, however, if the UK accepts the free movement of people in return. British capital would welcome this solution but it would impale the government on the second horn of its dilemma. A soft Brexit would leave the Conservatives unable to stop immigration or even ‘take control’ of it. German Prime Minister Angela Merkel has made it quite clear that if a post-Brexit Britain wants to be part of the single market it will have to accept free movement of people: the Leave campaign have stoked up demands which are actually impossible to satisfy.
May’s decision to call an early election was a desperate attempt to resolve this contradiction, and appears to have involved four calculations. At some level May was aware that, whatever form it ultimately takes, the Brexit over which she (at the time of writing) will preside will not benefit the majority of the British people, including the section which voted for it. It would therefore be in the best interests of the Tory Party to secure another five years in office before the disaster begins to unfold, a process otherwise inconveniently synchronised with the next scheduled election in 2020. The temptation to circumvent this outcome will have been heightened by the chance to take advantage of a Labour Party suffering historically low levels of popular support, with a supposedly unelectable leader and so badly-divided internally that even the pretence of unity would collapse under the pressures of the campaign.
These two calculations were obviously not stated openly, but the remaining two constituted, as it were, the official reasoning. Winning an election victory could therefore be claimed, however unjustifiably, as advance endorsement of whatever deal – or no deal – that May is either able to achieve or is forced to accept. It would, in other words, be used to argue against any demands for a further referendum to ratify the eventual agreement between London and Brussels. May also claimed that an enlarged Tory majority will increase her freedom of manoeuvre in the negotiations: but in relation to whom? The European Parliament’s chief negotiator Guy Verhorfstadt has stated that his team regard the scale of May’s mandate as irrelevant and, although his views have been dismissed by liberal commentators, there is a sense in which he was telling the truth. The EU would have preferred the UK to remain and representatives had previously hinted that the very narrowness of the Leave victory might offer the possibility of a rethink – referendum. Decisions by member states have been rerun or ignored in several other contexts, after all.
But any perceived increase in support for Brexit, such as that signalled by a Tory landslide, would remove any chance of the Brexit outcome being reversed, and consequently any incentive negotiators may have had to make concessions. (Nevertheless, we can only admire the audacity, and perhaps wonder at the naivety, of those Tory Brexiteers who rail against the unelected bureaucrats of Brussels, but now expect them to respect elected outcomes, even though they have never done so in the past except where these aligned with EU objectives.) No, the main group against whom May needs to bolster her support are the hard-right Brexit ultras of her own party whose intransigence is threatening to turn a crisis for British capitalism into a catastrophe. May evidently believed that an increased majority would reduce her reliance on them. In other words, she was not seeking a mandate for a hard Brexit, but a mandate to avoid one: this is what ‘strengthening her hand’ actually means. But this was unlikely to have been the case given that Tory candidates will be elected precisely because they cleave to hard Brexit positions, if only to attract the votes of former UKIP supporters, which suggests some of the desperation involved.
The gambles of 2014 and 2016 led to one near and one actual unintended outcome; but May clearly thought that this snap election did not involve a risk of similar proportions. After having proclaimed the necessity for a landslide, anything less was going to be regarded as a disaster for the Tories. But this gamble, like the EU referendum, has also failed and, as I write, the disaster is unfolding with – as Rosa Luxemburg liked to say – all the inevitability of natural law.
This takes us to the crisis of party. It was clear even before the General Election that the Tories have no idea how to proceed. The details leaked to the Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung about the Downing Street dinner held for European Commission President Jean-Claude Junker and his negotiating team reveal a British side which is apparently uncomprehending about the technicalities of the withdrawal process, over-optimistic about the speed at which the different aspects can be agreed and deluded about the terms which the UK can expect to be offered. Now, the quality of British ruling class leadership has certainly declined terribly over the last seventy years, but their ineptitude is not because the politicians involved are particularly unintelligent – in the majority of cases, anyway, there is always Liam Fox – but rather their situation has rendered them so. I earlier quoted Adorno to the effect that stupidity was not a natural quality, but one socially produced and reinforced, as it certainly is in the case of the contemporary Tory Party. We are not, in other words, faced with a leading group finely attuned to the needs of their class and implementing carefully considered strategies for meeting them, but one desperately scrambling around for the least bad of the available options.
In these circumstances, the expressions of serenity which cling to the faces of Davis, Fox and Johnson and they bumble from one diplomatic gaffe to another is not because they have a Cunning Plan unknown to the rest of us, but precisely because they do not. As Alan Finlayson has observed, there is ‘an unusual political philosophy’ behind ‘Brexitism’: ‘“You don’t know what will happen”, these Brexiters will say if they catch you speculating as to the likely negotiating position of Estonia or the prospect of continued passporting rights for London-based banks. “Nobody can know the future”.’ [106] But perhaps this is less about the impossibility of prediction as a refusal to consider what it might involve. ‘They ... see rainbow dreams as they drown’, as Trotsky wrote of another ruling class similarly groping with sightless eyes towards destruction, almost exactly a hundred years ago. [107]
The problem for British capitalism is compounded by the fact that there is no obvious alternative ‘party of capital’ on which it can rely. For the moment at least, the Labour Party cannot play this role – no longer because of its internal divisions, but because it has moved decisively to the left, a turn which has proved electorally popular. The continuing unbridled hostility of the majority of Parliamentary Labour Party to Corbyn is not because, as they previously claimed, they fear he will inevitably lose a General Election, but precisely because, after the 2017 result, they now fear he would win one – and the next may not be far off. The Labour Party could remain in its current divided state, or be either transformed into an organisation nearer to the new reformist formations which have emerged in the South of Europe, or it could fragment entirely. But the party crisis is wider than the changes within the Labour Party – indeed, in some ways this transcends individual organisations to threaten the party system itself. The Tories are the largest party in England, but no longer completely dominant in face of the Labour revival; Labour is dominant in Wales, the SNP, although weakened are still the largest party in the Scottish Parliament and have the most Scottish MPs at Westminster, and the Democratic Unionist Party and Sinn Fein are now almost evenly matched in Northern Ireland. There is no longer a single party which commands support across the whole of the UK – an unprecedented development in the history of the British state.
And so, we turn finally to the crisis of that state. As noted earlier, it began in 2011, in the context of the long depression which began three years earlier, when the SNP first got elected with a majority government in Scotland. The 2014 referendum which followed was a close call, but what Brexit has put on the agenda is of course the possibility of a second Scottish referendum, more quickly than I or most other people thought possible in 2014. The loss of Scotland would be infinitely more important to the British State than the loss of part of Ireland, for if Scotland goes then the United Kingdom is well and truly finished. And yet here too the question of the EU has had an impact. The SNP responded to the Brexit vote by arguing for a second independence referendum on the basis that the majority of Scots voted Remain, and it was this which cost it votes and seats in the General Election. Scotland remains the weak link in the structure of the British state. One of the key issues facing the left in Scotland is to argue, against the SNP (and the Scottish Greens), that the question of Scottish independence from the UK and Scottish membership of the EU are entirely separate questions.
 
Conclusion
The task of the left is to build an alternative to the different political wings of capital: the real neither/nor formulation today is neither social neoliberalism nor right-wing populism but international socialism. And if the left is not yet in a position to offer a concrete organisational form as an alternative, it must still argue against the capitulation to the former or the alternative will never be built, the evasion will never stop, because reactionary populism is not going to vanish: there will always be a Trump or a Le Pen, or a Farage whose defeat requires us to support a Clinton, Macron or Juncker. In this scenario, we will be told once again that our duty is to support the dominant faction of the capitalist ruling class. And once the support has been delivered, the neoliberal saviours will continue with the very policies which helped produce the racism in the first place. The resurgence of the Labour Party in the UK under Corbyn’s leadership has meant that, quite unexpectedly, an alternative is now available. It is not a revolutionary one, and no-one should pretend that the structural impediments to parliamentary socialism have magically vanished: but it does mean that we are no longer simply faced with a choice of evils and this may demonstrate that if this is possible in the UK, birthplace of neoliberalism, it may also be possible elsewhere. It is at any rate surely time to put the notion of ‘the lesser evil’ out of its misery and give it the pauper’s burial it deserves.
* * *
References
[1] Laurie Penny, The Backlash to Donald Trump’s “Muslim Ban” is Bathing America in Anger. What Comes Next?, New Statesman (3–9 February, 2017), p. 38.
[2] Natalie Nougayrède, The Nightmare of a Le Pen win could still come true, The Guardian (25 April, 2017).
[3] The next three sections draw on chapters 7 and 8 of my Nation-States: Consciousness and Competition (Chicago: Haymarket, 2016).
[4] See, for example, Mark Lilla, The Once and Future Liberal: After Identity Politics (New York: Harper Collins, 2017).
[5] Hal Draper [1967], Who’s Going to be the Lesser Evil in 1968?, reprinted in International Socialist Review 34 (April–May 2004).
[6] Ellen Meiksins Wood, The Separation of the Economic and Political under Capitalism, New Left Review, I/127 (May/June 1981), pp. 81–82.
[7] Adam Smith [1776], An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, edited by Edwin Cannan (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976), Book I, chapter 11, p. 278.
[8] Ibid., Book IV, chapter 7, p. 8.
[9] Karl Marx [1867], Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, vol. 1 (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books/New Left Review, 1976), pp. 606–607.
[10] Ibid., p. 610.
[11] Carl Schmitt [1932], The Concept of the Political, in The Concept of the Political (Expanded edition, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007), p. 63.
[12] Joseph Schumpeter [1944], Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (London: Routledge, 1994), pp. 138–139.
[13] Charles Post, We’ve been Trumped, International Socialist Review 104 (Spring 2017), pp. 45–46.
[14] Hal Draper, Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, vol. 1, State and Bureaucracy (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1978), pp. 321–324.
[15] Bernard Porter, Empire and Superempire: Britain, America and the World (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006), p. 49.
[16] Fred Block [1977], The Ruling Class Does Not Rule: Notes on the Marxist Theory of the State, in Revising State Theory: Essays in Politics and Postindustrialisation (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1987), chapter 3.
[17] Eric J. Hobsbawm, Revolution, in Revolution in History, edited by Roy Porter and Mikuláš Teich (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), p. 27.
[18] Antonio Gramsci [1929–1934], Selections from the Prison Notebooks, edited and translated by Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith (London: Lawrence and Wishart 1971), p. 211, Q13§23.
[19] Neil Davidson, ‘What was Neolberalism?’, in Neoliberal Scotland: Class and Society in a Stateless Nation, edited by Neil Davidson, Patricia Mccafferty and David Miller (Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Press, 2010), pp. 21–31; Crisis Neoliberalism and Regimes of Permanent Exception, Critical Sociology, vol. 43, no. 4–5 (July 2017): pp. 618–621.
[20] Gramsci [1929–1934], Selections from the Prison Notebooks, p. 408, Q7§24.
[21] Robert Skidelsky, The Economic Consequences of Mr Osborne, New Statesman (14–20 March 2014), p. 29. The reasons for this are too complex to be discussed here, but see my Neoliberalism as the Agent of Capitalist Self-Destruction, Salvage 1 (July 2015): pp. 81–96.
[22] Ha-Joon Chang, Economics: the User’s Guide (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 2014), pp. 190–191; Will Hutton, Power is Fragmenting. But what is the True Cost to Democracy?, The Observer (25 August, 2013), p. 36.
[23] Jan-Werner Müller, What is Populism? (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016), p. 93.
[24] Michael Mann, Fascists (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), pp. 367–368.
[25] Peter Mair, Ruling the Void: the Hollowing of Western Democracy (London: Verso, 2013), p. 45.
[26] Leon D. Trotsky [1932], What Next? Vital Questions for the German Proletariat, in The Struggle against Fascism in Germany (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1975), p. 125.
[27] Neil Davidson, How Revolutionary were the Bourgeois Revolutions? (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2012), p. 490–497.
[28] Roger Griffin, Revolution from the Right: Fascism, in Revolutions and Revolutionary Traditions in the West, 1560–1991, edited by David Parker (London: Routledge, 2000), p. 198.
[29] Daniele Albertazzi and Duncan McDonnell, Introduction: the Sceptre and the Specter, in Twenty-First Century Populism: The Spectre of Western Democracy, edited by Daniele Albertazzi and Duncan McDonnell (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008), p. 5.
[30] Alexandra Cole, Old Right or New Right? The Ideological Positioning of Parties of the Far Right, European Journal of Political Research, vol. 44, no. 2, (2005), pp. 222–223.
[31] Ulrich Herbert, Labor and Extermination: Economic Interest and the Primacy of Weltanschauung in National Socialism, Past and Present 138 (February 1993), p. 195.
[32] Alex Callinicos, Plumbing the Depths: Marxism and the Holocaust, Yale Journal of Criticism, vol. 14, no. 2 (June 2001), pp. 403, 406.
[33] Peter Sedgwick, The Problem of Fascism, International Socialism, first series, 42 (February/March 1970), 34. Callinicos actually ascribes this thought to Joel Geier, who expressed it from the floor during a discussion at Marxism 1993. See Callinicos, Plumbing the Depths, p. 413, note 95.
[34] Richard Evans, The Coming of the Third Reich (London: Allen Lane, 2003), pp. 22–76; Ian Kershaw, Fateful Choices: Ten Decisions that Changed the World, 1940–1941 (London: Allen Lane, 2007), pp. 438–444; Sabby Sagall, Final Solutions: Human Nature, Capitalism, and Genocide (London: Pluto Press, 2013), pp. 196–210.
[35] Detlev Peukert [1982], Inside Nazi Germany: Conformity, Opposition and Racism in Everyday Life (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1989), p. 44.
[36] Götz Aly, Hitler’s Beneficiaries: Plunder, Racial War, and the Nazi Welfare State (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2006).
[37] Donny Gluckstein, The Nazis, Capitalism, and the Working Class (London: Bookmarks, 1999), chapter 9; Peukert, Inside Nazi Germany, pp. 118–125.
[38] Tim Mason [1975], The Primacy of Politics: Politics and Economics in National Socialist Germany, in Nazism, Fascism and the Working Class, edited by Jane Caplan (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), p. 74.
[39] Peukert, Inside Nazi Germany, pp. 176–178; Adam Tooze, The Wages of Destruction: the Making and Breaking of the Nazi Economy (New York: Viking, 2006), pp. 358–359, 513–515.
[40] Ian Kershaw, Hitler, 1889–1936: Hubris (London: Allen Lane, 1998), pp. 563, 567–568, 713.
[41] Theodor Adorno [1951], Minima Moralia: Reflections from Damaged Life (London: Verso, 1978), pp. 105–106.
[42] Chip Berlet and Matthew N. Lyons, Right-Wing Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort (New York: The Guilford Press, 2000), pp. 347–348.
[43] Nigel Harris [1968], Beliefs in Society: the Problem of Ideology (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1971), pp. 115–116.
[44] Sara Diamond, Roads to Dominion: Right-Wing Movements and Political Power in the United States (New York: The Guilford Press, 1995), p. 6
[45] Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, pp. 333–334, Q11§12.
[46] Georg Lukács [1923], Class Consciousness, in History and Class Consciousness: Essays on Marxist Dialectics (London: Merlin Press, 1971), p. 51.
[47] Berlet and Lyons, Right-Wing Populism in America, p. 348.
[48] Chip Berlet, The Violence of Right-wing Populism, Peace Review, vol. 7, nos. 3/4 (1995), p. 285.
[49] Cole, Old Right or New Right?, pp. 222–223.
[50] Michael Kimmel, Angry White Men: American Masculinity at the End of an Era (New York: Nation Books, 2013), p. 281
[51] Müller, What is Populism?, p. 13.
[52] Ed Pilkington, Immigrants go into hiding as Alabama rules that looking illegal is enough, The Guardian (15 October, 2011).
[53] Immigration Policy Centre, Bad for Business: How Alabama’s Anti-immigrant Law Stifles State Economy (3 November, 2011).
[54] Guglielmo Carchedi, For another Europe: A Class Analysis of European Economic Integration (London: Verso, 2001), pp. 8–10.
[55] Nigel Harris, The Mountains of Profit, Socialist Worker Review 94 (January 1987), p. 7.
[56] Andreas Bieler and Thorsten Schulen, European Integration: A Strategic Level for Trade Union Resistance to Neoliberal Restructuring and for the Promotion of Political Alternatives?, in Labour and the Challenges of Globalization: What Prospects for Transnational Solidarity? Edited by Andreas Bieler, Ingemar Lindberg and Devan Pilay (London: Pluto Press, 2008), p. 233.
[57] Christopher Hermann and Ines Hofbauer, The European Social Model: Between Competitive Modernisation and Neoliberal Resistance, Capital and Class 93, special issue on The Left and Europe (Autumn 2007), p. 132.
[58] Larry Elliott and Dan Atkinson, Europe Isn’t Working (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2016), pp. 93–94.
[59] Bieler and Schulen, European Integration, p. 233.
[60] Michael Roberts, The Long Depression: How it Happened, Why it Happened, and What Happens Next (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2016), p. 169.
[61] Ibid., pp. 167–172.
[62] In so far as it does attempt to act in its own interests – in the Ukraine, for example – it has proved to be ineffectual. For the record, I regard Russia as the main imperial threat to Ukraine, not the EU.
[63] Mike Haynes, Setting the Limits to Europe as an “Imagined Community”, in The European Union and Migrant Labour, edited by Gareth Dale and Mike Cole (Oxford: Berg, 1999), p. 18.
[64] Fezyi Baban, Cosmopolitan Europe: Border Crossings and Transnationalism in Europe, Global Society, vol. 27, no. 2 (2013), p. 229.
[65] Phillip Cunliffe, After Brexit: Ending Out-Sourced Anti-racism, in The Current Moment website (posted 2 August 2016).
[66] The slogan another Europe is possible completely elides the difference between the continent and the European Union.
[67] Colin Crouch, Post-Democracy (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2004), pp. 107–108.
[68] Fredrick von Hayek, The Economic Conditions of Interstate Federalism, New Commonwealth Quarterly, vol. 5, no. 2 (1939). See the discussions in Perry Anderson [1996], Origins, in The New Old World (London: Verso, 2009), pp. 30–32 and [2007] Outcomes, Ibid., pp. 64–66, and in Wolfgang Streeck, Buying Time: The Delayed Crisis of Democratic Capitalism (London: Verso, 2014), pp. 97–103.
[69] Claus Offe, Europe Entrapped (Cambridge: Polity, 2015), p. 114.
[70] Edward Luttwak [1996], Central Bankism, in The Question of Europe, edited by Peter Gowan and Perry Anderson (London: Verso, 1997), pp. 231–232.
[71] Streeck, Buying Time, p. 105.
[72] Agata Pyzik, Poor but Sexy: Culture Clashes in Europe East and West (Winchester UK: Zero Books, 2014), pp. 23, 38.
[73] Offe, Europe Entrapped, p. 111.
[74] Anderson, Origins, p. 23.
[75] Luke Cooper, Europe’s Problem with Nationalism, in Free Movement and Beyond: Agenda Setting for Brexit Britain, edited by Kate Hudson (London: Public Reading Rooms, 2017), pp. 64–70.
[76] Tony Norfield, The City: London and the Global Power of Finance (London: Verso, 2015), p. 218. Like most people on the left, Norfield thought that ‘exit ... looks unlikely’, but that ‘the outcome is far from being certain’. Ibid., p. 219.
[77] Yanis Varoufakis, Macron backed my nation: the French Left should back him, The Guardian (5 May 2017).
[78] Yanis Varoufakis, Why we must save the EU, in Free Movement and Beyond, p. 24.
[79] Ed Rooksby, The Brexit Disaster (posted 30 June 2016).
[80] Jamie Allinson, China Mièville, Richard Seymour and Rosie Warren, Neither Westminster nor Brussels, Salvage 3 (May 2016), p. 17.
[81] Ibid., p. 16. For the purposes of full disclosure, I should point out that this argument is partly directed against my article, A Socialist Case for Leaving the EU (posted 24 March 2016); see Allinson, Mièville, Seymour and Warren, Neither Westminster nor Brussels, p. 18.
[82] Catherine Merridale, Lenin on the Train (London: Allen Lane, 2016), p. 136.
[83] Ibid., p. 195
[84] Ibid., p. 241.
[85] S.A. Smith, Russia in Revolution: An Empire in Crisis, 1890–1928 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017), p. 157.
[86] Merridale, Lenin on the Train, p. 253.
[87] Tariq Ali, The Dilemmas of Lenin: Terrorism, War, Empire, Love, Revolution (London: Verso, 2017), p. 159.
[88] Leon D. Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution (Pluto Press, 1977), pp. 619 and 596–623 more generally.
[89] Michael Mann, The Sources of Social Power, vol. 3, Global Empires and Revolution, 1890–1945 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 144–145.
[90] Smith, Russia in Revolution, 157.
[91] Pierre Broué [1971], The German Revolution, 1917–1923, edited by Ian Birchall and Brian Pearce (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2005), pp. 89–142.
[92] Leon D. Trotsky [1931], For a Workers’ United Front against Fascism, in The Struggle against Fascism in Germany, p. 103.
[93] Liz Fekete, Flying the Flag for Neoliberalism, Race and Class, vol. 58, no. 3 (January–March 2017), p. 18.
[94] Wolfgang Streek, The Return of the Repressed, New Left Review II/104 (March/April 2017), p. 18.
[95] Yanis Varoufakis, Adults in the Room: My Battle with Europe’s Deep Establishment (London: Bodley Head, 2017), p. 482.
[96] Robert O. Paxton, The Anatomy of Fascism (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 2015), p. 43.
[97] Nancy Fraser, Progressive Neoliberalism versus Reactionary Populism, in The Great Regression, edited by Heinrich Geiselberger (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2017), pp. 46–47.
[98] Slavoj Žižek, The Courage of Hopelessness: Chronicles of a Year of Acting Dangerously (London: Allen Lane, 2017), p. 249.
[99] Neil Faulkner, Brexit, Racism, and the Crisis of European Capitalism, in Free Movement and Beyond, p. 131.
[100] Kim Stanley Robinson [1993], Red Mars (London: Harper Voyager, 2009), p. 543.
[101] The atmosphere of the time is well conveyed in David Widgery, Beating Time: Riot ’n’ Race ’n’ Rock ’n’ Roll (London: Chatto and Windus, 1986) and in the more recent memoirs of the RAR/ANL era; see for example, Daniel Rachel, Walls Come Tumbling Down: The Music and Politics of Rock against Racism, 2 Tone and Red Wedge (London: Picador, 2016), pp. 96–113.
[102] Kenan Malik, How did the left radicalism of my Manchester youth give way to Islamism?, The Observer (28 May 2008).
[103] Neil Davidson, After Brexit, International Socialist Review online (posted 23 September 2016).
[104] Hamish Crooks, Love Thy Neighbour, The Guardian (Weekend) (18 March 2017), p. 50.
[105] Christakis Georgiou, British Capitalism and European Unification: From Ottawa to the Brexit Referendu, Historical Materialism, vol. 25, no. 1 (2017), p. 124.
[106] Alan Finlayson, Brexitism, London Review of Books, vol. 39, no. 10 (18 May 2017), p. 22.
[107] Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution, p. 113.
 



The Threat to Reason
Dan Hind
Verso, £14.99
The Enlightenment tradition is under attack – at least if a series of recent books are to be believed. The source is apparently a rising tide of irrationality, manifested by intellectual fashions such as postmodernism, but more seriously by the revival of religious belief. So, while earlier works dedicated to “defending the Enlightenment”, like Francis Wheen’s How Mumbo-Jumbo Conquered the World, attacked what they perceived to be irrationality in all its forms, the latest crop have focused almost exclusively on religion.
Although different in emphasis, books like Richard Dawkins’s The God Delusion, Sam Hall’s Letter to a Christian Nation, and Christopher Hitchens’ God is Not Great are all loitering with intent on the same street corner, waiting to club passing believers insensible with the baseball bat of reason. It seems that two important Enlightenment virtues these authors have not absorbed are those of tolerance and respect for the views of others.
But, whatever other disagreements we may have with these authors, surely they are right to attack the obscurantism and irrationality of religious belief? In a commendably short and well argued book, Dan Hind argues that they are not. In fact, as Hind convincingly shows, they are either, at best, staging an unconscious diversion from the real threats to the Enlightenment tradition or, at worst, providing ideological cover for imperial politics. It is no accident that under the cover of attacks on religion in general the greatest bile is invariably reserved for Islam.
Hind is not primarily concerned with recounting the history of the Enlightenment. He discusses Bacon and Kant, but is mainly concerned to show that the historical Enlightenment is greatly misrepresented by its self-appointed defenders, who he describes as advocating a “Folk Enlightenment” in which every issue is reduced to a contest between rationality and irrationality. Against this Hind makes three points.
First, not all aspects of human life – Hind mentions love and morality, although we could probably add our response to works of art – are subject to “the dictates of reason”. These things are not irrational, incidentally, but belong to a different realm of experience. In this respect, the notion of “sympathy”, developed by arch Enlightenment thinker Adam Smith, is surely as relevant as “reason”.
Second, religion itself is not the main issue. It is rather the way in which religious views are mobilised to defend secular agendas. Islam is no more intrinsically aggressive or genocidal than Christianity.
According to Hitchens et al., an atrocity like 9/11 is rooted in Osama’s Islamism, but the invasion of Iraq is not, of course similarly rooted in Bush and Blair’s Christianity.
Third, the real threat to Enlightenment values, particularly the value of free inquiry for the betterment of humanity, actually comes from the interface between the capitalist state and the giant corporations, who practise what Hind calls an “Occult Enlightenment”, secret and dedicated to the expansion of power and the pursuit of profit.
Is it rational, he quite reasonably asks, for corporations to manufacture prescription drugs which they know will cause new and in some cases fatal illnesses in consumers? This takes us to the heart of the problem. What is rational for Big Pharma may not be for those who buy their products. There is, in other words, more than one form of rationality, distinguishable by the ends and values they are designed to serve.
If there is a problem with this extremely valuable book it is that, although Hind identifies the “folk” and “occult” Enlightenments with supporters of state and capitalist power, his alternative “Open Enlightenment” is presented in terms of a different attitude to truth, rather than one associated with opposed class or other social forces. But it is possible to complete the analysis. This is a powerful counterblast to the vulgar reductionism and mock radicalism of the pseudo-enlightened tomes which are currently cluttering our bookshops.
 



In a recent article in The Guardian, Scottish journalist Iain MacWhirter noted Gordon Brown’s “apparent capitulation to neoconservatism” and asked what might have happened if Brown had taken a different path.
MacWhirter asked:
“What if Brown had decided to halt the renewal of Trident, rule out nuclear power ... share the proceeds of growth by abolishing prescription charges and graduate fees, launch a pilot project on free school meals and curb the right to buy council houses?”
Anticipating the claim that these are impossible policies to follow these days, MacWhirter was then able to reveal – to no doubt astonished readers in England and Wales – that these policies were in fact being pursued by the Scottish National Party (SNP) minority government in Edinburgh.
By any criteria, the SNP has never been a reformist or social democratic party in the sense in which Marxists have traditionally used that term.
The SNP has always been a classically petty bourgeois party – in the literal sense that their core membership consisted of doctors, lawyers and small business people – which has never deviated from support for capitalism.
The SNP and its predecessors drew support from working class “protest” voters at by-elections, but never really made permanent inroads into Labour support.
It has still only done so in a relatively narrow way. The Labour vote did not collapse in the Scottish elections in May and the SNP was able to form the government only because supporters of the smaller, more radical parties like the Greens and the Scottish Socialist Party, switched votes.
 
Independence
The reason they switched votes is important – the SNP did not stand on a platform that emphasised independence. Opposition to the war in Iraq and social reforms all played a far greater role.
This is not because the SNP has had a sudden conversion to social democracy. On the contrary, the left inside the SNP is as weak as it has ever been.
The real battle is between the “independence nothing less” fundamentalists and the “Catalans” – the increasingly dominant wing whose real agenda is to renegotiate the devolved government within Britain.
First minister Alex Salmond is playing a longer game in which he hopes to build the basis for a permanent majority.
To do this he has to deliver some reforms to distinguish the SNP from other parties. But by making these reforms, the SNP has exposed one of the great ideological myths of neoliberalism – that there is no alternative to the programme of privatisation, deregulation, and so on.
This is what has infuriated the Labour Party. Labour MPs in England have complained that the SNP has only been able to make these reforms because Scots are benefiting “unfairly” from English largesse.
This is nonsense. As the SNP has gleefully pointed out, the result of the recent Comprehensive Spending Review has seen Scotland receive the lowest budget allocation since devolution in 1999 – something that may be connected to the fact that the Labour-led coalition is no longer in office.
Labour minister David Cairns replied to MacWhirter by complaining about SNP plans to end the “right to buy” scheme and to build council houses. These arguments tell us more about changes to the Labour Party than the SNP.
It is important not to exaggerate what the SNP has done or is likely to do. The SNP is as committed to the core economic principles of neoliberalism as the other parties.
At the moment it has the perfect excuse for not delivering – the limited financial settlement from Brown and the pan-unionist alliance of parties which can be guaranteed to block bills.
Nevertheless, the SNP has shown that neoliberalism is a conscious choice.
This is useful in two ways. To English Labour politicians who argue that Scotland is advantaged, we have to say – why are they not fighting for the same things in England? To the SNP, we have to argue that we want the reforms to go further, and if they don’t, that will have been their choice as well.
 



Neil Davidson fails to be converted by Peter Howson’s religiously inspired work








Peter Howson and his latest work
The Crucifixion of St Andrew



According to the New Testament, St Andrew was the first disciple to be called by Jesus Christ. He was later executed by the Romans at Patras in present day Greece on the X-shaped cross which now bears his name.
A new exhibition of 80 paintings and drawings by artist Peter Howson, dealing mainly with Andrew’s death, opened on St Andrew’s Day (30 November) in the Edinburgh City Art Centre.
It takes place against the background of the Scottish Parliament voting to make 30 November a national holiday – although in typical New Labour style, only by substituting it for an existing one.
It may not be immediately obvious why a 1st century Jewish Christian martyr is Scotland’s patron saint. According to legend, Bishop Regulus of Patras fled during the 4th century with Andrew’s relics. He was supposedly shipwrecked on the coast of Fife, where the town and university called after St Andrew now stand.
Andrew only became important in Scottish history much later. His cross was adopted as the official seal of Scottish government in 1286 as a unifying symbol for the medieval monarchy, immediately before the wars against England for an independent feudal kingdom began.
The Reformation of 1560 was responsible for destroying most of the iconography of Catholic Scotland, but representations of St Andrew had little popular significance in the first place.
As the exhibition’s programme points out, Howson’s paintings of St Andrew’s martyrdom are without precedent in Scotland. So why the renewal of interest in a quasi-mythical figure who never set foot in the country?
 
Patriotism
For Labour MSPs, this is an opportunity to emphasise their Scottishness at no political cost and thus deflect Scottish National Party accusations that they lack patriotism. For Howson, however, the issue is more complex.
Howson was one of the so-called New Glasgow Boys, a group of mainly figurative artists that emerged in the mid-1980s and included Ken Currie and Stephen Campbell. Howson’s representations of the human form are monumental, grotesquely muscular and – regardless of the supposed gender involved – invariably masculine.
The style is at any rate distinctive, whatever one thinks of it. So too is his subject matter, a Scotland populated by down-and-outs, drunks, prostitutes and men either on the edge of violence or actually engaged it.
As an antidote to both shallow boosterism about the “New Scotland” and the moral vacuity of most “Brit-art”, this has some attractions. But the pleasures of negative critique apart, Howson’s work is problematic in terms of both form and content.
Monstrous though Howson’s figures are, his approach is highly conventional. And having established a style, Howson works it to death, repeating but never developing.
The current exhibition has one central work, The Crucifixion of St Andrew, but much of the rest is taken up with preparatory studies and sketches, which are often more interesting than the paintings – some of the pen and ink “studies for Saint Andrew”, for example, recall Picasso’s later work.
The most convincing works here are the handful of paintings of the faces of his main protagonists. These show Howson at his best, not least because they exclude the portentous clutter of the major canvasses.
Taken in the context of his work as a whole, The Crucifixion itself resembles the latest instalment of a plotless graphic novel about the aftermath of the apocalypse – although this apocalypse is a spiritual absence, a moral wilderness, rather than the result of war or environmental collapse.
 
Conversion
Howson announced his religious conversion in 2003. His figures still wander through the same landscapes of desolation, but now with the added miraculous ingredient (so to speak) of Christian salvation.
Howson has described himself as being influenced by 19th century visionary William Blake. But the comparison relies on fairly superficial parallels in the way both artists represent the body.
Blake’s highly personalised but revolutionary mysticism involved a celebration of the human physicality (“the naked female form divine”) and the god-given potential of human beings to transform their world.
In contrast, the ugly swarming masses that populate Howson’s paintings are lost in a collective darkness and cannot save themselves – they need to be saved by the sacrificial example of the martyred saint.
Given the current controversies over religion, the question of how to represent faith in the arts – and not only the visual arts – is likely to become more pressing in the coming years.
Howson’s most recent work demonstrates, if nothing else, that the solution is unlikely to be found simply by representing saints transplanted into the landscapes of capitalist modernity.
Peter Howson’s exhibition is at Edinburgh City Art Centre, Market Street, until 4 March. Go to www.howsonworks.com for more details.
 






Scotland’s historical role in Malawi contradicts attempts to present itself as an ‘oppressed’ nation, writes Neil Davidson










It has the seventh lowest life expectancy, the fifth lowest GDP per head and the third lowest level of purchasing power in the world. But it also has the ninth highest level of consumer price inflation and the ninth highest prevalence of HIV/Aids.
Clearly this is a former British colony.
These statistics refer to Malawi, whose citizens are no doubt recovering from news that their future British high commissioner is to be Jack McConnell – the former Scottish first minister before the SNP victory in May.
McConnell’s interest in Malawi emerged, suddenly and suspiciously, in the run-up to the Make Poverty History demonstrations in 2005. Shortly after this he visited Malawi and set up a charity to “tackle poverty”.
In general this shows one of the ways in which the ideology of contemporary imperialism works in relation to former colonies. If Iraq epitomises the murderous violence directed at the disobedient, Malawi demonstrates the patronising charity displayed towards those considered helpless but unthreatening.
More specifically, however, it continues a specifically Scottish imperial role in the country.
This point cannot be made strongly enough in the face of the pervasive fantasy on the Scottish left that Scotland is an oppressed nation, rather than a leading component of the British oppressor. Certain place names of modern Malawi stand out – Livingstonia, named after the Scottish missionary David Livingstone, and Blantyre, named after his birthplace.
A centralised political state was formed in what is now central and southern Malawi by the late 15th century, ruling a mainly agricultural society based on the intensive cultivation of corn, cassava and rice.
But like many other African states, internal development was severely affected by external pressure – from the 1790s onwards by the slave trade and then by British occupation in the 1880s.
Scottish Christian missionaries and their Islamic rivals both started arriving in the 1850s, but the former were backed up by a state power which the latter lacked. By the 1880s the Scottish missionaries were increasingly squeezed between Arab slave traders and Portuguese imperialists based in Mozambique.
The British state might in any case have intervened on their behalf, but the decisive catalyst was the threat that Germany might occupy Nyasaland. A deal was done.
The British handed Heligoland to the Germans in return for agreement that they might grab Nyasaland (and three other “protectorates”) for themselves. Needless to say the inhabitants were not consulted.
There have been three great revolts by the oppressed of Malawi.
Following the British occupation, white settlers began to establish their own plantations by dispossessing the native population.
A rising in 1915 was the first in British Africa. One of the colonists targeted by the rebels was Livingstone’s grandson, Alexander Bruce, who owned a plantation of 169,000 acres that was the biggest in the colony.
The second revolt, and the triumph of the national liberation movement, came after the British merged Nyasaland with Northern and Southern Rhodesia (Zambia and Zimbabwe) in 1953, against the wishes of the population.
They attempted to bring the white racist regime in Southern Rhodesia under tighter control, by diluting their authority within a broader area directly ruled by the colonial office.
Precisely because it seemed to extend the influence of the Rhodesians into new areas, the federation gave great impetus to the nationalist movement in Nyasaland, where a series of violent demonstrations led to the establishment of the independent state of Malawi in 1964 under Hastings Banda.
The role of religion and of church organisation are important and complex. The rising in 1915 was led by the Reverend John Chilembwe, originally educated by the Free Church of Scotland. At this stage the church itself was still profoundly racist.
By the 1950s, however, the Scottish churches tended to support African independence.
During the struggle for independence a state of emergency was declared by the British in 1959 which resulted in 1,500 arrests and 50 deaths, all of them black. Around 700 of those arrested were members of the Church of Central Africa – not just the leadership. Banda himself was a Christian doctor trained in Edinburgh.
In 1992 there was a third great revolt of the Malawi people, this time against the corruption and oppression of the post-colonial regime. Strikes, demonstrations and riots forced Banda to concede a referendum on the one party system, which ultimately led to multi-party elections and the end of Malawi Congress Party rule in 1994.
As the figures quoted at the beginning of this piece suggest, the people of Malawi still need revolutionary change in their conditions.
But their history of struggle shows that they themselves will be the agents of that change, not the condescending representatives of the imperial powers who they have had to free themselves from.
Neil Davidson is a visiting research fellow at the University of Strathclyde and the author of The Origins of Scottish Nationhood and Discovering the Scottish Revolution, 1692–1746.
 



Henry Heller
The Bourgeois Revolution in France, 1789–1815
Berghahn Books, 2006, £36.50
Marx and Engels were born into a world shaped by the French Revolution – literally so in the case of Marx, who grew up in the Rhineland where the French occupation between 1807 and 1813 greatly accelerated the dismantling of feudalism in that region. It is unsurprising then that this cataclysmic event should have influenced the formation of their theories. By the mid-1840s the revolution had acquired a three-fold significance in their thought.
First, in terms of the past, France provided the clearest example of how capitalism had first emerged within feudalism as a subordinate mode of production and then become dominant across a particular national territory. But this outcome was not simply the inevitable evolutionary triumph of a more dynamic economic system; it also required a successful struggle for political power by the capitalist class against the existing feudal-absolutist order.
Second, in terms of the present, it provided an inspiration for those national bourgeoisies – at this stage the vast majority – who were still excluded from political power. Marx was particularly concerned that the German bourgeoisie should learn the lessons of the French Revolution, although he rightly remained pessimistic about its capacity to do so. He was not so naive as to think, however, that bourgeois leadership involved industrialists and financiers personally mounting the barricades. He was quite aware that the actual fighting had been carried out by classes below the bourgeoisie in the class structure, and on some occasions suggested that without these plebeians the revolution would not have succeeded or even survived.
Third, in terms of the future, it also provided the emergent proletariat with lessons in the need for revolutionary intransigence on its own behalf, rather than on behalf of a new class of exploiters. But more generally, the mobilisations which characterised the crucial ‘days’ of the revolution involved far greater levels of mass involvement and higher levels of popular initiative than the preceding bourgeois revolutions in the United Netherlands, England, Scotland or America. Its mass character was therefore paradoxical, making possible the period of bourgeois ascendancy and prefiguring the form of the coming proletarian revolutions. As Georg Lukács later noted, ‘From the Great French Revolution on, all revolutions exhibit the same pattern with increasing intensity.’ [1] Indeed the actual pattern of events – the initial unity of the revolutionary forces, their increasing polarisation into left and right under pressure from the counter-revolution, the ultimate stabilisation on the basis of a conservative reaction within the revolution – seemed to offer a general pattern of development.
For Marx, therefore, the French Revolution involved three key elements: bourgeois leadership that gave the revolution its class character; mass mobilisations of peasants, urban masses and revolutionary armies that were necessary to take power and defend the new state; and the removal of obstacles to capitalist development that constituted the outcome. In France itself this interpretation gave rise to an extraordinarily rich socialist historiography, from Jaurès to Mathiez, and from Lefebvre to Soboul, much of which can still be read with profit today. But because Marx wrote specifically about the French Revolution and, to a lesser extent, its immediate predecessors, he did not leave behind a general theory of bourgeois revolution. The outline of one did emerge in Engels’s later writings and was further developed by Lenin, Trotsky, Lukács, Gramsci and many other thinkers, although by no means in a systematic way. The underlying theme was that bourgeois revolutions were not the sum total of a checklist of ‘tasks’ which had to be accomplished before they could be declared complete. The only necessary component of a bourgeois revolution was not the nature of the process or the identity of the class actors, but the outcome: the establishment of a state committed to ensuring the accumulation of capital.
Unfortunately, this approach, like so much else of value in Marxist theory, was suppressed for decades by Stalinism. In its place the orthodoxy became a model of bourgeois revolution based on the French Revolution – or, to be more exact, a particular reading of the first five years of the French Revolution – a model accepted even by people who were not Stalinists, people who were in most other respects opposed to Stalinism. The problem was that the ‘French model’ was a positive obstacle to understanding how the bourgeoisie had come to power on a global scale. By using France as an example against which all other bourgeois revolutions were judged, it was inevitable that even those countries, like England, in which the revolutions were structurally quite similar to the French, would be found wanting, while some countries, like Germany, would be found not to have undergone bourgeois revolutions at all, because they had failed to reproduce the French experience. But what would become of this conception of bourgeois revolution if even the French Revolution was found not to live up to its image? This was exactly what began to be argued, first in the 1950s, then with greater confidence and frequency, from the 1970s.
 
The French Revolution did not take place
‘Revisionism’ is the catch-all term for a range of arguments which deny that the French Revolution was a ‘bourgeois revolution’. Some versions go so far as to deny that it can be explained in social terms at all. The arguments have developed in three main phases.
The first, relatively isolated, expressions of the case were made over 50 years ago in Britain and Israel. In his inaugural lecture as chair in French History at the University of London, first published in 1955 as The Myth of the French Revolution, the British historian Alfred Cobban made four points. First, France was no longer a feudal society by 1789. Some dues and services still survived, but these were functionless survivals whose significance may have been deliberately over-emphasised by the Constituent Assembly so that their abolition, under pressure from the peasantry, would not set a precedent which could be extended to bourgeois property rights. Second, the main representatives of the Third Estate were not capitalists, but lawyers or, more precisely, venal office holders, functionaries and professional men who used the revolution to ascend the state structure at the expense of the nobility. Third, both the formal abolition of feudal dues and the ascendancy of the bourgeois office holders had been achieved by 1791 – the subsequent events were violent, but essentially irrelevant, since by 1799 the situation had simply reverted to that at the beginning of the decade. Fourth, the impact of the revolution on capitalist development was limited and may even have retarded it until much later in the 19th century. [2] What then had led to the Jacobin dictatorship, the September Massacres, the Terror and all those other supposedly pointless events which Cobban regarded with such fastidious British distaste? The answer had been independently provided, not by a historian, but by the political scientist J.L. Talmon, then based at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem. His focus was on the Enlightenment beliefs which he claimed had taken on a life of their own and led to the Dictatorship of Virtue, an abstract set of truths which empowered the Jacobins and their supporters to kill in the name of ideological purity. [3] Both Cobban and Talmon were committed Cold Warriors. Cobban helped ensure that one of his own students, George Rudé, was blacklisted from lecturing in Britain. Talmon contributed towards the ‘end of ideology’ thesis during the 1950s and drew parallels between the ‘totalitarian democracy’ of the Jacobins and that of the supposedly equivalent modern totalitarianisms of Fascism and Communism. [4]
What was significant about the second phase moment of revisionism was where it arose and who was responsible. From the mid-1970s onwards these arguments began to be expressed in France itself by people on the left, or at least people who had been on the left. The most important of these was François Furet, a member of the Communist Party of France. In a history of the revolution written in 1965 with Denis Richet, Furet introduced the idea of ‘the skidding off course of the revolution’ after 1791. [5] If his first contribution echoed Cobban’s claim that the real goals of the revolution had been achieved by 1791, his second, a decade later, recalled Talmon’s emphasis on ideology. In this essay, The French Revolution Is Over, Furet specifically attacks the connections which the French left in particular drew between the French and Russian Revolutions. Furet was, however, concerned less with the historical accuracy of this claim than with highlighting what he thought the real connections were, namely the comparable totalitarian systems embodied in the Terror and the Gulag. [6]
How have Marxists responded to the revisionist critique of the concept of bourgeois revolution? On the one hand, some have attempted to construct a more defensible version of the Cl assical Marxist position, drawing the scattered insights of the Second and early Third Internationals into a new synthesis. (The first attempts to do so actually predate the emergence of revisionism and were undertaken, in the context of a discussion of the nature of the USSR, by Cliff, Deutscher and Shachtman – a trio of very different Trotskyists – in books and articles written in 1948–49.) This version of the theory shifts focus from the role of the bourgeoisie in the bourgeois revolutions – although they did of course play a major role, above all in the Dutch, English and French revolutions – to the consequences for the bourgeoisie of the bourgeois revolutions; it therefore accepts at least some of empirical criticisms of the revisionists, but regards them as irrelevant. [7] On the other hand, the ‘political Marxism’ of Robert Brenner, Ellen Meiksins Wood and their followers not only accepts the empirical criticisms of the revisionists, but agrees that they invalidate the entire concept. Here the focus is on the transition from feudal to capitalist social relations, rather than the revolutions which had hitherto been regarded as essential to the process, which this position sees as quite separate. [8] In effect, this is not so much a response to revisionism as a third and, one hopes, final phase of the thing itself.
Here, as with the influence of Cobban on Furet, there are connections with the preceding phase. George Comninel, for example, makes the apparently curious claim that the ‘only’ bourgeois aspect of the revolution was the fact that the bourgeoisie led it against their aristocratic opponents. Bourgeois leadership and aristocratic opponents may sound like reasonably decisive criteria, but it is important to understand that Comninel does not regard the ‘bourgeoisie’ as having any necessary connection with capitalism or the ‘aristocracy’ as having any necessary connection with feudalism. In the absence of ‘a system entirely structured about commodity production as the self-expansion of capital through the reduction of labour to labour power’, capitalism did not exist in France prior to 1789. Rather the bourgeoisie essentially belonged to the same social class as the aristocracy because both ultimately drew their income through the same method of surplus extraction. The revolution should therefore be seen as ‘an intra-class conflict’ or ‘civil war’ over distribution of the surplus. Unsurprisingly, Comninel does not think that the revolution did anything to promote capitalism either: ‘The revolution was not fought by capitalists, and it did not produce capitalist society.’ If anything, it restricted it further by preserving small-scale peasant production. [9] Virtually the only difference between Comninel and the earlier generations of revisionists is his belief that capitalism, rather than having already surpassed feudalism in France by 1789, did not exist at all.
A new synthesis
From the preceding discussion it should be obvious why a book called The Bourgeois Revolution in France should be of interest to readers of International Socialism, particularly when the author begins with this assessment:
It seems evident that a connection exists between the predominance of revisionism, the decline of revolutionary movements of the 1960s and 1970s, and the conservative or neoliberal ideological offensive of the last decades. Whether or not the modern world came into being by revolution is more than an academic question. It bears on the present and future as well as on the interpretation of the past. [10]
So writes Henry Heller, a Canadian Marxist scholar who, over the last 20 years, has increased our understanding of 16th century France with a series of books reassessing the French experience of Calvinism, the Wars of Religion and the relationship between economic development and technological change. [11] It is only now, in his latest book, that Heller broaches the moment in French history during which classical Marxism has traditionally seen the breakthrough to capitalist economy and bourgeois society as finally taking place. And he has a specific purpose in doing so: ‘This work seeks to reclaim the idea that the French Revolution was a bourgeois revolution.’ [12] Indeed, it is the first book in English explicitly to defend a Marxist interpretation of the French Revolution since revisionism became entrenched.
Heller seeks ‘confirmation of the Marxist view’ in what he modestly calls ‘a review of existing scholarly literature’. [13] In a relatively short but densely packed book, Heller has synthesised recent work by other historians which is either difficult for non-specialists to obtain or as yet untranslated into English. In the first category are mainly Anglo-American historians who have challenged specific revisionist claims on empirical grounds, without seeking to reject the entire approach. In the second are mainly French Marxists like Michel Vovelle and Guy Lemarchand (but also the Russian, Anatoli Ado), who are concerned not only with grounding their work in primary research, but also with engaging the revisionists in theoretical terms. [14] Heller assumes that his readers are aware of both the course of events and the main conflicting interpretations. Although the book proceeds through chronological periods, it does not really provide a narrative account, despite claims to this effect by Heller in the Preface. Consequently, readers seeking an introduction to the history of the French Revolution should turn instead to the short book written by Albert Soboul during the 1960s (which is also a fine example of the ‘classic’ position) or to the article by Paul McGarr published in this journal on the bicentenary of 1789. [15] That said, Heller writes simply and accessibly, and conveys a vast amount of information about who was doing what to who and why. Not that Heller is dismissive of theory, but his own theoretical approach differs from that of most previous historians in three main ways.
First, he does not focus his attention on the popular movements of either the peasants or sans-culottes: ‘Rather, the focus will be on the step-by-step development of the bourgeoisie as a new ruling class.’ [16] He clearly regards much of the writing about the movements from below as a way of sidestepping discussion of the revolutionary role of the bourgeoisie. But Heller goes further. From Daniel Guérin onwards, many historians have stressed the anti-capitalist possibilities of working class power emerging from the activity of the sans-culottes. [17] As far as France is concerned, most of the debate among socialists has not been about the accuracy of this assessment, but about how far an anti-capitalist programme could have succeeded. In a splendidly iconoclastic move Heller rejects the entire premise, writing that, ‘far from being an impediment to capitalism, the popular democratic phase of the revolution was an essential element to the further development of French capitalism’. [18] Following the work of Richard Mowbery Andrews, Heller argues that many of the classic histories of the revolution ‘took the egalitarian ideology of the sans-culottes too much at face value’, losing sight of ‘the fact that those who dominated the movement were solid bourgeois, notably the master artisans’. [19]
Second, he deals with the revolutionary period as a whole: ‘This history will make a point of investigating not merely the 18th century background and the most tumultuous years of the revolution, but also the period of its consolidation under the Directory and Napoleon.’ [20] Just as any serious discussion of the English Revolution has to span the period from the Scottish Covenanting rebellion of 1637 through to the Restoration of 1660, so too must one of the French Revolution extend from the Assembly of the Notables in 1787 to the Restoration of 1815. This may seem obvious, but many of the greatest works on the subject – such as the major books by Lefevbre and Soboul – conclude in 1799 with Napoleon’s seizure of power, and many finish earlier with Thermidor in 1794. [21] By dealing with the period as a whole Heller affirms that the unheroic later stages are just as central as the years of mass mobilisation to the issue of capitalist dominance.
Third, although he foregrounds economic developments in a way that will undoubtedly scandalise the revisionists, Heller does not advocate a crude economic determinism. Rather ‘the view advanced here will be one that insists that the economic, political and cultural factors cannot be seen as separate from one another ... such factors will be treated dialectically as coexistent features of a great civilisational transformation’. [22] And, although he does not use the term, Heller is here invoking the notion of totality:
From a Marxist point of view it is not the primacy of the economic that is the distinguishing feature. Rather it is an insistence on a knowledge of the historical process in its entirety or as a whole. [23]
Indeed, his main criticism of the revisionists is their blindness to the inner connections between changes to different aspects of French society. Heller accepts that they may have brought some gains in the study of areas like gender and political culture: ‘But in the final analysis, the maintenance of a perspective that rejects the idea of the French Revolution as a capitalist revolution, is only possible by refusing to comprehend these events as part of a unified process or by rejecting the idea that such comprehension is possible.’ [24]
How then does Heller’s approach deal with some key themes thrown up by the revisionist debates?
Capitalism and crisis before 1789
If capitalism were already totally dominant in a society, there would be no need for a bourgeois revolution, because there would be no forces capable of opposing it. But if capitalism did not exist at all in a society, then there would be no possibility of a bourgeois revolution, because there would be no forces capable of supporting it. To what extent had capitalism developed in France by 1789? As Heller writes:
The initial success of the bourgeoisie did not mean that France was a fully developed capitalist economy led by a fully conscious and self-confident capitalist class. It meant only that the bourgeoisie had developed enough economic as well as political strength to get rid of the ancien régime. It would take an extended process over the next 25 years for it to mature as a class while further developing its economic underpinnings. [25]
Heller argues that capitalist production existed to varying degrees across the different sectors of the economy in 18th century France. The uneven spatial development of agriculture effectively divided the country into three regions, but only in the north did capitalist agriculture emerge, bringing with it social differentiation between proprietors and large farmers on the one hand, and day labourers and teamsters on the other. Although the point is not original, it is extremely important as a demonstration that the type of productive relations typical of English capitalist agriculture were also present on a geographically more restricted basis in France. [26]
In relation to trade, once the demand for commodities expanded beyond a certain point, it had implications for how production – not simply the division of labour, or the labour process more generally – was organised. Heller shows that there was certainly a massive increase in French trade across the 18th century. [27] It is true that much of the production of commodities took place in small workshops and on a seasonal basis, but large factories also began to appear. The greatest of all, the Le Creusot iron and steel factory built during the 1780s, ‘had a workforce of over 1,300, used the advanced coke reduction process in the manufacture of steel, and operated with the help of at least five steam engines and between 12 and 15 miles of railway tracking’. [28]
And what of the labourers who worked in these enterprises? In many respects they were not fully-formed proletarians, completely separated from both the means of production and the means of subsistence. But as Heller points out, people may be driven to work for wages, not because they have no access to subsistence production, but because it is insufficient to support them. Equally, capitalists are quite content for workers to partially provide for themselves, since this allows the level of wages to be held down. [29] To imagine otherwise is to abandon the possibility of a transitional economy at all: an economy must either be feudal or capitalist (or something else altogether), but nothing in between. This is highly unrealistic, to say the least:
The full emergence of abstract labour and value are not capitalist preconditions but the end product of a prolonged historical process in which struggle over the means of production and their further development are primary factors ... At a certain stage in the evolution of the economy of the ancien régime, the creation of value began to occur within the structures of the guilds and corporations, institutions that likely facilitated the process. [30]
But capitalist developments were opposed, and from more than one source. Heller cites the example of Jacques Vaucanson, a mechanic who entered the Académie des Sciences at the insistence of Louis XV because of his inventions, including ‘a mechanical silk loom, a draw loom for brocade and figured silk, a silk throwing mill, and a mangle to achieve the effect of moiré or “clouded silk”.’ His entry to the Académie was opposed by the aristocratic members who opposed the practical application of scientific theory for the vulgar purposes of commerce. But he was also opposed by the corporate guilds of the artisans, themselves already under attack from the merchant capitalists, and who rioted to prevent the introduction of the mechanical loom. [31] The kind of support the absolutist state could give to innovators like Vaucanson against noble opposition was limited, since the nobility was the ultimate basis of its support. [32]
The absolutist state concentrated power, drawing it away from the local lordships to the centralised state as guarantor of surplus extraction and defence against peasant revolt. [33] Yet, centralisation did not necessarily mean that the state was all-powerful, despite its propaganda to that effect. [34] As Heller writes, ‘The absolutist state had deprived the French nobility of much of its ability to control the rural population or to withstand revolt.’ But it could not always replace that ability with its own power, which mattered in a situation where peasant resistance to the payment of tithes and enforcement of seigneurial rights had been increasing since 1775. [35]
Heller agrees with most commentators that the fiscal crisis of the state was a major precipitant of the revolution, in particular the increased share of taxation falling on the commoners. Not only were the nobles largely exempt from these, but they increased their own income levels by squeezing greater rents from their tenants. As we have seen, however, Heller also insists that there was an economic as well as a financial crisis: ‘Economic crisis galvanised the mass of the population to throw its weight behind the political struggle of the bourgeoisie, allowing it to take power.’ [36] Heller follows the Marxist Guy Lemarchand in arguing that there was a shortage of investment capital in both industry and agriculture, ‘because too much of the economic surplus was drained off in the form of agricultural rents’. ‘In the final analysis the paralysis of the leading sectors of an emergent capitalism reflected the ongoing stranglehold of the seigneurial class over the economy.’ The crisis was also agricultural: ‘The growth in population rendered the holdings of many of the peasants progressively smaller and increasingly fragile.’ The two were connected by the limitations to French development:
The domestic market was clearly inhibited by growing rural poverty. But the market was also blocked by the persistence of tolls and tariffs, local systems of weights and measures, a lack of adequate means of transport, and the burden of indirect taxes. Such a situation encouraged the persistence of too large a degree of domestic or local subsistence inhibiting urbanisation and the commercialisation of agriculture.
In short, the revolution had three underlying economic causes. The crisis of industrial underinvestment in the capitalist manufacturing sector and ‘a classic Malthusian’ crisis of subsistence in feudal agriculture set the context for ‘the financial insolvency of the state’, which in turn ‘led to an ultimate political crisis’. The alignment of the joint crises of capitalism, feudalism and the absolutist state suggests the transitional, combined nature of French economy, but also that the transition had reached the point where it would be increasing difficult for the process to continue without radical political change. [37]
 
Both bourgeois and capitalist
Who then were the bourgeoisie who took the leadership of the revolution once the crisis had broken? Heller points out that, in terms of social weight, there were simply many more members of that class by the end of the 18th century than at the beginning: ‘It is estimated that the size of the bourgeoisie grew from 700,000 to 800,000 at the beginning of the 18th century to perhaps 2.3 million in 1789, vastly outnumbering the 120,000 or so nobles.’ Partly because of this, from 1720 onwards the nobility began to force through measures which excluded the bourgeoisie from joining them, including the ending of ennoblement through office in 1728. The bourgeoisie were opposed to the tax exemptions of the nobility, particularly as taxation increased, although membership of the nobility based on merit was still their goal. As this suggests, the development of their class consciousness was subject to contradictory pressures. On the one hand, their capacity for collective self-organisation was limited, for fairly obvious reasons: ‘Before the onset of the revolution, the sphere of autonomous political activity was quite circumscribed by the authorities of the ancien régime as a matter of policy.’ On the other hand, a bourgeois way of life involving distinct forms of dress, manners, speech and so on began to develop. So too did organisations where new ideas could be discussed and other activities besides. The Freemasons were one such organisation: ‘The meeting of the lodges became sites not only for philosophical discussions, but for the creating and financing of new business partnerships.’ It was clear to many young bourgeois that careers were not open to their talents: ‘As a result, late 18th century France produced a large stratum of alienated intelligentsia who played an important role in the Revolution.’ [38]
But what was the relationship of these bourgeois intellectuals to capitalism? As we have seen from the work of George Comninel, some ‘political Marxists’ claim that capitalists and the bourgeoisie are quite distinct classes, a position which has implications for how we assess revolutions, notably the English and French, which otherwise appear decidedly similar. Benno Teschke, for example, claims that ‘while the English Revolution was not bourgeois, it was capitalist, and while the French Revolution was bourgeois, it was not capitalist’. [39] This distinction is completely untenable and relies on a fixation on the etymological origin of the word ‘bourgeois’ – as if the fact that it originally meant ‘town dweller’ in the middle ages continued to determine how it was used in the 18th century! Capitalists are part of the bourgeoisie. The latter is a far broader category, but one which could not exist as a class without the centripetal economic core of people committed to capital accumulation. Heller makes two points in this context.
First, there are perfectly good reasons why leadership should be exerted by individuals at the economic periphery. In one of his few direct references to the classical Marxist tradition, Heller notes Gramsci’s insistence on the formation of ‘organic intellectuals’ to a revolutionary class: ‘As a new class develops within the world of economic production, it tends to create from out of itself a stratum of intellectuals that helps to give it a sense of homogeneity and a sense of its economic as well as its social and political functions.’ In France these included ‘physicians, journalists, writers and, above all, lawyers’. ‘In this light’, Heller justly remarks, ‘to demand why business people and not lawyers were to be found sitting in the Estates General for the third estate in 1789 is to invoke an argument based on a crude reductionism – a position of which Marxists have often been accused.’ [40]
Second, it is in any case untrue that capitalists in the narrow sense were uninvolved in the revolution. Their direct intervention in government tended to be exercised outside the capital, something which has often been ignored because of the decisive impact of events in Paris. But as Heller says, ‘the weight of the economic bourgeoisie made itself felt directly at the level of local rather than national government’. [41] Their most obvious impact, however, can be seen in the laws passed by the Convention. Take three components of the legislative programme of 1791, which clearly embody capitalist interests. Under the Law of Allaire of 2 March feudal guilds were abolished and restrictions on businesses removed. The Le Chapelier Law of 14–17 June banned combinations and industrial action. Finally, the decree on agrarian property rights of 5 June, the most important of a series of enactments concerning agriculture, established freedom of ownership, including the right to enclose common land. [42]
Because of their date, these examples may not convince revisionists who believe that the bourgeois content of the revolution ended after 1791. But the majority of the Jacobins saw political dictatorship, economic centralisation, the Law of the Maximum and all the rest as temporary measures made necessary by civil war and invasion. Only at the outer edges of Jacobinism did members see them as being anti-capitalist in themselves, and this was the anti-capitalism of small producers, not workers: ‘The creation of the Jacobin state was not simply based on countering the threat of counter-revolution, but on the determination to oppose the threat from economic competition from its English rival by using political means.’ [43]
The arms industry provides a good example of how military necessity contributed to capitalist expansion. In what can retrospectively be seen as early measures of state capitalism, the Committee of Public Safety effectively nationalised the existing armouries and organised the building of new ones in Paris and elsewhere. The majority of forges (about 1,000) were confiscated from their noble and ecclesiastical owners and transformed into state property, leased out to the maîtres de forges who had previously run them. Under the Directory and Napoleon they were ultimately sold off to the same individuals who, over the entire revolutionary period, began through a process of internal competition to centralise ownership and control: ‘The stage was set for a future transformation of this industry – key to the development of 19 century industrial capitalism – under the auspices of these maîtres de forges who now operated these means of production as their private property.’ Steel production nearly doubled between 1789 and 1801. And the new owners prospered too: by 1811 more than a dozen of the maîtres de forges had assets of between one and three million francs. [44]
In his discussion of the ideology of the revolutionary bourgeoisie Heller focuses on unjustly neglected figures like Pierre Louis Roederer and Etienne Clavière. The latter was a Genevan financial speculator and banker who ‘combined fervent idealism and shrewd business calculation’, ultimately becoming minister for finance briefly in 1792–93. Of this type of individual, Heller writes, ‘They identified this new regime with the free market.’ [45] Similar views were unambiguously expressed following the Thermidorian coup of 1794. One member of the new ruling group, Paul-Augustin Lozeau, rejected the Jacobin ideal of universal property ownership and abolition of poverty: ‘Even if it were possible how then, asked Lozeau, could the big farmers, the merchants, and the industrialists find the labour power that was indispensable to their enterprises?’ [46]
The nature of post-revolutionary France
The orthodox view of post-revolutionary France, held by virtually everyone from Engels to the revisionists, is that a mass of peasant smallholders, left in secure possession of their holdings by the revolution, acted as a break on the development of capitalism. The assumption here is that only large capitalist farmers can be competitive, but this is not necessarily the case. The division of the land would initially have retarded capitalist development: ‘But under free market conditions it would have speeded primitive accumulation over the medium term by unleashing the path of small-scale commodity production in both town and country.’ This position was actually theorised under the Directory from 1795 by the proponents of what James Livesey calls ‘commercial republicanism’, who saw it as a conscious alternative to the British path of ‘enclosure, tenant farming and agricultural innovation’. The post-Thermidorian reaction refused the demands of the peasants for land and upheld the ownership and dominance of ‘nobles, bourgeoisie and rich peasants’. We therefore may have to revise the traditional view of the agrarian settlement and consider whether it was not ‘the persistence of large property and the burden of rent, not small peasant property, which inhibited a more rapid development of French capitalism’. In turn, this might suggest that ‘the popular revolution based on the petty producers ought to be seen as an essential element of the capitalist dynamic characteristic of this upheaval’. [47]
Heller agrees with Livesey that ‘revisionist attempts to measure the economic consequences of the revolution in terms of short-term costs and benefits is historiographically misconceived’. [48] This does not mean that there were no benefits. In particular, Heller questions the conventional view that British manufacturing was superior to the French in the immediate aftermath of the revolution. First, Britain was actually less mechanised during this period than was traditionally thought; it was only in the latter half of the 19th century that this became dominant. Second, mass production was not the only method of industrialisation: ‘With its higher quality production, France inserted itself differently into the international division of labour ... [growing] at a rate comparable to that of its neighbours but based its secondary sector on small craft and manufacturing enterprises.’ [49]
The missing international dimension
No book can encompass every aspect of a subject, but the one key area where Heller’s account is noticeably deficient is in its treatment of the international dimension. Clearly a major contributory factor to the territorial expansion of capitalism during the 19th century was the competitive pressure which the existing capitalist nation-states, including France, placed on the feudal and absolutist regimes, forcing those which were able to establish nation-state structures and capitalist economies. As the theory of uneven and combined development would lead us to expect, once the development of capitalism became a conscious process then obviously changes to the relations of production tended to accompany or even precede changes to the forces of production, precisely because the aspirant capitalists knew what they were trying to achieve, unlike their predecessors in the period when capitalism first emerged as a distinct mode of production. [50]
At one point Heller notes that the market is scarcely a spontaneous generation in any historical circumstances: ‘The provision of a more or less trained and disciplined labour force, a reliable currency, law and order, and an infrastructure of roads and bridges is not provided directly through the market but requires state intervention.’ But the main role of the revolutionary French state was in nurturing, not conceiving, French capitalism, a process ‘made necessary by the ongoing weakness of the capitalist economy in France as compared to, and in competition with, England’. [51] As the last sentence suggests, Heller does not ignore the effect on France of competition with Britain. However, he neglects two other aspects of France’s situation in the formative world market, one in the period leading up to the revolution, the other in the period flowing out of it.
The first is the extent of capitalist production outside France. Any account of the formative process of French capitalism must include the colonial economy, particularly the slave plantations of the Caribbean. These classically ‘combined’ forms were perhaps the most advanced under French ownership and bore the closest relationship to those of their British rivals. As Robin Blackburn notes, ‘It would ... be wrong to propose a sharp contrast between English ‘bourgeois’ colonisation and French ‘feudal’ colonisation, since the social forces involved in both – merchants and colonists – were comparable.’ [52] As C.L.R. James notes of the slaves, ‘Working and living together in gangs of hundreds on the huge sugar factories which covered the North Plain [of San Domingo], they were closer to a modern proletariat than any group of workers in existence at the time.’ [53] Extending his focus to the colonial world would have strengthened the argument Heller wants to make about the pre-revolutionary existence of French capitalism.
The second is the international impact of the revolution. Apart from the inspiration which it provided to revolutionaries in other countries, the most obvious aspect is the direct intervention of the French state in the territories which it conquered. Indeed, one of the proofs of the bourgeois nature of the revolution is precisely the way in which it acted to attack feudalism outside its own borders, even after the internal reaction began with Thermidor. Heller’s main references are to the extent to which the manufactured commodities of the conquered territories grew or failed to grow under French rule. There are clearly more of the latter than the former (Heller mentions Belgium, the Rhineland, Bavaria, Saxony and Switzerland), but the issue is surely broader than this. [54] Like the New Model Army in Scotland between 1651 and 1660, the ‘people’s armies’ attempted to crush the local nobility, abolish feudal tenures and jurisdictions and generally rationalise economy and society. Their failure to do so on a permanent basis – for which there are also parallels with the New Model Army in Scotland – was an important factor in determining why capitalist stabilisation had to take place on the conservative basis of a restored monarchy.
The extent to which the French were able to establish sister republics in conquered Europe depended on whether indigenous forces existed which were willing to be involved in the process of reform, but precisely because of their isolation, their minority status, they were not necessarily those with popular followings, as the Spanish rebellion against France and its local supporters after 1808 was to prove. Where there were social forces committed to republican politics, it tended to be in those areas, principally Holland, where bourgeois revolutions had already taken place and consequently where these forces were opposed to the imperial role of the French armies. [55] In Britain, the most advanced of all, the ruling class were violently opposed to France and prepared to ally with absolutist reaction to defeat it, partly because the British bourgeoisie feared – as they had the Dutch in the 1650s – a successful rival, and partly because the very violence of the revolution had acted as an inspiration to nascent working class forces in England and Scotland, and to bourgeois revolutionaries in Ireland. In some territories, like Hanover and Westphalia in 1807, the French abolished serfdom only for it to be restored after Napoleon withdrew in 1813. In other parts of the German lands, notably in the Rhineland, it proved impossible to restore seignorial rights, but these examples were too few to be the basis for a Europe of independent states on the French model.
Perhaps the most important long-term international effect of the French Revolution, however, was the way in which it acted as a stimulus for revolution from above. Even in the short term, French victories led to internal reform. For Prussia, defeat at the hands of the Napoleonic armies at Jena and Auerstadt in 1806, and the subsequent humiliation of the Peace of Tilsit in 1807, seemed to demonstrate the superiority of free peasants over serfs as a source of manpower, while the indemnities imposed by the victorious French demanded an increase in revenues which was unlikely to be produced as long as serfdom endured. [56] The triumph of bourgeois revolution in France now meant that capitalism took on an unstoppable economic force it had not possessed when Britain was the only capitalist power of any size. But the bourgeoisies of Europe were themselves increasing paralysed between the conflicting desire to bring about revolutions that would place them in power and fear of the mass mobilisations that seemed necessary to achieve it. Ironically, it was the very grandeur and ferocity of the popular interventions which characterised the French Revolution that ensured it would never be repeated. Other forces, often from sections of the old ruling class, would eventually act in their stead, particularly in Germany, Italy and Japan.
It is for this reason that I think we have to question some of the formulations which Heller uses here. His work enters a debate over two different if related questions. The first is the specific one of the French Revolution – what caused it, who was involved, what were their motivations, and so on. The other is the general one of whether it is possible to produce a theory of bourgeois revolution that can encompass the French example, but also the quite different experiences of countries as distinct as Scotland, Mexico or China. Heller has made a considerable contribution to the first, but tends to avoid the second. Indeed, Heller suggests that the French Revolution was bourgeois because it was led by the bourgeoisie. [57] This is certainly true of France, but if direct leadership is the main criterion there have been precious few other bourgeois revolutions. Heller is surely correct to write: ‘In Marx’s eyes the revolution in France alongside the English Revolution was the classic form of a bourgeois revolution.’ ‘Classic’ does not, however, imply that it was typical or characteristic, still less that ‘it was a model against which the ascent of the bourgeoisie to power elsewhere could be judged’. [58] At certain points in his book Heller appears to recognise this, writing of Marx, ‘His view of the French Revolution as archetypical of bourgeois revolutions may ... be questioned.’ [59] Elsewhere, however, he echoes the conventional view of the failure to repeat the French road: ‘We must acknowledge that transitions to capitalism occurred in Japan and Germany without such a rupture, albeit at an ultimately tragic historical cost in the form of fascism.’ [60] The view that fascism arose because of the failure or unfulfilled character of the German bourgeois revolution has been subjected to searching Marxist criticism by David Blackbourn and, in particular, Geoff Eley, who have turned the entire argument on its head by arguing that the German Revolution was more authentically ‘bourgeois’ than either the English or French. The tragedy of fascism arose not because of the form taken by the German bourgeois revolution, but as the result of the crisis of the Weimar Republic in the years immediately preceding the Nazi seizure of power. [61]
 
Conclusion
In many ways Heller’s work resembles that of the late Brian Manning, a writer who defended the bourgeois nature of English Revolution in his work as vigorously as Heller does that of the French Revolution here. Manning was, however, suspicious of Marxist reappraisals of the bourgeois revolution which downplayed the conscious role of the bourgeoisie, seeing this as moving away from notions of class struggle. [62] I think Manning was wrong about this, since the view that revolutions do not have to be carried out by the bourgeoisie does not commit one to the claim that they are never carried out by the bourgeoisie, as in their different ways both the English and French revolutions were. It seems quite possible to be able to defend a conception of bourgeois self-emancipation, as Heller so ably does here, while still holding that this was not the only or the most common route to capitalist domination.
It will be interesting to find out what further thoughts Heller has on the subject. For the moment, however, this work is indispensable for anyone interested in a serious Marxist view of the subject. It is a notable demonstration that, contrary to what is claimed by Furet and everyone else who wants to wave goodbye to what Heller calls ‘the capital event of the modern age’, the French Revolution is not yet over. [63]

Notes
1. G. Lukács, Towards a Methodology of the Problem of Organisation, in History and Class Consciousness (London 1971), p. 308.
2. A. Cobban (1955), The Myth of the French Revolution, in Aspects of the French Revolution (London 1971), pp. 95-106. Cobban developed these arguments in The Social Interpretation of the French Revolution (Cambridge 1964).
3. J.L. Talmon (1952), The Origins of Totalitarian Democracy (London 1961), p. 80.
4. E.J. Hobsbawm, Echoes of the Marseillaise: Two Centuries Look Back at the French Revolution (London and New York 1990), p. 109; A. MacIntyre, The End of Ideology and the End of the End of Ideology, in Against the Self-Images of the Age: Essays on Ideology and Philosophy (London 1971), p. 4.
5. The phrase sounds rather more elegant in the original French, i.e., ‘le dérapage de la révolution’. F. Furet and D. Richet (1965), La Révolution française (Revised Edition, Paris 1970), p. 126.
6. F. Furet, The French Revolution is Over, in Interpreting the French Revolution, translated by E. Forster (Cambridge and Paris 1981), pp. 5–6, 12.
7. N. Davidson, How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions? (continued), Historical Materialism, vol. 13, no. 4 (2005), pp. 8–21, 27–32.
8. B. Teschke, Bourgeois Revolution, State Formation and the Absence of the International, Historical Materialism, vol. 13, no. 2 (2005), p. 5.
9. G.C. Comninel, Rethinking the French Revolution: Marxism and  the Revisionist Challenge (London and New York 1990), pp. 182, 193, 200, 202.
10. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, 1789–1815 (Oxford and New York 2006), p. viii.
11. H. Heller, The Conquest of Poverty: the Calvinist Revolt in Sixteenth Century France (Leiden 1986); Iron and Blood: Civil Wars in Sixteenth Century France (Montreal 1991); Labour, Science and Technology in France, 1500–1620 (Cambridge 1996).
12. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, as above, p. 1.
13. As above, p. 149.
14. As above, pp. 26–28.
15. A. Soboul (1965), A Short History of the French Revolution, 1789–1799, translated by G. Symcox (Berkeley, Los Angeles and London 1977); P. McGarr, The Great French Revolution, International Socialism 2 : 43 (Summer 1989).
16. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, as above, p. 22.
17. To be fair to Guérin, his conclusions about the prospects of working class power in the French Revolution were ultimately more realistic than those of his followers: ‘The objective conditions of the time did not allow the [sans-culotte] vanguard to beat the bourgeoisie at their own game’ – D. Guerin (1946), La Lutte de Classes sous la Première République, Revised Edition, 2 volumes (Paris 1968), vol. 1, p. 405.
18. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, as above, p. 23.
19. As above, pp. 89, 93.
20. As above, p. 23.
21. G. Lefebvre (1951), The French Revolution (2 volumes, London and New York 1962–1964), vol. 1, From its Origins to 1793, translated by E.M. Evanson; vol. 2, From 1793 to 1799, translated by J.H. Stewart and J. Friguglietti; Soboul (1962), The French Revolution, 1787–1799: from the Storming of the Bastille to Napoleon, translated by A. Forrest and C. Jones (London 1989).
22. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, as above, p. 23.
23. As above, p. 74.
24. As above, p. 150.
25. As above, p. 7.
26. As above, p. 31. And see, for example, I. Wallerstein, The Modern World System (3 volumes, New York 1974–1989), vol. 2, Mercantilism and the Consolidation of the European World-Economy, 1600–1750, pp. 87–90.
27. As above, p. 34.
28. As above, p. 36.
29. As above, pp. 5–6, 36, 45–48.
30. As above, p. 51.
31. As above, pp. 37–38.
32. As above, p. 67.
33. See, in general, P. Anderson, Lineages of the Absolutist State (London 1974), pp. 19–20, and specifically in relation to France, R. Brenner, The Agrarian Roots of European Capitalism’, in T.H. Aston and C.H.E. Philpin (eds.), The Brenner Debate: Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe (Cambridge 1985), pp. 286–291.
34. See, in general, M. Mann, The Sources of Social Power (2 volumes, Cambridge 1986–1993), vol. 1, A History of Power from the Beginning to AD 1760, pp. 475–483 and, specifically in relation to France, T. Skocpol, States and Social Revolutions: a Comparative Analysis of France, Russia and China (Cambridge 1979), pp. 52–54.
35. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, as above, p. 66.
36. As above, p. 67.
37. As above, pp. 67-69, 70, 147.
38. As above, pp. 54-60.
39. B. Teschke, Bourgeois Revolution, State Formation and the Absence of the International, as above, p. 12. See also E.M. Wood, The Origin of Capitalism: a Longer View (London and New York 2002), p. 63.
40. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, as above, p. 72. For Gramsci’s original discussion of ‘organic intellectuals’, see A. Gramsci, The Intellectuals, in Selections from the Prison Notebooks, edited and translated by Q. Hoare and G. Nowell Smith (London 1971), pp. 14–21.
41. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, as above, p. 86.
42. As above, pp. 88, 89.
43. As above, p. 91.
44. As above, pp. 96, 103, 119, 129.
45. As above, pp. 76, 77, 78.
46. As above, p. 110.
47. As above, pp. 94, 99–103.
48. As above, p. 113.
49. As above, p. 137.
50. See, for example, my discussion of the transition to capitalism in rural Scotland, The Scottish Path to Capitalist Agriculture 2: the Capitalist Offensive (1747–1815), Journal of Agrarian Change, vol. 4, no. 4 (October 2004), pp. 415–416, 423–431.
51. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, as above, p. 126.
52. R. Blackburn, The Making of New World Slavery: from the Baroque to the Modern, 1492–1800 (London and New York 1997), pp. 300–301.
53. C.L.R. James, The Black Jacobins: Toussaint L’Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution (London 1980), pp. 85–86.
54. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, as above, p. 139.
55. S. Schama, Patriots and Liberators: Revolution in the Netherlands, 1780–1813 (London 1992), pp. 12–15.
56. J. Blum, The End of the Old Order in Rural Europe (Princeton 1978), pp. 362, 370; T.J. Byres, Capitalism from Above and Capitalism from Below (Houndmills 1996), pp. 27–8.
57. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, as above, p. 7.
58. As above, p. 11.
59. As above, p. 149.
60. As above, p. 65.
61. G. Eley, The British Model and the German Road: Rethinking the Course of German History Before 1914, in D. Blackbourn and G. Eley, The Peculiarities of German History, as above, pp. 85, 154. These conclusions are supported by most serious contemporary histories of Nazi Germany. See, for example, I. Kershaw, Hitler, 1889–1936: Hubris (London 1998), pp. 73–75 and R.J. Evans, The Coming of the Third Reich (London 2003), pp. 2–21.
62. B. Manning, The English Revolution: the Decline and Fall of Revisionism, Socialist History, 14 (1999), p. 46 and pp. 44–46 more generally.
63. H. Heller, The Bourgeois Revolution in France, as above, p. ix.
 



Gordon Brown addressed the annual Fabian Society Conference in January 2006 on the theme of The Future of Britishness. [1] He asked his audience:
What is the British equivalent of the US 4th of July, or even the French 14th of July? ... What is our equivalent for a national celebration of who we are and what we stand for? In recent years we have had magnificent celebrations of VE Day, the Jubilee and, last year, Trafalgar Day. Perhaps Armistice Day and Remembrance Sunday are the nearest we have come to a British day that is – in every corner of our country – commemorative, unifying, and an expression of British ideas of standing firm in the world in the name of liberty responsibility and fairness? [2]
Brown’s bewilderment may seem surprising, given that he has recently become, in Tom Nairn’s phrase, the ‘bard of Britishness’. [3] For there is one obvious candidate for a British national day: 1 May 1707, the date on which the Treaty of Union between Scotland and England came into effect with the first meeting of the British parliament. Yet there is no public commemoration of the 300th anniversary of the British state, only exhibitions of documents and artworks in the national archives, museums and galleries. [4] There were just as few commemorations of the bicentenary in 1907. Why is such a central date in British history being allowed to pass virtually unnoticed again? A hundred years ago there would have been three main reasons. One was the English habit – not yet extinct, alas – of seeing British history as a continuation of English history, which deprives 1707 of any particular significance. The second was that the politics of the Treaty of Union were highly undemocratic, even by modern standards. Unlike the American Declaration of Independence or the fall of the Bastille, they were scarcely a model of heroic national virtue, although equally part of the global bourgeois revolution. The third and perhaps most important was the apparent invulnerability of Britain. With an empire surely destined to last forever, it had no need to dwell on its somewhat disreputable origins. Reality has since impinged. The empire has been reduced to an unwanted fragment of its first colony in Ireland and the territorial-constitutional integrity of the British state itself has come under varying levels of threat.
An official commemoration in 2007 would provide an opportunity for supporters of Scottish independence to use the origins of the Union as an argument for bringing it to an end. The current anniversary has been particularly sensitive, with Scottish parliamentary elections taking place two days after the tricentenary. These are conducted under a version of proportional representation deliberately adopted to prevent any one party, particularly the Scottish National Party (SNP), from gaining a majority of seats.
Scotland has been governed by a coalition between Labour and the Liberal Democrats since the setting up of the devolved parliament in 1999, with the SNP as the official opposition and the Tories trailing behind. The voting system allowed a number of smaller, more radical parties to achieve a presence – the Scottish Greens, the Scottish Socialist Party and the Scottish Senior Citizen’s Unity Party – together with a scattering of mainly left wing independents. Commentators have expected the outgoing coalition to do badly this time because of the unpopularity of Labour, with the main beneficiaries being above all the SNP and then the smaller parties, all committed, with varying degrees of priority, to Scottish independence.
This would not necessarily mean an immediate push for independence. The SNP also attracts voters looking to punish Labour on left wing grounds, especially since the Liberal Democrats are excluded as an alternative because they are part of the coalition and the far left has recently experienced a necessary but damaging split. The SNP has cultivated a ‘social democratic’ image, particularly over the issues of war and nuclear weapons, even if – as we shall see – any probing of its domestic programme reveals a commitment to the same neoliberal consensus as the other main parties. Its leader Alex Salmond is ostensibly committed to a referendum on independence, but if the SNP emerges as the largest single party it would have to form a coalition to take over the executive. No other major party will support the referendum idea, and Salmond may have the excuse he needs to abandon the idea – as one of the shrewdest operators in Scottish politics, he knows perfectly well that such a referendum would almost certainly be lost. And there is a precedent which suggests that an SNP-led coalition would not necessarily herald major constitutional change. In Canada the nationalist Parti Quebecois took office at the provisional* level in 1976. But Quebec has not become an independent state, despite two referendums on the issue and several Parti Quebecois provisional* governments over the past 30 years.
 
[* Note by ETOL: Presumably this is supposed to be “provincial”.  Principles, false trails and red herrings
Socialists in Scotland will have to make tactical shifts in response to the election results. But they will still have to be underpinned by a broader set of principles. What are these and how do they affect our attitude to the Anglo-Scottish Union and a possible Scottish secession? The existence of Scottish nationhood is not at issue. Scotland is a nation, not because it matches some arbitrary check-list of criteria, but because the Scots possess a national consciousness, even if this consciousness only became fully developed much later than is usually supposed – in the latter half of the 18th century, by my reading of the evidence – and arose in conjunction with a British national consciousness. [5] Scotland is a nation, but the mere existence of nationhood does not always result in a demand for statehood.
If, however, such a demand was to gain majority support and then come to fruition, there is no reason why Scotland could not become a functioning capitalist nation-state like any other. ‘An independent Scotland’, notes Tony Judt in his important history of post-war Europe, ‘was a perfectly plausible proposition – particularly in a European Union in which it would have been by no means the smallest or poorest nation-state’. [6] This does not mean accepting the highly imaginative parallels that are often drawn with Ireland. As Tom Devine noted, ‘the spectacular growth rates of Ireland’ are ‘simply not repeatable in Scotland’, since Scotland does not have the ‘Irish starting point of a low-wage, low-cost environment with a deep pool of unemployed’ which ‘made a rapid take off possible’. [7]
An independent Scotland would be intrinsically neither better nor worse than any other capitalist state. It is hypocrisy to oppose Scottish nationalism while remaining silent about British nationalism. When those warmongering privatisers Gordon Brown and Douglas Alexander claim to be ‘international socialists’ by defending the British state, they are only the latest in a long line of Labour politicians who disparage every nationalism except their own. [8]
Whether socialists in Scotland should seek to establish a separate state is another question. Support for the right to self-determination is not the same as supporting separation, any more than supporting the right to divorce is to insist that particular couples should do so. Support for separation should always depend on the concrete circumstances in which the issue is posed and its impact on the wider struggle against capitalism. Separatist sentiment which reflects class feeling against capitalism, neoliberalism, oppression and imperialist war is very different from that based on nationalist antagonism and an attempt to gain benefits at the expense of other workers.
Finally, even where it is right to support secession, extraordinary care has to be taken not to encourage divisions between workers who belong to different national groups. Socialists should, for example, oppose any attempts to set up breakaway Scottish trade unions, as this would fragment working class organisations in the face of capitalists who operate on both sides of the border. Even if secession were to take place, common union membership can exist across national boundaries, as it does across Canada and the US, and across Ireland and Britain. Class unity is about solidarity, which recognises no borders.
 
Is there a Scottish national ‘movement’?
Since the 1960s over-optimistic predictions about the impending appearance of a ‘majority for independence’ have always proved wrong. Recently, these have been based on the rise in the number of Scots claiming their identity is mainly or exclusively Scottish, as opposed to British. But it is quite possible to assert a Scottish national consciousness without feeling that this necessarily implies any association with Scottish nationalism or a desire for independence. A sense of Britishness has been shared with Scottish national consciousness since the latter half of the 18th century precisely because political and economic issues have tended to be resolved at a British level. It is a cliche of recent political, historical and sociological writing on Scotland that Scottishness is a national identity, while Britishness is a mere state identity. [9] But this is to fundamentally misunderstand the function of national identity under capitalism. British ‘national consciousness’ is no more or less artificial than Scottish, French or Swedish national consciousness. No nations are more or less ‘real’ than others and the assertion of the Scottish ‘side’ of this dual identity has no necessary political implications.
What then is the level of popular demand for secession? Not all voters for the SNP or the other pro-independence parties support independence, while some voters for the other parties do, with some recent polls suggesting more than 50 percent support. [10] So there are many people prepared to express a wish for independence in an opinion poll who then vote for ‘unionist’ parties – above all the Labour Party – in actual elections, even though they know that these parties are fundamentally opposed to independence. This calls into question the strength of their views on independence. Further evidence suggests that support for independence may be relatively superficial. One study of the 1997 general election found that ‘out of 16 issues “constitutional issues/devolution” ranked 16th in importance with voters’. [11] This was despite outgoing prime minister John Major talking up the ‘constitutional threat’ of devolution.
The low level of interest was replicated again during 2001. One poll showed that ‘constitutional issues/devolution’ received 8 percent support, coming 15th out of 17 in a ranking of issues Scottish voters regarded as ‘very important’ in helping them decide what party to vote for – a long way after healthcare, education, law and order, pensions, taxation, unemployment and so on. [12] Similar results have been repeated since.
David McCrone and Lindsay Paterson questioned people between 1997 and 2000: 45 percent supported independence at least once, but only 7 percent supported it on all four occasions, and only 14 percent on three out of the four. They concluded that ‘there is no stable core for independence’, but added, ‘Many more people are prepared to countenance independence if they were persuaded that it would generate more responsive government, and would be likely to produce the kind of society they aspire to’. [13]
They may be so persuaded in the future, but for the moment there is no ‘movement’ for Scottish independence in the way there is a movement against imperialist intervention in the Middle East, or local movements against the closure of hospital accident and emergency services. Supporters of the demand are not organising to demonstrate, petition, debate and generally mobilise. There is no sign that they are prepared to do anything more than express a vague aspiration in opinion polls and sometimes vote for parties who stand for independence and – in the case of the Scottish Socialist Party, Solidarity and the Greens – many other things beside. A demonstration on 30 September 2006, called by the pan-nationalist front Independence First, mobilised 1,000 people according to the organisers. [14] Contrast this with 100,000 who protested against the Iraq war on the streets of Glasgow on 15 February 2003, and the thousands who have protested since.
It is debatable whether the SNP today actually believes it is possible to achieve majority support for independence in a referendum. The aftermath of every single election since October 1974 has seen the party plunge into internal recriminations over its failure once again to deliver a majority vote for independence. There is now a division between the fundamentalists, who put the achievement of independence before all other considerations, and those who accept that this is unlikely to happen, at least in the foreseeable future, and consequently want more devolved powers through a ‘Catalan’ solution of greater autonomy within the UK. This debate has been relatively muted so far. But Dennis MacLeod, a Canada-based capitalist, and Mike Russell, a former front bench spokesperson for the SNP, have proposed a stages strategy which accepts that a transition to independence will be necessary. Since ‘some further time may be needed before the majority of our fellow Scots are ready’ they propose a ‘devolution stage two’ or ‘new Union’ to act as a ‘staging post’ in which the powers currently reserved to Westminster would be devolved, except for foreign affairs and military command. [15] Closer to the leadership of the SNP, shadow justice minister Kenny Macaskill has gone further and suggested that independence itself could be abandoned in favour of a renegotiated Union. [16]
Should it matter to socialists if there is no majority for secession? Socialists who want to argue for Scottish independence are saying that the left should create a movement where none exists, and persuade people who currently do not support independence that they should, in circumstances where even the bourgeois nationalists are in retreat. Why would socialists want to do this?
 
300 years of national oppression?
One reason might be that Scotland is oppressed and that support for secession should therefore be a matter of principle. The opposition of the majority of Scots to the Union in 1706–7 and the bribery which accompanied the negotiations (exaggerated, but real nonetheless) are still regularly cited as reasons why the Union should be opposed now. But it is completely misleading to talk about ‘the Union’ as if it was signed last week and nothing has happened since. Only nine years after the signing some of the very same people who had opposed the Union were advocating its military defence against Jacobite attempts to dissolve it and restore French-backed absolutism across the whole of Britain. And 30 years after that, in 1745–46, there were actual popular risings in Perth and Stirling against the Jacobites – an aspect of our ‘hidden history’ of struggle that left nationalists are naturally unwilling to celebrate. [17]
A misleading parallel is often drawn with Ireland, because of the supposed existence of a commonly oppressive ‘Unionism’ in both countries. However, as Patrick Weight noted:
Ordinary Scots endured no major injustice that the English did not endure between 1707 and 2000, with the exception of the Highland Clearances. No meaningful comparison can therefore be made with the Irish experience of Union, in which millions were starved and killed and repeated attempts were made to extinguish their religion, culture and way of life – a task which the Scots had happily assisted the English with. [18]
In Ireland Unionism is the ideology of a distinct social group which gained from British rule – the relatively privileged descendants of the colonial settlers who were marked out from the native population by their religion. In the case of the Protestant working class those privileges have been very relative indeed, but no less effective for all that in dividing it from the Catholic working class. None of this applies in Scotland. There is no social factor that has united the opponents of Scottish independence – or indeed its supporters. The term ‘Unionist’ becomes simply a term of abuse which would apply to most members of the Scottish working class, since historically they have voted for a party (Labour) opposed to independence. In fact, ‘Unionism’ in Scotland emerged as a term referring to the defence by ‘Liberal Unionists’ and Tories of the Union with Ireland, not Scotland, for the simple reason that virtually no one in Scotland was interested at the time in breaking from Britain. [19] Some ‘stateless nations’, such as Quebec and Catalonia, have been oppressed in the very recent past. This has not been true of the Scots. [20]
For claims of oppression to be valid today, Scots would have to suffer systematic discrimination simply because they are Scots, not because of the normal economic operations of the capitalist system. But there is no law controlling what a Scottish person must or must not do that does not apply to everyone else in Britain. Take two recent examples were widely claimed as demonstrating Scottish oppression. One is how ‘Scotland’s oil’ was supposedly appropriated by a succession of British governments. We need only ask what would have happened if the oil had been discovered off the south west coast of England: would Westminster have fought the multinational corporations to redistribute the oil wealth among the English people? Both Labour and Conservative governments would have behaved exactly as they did in the Scottish case, so why treat this as an example of a specifically national oppression? The other case is the introduction of the Poll Tax in Scotland a year earlier than England. This is a perfect example of how the operation of bourgeois politics in capitalist society can be wilfully misinterpreted as having a ‘national’ dimension that is in fact completely absent. Conservative think-tanks had been developing the tax since 1984 as an all-British measure that would shift the burden of payment onto the working class. An accident of timing gave it added impetus: the Scottish rates revaluation of 1984–85 provoked outrage among home owners, businesses and Conservative activists who were handed higher bills. The then secretary of state for Scotland, George Younger, was under pressure from his own members who feared losing votes in the general election of 1987, and he persuaded the cabinet to introduce the Poll Tax Enabling Bill in Scotland first. [21] The resulting disaster was brought about by an attempt to placate the class base of Scottish conservatism, not to continue the work of the ‘conquering English’ in oppressing the Scots. Everything looks national if you look at it through nationalist spectacles.
Perhaps the most decisive argument against oppression is the most obvious: if it were so, surely the majority of people would have realised by now; surely it would have been reflected in their political behaviour. As Eric Hobsbawm remarked of the first post-referendum election to the Scottish Parliament:
We would have thought it impossible, 20 years ago, that only 60 percent of the citizens would vote in the first election for a Scottish parliament in 300 years, an election supposed to realise the historical ambition of the people of that country. In the first elections in South Africa, people queued for miles to get to the polling station. [22]
In fact, there is only one serious reason why socialists should not oppose independence – not because Scotland is oppressed, but because it is, as part of the British state, an oppressor. The point was made many years ago in Hamish Henderson’s great internationalist epic, The Freedom Come All Ye, which looks forward to a socialist future in which ‘Broken families in the lands we’ve harried/Will curse Scotland the Brave nae mair, nae mair’. [23] The political implications, however, need further investigation.
 
Scotland, Western imperialism and global capital
A characteristic statement of the ‘anti-imperialist independence’ case comes from Alan McCombes, the national policy coordinator for the Scottish Socialist Party:
Scotland is a vital cog in the Western military machine, with vital submarine and air bases. More than 80 percent of all European Union oil reserves are in Scottish waters, while Edinburgh is the fourth finance centre in Europe. The tearing of the blue out of the Union Jack and the dismantling of the 300 year old British state would also be a traumatic psychological blow for the forces of capitalism and conservatism in Britain, Europe and the USA ... It is no accident that big business and the conservative right in Scotland are fanatically pro-union. The break up of the United Kingdom might not mean instant socialism, but it would mean a decisive shift in the balance of ideological and class forces. [24]
There is no dispute over Scotland’s imperial role (although, in Ulster at least, this preceded the Union). But would Scottish secession remove an important component of the imperialist system? And would the capitalist class, internationally as well as in Britain, oppose secession through fear of ‘psychological trauma’? Surely not. States and capitals have different interests. [25] Formally, British state managers have conceded the right of self-determination. During the 1992 general election John Major said, ‘No nation can be held within a Union against its will’. [26] Shortly after the 1997 general election, when preparations for the Scottish and Welsh referendums were under way, Labour’s Donald Dewar noted that ‘the only way we [i.e. the Scots] could move to independence would be if people voted for independence. That is clearly their right’. [27] It is extremely unlikely that British state managers would use force or sanctions to oppose the session of Scotland on a capitalist basis.
However, as Michael Keating has noted, while ‘successive British governments have recognised’ that Scotland is a self-determining nation within the Union, they have ‘then tried to deny the consequences’. [28] In immediate party political terms, Labour relies heavily on its Scottish contingent in the House of Commons and would be badly weakened without it. (This is one of the not very elevated reasons behind Gordon Brown’s discovery of the joys of Britishness.) More generally, whichever party was in power, secession would weaken the influence of Britain – or ‘the rest of the UK’ – on the geopolitical stage; it would make permanent membership of the UN Security Council very difficult to justify, for example. Whether it would also prove to be a devastating blow to Western imperialism is a different matter, since there is no certainty that independence would inevitably make Scotland a non-nuclear state outside of Nato. The SNP website ‘reaffirms that no nuclear weapons will be based on independent Scottish soil’ and says, ‘An SNP government will not be part of a nuclear-based commitment such as Nato.’ But it also insists that Scotland would ‘maintain active defence commitments with friends and allies through the United Nations, European Union and Partnership for Peace’. [29] The Partnership for Peace is a Nato programme, involving over 20 states which are not front-line, or required to have a nuclear basis, but which are prepared to allow their territories to be used by combat troops (as Ireland did during the Iraq war) and to act as ‘peacekeepers’ (as Spain does in Afghanistan). [30] And even Nato membership is not completely ruled out. Part of Mike Russell’s failed attempt to become SNP convenor in 2004 involved support for a non-nuclear defence policy within Nato. In his book with MacLeod he describes Nato as a ‘proven alliance’ and commends retaining membership ‘for pragmatic reasons in terms of policy presentation and the creation of confidence’. In these conditions, ‘our troops could operate within a joint UK command in certain circumstances’. [31] Michael Fry has also written, ‘There is no reason why the two armies should not enjoy an extremely close working relationship’. [32] State Department officials could probably rest assured that mutually beneficial arrangements can be organised.
The application of international law since the break up of the Soviet Union would not allow Scotland to be a separate nuclear state alongside the UK, but there is no prohibition on recognised nuclear powers maintaining weapons on foreign territory. Any British government is likely to want these missiles to remain in Scotland, not to mention the American state which ultimately controls their use. [33] William Walker has noted the ‘uncharacteristic caution’ of the SNP to pursue the subject of the Trident replacement:
The party’s leaders realise that if establishing a reputation for sound governance and cooperation is paramount prior to the referendum, it will have little choice but to assist the government in London with the operation of Trident once it holds power in Holyrood. It cannot pick a fight with London, the US and other Nato members on such a sensitive issue without significant risk to its reputation. [34]
 
Capitalism and independence
The British bourgeoisie is by no means as obsessed with the constitutional form of the existing nation-state as the pro-independence wing of the Scottish left. Britain’s capitalists are interested in maintaining their class power – the national context through which they do so is less important to them. This does not mean that they would enthusiastically embrace independence, or that it would be their first choice. But neither would it constitute an insuperable problem for them, still less for the transnational capitalist class as a whole. Claims that globalisation is reducing the autonomy of states are undoubtedly exaggerated, but this process certainly intensifies the pressures that world markets have always exercised over even moderate reforming regimes. Scotland would be no exception:
The ratio of external to total sales flows in Scotland is ... about 62 percent compared to just below 30 percent in the UK ... the fortunes of the Scottish economy depend much more on what happens outside its borders than nations and countries of greater scale. [35]
A few bourgeois ideologues actually see advantages in independence. The Economist has been arguing for years that, in capitalist terms, ‘standing on its own two feet’ would be an exemplary experience for Scotland. Deprived of the subsidies which supposedly allow the Scots to maintain higher levels of public sector employment and marginally better social provision than the rest of the UK, they would finally be forced to accept economic reality and live within their means.
An SNP-led independent government would not use the same rhetoric, of course, but the party is already moving towards the same policies in practical terms. The leadership uses social democratic language, but is quick to add that it will continue to hold out bribes to capitalists to encourage investment. ‘I think private profit is entirely admirable,’ Alex Salmond recently explained to the Observer. ‘The competitive economy is a good thing, but I don’t think people should profit out of public services.’ His interviewer adds, ‘He also wants to regenerate inner cities by slashing business rates, and a priority would be to cut corporation tax.’ [36]
Both wings of the SNP are committed to neoliberalism. Jim Mather, the SNP’s economic spokesperson, wrote in the Scottish Parliament house journal in 2003, ‘We should not apologise for encouraging wealth creation and success ... We want more millionaires and any notion that an independent Scotland would be a left wing country is delusional nonsense’. [37] MacLeod and Russell claim that the newly industrialising countries in Asia ‘have achieved or are achieving their new-found status by rejecting the economic constraints of doctrinaire socialism. The brand of capitalism they have adopted is not the watered down version that still appeals to many in Scotland.’ Among the components of the ‘programme of national recovery’ they expect an SNP government to introduce are ‘freezing and cutting government expenditures ... the freezing of recruitment ... boosting business growth by reducing corporate and personal taxes ... improving government efficiency by exposure to the free market economy’ and ‘facilitating the transfer of civil servants (and potential civil servants) to the private sector’. [38]
The adoption of neoliberal economics is not just because of the general capitulation to these doctrines by all conventional bourgeois politicians. It is because there are particular ‘start-up’ costs associated with establishing a new state. Clive Lee noted in one of the few serious attempts to analyse the costs of secession over a decade ago that, even taking oil revenues into account, the costs of secession would leave an independent Scotland with a budget deficit. The alternatives would be to reduce spending, raise taxes or increase public borrowing, but the latter would be restricted by the fact that Scotland would inherit part of the existing British public sector borrowing requirement. Lee’s conclusions are sober, without indulging in needlessly apocalyptic predictions: ‘It seems probable, therefore, that an independent Scotland would have some difficulty in maintaining and financing public expenditure at present levels, a necessity given the problems both of social deprivation and economic decline which still affect much of the country’. [39]
If Scottish independence does become something that the capitalist class can live with, then one of the key arguments on the left for supporting it – that it is intrinsically contrary to the interests of the bourgeoisie – will have effectively collapsed. In spite of this, there are tactical reasons why socialists might, in certain concrete situations, urge a yes vote in a referendum on independence. If one were held today – which is extremely unlikely – a central issue would be British participation in the wars waged by US imperialism on Iraq and Afghanistan. Even so there is still a danger of socialists turning national consciousness into nationalism, creating it where it does not currently exist. There is already some limited evidence that nationalism may be weakening class identity. Lindsay Patterson and his colleagues at Edinburgh University found that in 1999 the proportion of Scots identifying with English people of the same class had fallen by nearly half (from 44 percent to 24 percent), while those identifying with Scots of different social classes had risen (from 38 percent to 43 percent). [40] For working class Scots this is potentially disastrous.
There is also the danger of working on the basis of an illusion – the wholly false assumption that Scottish people are automatically more left wing than the English. The Tories were the only party ever to achieve an absolute majority in a general election in Scotland, as recently as 1955, even if they came close to meltdown in the Thatcher years. And when it comes to working class militancy, the Scottish record is by no means one of automatically being better than England. The militant heart of the great mining strikes of 1972, 1974 and 1984–85 was Yorkshire, not Scotland, while the language of separate Scottish interests was used to keep the Ravenscraig Steel Works operating on scab coal through the 1984–85 strike. The Tory Industrial Relations Act of the early 1970s was defeated by the defiance of London dockers. The Poll Tax was finally destroyed by a riot in Trafalgar Square, even if the non-payment campaign that started in Scotland played a role. Neither national group of workers has an intrinsically higher class consciousness than the other.
Gregor Gall claims these points are irrelevant because ‘what is special and different about Scotland is that this evidence of radicalism and militancy is associated and conflated with national identity in such a way that is not possible for other “left” regions’. He writes, ‘Scottish socialism can be defined primarily in terms of being a radical populism imbued with notions of national identity.’ [41] ‘Populism’ is a double-edged sword and the assumption that it will always be left in tendency is unsustainable. [42] As the ex-Trotskyist, market-nationalist George Kerevan (of all people) put it during an exchange with Tom Nairn, ‘Yes, electorates are fed up with mainstream politics but history is rather cruel to those who assume that it always takes a progressive form, even in Scotland.’ [43] The recent announcement by the millionaire and opponent of gay rights Brian Souter of his support for the SNP – gleefully welcomed by the party leadership – should remind us once again that independence would have more socially contradictory outcomes than some on the left will allow themselves to believe.
 
The possibility of a Scottish socialist republic
But, some argue, Scottish secession on a left wing basis, say with a government majority of Solidarity, Scottish Socialist Party, Green and Labour left MSPs would surely pose a challenge to capital. In fact, even if a majority of MSPs were socialists, an independent Scottish Parliament would no more be able to introduce socialism than the Westminster parliament. I suspect that what is involved here is the belief that Scottish secession will leave us with a new ‘socialist’ state apparatus. It will not. The state would not be destroyed simply by transferring its functions from London to Edinburgh, any more than it was destroyed after these functions transferred from London to Dublin in 1922. Grand sounding declarations about the ‘destruction of the British state’ lead, at the very least, to dangerous illusions in a Scottish parliamentary road to socialism.
Comparisons with Latin America are irrelevant here. The point about Venezuela and Bolivia is not that they are ‘independent’, but that the level of class struggle there is rather higher than is currently the case in Scotland, and that this has been expressed electorally. Even so, the reformist governments there have so far only made the smallest impact in reversing the balance between abysmal levels of poverty on the one hand and capitalist wealth on the other.
As the novelist Naomi Mitchison wrote in a letter to the Nationalist Robert Muirhead in 1953, ‘It seems to me that you are bound to assume that a self-governing Scotland is going to be immediately morally better, and I don’t see it unless there has also been a revolution.’ [44]
But even raising the scenario of a left wing breakaway is to reveal its unreality. It would only happen in conditions of massively heightened class struggle, but in what possible circumstances would this take place in Scotland and not the rest of Britain? And if the main reason why Scots are attracted to independence is precisely because it promises a road to socialism, supposedly blocked in England and Wales, why would they embrace it at the very point when this appeared to be happening across Britain as a whole? The only conditions under which the scenario is possible are the same ones that would render it irrelevant.
But nevertheless let us suppose that it does happen. What then? The socialist revolution is a global event. As long as it remains isolated it remains susceptible to counter-revolution, either from without or from within. ‘Socialism in one country’ was impossible in Russia; it will not be any more possible in Scotland. It will either have to be joined by revolutions elsewhere in the UK and beyond, or be crushed by internal or external reaction.
A major revival of the class struggle across Britain as a whole, one which looked as if it might be leading towards a revolutionary conclusion, might lead the ruling class to see an advantage in splitting the movement by supporting the fragmentation of a hitherto unitary state. During the general election campaign of 1950 Winston Churchill gave a speech at the Usher Hall in Edinburgh during which he complained of the centralisation of power by the post-war Labour government: ‘If England became an absolutist socialist state, owning all the means of production, distribution and exchange, I personally cannot feel Scotland would be bound to accept such a dispensation.’ [45] Nothing came of that at the time, of course, but things could be different in a genuinely threatening situation. Recent threats of secession by right wing governors in eastern Bolivia suggest that the tactic is likely to have a long life ahead of it. Socialist insistence that Scottish independence is a matter of principle can end up assisting our enemies.
 
Conclusion
Why is this debate so persistent? Through the years of defeat in the 1980s and early 1990s, many members of the Scottish far left effectively accepted the arguments that a majority of the English working class had succumbed to Thatcherism, that there would no longer be all-British struggles such as the miners’ strike and that the only recourse was to take Scotland as the basis for socialist activity. Having opted for this position, it then became necessary to defend it by exaggerating the special capacities of the Scottish working class, by inventing non-existent examples of national oppression, by inflating the role of Britain on the world stage in order to make its demise a matter of absolute priority and, perhaps most damaging of all, by downplaying or disparaging the actual struggles against war and capitalist globalisation precisely because they were not confined to the Caledonian prison into which left nationalism had locked itself.
Against the elevation of Scottish independence to a matter of principle, socialists have to respond that the principles lie elsewhere. No support under any circumstances for the British state, but no pretence either that constitutional reordering of its component parts equals ‘destruction’ of the state; not the slightest concession to the myth of ‘British values’, but no pretence that ‘Scottish values’ are not equally infected with the poisons of race and empire. Above all, we need to understand that the Scottish national question is essentially a tactical question. Secession by itself will not miraculously remove the problems of state power and socialist construction that will continue to haunt us.

Notes
1. Earlier versions of this argument appeared in Should Scotland Go?, Socialist Worker, 2 December 2006, and Is There a Scottish Road to Socialism?, in Gregor Gall (ed.), Is There a Scottish Road to Socialism? (Glasgow, 2007), pp. 124–128. I greatly benefited from discussion with comrades at an SWP members’ school in Glasgow on 2–3 December 2006 and two subsequent Marxist Forums in Edinburgh (18 January 2007) and Glasgow (2 February 2007). Thanks also to the editor for restraining my wilder excesses.
2. Gordon Brown, The Future of Britishness, Fabian Society press release.
3. Tom Nairn, with contributions from L. Andrews, et al., Gordon Brown: ‘Bard of Britishness’ (Cardiff 2006).
4. J. Cuisick and T. Crighton, Brown Defends UK But Act Of Union Ignored, Sunday Herald, 14 January 2007; I. Jack, Grand Alliance, the Guardian (G2), 8 February 2007.
5. Neil Davidson, The Origins of Scottish Nationhood (London/Stirling 2000), pp. 47–89, 112–199.
6. T. Judt, Postwar, a History of Europe Since 1945 (London 2006), p. 706; see P. Jones, The Economics of Independence, in J.E. Murkens with P. Jones and M. Keating, Scottish Independence: a Practical Guide (Edinburgh, 2002), pp. 182-184, for an attempt to establish the comparative basis for assessing the wealth of Scotland.
7. T.M. Devine, The Scottish Nation, 1700–2007 (Harmondsworth 2006), pp. 646–647.
8. G. Brown and D. Alexander, New Scotland, New Britain (London 1999), p. 3. As the author of the standard biography of Maxton, Brown knows very well that his hero was perfectly capable of anti-English rhetoric when the occasion presented itself. He reports his appearance at the famous Scottish Home Rule Association rally in Glasgow during May 1924: ‘In a memorable speech he asked for “no greater job in life than to make English-ridden, capitalist-ridden, landlord-ridden Scotland into the Scottish Socialist Republic”, and in doing so he thought he would be rendering a very great service to the people of England, Wales and Europe and to the cause of internationalism generally.’ Brown claims that Maxton later expressed regret for saying ‘English-ridden’, but gives no source. See G. Brown, Maxton (Glasgow 1988), p. 161.
9. See, among many others, D. Eastwood, L. Brockliss and M. John, From Dynastic Union to Unitary State: the European Experience, in L. Brockliss and D. Eastwood (eds.), A Union of Multiple Identities: the British Isles, c.1750–1850 (Manchester/New York 1997), pp. 195, 199; N. Davies, The Isles: a History (London 1999), p. 1039; L. Patterson et al., New Scotland, New Politics? (Edinburgh 2001), p. 102; Tom Nairn, Pariah: Misfortunes of the British Kingdom (London/New York 2002), p. 141.
10. D. McCrone and L. Patterson, The Conundrum of Scottish Independence, in Scottish Affairs 40 (Summer 2002), pp. 56–57, 60–61.
11. R.M. Worcester and R. Mortimore, Explaining Labour’s Landslide (London 1999), p. 178.
12. R.M. Worcester and R. Mortimore, Explaining Labour’s Second Landslide (London 2001), p. 228.
13. D. McCrone and L. Patterson, as above, pp. 69–70, 73–74.
14.
Rally Calls For Independence Vote, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/scotland/5395464.stm.
15. D. MacLeod and M. Russell, Grasping the Thistle: How Scotland Must React to the Three Key Challenges of the Twenty First Century (Glendaruel 2006), pp. 125–126, 238–9.
16. K. Macaskill, Building the Nation – Post Devolution Nationalism in Scotland (Edinburgh 2004).
17. For the Union itself see Neil Davidson, Discovering the Scottish Revolution, 1692–1746 (London/Sterling, Virginia 2003), chapter 3. Of the recent books published to coincide with the tricentenary, the most important are D. Watt, The Price of Scotland: Darien, Union and the Wealth of Nations (Edinburgh, 2007), and C.A. Whatley with D.J. Patrick, The Scots and the Union (Edinburgh 2006). The latter in particular is an immensely serious piece of scholarship and probably the best of the available accounts. The whole field of contemporary Union studies, including these books, is reviewed in J.R. Young, The Union Unravelled, in Scottish Review of Books, volume 3, number 1 (11 February 2007). Popular opposition is discussed in Neil Davidson, as above, pp. 131–158, and K. Bowie, Public Opinion, Popular Politics and the Union of 1707, in Scottish Historical Review, volume 82:2, number 214 (October 2003). On the risings against the Jacobites, see Neil Davidson, as above, pp. 200–202, 241–247.
18. P. Weight, Patriots: National Identity in Britain, 1940–2000 (London 2002), pp. 701–702.
19. C. Burness, ‘Strange Associations’: the Irish Question and the Making of Scottish Unionism, 1886–1918 (East Linton 2003), pp. 46–50, 206–220.
20. For a detailed rebuttal of claims that Scotland is oppressed, see Neil Davidson, The Origins of Scottish Nationhood, as above, chapter 5.
21. J. Mitchell, Conservatives and the Union: a Study of Conservative Attitudes to Scotland (Edinburgh 1990), pp. 116–18; D. Butler, A. Adonis and T. Travers, Failure in British Politics (Oxford 1994), pp. 61–66, 101–104.
22. Eric Hobsbawm in conversation with A. Polito, The New Century, translated from the Italian by A. Cameron (London 2000), pp. 114, 115.
23. H. Henderson, Freedom Come-All-Ye, reproduced in A. Munro, The Folk Music Revival in Scotland (London 1984), pp. 74–75. Henderson’s words are sung, appropriately enough, to the pipe tune, The Bloody Fields of Flanders, and were originally dedicated to ‘the Glasgow Peace Marchers, May 1960’.
24. Alan McCombes, Choosing to make a Start, in Scottish Left Review 20 (January/February 2004), p. 7.
25. Contemporary debates tend to express this as different logics, although I prefer to see the link between capital and states as through a series of mediations. For two recent central discussions see G. Arrighi, The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power and the Origins of Our Times (London/New York 1994), pp. 33–35, and David Harvey, The New Imperialism (Oxford 2003), pp. 27–30, although as Arrighi has subsequently noted, Harvey’s usage is slightly different from his own. See Hegemony Unravelling – 1, in New Left Review 32 (March/April 2005), pp. 27–30, footnote 15. The issues are reviewed in several contributions to Symposium: on David Harvey’s The New Imperialism, in Historical Materialism, volume 14, number 4 (2006). See in particular the contributions from E.M. Wood, and from Sam Ashman and Alex Callinicos.
26.
Herald, 3 March 1992.
27.
Herald, 16 May 1997.
28. M. Keating, Independence in an Interdependent World, in J.E. Murkens with P. Jones and M. Keating, Scottish Independence, as above, p. 296.
29.
www.snp.org/policies/international-affairs/copy_of_index_html.
30. For details of the programme see the Nato website, which also contains a useful selection of historical documents and communiques: www.nato.int/issues/pfp/pfp.htm.
31. D. MacLeod and M. Russell, Grasping the Thistle, as above, p. 150.
32. M. Fry, Scotland Alone, in Prospect (December 2006), p. 27.
33. J.E. Murkens, The Road to Independence, in J.E. Murkens with P. Jones and M. Keating, Scottish Independence, as above, p. 88.
34. W Walker, Not in my Backyard, in Scottish Left Review 37 (November/December 2006), p. 15.
35. B. Ashcroft, The Scottish Economy, in N. Hood, J. Peat, E. Peters and S. Young (eds.), Scotland in a Global Economy: the 2020 Vision (Basingstoke 2002), p. 20.
36. L. Martin, Our Nation Is Equal to Any Other, The Observer, 4 February 2007.
37. J. Mather, Less Tax Please, Holyrood 95, 22 September 2003, p. 25.
38. D. MacLeod and M. Russell, Grasping the Thistle, as above, pp. 92, 132.
39. C.H. Lee, Scotland and the United Kingdom: the Economy and the Union in the Twentieth Century (Manchester 1995), pp. 219–220
40. L. Patterson et al., New Scotland, New Politics?, as above, pp. 108–109.
41. Gregor Gall, The Political Economy of Scotland: Red Scotland, Radical Scotland? (Cardiff 2005), pp. 176–177, 156. The notion of ‘communities of collectivism’ is taken from R. Fantasia, Cultures of Solidarity: Consciousness, Action and Contemporary American Workers (Berkeley 1988).
42. I have discussed Gall’s claims at greater length in Neil Davidson, Scotland: almost afraid to know itself?, International Socialism 2 : 109 (Winter 2005/6), pp. 179–181. For his response see Debating Radical Scotland, Frontline, volume 2, number 1.
43. G. Kerevan, Scotland in the Global Age: Tom Nairn in Conversation with George Kerevan, in G. Hassan, E. Gibb and L. Howland (eds.), Scotland 2020: Hopeful Stories for a Northern Nation (London 2005), p. 230.
44. Mitchison to Muirhead, 23 April 1953, quoted in C. Harvie, Scotland and Nationalism: Scottish Society and Politics, 1707–1977 (London 1977), p. 283.
45.
Scotsman, 15 February 1950.
 



>Neil Davidson continues an rs21 series on the fundamentals of our political tradition by looking at uneven and combined development
Introduction
The radical novelty of what Trotsky meant by uneven and combined development is often underestimated. The most common mistake is to reduce it to, or confuse it with, the longstanding theory of uneven development. The most famous (and certainly the most often quoted) passage in Trotsky’s The History of the Russian Revolution (1932) is an expression of this position: “The privilege of historic backwardness – and such a privilege exists – permits, or rather compels, the adoption of whatever is ready in advance of any specified date, skipping a whole series of intermediate stages”. But if all that Trotsky had proposed was a schema in which the “advantages of backwardness” allowed less developed nation-states to adopt the most modern available technologies he would have remained within the established limits of unevenness and, indeed, would not have distinguished himself from Stalinist usage of the same concept. What is the distinction?
 
Uneven development
Until the First World War uneven development had been a largely descriptive concept, without specific political implications. In Imperialism: the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1916) Lenin wrote, “The uneven and spasmodic development of individual enterprises, individual branches of industry and individual countries is inevitable under the capitalist system”. Essentially, he argued that by the beginning of the 20th century uneven development had acquired three main aspects.
The first was the process by which the advanced states had reached their leading positions within the structured inequality of the world system. During the late 19th century the “skipping of stages” had been the experience of several states, notably Germany, Italy and Japan. The pressure of military and commercial competition between the actual or aspirant Great Powers forced those which were still absolutist states based on the feudal mode of production – or at least those which were capable of doing so – to adopt the current stage of development achieved by their capitalist rivals. This was necessary if they were to have any chance, not only of successfully competing, but of surviving at the summit of the world order. In very compressed timespans they had been able to adopt the socio-economic achievements of Britain to the extent that they became recognisably the same kind of societies, without necessarily reproducing every characteristic of the Anglo-Saxon pioneer. Where backwardness remained it tended to be in the nature of the political regimes led by monarchs or emperors supported by a landowning aristocracy.
By the outbreak of the First World War membership of the dominant states was essentially fixed. What remained was the second aspect of uneven development: the ongoing rivalry between the great powers which involved them constantly trying to “catch up and overtake” each other in a contest for supremacy that would continue as long as capitalism itself.
This rivalry led in turn to a third aspect: the developed imperialist states collectively, but competitively, asserting their dominance over two other types of state, described by Lenin as “the colonies themselves” and “the diverse forms of dependent countries which, politically, are formally independent but, in fact, are enmeshed in the net of financial and diplomatic dependence”, like Argentina and Portugal. Colonial expansion prevented some of the societies subject to colonialism from developing at all, and in the case of the most undeveloped, the people involved suffered near or complete extermination and their lands were taken by settlers. More often the peoples survived, but their social systems were immobilised by imperial powers interested in strategic advantage or plunder, or both.
Trotsky certainly took uneven development in these three senses as his starting point – as is suggested by the word order in the title of his own theory: “I would put uneven before combined, because the second grows out of the first and completes it”. How then does the concept of uneven and combined development differ from uneven development as such? The main difference is that it takes account of the internal effects of uneven development. To explain the link between the advanced nature of Russian industry on the one hand, and the militancy of Russian workers on the other, Trotsky had to transcend the theory of uneven development, a process he did not complete until the early 1930s. The inability of uneven development to fully encapsulate these phenomena is what appears to have made Trotsky search for a new concept with which to supplement it. It took a political crisis to provoke this conceptualisation.
During the Chinese Revolution of 1925–7 the emergent Stalinist regime in Russia ordered the local Communist Party to subordinate its own organisation and demands to those of the bourgeois nationalists in the Guomindang. The ultimately disastrous outcome for the Chinese working class movement was the catalyst for Trotsky to generalise the strategy of permanent revolution from Russia to sections of the colonial and semi-colonial world. This was not done indiscriminately – since some were still untouched by capitalist development and had no working class of any size – but applied to those places where conditions similar to those in Russia prevailed. Due to a common set of circumstances, the working classes in these countries had far greater levels of both consciousness and organisation than the proletariat in the more developed countries where Marxists had traditionally expected the socialist revolution to begin. Trotsky claimed that “the prediction that historically backward Russia could arrive at the proletarian revolution sooner than advanced Britain rests almost entirely upon the law of uneven development”. But uneven development was not the sole basis for this prediction, as we can see by contrasting actual Russian development with two possible alternatives.
One of these was the path of the advanced capitalist states. The pace of development was relatively faster in most of the countries that followed Holland and England, partly because of the urgency of acquiring the attributes of capitalist modernity, partly because the long period of experiment and evolution, characteristic of the two pioneers, could be dispensed with. In the case of Scotland in the 18th century or Prussia in the 19th century, this led to enormous tensions which resolved themselves in moments of class struggle, foreshadowing the process of permanent revolution. But because these societies did make the transition to the ranks of the advanced societies, either as the centre (Prussia/Germany) or a component part of another national formation (Scotland/Britain) these moments passed with the tensions that caused them.
The other alternative was the path of the colonies or semi-colonies. Colonial rule could even throw societies backwards, as in the case of British-occupied Iraq. Ruling through the Hashemite monarchy after 1920, the regime deliberately rejected any attempts at modernisation, except in the oil industry. Instead it reinforced disintegrating tribal loyalties and semi-feudal types of land tenure over the peasantry.
Tsarist Russia neither emulated the process of “catch up and overtake” among the advanced countries nor suffered that of “blocked development” within the backward ones, but instead experienced a collision between the two.
 
Combined Development
It was in relation to developments in China that Trotsky finally moved beyond uneven development. He continued to employ the term between 1928 and 1930, most importantly in the articles collected in The Third International after Lenin, and in Permanent Revolution and its various prefaces. In these texts his main emphasis is still distinguishing his use of uneven development from that of Stalin, for whom countries developed at different tempos and must therefore advance through a series of stages – including that of socialism – at their own individual pace.
Trotsky highlighted instead, the “unity” of the world economy and the “interdependence” of the imperial powers and the colonial and semi-colonial world. Unevenness in this sense means simultaneously that individual countries could leap over the capitalist stage of development, as Russia had done and as China might have done, but would still be unable to complete the transition to socialism while the world economy as a whole remained dominated by the capitalist mode of production. The international system was both a spur at one moment and a block at another. Yet these important insights still did not address the question of how the first part of this process, the revolutionary moment, was possible. Trotsky needed a new concept, incorporating uneven development, but deepening its content.
Trotsky highlighted instead, the “unity” of the world economy and the “interdependence” of the imperial powers and the colonial and semi-colonial world. Unevenness in this sense means simultaneously that individual countries could leap over the capitalist stage of development, as Russia had done and as China might have done, but would still be unable to complete the transition to socialism while the world economy as a whole remained dominated by the capitalist mode of production. The international system was both a spur at one moment and a block at another. Yet these important insights still did not address the question of how the first part of this process, the revolutionary moment, was possible. Trotsky needed a new concept, incorporating uneven development, but deepening its content.
It was in the first volume of The History of the Russian Revolution that he first outlines this new concept:
From the universal law of unevenness thus derives another law which, for want of a better name, we may call the law of combined development – by which we mean a drawing together of the different stages of the journey, a combining of separate steps, an amalgam of archaic with more contemporary forms.
The precise forms which combination took obviously varied depending on whether the country involved was a formal colony controlled by a single imperial power, like India, or one nominally independent, but actually subdivided between several warlords and imperial powers, like China. Clearly there were differences. Unlike Tsarist Russia, neither Imperial nor Republican China was in a position to stimulate capitalist industrial growth. Where similarities did exist, was in the role of foreign capital and imported technology together with the limited geographical implantation of capitalist industry. Nevertheless it was possible to generalise in relation to these effects.
Historical backwardness does not imply a simple reproduction of the development of advanced countries, England or France, with a delay of one, two, or three centuries. It engenders an entirely new “combined” social formation in which the latest conquests of capitalist technique and structure root themselves into relations of feudal or pre-feudal barbarism, transforming and subjecting them and creating peculiar relations of classes.
Uneven and combined development affects the totality of a national society, not merely the economy. Trotsky was not saying that forms characteristic of different stages of development simply coexist alongside each other in striking or dramatic contrasts, although that could be true. Nor was he just emphasising the existence of transitional modes of production, although he recognised that these could exist. A process that permeates every aspect of society, ideology as much as economy, must involve more than this. The “articulation” of capitalist and pre-capitalist modes had, after all, been progressing slowly in the Russian countryside since the abolition of serfdom in 1861, and had led to many complex transitional forms, as Lenin documented. None by themselves led to the type of situation Trotsky was seeking to explain:
At the same time that peasant land-cultivation as a whole remained, right up to the revolution, at the level of the 17th century, Russian industry in its technique and capitalist structure stood at the level of the advanced countries, and in certain respects even outstripped them.
The detonation of the process requires sudden, intensive industrialisation and urbanisation, regardless of whether the pre-existing agrarian economy was based on feudal or capitalist relations. Here too the Chinese experience was important. Trotsky was quite insistent – perhaps over-insistent – on which mode dominated the Chinese social formation. He rejected the Communist International’s claims that feudalism predominated in the Chinese economic base and political superstructure: “Of course, matters would be quite hopeless if feudal survivals did really dominate in Chinese economic life,” he wrote in 1929. “But fortunately, survivals in general cannot dominate.” Instead he emphasised the extent of market relations and influence of different forms of mercantile and banking capital. Rural social relations “stem in part from the days of feudalism; and in part they constitute a new formation”, but within this formation: “it is capitalist relations that dominate and not “feudal” (more correctly, serf and, generally, pre-capitalist) relations. Only thanks to this dominant role of capitalist relations can we speak seriously of the prospects of proletarian hegemony in a national revolution”.
Whatever the extent of Trotsky’s exaggerations here, it is important, not least in relation to modern China, that uneven and combined development can take place where the capitalist mode was already dominant. The archaic and the modern, the settled and disruptive, overlap, fuse and merge in all aspects of the social formations concerned, from the organisation of arms production to the structure of religious observance, in entirely new and unstable ways, generating socially explosive situations in which revolution became what Georg Lukács termed “actual”.
 
Implications for the class struggle
These new combined formations gave rise to conflicts unknown in earlier historical periods. On the one hand: “The [backward] nation ... not infrequently debases the achievements borrowed from outside in the process of adapting them to its own more primitive culture”. From 1861 Tsarism established factories using manufacturing technology characteristic of monopoly capitalism in order to produce arms with which to defend a feudal absolutist state. On the other hand, by doing so they bring into being a class more skilled, more politically conscious than that faced by any previous absolutist or early capitalist states. All subsequent non-Marxist theories of “the advantages of backwardness” assumed that technological transfers had a limited, or at least delayed, impact on other aspects of social life. Against this Trotsky argued that these transfers could in fact quicken the pace of change more generally, so that they attained higher levels of development than in their established rivals. As an example of this he drew attention to the greater implantation of Marxist theory among the working classes of Russia and, later, China than in that of Britain. Thus, for Trotsky, the most important consequence of uneven and combined development was the enhanced capacity it gave the working classes for political and industrial organisation, theoretical understanding and revolutionary activity:
When the productive forces of the metropolis, of a country of classical capitalism…find ingress into more backward countries, like Germany in the first half of the 19th century, and Russia at the merging of the 19th and 20th centuries, and in the present day in Asia; when the economic factors burst in a revolutionary manner, breaking up the old order; when development is no longer gradual and “organic” but assumes the form of terrible convulsions and drastic changes of former conceptions, then it becomes easier for critical thought to find revolutionary expression, provided that the necessary theoretical prerequisites exist in the given country.
But uneven and combined development can also work, as it were, in reverse: “debased adaptation” is not only a feature of backward societies. Here too the opening of the age of imperialism is decisive. Between 1870 and 1914, for example, imperial Britain, Germany and Japan all consciously emphasised the role of their monarch-emperors. In each case, the pre-existing symbolism of the crown was used to represent national unity against two main challenges: external imperial rivalry and internal class divisions. Trotsky saw this as a much more general phenomenon, necessarily caused by the need to maintain bourgeois hegemony over the exploited and oppressed in an era of revolution and which reached its peak in the US: “It is considered unquestionable that technology and science undermine superstition. But the class character of society sets substantial limits here too. Take America. There, church sermons are broadcast by radio, which means that the radio is serving as a means of spreading prejudices.”
The theory of uneven and combined development explained what occurs when the process of “overleaping” takes place in the colonial or neo-colonial world, where it is impossible to fully “catch up” with, let alone “overtake” the developed West, so “overleaping” occurs instead in a fragmentary or partial way. But the resulting combined forms, because of their inbuilt social instability, paradoxically made revolutionary outbreaks more likely than in the developed world, with its greater levels of stability and reformist traditions. In other words, the presence of uneven and combined development made it possible for a strategy of permanent revolution to be pursued with greater likelihood of success; its absence made it, not inevitable, but less likely that such a strategy would be pursued in the first place, thus leading to the process of “deflection” highlighted by Tony Cliff in his 1963 article.
 
Uneven and combined development today
Permanent revolution, and consequently deflected permanent revolution may now be historical concepts, but uneven and combined development is not. This has important implications for the possibility of socialist revolution beginning in the Global South. The relentless expansion of neoliberal globalisation, and the consequent devastating effects of industrialisation and urbanisation into areas they had previously bypassed, often under conditions of intense state repression, means that the same responses are being reproduced places as distinct as China and Dubai. But these are only the most extreme examples of a general trend that is the most characteristic of the current phase of capitalist development. Two points need to be made in relation to the process.
One is that it is not limited to the Global South, but to the relatively undeveloped parts of the First and former Second Worlds. Take, for example, the Italian Mezzogiorno, where Italian unification was followed by a pronounced process of deindustrialisation, which led to a steady drain of capital to the North, with a long-term reservoir of cheap labour-power, cheap agricultural products and a docile clientele in the South. Here the process of uneven and combined development led to similarly high levels of militancy to that seen in countries characterised by more general backwardness. The key episode was the revolt of the Italian immigrants against their living conditions and low pay during the “industrial miracle” of the late 50s and early 60s, culminating in 1969. What is interesting about the Italian example, however, is that the process has continued, in different forms until the present day.
The other is that, in the Global South proper at least, the process is still unable completely to transform those societies. The state “containers” within which the process of uneven and combined development unfolds, including China, will never achieve the type of total transformation characteristic of the states that formed the original core of the capitalist world system, at least in any foreseeable timescale. Uneven and combined development is therefore likely to be an ongoing process, which will only be resolved by either revolution or disintegration. But in the meantime, China, and other states like India and Brazil where growth has been less dramatic, remain both inherently unstable in their internal social relations and expansive in their external search for markets, raw materials and investment opportunities. As we have recently seen in the Arab Spring, it is in this inherent instability that provides one of the preconditions for revolution.
 



>A non-nationalist argument for Scottish independence
On the evening of May 16, 1973, around halfway through the Aladdin Sane tour, I watched David Bowie play his second sold-out show at the Aberdeen Music Hall. I could not have imagined that one day I would be listening to him – or, rather, listening to Kate Moss speaking on his behalf – intervene in the debate over a Scottish independence referendum. Mind you, I cannot pretend that the national question was a high priority for my 15-year-old self; nor could I have imagined that there would ever be a Scottish independence referendum.
The message that Moss read out for Bowie at the Brit Awards on February 20 this year – “Scotland, stay with us” – nevertheless deserves to be taken more seriously than it has been, and certainly more than the mixture of bluff and bullying that Scots have recently received from George Osborne, Jose Manuel Barroso, and the directors of Standard Life PLC. Bowie is actually a more political artist than is often supposed, but he is in no sense a conventional left-wing one. Yet his intervention was typical of a widely held view on the Left that a “yes” vote for Scottish independence on September 18 would be a disaster for “us” (meaning the English), and perhaps also for the Scots themselves. These views are also widely held in Scotland itself.
Before turning to these arguments, it is worth considering one pro-independence position that can only be held in England. Expressed most recently (if eccentrically) by Will Self in the New Statesman, this holds that an independent Scotland would be a social-democratic – perhaps even socialist – inspiration to the English Left, finally galvanizing it into posing a serious challenge to neoliberalism and imperialism. And in some respects, a survey of social legislation in Scotland even under devolution, including that passed by the first two Liberal/Labour coalition governments, tends to support this perspective.
Scotland has free care for the elderly, free prescriptions for all, and no student tuition fees (at least for Scottish students). And the bedroom tax, while it is beyond the power of Holyrood to abolish, has effectively been neutralized by the current Scottish National Party (SNP) government’s declaration (in a move supported by Labour) that it would set aside £15 million to meet the additional costs of the 76,000 social housing tenants deemed to have a “spare bedroom.”
Furthermore, although there are longstanding private schools in Scotland, education has not been subjected to the disintegrative effect of academies and free schools; water remains in public hands; the extent of privatization of the National Health Service in England has not been replicated north of the border; private finance initiatives and public-private partnerships are no longer in use. And while it would be absurd to pretend that racism is not a problem in Scotland, the public culture in this respect is different from England, not least because the SNP government – to its endless credit – has argued for welcoming migrants rather than attacking them.
We should nevertheless be skeptical about claims that, on the basis of these modest but real reforms, independence would automatically lead to the creation of a social democratic, let alone socialist, society. There is nothing intrinsically progressive about Scottish statehood – otherwise it would not be supported by reactionary types like Sir Brian Souter of Stagecoach or Sir George Mathewson (formerly of the Royal Bank of Scotland), both of whom are perfectly aware of their class interests.
It is also true that, in economic terms, the SNP is committed to the neoliberal agenda – it is almost entirely in social terms that it has deviated to the left. This means that the SNP is presenting a highly contradictory program: on the one hand it argues for an Irish-style “competitive” tax regime for the corporations, while on the other claiming that it will be able to provide a Scandinavian-style welfare state. Nor is this the only contradiction: the SNP is committed to removing nuclear weapons from the Clyde, but also to remaining within NATO, positions which are likely to conflict with each other, to say the least.
These contradictions form the starting point of the Left critique of the independence movement. But even so, a vote for independence in the referendum is not the same as a vote for the SNP. It is conceivable that independence might be won and the SNP could still lose the next Scottish parliamentary election, or vice versa. Support for a national demand such as Scottish independence is quite distinguishable from support for a party that advocates it. Indeed there are good reasons for thinking that the SNP – or at least its leadership – is not as committed to independence as it and almost everybody else finds it convenient to pretend.
“Maximum devolution,” or “devo max,” is the constitutional option probably supported by most Scots, although it is not an option on the referendum. This would leave the Scottish Parliament in control of all state functions (including taxation), with the exception of those controlled by the Foreign Office, the Ministry of Defence and the Bank of England, in relation to setting interest rates. The bulk of the SNP leadership recognizes that there is unlikely to be a majority for independence in September.
Devo max is therefore what they hope to achieve – and, more importantly, what they think they can achieve – in the short to medium term. Salmond cannot of course openly argue for this without incurring the wrath of the fundamentalist-nationalist wing of his party, for whom anything less than independence is betraying of the blood of Wallace and The Bruce, and so on.
Thus the way he has framed the outcome of a “yes” vote is as close to devo max as possible – retention of the monarchy, the pound sterling (under the tutelage of the Treasury and the Bank of England), and membership in the EU – the last two in themselves guaranteeing that the neoliberal ascendancy would continue, regardless of the intentions of the SNP leadership. Ironically, Osborne’s and Barroso’s intransigence may have inadvertently provided Salmond with an escape clause, if he is capable of taking it.
The situation is further complicated, however, by the fact that, in certain circumstances, devo max would probably be acceptable to a majority of Tories, if it was politically necessary. Cameron certainly wants to win a vote against independence, but, tactically inept though he is, is also aware that even if this is achieved the demand for further devolution will be unstoppable, and would probably result in pressure for devo max.
Cameron effectively conceded this early after the announcement of the referendum, in a February 2012 speech in Edinburgh when he offered further measures of devolution if voters rejected independence. For tactical reasons, Salmond affected to believe this was a ruse to lull the Scots into voting for the status quo, after which the promise would be quietly forgotten. It is usually wise to believe the worst about Tory intentions, but in this case Cameron is probably genuine.
If the essential integrity of the British state was maintained at the military-diplomatic level, the latter would be an acceptable outcome, particularly since it would place the responsibility for raising taxation and cutting expenditures on the Scottish government. Indeed, some Tory intellectuals, notably Tim Montgomerie, are already arguing that Cameron should seize the opportunity to reconstruct the British Constitution on a federal basis. This is a position that would bring the Tories into harmony with the Liberal Democrats, for whom this is a policy goal dating back to the days of the original Liberal Party.
In other words, given the amount of shadow play involved in the current debates, the Left needs to present arguments for a genuine independence from the British state; but the Scottish Left is split on the question. The Labour Party is officially part of the Better Together campaign (“Project Fear”) along with the Tories and the Liberal Democrats, although an unquantifiable but substantial number of Labour members either want the party to campaign separately from the parties of the ruling Westminster Coalition, or even for it to support independence.
The “Yes Scotland” campaign is unsurprisingly dominated by the SNP, with support from the Greens and the remnants of the Scottish Socialist Party (SSP). Aligned to it, but much further to the left, is the Radical Independence Campaign (RIC), which involves the SNP left, the Greens, the SSP, and the rest of the radical and revolutionary left (Solidarity, the Socialist Workers Party, etc.). RIC has held two large conferences in Glasgow and is now conducting voter registration drives in the housing schemes of Central Scotland. (For the purposes of full disclosure, I should point out that I support RIC, although this will soon become obvious.)
What are the respective arguments of the two camps?
 
No?
Some left arguments for Scotland remaining within the Union deserve to be taken more seriously than others. One which does not deserve to be taken seriously is the claim that the desire for independence is the expression of an atavistic identity politics, a nationalist diversion from class issues that are essentially the same on both sides of the border. I would like to say that the presumption and lack of self-awareness involved in making these claims is extraordinary, but unfortunately it is very ordinary indeed. Supporting Scotland becoming an independent state apparently marks one down as a nationalist, but supporting the British state remaining as currently constituted does not. This is what is usually referred to as a double standard.
Left-wing opponents of Scottish independence tend to become incensed when they are themselves accused of nationalism, as though British nationalism was not really a nationalism at all – a venerable conservative position dating at least as far back as Lord Acton’s writings on the subject. Very well, but if they can apparently detach their desire to maintain the British state from British nationalism, why do they assume that supporters of establishing a Scottish state cannot do the same with regards to Scottish nationalism?
In fact, there are good socialist (and, indeed, capitalist) reasons for supporting either position that do not depend on possessing any nationalist feelings at all. It is possible to support the continued existence of the United Kingdom without being a British unionist, just as it is possible to support secession from Britain without being a Scottish nationalist. As I will argue below, for socialists, as opposed to British unionists or Scottish nationalists, support or opposition to Scottish independence is essentially a tactical question.
A more concrete set of arguments for voting “no” concerns the potential weakening of the British working class. These involve varying degrees of intellectual coherence. One is that the Labour Party will find it more difficult, perhaps even impossible, to form a government without the numeric weight of Scottish votes and MPs: the Scots who vote for independence are condemning their English brothers and sisters to an eternity of Conservative rule. There are a number of responses one could make to this type of political-emotional blackmail, but the most obvious, based on facts available in any reasonably detailed handbook of British electoral statistics, is that it is simply untrue.
In general elections since World War II, Labour has only twice – in 1964 and February 1974 – relied on the results in Scotland to form a government, and in both cases these governments were subsequently re-elected – in 1966 and October 1974 respectively – without any such reliance. Labour’s great majorities in 1945 and 1997 would have been reduced without Scotland, but not to the point where their ability to enact legislation would have been threatened. In other words, Scottish independence does not create an impossible logistical obstacle to the formation of a future Labour government. If, subsequent to a Scottish secession, Labour was unable to gain an electoral majority in the Remainder of the United Kingdom (RUK), the responsibility would not lie with the departing Caledonians but with that party’s electoral politics.
A second, more serious argument is that the Scottish economy is to a very great extent owned and controlled externally by foreign multinationals or their subsidiaries, while economic policy is determined by financial institutions based in the City of London and the EU bureaucracy based in Brussels. Deprived of the protective power exercised by the British Parliament, an independent Scotland would be at the mercy of these forces. It is true, of course, that an independent Scotland would still be dominated by capital, much of it external in origin; but who, apart from the most hopelessly naive ever imagined otherwise? And even – leaving aside the nationalist implications – the idea that there is something particularly pernicious about “foreign” capital of course depends on how one sees the socialist transformation of society being accomplished.
By far the most serious left argument against Scottish independence is that it will undermine the British trade union movement, by preventing cross-border unity. This would indeed be serious if it was an inevitable consequence of secession, but it is not. Workers in Ireland can belong to the same unions as workers in Britain, workers in Canada can belong to the same unions as workers in the USA; there is no reason why workers in Scotland could not belong to the same unions as workers in England and Wales. More importantly, unity is not secured by the constitutional form of the state or by the bureaucratic structures of union organization, but rather by the willingness to show solidarity and take joint collective action, across borders if necessary.
Grangemouth is in Scotland, yet the existence of UK-level Unite organization did not prevent the debacle which overwhelmed the workforce last November when the union effectively conceded a pay freeze, attacks on pension levels, and a massive reduction in workplace rights. On the other hand, workers across southern Europe demonstrated the possibility of coordinated action across borders in strikes against austerity on November 14, 2012.
Finally, if Scottish independence is so unthreatening to capital, so divisive of the working class, why then are most sections of the British – and, indeed, the European and US – ruling classes so opposed to it? Why is Osborne so implacable about the impossibility of monetary union? Why is Barroso so determined that Scotland would not automatically be entitled to EU membership? The changing positions of The Economist – always the most reliable bellwether of neoliberal ideology – suggest an answer.
During the glory days of neoliberal globalization it was forever insouciantly recommending that the Scots be granted independence so that they would be compelled to become more competitive by cutting wages and welfare. Now it runs cover stories bewailing the fate of “Skintland” were its inhabitants to opt for a constitutional option that the magazine had previously regarded as necessary to impose market disciplines. One suspects this change of heart is not prompted by a concern for the Scots, but rather a fear of the consequences for the British state, and consequently for capital invested in Britain, from whatever source. The problems posed by independence are not directly economic, but are related to the capitalist economy through a series of mediations. What are they?
 
Legitimation or Delegation?
For socialists, the question is whether or not independence strengthens the working class. But the working class with which we should be concerned is not only British, still less only Scottish, but international. Furthermore, the question cannot be posed in a purely economic way: strength comes from ideological and political clarity as much as from organizational capacity. So what, then, are socialist arguments for independence that would meet these requirements? The most obvious is the possibility of breaking up the British imperialist state.
Britain is still an imperial state, at war for every single year from 1914 to 2013. (The First World War Centenary commemorations begin a little over a month before the referendum, and the closing ceremony of the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow will seamlessly meld into the opening events of the Centenary across Britain as a whole, with a wreath-laying at the Cenotaph in George Square. This is not an innocent coincidence.)
A referendum called while the occupation of Afghanistan was still ongoing, with the Iraqi and Libyan interventions a recent memory, is inseparable from the arguments against these wars and the British state’s subordinate alliance with the American empire. Scottish secession would at the very least make it more difficult for Britain to play this role, if only by reducing its practical importance for the US.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) has recently been leaking into its favored urinal, The Telegraph, concerns for the international standing of the RUK, post-Scottish independence. The FCO fears that it might be removed as one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council – with the power of veto that this position confers – as the result of an Argentinian conspiracy backed by other Latin American states, although one imagines that India might also have good reason to see RUK removed.
One Better Together leaflet, handed to me by a Labour activist on the streets of Dunbar, stated, as a reason to vote “no” in the referendum: “The UK means Scots get a seat at the top table at the UN beside Russia, China and America.” Indeed. And the fact that British state managers would find their geopolitical position weakened by the removal of the Rest of the United Kingdom (“Little Britain”) from permanent membership of the UN Security Council seems an excellent reason to vote “yes.”
There would also be difficulties if the SNP were to remain the governing party in an independent Scotland and actually fulfilled its promise to remove nuclear weapons from the Clyde. There are virtually no other deep water bases on the UK coastline where these submarines can be docked, and to construct them would involve massive expenditure. The Ministry of Defence is currently wringing its hands about the potential cost of relocating Trident from the Clyde to England, at a likely cost of £35 billion; although the SNP cannot be relied on to carry through the removal of Trident without mass pressure from below.
Finally, in this connection, one immediate consequence of Scottish independence would be to place a question mark over the existential viability of Northern Ireland, since the Union has always been with Britain, not England, and – as Ulster unionists of all varieties are perfectly well aware – Sinn Fein would almost certainly begin agitation for an all-Irish referendum on reunification.
Devolution has changed the context in which socialists in Scotland operate. The British state has already begun to fragment. To call for its further fragmentation on an antiwar basis, in a situation where a majority opposed the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, means that independence can be supported as a means to an anti-imperialist end, rather than as part of the political logic of Scottish nationalism.
That fragmentation brings me to the second set of reasons to vote for independence: the nature of the alternative. The meaning of devolution has changed over the decades. Previously, it was a way of meeting popular aspirations without threatening the economic order. Now, it is also potentially useful for further implanting social neoliberalism. The more politics is emptied of content, the more social neoliberal regimes need to prove that democracy is still meaningful – not, of course, by extending the areas of social life under democratic control, but by multiplying the opportunities for citizen-consumers to take part in elections for local councilors, mayors, police and crime commissioners, members of the Welsh and London assemblies, and the Scottish, European and British parliaments. It has not reversed the growing public withdrawal from official politics and in that sense has failed as a neoliberal strategy of legitimation. On the other hand, devolution is also part of a neoliberal strategy of delegation, and in this respect it has been much more successful.
Here, responsibility for implementing anti-reforms is spread beyond governing parties and central state apparatuses to elected bodies whose policy options are severely restricted both by statute and – as in the case of local councils – by reliance on the central state for most of their funding. In the case of the devolved nations, the assumption is that the people most likely to participate in local decision-making will be members of the middle class, who can be expected to behave, en masse, in ways that will impose restrictions on local taxation and public spending, and thus maintain the neoliberal order with a supposedly popular mandate: atomized citizens voting for which services they want to close.
If the essential integrity of the British state was maintained at the military-diplomatic level, then further devolution, even to the point of outright federalism, would be an acceptable outcome for the majority of the British ruling class, particularly since it would place the responsibility for raising taxation and cutting expenditure on the Scottish government. Without fostering any illusions in the ability of individual states to remove themselves from the pressures of the capitalist world economy, the ability to hold elected politicians directly to account is preferable to the current endless displacement of responsibility. In particular, it would make it more difficult for the SNP to blame Westminster for the decisions that it has taken with regard to imposing the austerity program.
One difficulty is that the entire issue of independence still feels slightly alien to most socialists and trade unionists, as if it were an irrelevance or distraction from our proper role of fighting austerity and expressing solidarity with the oppressed. Socialists may wish they were not faced with this issue, which many clearly regard as a diversion from more serious matters. But we are rarely granted the luxury of deciding the terrain upon which we have to fight. To evade the issue by affecting abstention between independence and the status quo is, in effect, to opt for the latter while pretending to be hostile to both.
The likely outcome is a “no” vote, although in a closer race than is currently being predicted. But this is unlikely to be the end of the matter. It is essential, then, that the Left establish which reasons for supporting independence are valid and which are not, since we will be required to argue them again. In the meantime, the question of what kind of Scotland we want to see, and how we can fight for it now, regardless of the constitutional situation, might provide a bridge between sections of the Left currently divided by it.
Neil Davidson a lecturer in sociology at the University of Glasgow.
 






In the fifth and final part of his analysis of Scottish politics after the referendum, written in late September, Scottish historian and activist Neil Davidson looks at events since the vote. A printable PDF of all five articles is available here.



Defeat in victory, victory in defeat
I quoted earlier the concerns of Scottish historian Colin Kidd [1] to the prospect of a Yes vote. It is only fair, therefore, to quote his response to its removal:
The relief was visceral ... coming to at 4.00 a.m. I experienced a calm I hadn’t felt for months. I sensed that the nationalists [sic] had lost. Total silence: the sound of the quiet Unionist majority celebrating.







His relief was widely shared, and not only by this silent majority. No sooner was the result beyond dispute than markets began to rally: the value of stocks in Scottish financial companies, which had been in freefall during the final stages of the campaign, soared by £2 billion with RBS and Lloyds at the forefront. The FTSE 100 index rose 18.6 points to 6837.9. Even sterling reached a two-year high against the euro and a two-week high against the dollar, before falling back to more realistic levels. According to Cameron the monarch purred with delight on being told the result. The Prime Minister himself knew that he would not now go down in history as the modern Lord North, responsible for “losing” Scotland as his predecessor had “lost” America, but more importantly that he had averted what one Telegraph columnist [2] described as “the biggest constitutional crisis in the nation’s history”, a crisis which would have engulfed, not merely the coalition government, but the entire British political system. Nor was the relief felt only in the UK itself. Ulster Loyalists relaxed. In Washington, Obama and Clinton could rest easy in the knowledge that their nuclear arsenal would remain safely ensconced on the Clyde, twenty-five miles from one of the largest population centres in Western Europe. Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy and Chinese Premier Li Keqiang no longer worried that nationalist movements in Catalonia and Xinjiang province would be able to draw sustenance from the Scottish example.
Despite these manifestations of international ruling class satisfaction with the result, some No supporters continued to delude themselves as to the progressive nature of the outcome. Stephen Low [3], a Labour member of the Red Paper Collective, noted: “Scotland’s membership of the UK has been transformed from being the work of a ‘parcel o’ rogues’ in the eighteenth century to being the freely expressed view of significant majority of Scotland’s people in the twenty first.” But what exactly had the Scots endorsed? Not some notion of Britishness dating back to the dawn of the eighteenth century, but a very specific contemporary one. For one consequence of the No victory has been to undercut the admittedly self-satisfied claim that Scotland as a nation had never accepted “Thatcherism”, as neoliberalism still tends to be described here. In fact, that is exactly what we have done. In future, anyone attempting to claim that we did not vote for privatisation or austerity will simply be told by our rulers that we had our chance to vote for an alternative and refused to do so, thereby implicitly accepting the neoliberal order, to which all three Unionist parties are deeply committed. If the Scots will accept anything, why should the coalition or any future Tory government hold back? During the Conservative annual conference early in October George Osborne announced policies [4] which included a 2-year benefits freeze and denying housing benefit to 18–21-year-olds: the fact that these will affect around a million Scottish families gives some indication of the levels of poverty which already exist and which will now be made even worse. But perhaps the first action of the UK parliament after the referendum was the most symbolic of the geopolitical imperatives which lay behind the No campaign. After allowing a decent interval for the Labour Party annual conference to conclude without embarrassment, MPs voted by 524 to 43 to resume bombing Iraq. Britain, the USA and murderous fundamentalist Saudi Arabian regime: together.
As the counts were declared, Labour activists had exulted alongside their supposedly hated Conservative enemies. The Observer’s Scottish columnist Kevin McKenna [5] quoted a conversation with his daughter Clare, who had become a Yes activist during the campaign: “So many on the side of the rich and powerful must have been cheering themselves hoarse about the No vote and there were Labour people, our very own, cheering and dancing with them.” Labour’s attack dogs were now quite uninhibited in expressing their contempt for the whole process. “The quiet people have spoken and no amount of Saltire-waving can spin that story any other way”, wrote former Labour MP and arch-Unionist Brian Wilson [6]: “What happens next is important but also distinctly secondary to the result we already know.” Throughout the campaign No supporters had to intone through gritted teeth and frozen smiles how marvellous the carnival of democracy was, how excellent for the country, whatever the result. But now the rictus grin could be removed: “We are awash with high-minded twaddle about what a civilised exercise in democracy it was.” Wilson’s approval of the quiet, dutiful No voters is matched only by his hatred and rage at the campaign which destabilised what he evidently regards as the natural order in Scotland: “high minded twaddle” – this is what Labour figures actually think about democracy, if it involves anything other than voting for their party every five years. There had been a Labour for Independence group – a heroic endeavour under the circumstances, which was widely derided by the leadership and received relatively little publicity. Allan Grogan [7], one of the co-convenors, resigned from the party after the referendum and made this, I think accurate, assessment:
The irony is that with a “yes” vote we would have seen a return to a real Labour Party which most people would have voted for in Scotland. The party, particularly in this nation [i.e. Scotland] is in deep decline, and I fear it may be permanent.
We need not accept the myth of Labour’s Golden Past to recognise that independence would potentially have allowed the party to formulate a politics unimpeded by the rightward stampede of the London leadership – although whether they would have accepted the opportunity is of course another question.
The cheering and dancing among Conservative and Labour activists did not last for long. Will Hutton [8] initially sighed with relief that the threatened ethnic holocaust had been avoided: “Millions of English – and two million Scots – find ourselves delighted that the noxious, destructive division of our island has not happened.” But there is a shadow clouding their delight – unthinkably, the Tories are using the constitutional issue for party advantage! At 7 a.m. on 19 September Cameron had given a brief speech outside Downing Street in which he said, amongst other things, that further powers for Scotland would be devolved and a suitably distinguished crossbench peer – Lord Smith of Kelvin – would be appointed to set up a Commission to investigate the options in due course. However, he also intimated that the issue would be tied to that of what has come to be called English Votes for English Laws (EVEL). In plain language, the Tories were now going to use the situation to force a final solution to the West Lothian Question by excluding Scottish MPs – the overwhelming majority of whom are Labour – from voting on so-called “English” issues. As Murray Pittock [9] wrote of EVEL, long before the campaign began: “Enthusiasm for it is evidence that devolution is still seen in England not as fundamental change to the government of the UK, but as a sop to the Scots, and that any further developments must punish Scotland not reform England.”
 
New dawn fades?
Early in the evening of 19 September I took part in the first of many discussions about the future of the Scottish left following the referendum. I had to catch an early train home and, after leaving comrades in a café on Ingram Street in Glasgow’s Merchant City, I wandered into George Square, which in the weeks prior to the vote had been the site of daily mass gatherings of Yes supporters – not to listen to formal speeches or participate in rallies, but to meet, discuss, sing or simply to make visible the size and diversity of the movement. It was as if people who were canvassing, leafleting or flyposting – activities which tend to be carried out in small groups – had to return to the Square to refresh themselves in a public space over which they had regularly taking collective control. It was in these days that Glasgow most resembled the Greek and Spanish cities during the Movement of the Squares – to a far greater extent than in relatively small-scale Scottish manifestations of Occupy.
But on this evening Yes supporters were scattered and few and most overcome with grief. Instead, the Square was filling with triumphant Orange Lodge members, sans regalia, alongside the outright fascists of Britain First and the Scottish Defence League singing Rule, Britannia and God Save the Queen, waving Union Jacks, burning Saltires, throwing Nazi salutes and howling homophobic, racist and sectarian abuse: the poisonous pus seeping from the wounded, fever-ridden body of the threatened state; the monstrous id of British nationalism awakened by the menace of Scottish self-determination.
What happened the following day was an extraordinary moment of grace. In response to the violence of Friday night, Yes-supporting father and son Andrew and Darren Carnegie of the food share project, Glasgow’s Needy, began to make speeches calling for unity, peace and reconciliation. Over the next two days the Square began to fill with boxes and bags of food, over 2,000 in the end from as far afield as Aberdeen, requiring eight vans and 11 cars to transport them. But was this display of human solidarity with the poverty-stricken and state-sanctioned (immediately denounced by disgraced Falkirk Labour MP Eric Joyce as “poverty porn”) also an elegiac farewell to the activism unleashed by campaign? Would the inhabitants of housing schemes such as Northfield in Aberdeen, Fintry in Dundee, Craigmillar in Edinburgh and Drumchapel in Glasgow, so recently awakened to political life, now be returned to the silence and oblivion which has been their usual lot before the referendum campaign?
In fact, precisely the opposite happened. Membership of all the pro-independence parties massively increased immediately after the referendum. By Saturday 27 September, that of the SSP had risen from 1,000 to 3,600; of the Scottish Greens from 1,720 to 6,235, and of the SNP from 25,642 to 68,200. (Labour has not reported any rise in membership, although there have been unquantified reports of resignations.) This growth was replicated in the local RIC meetings: in Edinburgh RIC, which had around 20 regular attendees shot up to 137 in the week after the ballot. A series of demonstrations and rallies took place, including one of around 3,000 people outside the Scottish Parliament. The Women for Independence conference on Saturday 4 October in Perth attracted 1,000. Over 7,000 people indicated on Facebook that they were ‘attending’ the RIC conference on 22 November in Glasgow.
For many Yes supporters, particularly those who have only recently become active and have not yet become accustomed to the experience of defeat, their feelings of incomprehension, rage and humiliation could lead them into the trap of blaming those Scots who voted No and to write them off as participants in any further attempt to shape the future. “Hell mend them”, as the Scottish phrase goes. Understandable though these feelings are – I confess I shared them in the dark dawn of 19 September – they should be resisted. This is why the slogan of “we are the 45%”, raised in the immediate aftermath of the result, is deeply unhelpful: unlike “we are the 99%”, it enshrines minority status rather than seeking to overcome it. There are of course limits to how large a majority can ever be, although not, apparently, for Gerry Hassan [10]:
A traditional left approach of embracing ‘the ghetto’ or minority ‘rainbow coalition’ will not deliver a majority to Yes. This is something many on the left and left nationalists have not understood over the last three or four decades: namely, that a political contest carried out by constant retreat and conducted defensively, only results in defeat and demoralisation. The politics of Scotland’s future has to entail getting into the heads and hearts of the middle classes with all their varieties and different sub-parts, from the well-heeled and affluent, to the doing comfortably, and struggling to keep up appearances ... We are one Scotland. Not 45%, or 55%, or even 99%.
Leaving aside the totalitarian implications of “the 100%” or “one Scotland” – the idea that there could ever be complete agreement among the Scots is not only impossible but, given the class divisions within Scottish society, undesirable – there are two problems with this line of argument.
First, it depends on assumptions about both the middle classes and the working class which involve massively overestimating the size of former and equally massively underestimating that of the latter. Taken together, the three components of the middle classes – the petty bourgeoisie, the professions and the technical-managerial New Middle Class (NMC) – constitute at most 25% of the Scottish population. Victory in any future referendum will only be secured by winning over, not these classes, but those working-class people who feared for their pensions and jobs – scarcely surprising given the conditions of crisis and austerity under which most of us live – and those others who believed that voting No was the genuinely internationalist or solidaristic course. I believe the latter group were mistaken, but Yes supporters have to convince them of this, not denounce them: the achievement of independence, let alone any concrete moves towards socialism, will only be achieved alongside those working-class people who voted No.
Second, even in relation to the middle classes, the divisions are too great for appeals to “one Scotland” to cut much ice. For some middle-class Scots, voting No was a perfectly rational decision based on an accurate assessment of – and here I apologise for using such a terribly old-fashioned term – their class interests. Others, notably those in certain categories of financial, managerial and administrative employment which previously had the greatest security are now become more vulnerable, not least because of the extent of corporate rationalisation and downsizing that tended to follow the acquisitions and mergers boom of the 1990s and 2000s. The public sector jobs which their university-educated children would once have found waiting in graduation are decreasingly available, while Starbucks beckons. In terms of seeking alliances then, the independence movement is unlikely to find them in those sections of the professions and the private sector NMC which still have a material interest in preserving the capitalist system. There are, however, far greater possibilities among the petty bourgeoisie and the public sector and liberal NMC. As always, the very indeterminacy and volatility of middle class attitudes means that their ultimate direction will depend on the availability of a persuasive alternative, not vapid rhetoric which seeks to smooth over fundamental class differences.
 
Against Devo Max
In the aftermath, Yes campaigners are understandably also concerned to ensure that the promises of greater devolution emphasised in the final panic-stricken stages of the No campaign should be honoured. It is understandable because of a healthy distrust of these parties, given their record of being (in Brown’s typically pompous phrase) “promise breakers” over the NHS, student fees and rail renationalisation, to name but a few. However, although voters were originally asked to choose between the status quo and the potentially threatening alternative of independence, the status quo was never going to be an option. The panic of 6 September pressurised the Unionist parties into bringing forward their existing plans; it did not generate them and it would be a terrible mistake for the radical left to become fixated with the extent of new devolved powers or the length of time it will take to introduce them.
The parties made different if overlapping offers about the new powers that were coming to Holyrood over taxation. Labour: the ability to set and control income tax by up to 15p in the pound – the Tories and Lib Dems: to set and control all Scottish income tax. The latter sounds attractive, but as Iain MacWhirter [11] has pointed out, it is a trap. If the Scottish government is left in control over income tax, without corporation tax, inheritance tax, VAT and the rest, there will still be a £4 billion deficit: “What the Tories hope is this: the financial squeeze will force radical service cuts that will damage the SNP fatally, because they will have to implement them, and will undermine Labour by reducing its public sector client base.” But even further tax powers bring their own problems. As the Observer’s business editor [12] notes:
And what if devo max includes some control of corporation tax, national insurance, VAT, capital gains tax or air passenger duty? Following the Irish example, which Salmond was keen to do, regional politicians with the right to vary tax will offer huge tax inducements to win a factory or warehouse, creating a deep financial hole with the promise of taxpaying jobs in the future to bail them out. It is the same on the global stage, where countries outbid each other for the investment of multinationals. So whatever structure of regional government can be agreed in the wake of the referendum in Scotland (and there is no reason to be optimistic that an agreement is possible), the freedom on offer is one that provides councils with little more than the tools to undercut their neighbours.
What this seems to suggest is that only the most complete form of devo max would constitute a viable solution. Devo max in this sense means, as Brown [13] has said on numerous occasions, “as close to a federal state as you can be in a country where one nation is 85 per cent of the population”. The current enthusiasm for federalism stretches from the reformist left to the centre-right. [14] However, it is no more attractive a proposition.
I wrote earlier that Cameron was not opposed to devo max in this “federal” sense, quite the contrary. If the essential integrity of the British state was maintained at the military-diplomatic level, then further devolution, even to the point of outright federalism, would be an acceptable outcome for the majority of the British ruling class. On 11 July 2011 John Major [15] gave an interesting speech to the Ditchley Foundation in which he asked these rhetorical questions:
Why not devolve all responsibilities except foreign policy, defence and management of the economy? Why not let Scotland have wider tax-raising powers to pay for their policies and, in return, abolish the present block-grant settlement, reduce Scottish representation in the Commons, and cut the legislative burden at Westminster?
The Scottish Constitutional Commission, which is not noted for being sympathetic to Tory ideas, proposed a very similar arrangement [16], called “Secure Autonomy”: “It would deliver most of the proposed advantages of independence while preserving the security, economic, military and diplomatic advantages commonly attributed to the Union by its supporters.” There are serious dangers here, at least for any approach to independence which sees it as opening up possibilities for socialist change.
The meaning of devolution has changed over the decades. Previously, it was a way of meeting popular aspirations without threatening the economic order; now it also potentially useful to further implanting social neoliberalism. The more politics is emptied of content, the more social neoliberal regimes need to prove that democracy is still meaningful – not of course by extending the areas of social life under democratic control, but by multiplying the opportunities for citizen-consumers to take part in elections for local councillors, mayors, Police and Crime Commissioners, members of the Welsh and London Assemblies, and the Scottish, European and British Parliaments. Here, responsibility for implementing anti-reforms is spread beyond governing parties and central state apparatuses to elected bodies whose policy options are severely restricted both by statute and – as in the case of local councils – reliance on the central state for most of their funding. In the case of the devolved nations the assumption is that the people most likely to participate in local decision-making will be members of the middle class, who can be expected to behave, en masse, in ways which will impose restrictions on local taxation and public spending, and thus maintain the neoliberal order with a supposedly popular mandate: atomised citizens voting for which services they want to close. Consequently, devo max is not just an inadequate, but still desirable alternative to independence: it is a means of preserving the British state and the neoliberal order. As expected the SNP have now come out for the most complete form of devo max [17] – one reason why socialists cannot simply call for an SNP vote. Far from shifting attention from independence to devo max, the radical left should reject the latter completely except in so far as it involves the greater democratisation of Scottish society rather than “powers” for the Scottish sub-state.
 
What next?
The main impetus for the Yes campaign was not nationalism, but a desire for social change expressed through the demand for self-determination. The danger is that it will now become nationalist in orientation, particularly if the movement simply becomes an electoral support-group for the SNP. The thousands of mainly working-class people who have joined that organisation will change its inner dynamics, but they are unlikely to change its overall character as a mildly reformist party on the left wing of the social neoliberal spectrum.
The way in which campaigners flooded into the three main independence-supporting parties is indicative of a deeply-felt need to find a form of political expression, which none of them will be able to fully provide. RIC can only do so in part. Existing on the borderland between a campaign and a social movement, it faces the problem of how to continue campaigning for the goals which it sought to achieve through independence when the prospect of independence is no longer on the immediate agenda. Can it do so without simply fragmenting into multiple adjuncts to existing campaigns? This is the main question which confronts it as third and most important conference looms. RIC at any rate exists: the second issue is the absence from the Scottish political scene of a party of the left, large and serious enough to stand for election, but also committed to activity in the streets and workplaces. As a united front involving existing parties, RIC cannot become that kind of party, but the unaffiliated individuals, who were the basis of its mass support and that of the wider campaign, will have to be the basis of its membership.
All of the existing left groups contain militants and activists who would make a valuable contribution to any new formation; but simply attempting to recombine these groups, with all their inherited historic divisions and internal membership structures, whether as “platforms” or permanent factions, would be fatal to this enterprise, as would a recapitulation of the cult of personality, the politics of celebrity, which helped destroy the SSP. Podemos in Spain, which also emerged from an actual movement, is perhaps the closest to what is required, but it too has problems, not least those stemming from the attempt to position itself as “beyond left or right” – anti-politics in this sense being precisely what Scotland does not need right now. There are no exact models and we will consequently have to build our own. Politically, such a formation will certainly require a revolutionary current, but part of a process in which new activists can actually find out what the terms reform and revolution currently mean, and where they stand in relation to them. In terms of the programme for an independent Scotland, some elements are obvious: withdrawal from NATO and the EU, establishment of a republic and a Scottish currency unencumbered by the Bank of England, renationalisation of services and utilities, and the repeal of the anti-trade union laws. Nationalisation of the oil industry will be an urgent task, not least to pay for the social reconstruction required after the devastations of neoliberalism and austerity. These are not in themselves revolutionary demands – that they seem so is an indication of how far right politics has moved in the last 40 years – but in the current context they will rightly be seen as a breach with the order of capital. Working towards that will involve not only necessary defensive struggles against austerity, war and environmental destruction, but for the democratisation of Scottish society, in readiness for when the moment of independence becomes a possibility again.
That may not take as long as some imagine. I noted earlier that, in the eyes of the ruling class, the No vote effectively amounted to an endorsement of the neoliberal project. Working-class No voters obviously did not intend this, and no-one on either side was consciously inviting an escalation of austerity, but that is what is happening, with Labour abetting or endorsing the attacks. Resistance should be conducted on an UK-wide basis wherever possible, but as the attacks deepen, the question for the Scots of whether there is more “risk” involved in remaining in the UK than breaking with it will come to the fore again, especially if the 2015 General Election produces another Tory-led government. The British state is unlikely to allow another “official” referendum, especially one which our rulers think they will lose, so an “unofficial” manifestation along Catalan lines will be necessary and that situation, the question will become who is stronger, the social movement or the state. One of the advisers to the No campaign, Adam Tompkins [18] of the University of Glasgow, wrote in the aftermath:
The Union was not saved on Thursday; it won a reprieve ... I have long thought that the Union could withstand the threat of Scottish separation, once. But if circumstances were to bring us to a second independence referendum any time soon, I would place a large sum on the outcome being very different.
I would also make that bet.
*
Download all five of Neil’s articles as a single PDF here.
A substantially different version of these articles has appeared in New Left Review.
* * *
References
[1] Colin Kidd, After the Referendum, London Review of Books, vol. 36, no. 19 (9 October 2014), p. 20.
[2] Mick Brown, After Scotland Votes No, the Kingdom is still United, but uneasily so, The Sunday Telegraph (20 September 2014).
[3] Stephen Low, Remember “Class over Nation”, Scottish Left Review 83 (October 2014), p. 14.
[4] Iain S. Bruce, United Against a War on the Poor, The Sunday Herald (5 October 2014).
[5] Kevin McKenna, How Can You Console a Heartbroken and Angry Daughter? You Can’t, The Observer (21 September 2014).
[6] Brian Wilson, Labour Must Fight on the Social Issues, The Scotsman (20 September 2014).
[7] Allan Brogan, Out with the Old: in with the New?, Scottish Left Review 83 (October 2014), p. 7.
[8] Will Hutton, After the Scottish Referendum – David Cameron’s Attempt to Manipulate the Constitution is crudely Cynical, The Observer (21 September 2014). Apparently the Tories fail to realise what the ‘real problem at the heart of British government’ is: ‘the British state, feudal in its origins, remain feudally centralised even in the 21st century’. The myth that the British state is some peculiarly archaic formation involves confusing form (the Monarchy, the House of Lords, etc.) and content (how well it actually serves the interests of the British capitalist class). In fact, the British state is one of the most brilliantly successful, endlessly adaptive states in the history of capitalism – as it has just reminded us yet again.
[9] Murray J. Pittock, The Road to Independence? Scotland since the Sixties (London: Reaktion Books, 2008), p. 87.
[10] Gerry Hassan, We Are One Scotland: Anatomy of a Referendum, One Kingdom (27 September 2014).
[11] Iain MacWhirter, Trouble if Austerity is Heaped on Austerity, The Herald (30 September 2014).
[12] The More Power in Britain is Devolved, the Faster Tax Revenues Race to the Bottom, The Observer (20 September 2014).
[13] See, for example, Andrew Whitaker, Gordon Brown backs Federalism in Event of No Vote, The Scotsman (15 August 2014).
[14] Timothy Garten Ash, We Need a Federal Britain in a Confederal Europe, The Guardian (22 September 2014); Bryan, Powers for Political Change, pp. 194–197; David Torrance, Britain Rebooted: Scotland in a Federal Union (Edinburgh: Luath Press, 2014).
[15] Sir John Major’s Ditchley Foundation Speech – the Full Transcript on Devolution. Thanks to Jim Slaven for bringing this speech to my attention.
[16] W. Elliot Bulmer, Scotland’s Future After the Referendum, Herald Scotland, 27 September 2014.
[17] Magnus Gardham, Sturgeon sets out SNP Stall with Demand for Devo Max, The Herald (11 October 2014).
[18] Adam Tomkins, The Union can’t Withstand English nationalism, New Statesman (26 September–2 October 2014), p. 52.
 






Part one of a major five-part analysis of Scottish politics after the referendum, by Scottish historian and activist Neil Davidson.
The Scottish independence referendum was one of the most important political events of recent years. Faced with the possible break-up of the UK, the British ruling class panicked in a way we’ve not seen for decades. The No victory has done nothing to bolster the mainstream parties which supported the union – the resignation of Johann Lamont as leader of Scottish Labour has only highlighted the decline of the Labour Party in Scotland. After almost all of the radical left campaigned for a Yes vote, discussions continue about how the left should organise – the Radical Independence Campaign conference, involving 3,000 delegates in Glasgow on Saturday 22 November, will be an important part of that process.
One sign of the referendum’s impact has been the levels of recruitment to political parties since. Figures from 12 November show that SNP membership has more than trebled, from 25,000 to over 84,000; the Scottish Greens have done the same, going from 2,000 to 7,500 members; and Scottish Socialist Party membership has more than doubled from 1,500 to 3,500. Meanwhile the Scottish Labour Party has grown by only a fraction, from 12,500 to 13,500 – fewer recruits than the SSP.
Over the next five days we’ll be publishing a major analysis of these events,
Scotland: the Social Movement for Independence and the Crisis of the British State, written by Neil Davidson in the two weeks after the vote. With the fifth article we’ll include a printable version of all five parts, for those who prefer to read long documents in printed form.



* * *
Introduction




Photo: Ninlan Reid, flickr



If, in 2011, you had asked members of the radical left to identify a sequence of events that might lead to a crisis of the British state, most would have probably nominated a combination and escalation of the struggles then current: public sector strikes in defence of services and pay, riots in communities subject to police violence, and student demonstrations against tuition fees, perhaps set against the backdrop of opposition to yet another imperialist war in the Middle East. A referendum on Scottish independence is unlikely to have featured high on the list. Yet within three years such a referendum had momentarily rendered the actual end of the British state a realistic prospect and, for two weeks in September, the campaign for a Yes vote had reduced the British ruling class to a panic unparalleled since the early stages of the Miner’s Strike of 1984–5 and, in terms of public visibility, since the industrial struggles of the early 1970s.
Obviously this was contrary to the pieties of the Approved Left Strategies Playbook. According to conventional wisdom, a referendum would at best only encourage constitutional illusions, at worst lead to national divisions among the British working class. Typical exponents of this type of thinking were representatives of the Red Paper Collective [1], a reformist think-tank uniting trade union officials and Labour-supporting academics, who asked for “a better use of the labour movement’s time and resources than signing up to be foot-soldiers in one or other of the bourgeois campaigns currently vying for attention.” The suggestion that abstention was the appropriate response is rather disingenuous, since everyone associated with this group opposed Scottish independence and supported the continuing unity of the British state. [2] But even leaving that aside, the approach was in any case totally misguided.
In a capitalist society, all politics is by definition “bourgeois” unless working-class interests are forced onto the agendas which would otherwise exclude them. Some areas of political life are obviously more susceptible to working-class intervention than others, and some will always have greater priority, but none can be dismissed as entirely irrelevant. As the late Daniel Bensaïd [3] wrote, in his attempt to capture the essence of Leninism:
If one of the outlets is blocked with particular care, then the contagion will find another, sometimes the most unexpected. That is why we cannot know which spark will ignite the fire.
In this conception, which I endorse, the watchword is: “‘Be ready!’ Ready for the improbable, for the unexpected, for what happens.” Improbable as it may at first appear, the Scottish independence referendum became one of Bensaïd’s “outlets”.
Metropolitan fantasies and Scottish realities
Anyone who relied on commentaries by the Labour-supporting metropolitan liberal-left to understand events in Scotland might well be puzzled by this conclusion. For, whether out of conscious dishonesty or simply catastrophic levels of ignorance, the inhabitants of this milieu chose to portray the Yes campaign as an essentially ethnic movement. [4]. John McTernan, a former Labour Special Adviser, wrote on the day of the referendum:
Populism is sweeping Europe, and the UK is not immune. The SNP surge is part of this phenomenon. The characteristics are putting the nation and its needs and aspirations above other calls on solidarity.
I pause only to draw attention to the fact that this call for solidarity was being issued in the pages of the Daily Mail, before noting McTernan’s claim that there is a “clear populism of the Centre-Right – UKIP and the SNP in the UK.” Phillip Stephens of the Financial Times wrote that Salmond “has reawakened the allegiance of the tribe”, before also comparing the SNP with the racist xenophobes of UKIP: “Mr Salmond is to Scotland what Nigel Farage, the leader of the UK Independence party, is to England.”. The Observer’s Will Hutton [5] saw Scottish independence as heralding the Decline of Western Civilization:
If Britain can’t find a way of sticking together, it is the death of the liberal enlightenment before the atavistic forces of nationalism and ethnicity – a dark omen for the 21st century. Britain will cease as an idea. We will all be diminished.
Scottish novelist C.J. Sansom [6] at least allowed that the intentions of Yes supporters were commendable:
Some, certainly, will be thinking about voting yes on Thursday, not from nationalism, but in the hope of social change. Yet they will not get it, because, like it or not, they are voting for a nationalist outcome… And the SNP, who will be victors and negotiators of Scotland’s future, are not socialist, but classic populists who over the years have swithered around the political spectrum to gain votes for nationalism.
But those who do not wish to talk about British nationalism should also remain silent about Scottish nationalism. Michael Keating [7] points out, in a comment that might have been written with these commentators in mind: “Some of those who condemn minority nationalism as necessarily backward frame this as a condemnation of all nationalism, ignoring the implicit nationalism underlying their own position and confusing their own Metropolitan chauvinism with a cosmopolitan outlook.”
In fact, for most Yes campaigners the movement was not primarily about supporting the SNP, but nor was it even about Scottish nationalism in a wider sense. “For me”, writes Billy Bragg [8], “the most frustrating aspect of the debate on Scottish independence has been the failure of the English left to recognise that there is more than one kind of nationalism.” Bragg’s support was welcome, particularly in the pages of the Guardian, which in most respects played an abysmal role during the referendum campaign, but these comments confuse the issue. As a political ideology, nationalism – any nationalism, relatively progressive or absolutely reactionary – involves two inescapable principles: that the national group should have its own state, regardless of the social consequences; and that what unites the national group is more significant than what divides it, above all the class divide. Neither of these principles was dominant in the Yes campaign. One right-wing, but relatively level-headed No supporter [9] observed:
Those out canvassing don’t report encountering more blood-and-soil types than before. Instead, they say that what is driving people is a variant of the anti-politics mood that is roiling politics across the UK.
More precisely, Yes campaigners saw establishing a Scottish state, not as an eternal goal to be pursued in all circumstances, but as one which offered better opportunities for equality and social justice in our current condition of neoliberal austerity – in other words as a way of conducting the class struggle, not denying its existence. Writing in New Left Review in 1977, Tom Nairn [10] said:
The fact is that neo-nationalism has become the gravedigger of the old state in Britain, and as such the principal factor making for a political revolution of some sort in England as well as the small countries. Yet because this process assumes an unexpected form, many on the metropolitan left solemnly write it down as a betrayal of the revolution… The essential unity of the UK must be maintained till the working classes of all Britain are ready.
Nairn is often regarded as simply being premature in his assessment, and his point about the “unexpected form” of the threat to the British state is certainly relevant; but nevertheless “neo-nationalism” is not the gravedigger, for reasons well expressed by the Irish writer Fintan O’Toole [11]:
The Scottish referendum is…a symptom of a much broader loss of faith in the ability of existing institutions of governance to protect people against unaccountable power. This why the campaign is not particularly nationalistic… The demand for independence just happens, for historical reasons, to be the form in which Scots are expressing a need that is felt around the developed world, the urgent necessity of a new politics of democratic accountability.
Independence has therefore become the demand of socialists, environmentalists and feminists. The sections of the Scottish radical left who actively supported a Yes vote – the overwhelming majority, bar some fossilised sectarians – were therefore right to throw themselves into the campaign and, in doing so, took part in one of the greatest explosions of working class self-activity and political creativity in Scottish history, far greater in depth and breadth than those around the Make Poverty History/G8 Alternatives mobilisations in 2005, the Stop the War Coalition in 2002–3 or even the Anti-Poll Tax campaign in 1987–90. The level of participation and relative closeness of the outcome, for which the left can claim much of the credit, are two measure of this. Yet when the campaign began, early in 2012, there was no indication that it would take this form.
Shadow plays, double-bluffs, miscalculations
From 2000 onwards the SNP included in its electoral manifestos a commitment to carry out a referendum on independence, if it achieved a majority in the Scottish Parliament. Once that majority was achieved in May 2011 a referendum of some sort was inevitable. Under the Scotland Act (1998) all constitutional issues relating to the 1707 Treaty of Union between England and Scotland are reserved to Westminster. The question was therefore whether the referendum would be an “unofficial” one conducted by the Scottish Government (similar to one scheduled to be held in Catalonia on 9 November), or one in which the process was legitimated and the result consequently recognised by the UK government. Prime Minister and Conservative leader David Cameron took the initiative on 8 January 2012 by announcing that Westminster would legislate for a referendum to be held, but there were conditions; above all, there would only be one question. In other words, there would not be an option to vote for Maximum Devolution, or “devo max”, as it has come to be known.
Devo max was the option overwhelmingly supported by most Scots, perhaps as many as 71%, at this point. Although there are different conceptions of what exactly this might involve, the most complete version would have left the Scottish Parliament in control of all state functions (including taxation) with the exception of those controlled by the Foreign Office, the Ministry of Defence and the Bank of England. The bulk of the SNP leadership recognised that there was not – or at any rate, not yet – a majority for independence. Devo max was therefore what the SNP hoped to achieve – and more importantly, what they thought they could achieve – in the short-to medium-term. Scottish First Minister and SNP leader Alex Salmond would therefore have preferred devo max to be included on the ballot paper, since he would have been able to claim victory if the result was either independence (unlikely) or devo max (most probable).
Cameron refused to play ball. His reason for insisting on a stark alternative between the status quo and independence was simple enough: he wanted to decisively defeat the latter, if not for all time, then at least for the foreseeable future, without allowing voters an opt-out. The risks involved seemed small – he was as familiar with polls showing minority support for independence as Salmond, after all. We should not imagine, however, that Cameron was therefore opposed to devo max. On the contrary, in a speech in Edinburgh on 16 February he offered further measures of devolution if voters rejected independence. For tactical reasons Salmond affected to believe this was a ruse to lull the Scots into voting for the status quo, after which the promise would be quietly forgotten; but while there are historical precedents for doubting the veracity of Conservative promises, in this case I believe they were perfectly genuine, for reasons which, as we shall see, have now acquired urgent political importance. Cameron was however prepared to pay a high price for a one-question referendum. He eventually conceded to the SNP leader his demands for the enfranchisement of 16- and 17 year olds, the right to decide on the date and the nature of the question, thus enabling Salmond to frame it as a positive (unlike, “should Scotland remain part of the UK?”, for example) and campaign for an upbeat Yes rather than a recalcitrant No. These were all confirmed by the Edinburgh Agreement, signed by Cameron and Salmond for their respective governments, at St Andrews House on 15 October 2012.
Even though devo max was absent from the ballot paper, the version of independence promoted by the SNP closely resembled it, retaining as it did the monarchy, membership of NATO and the pound through a currency union with the Rest of the UK (RUK). The intention here was clearly to make the prospect of independence as palatable as possible to the unconvinced through the continued presence of these institutions, so that independence involved the fewest changes to the established order compatible with actual secession. However, as became clear during the campaign, most Scots voting for Yes wanted their country to be as different from the contemporary UK as possible, so this approach hampered the official Yes campaign from the start. Moreover, the issue of the currency placed a weapon in the hands of the No campaign which they were to use remorselessly until the very end.
The official Yes campaign, “Yes Scotland” was launched on 25 May, and was unsurprisingly dominated by the SNP with, in supporting roles, the Scottish Green Party and the Scottish Socialist Party. Its rival, “Better Together” followed on 25 June, uniting the Scottish Tories, the Scottish Liberal Democrats and the Scottish Labour Party – the latter providing both the campaign’s front man in the shape of former Chancellor Alasdair Darling and the bulk of its activists on the ground. Early in the campaign some Labour activists attempted to nullify their embarrassment at being in league with the Conservative enemy by pretending that the entire business was simply a tiresome distraction involving equivalent cross-class alliances on both sides. Pauline Bryan [12] of Labour Campaign for Socialism and the Red Paper Collective wrote:
In Scotland we can see that the SNP and particularly the Yes campaign are a broad alliance across the political spectrum, and the referendum has resulted in the better together campaign which has the support of the Tories, Lib Dems and Scottish Labour. It takes the politics out of politics.
This is simply an evasion. The most obvious difference between the two sides can be seen if we list those forces which stood behind the No campaign: the supposedly neutral institutions of the British state, in particular the Treasury and the BBC; most British capitalists; UKIP and the British National Party; the Orange Order; the entire press with the sole exception of the Glasgow Sunday Herald (and the more right-wing – i.e. the Express and the Mail – they were, the more rabidly Unionist they also tended to be); the President of the USA and his likely Democrat successor; the Commission of the EU; and the rulers of all nation-states with insurgent minority national movements. In short, behind the three Unionist parties stood the representatives and spokespersons of the British and international capitalist class, supporters of the current imperial ordering of the world system, and reactionaries and fascists of every description. Finding oneself in this company, anyone on the left might reasonably ask themselves whether it was conceivable that these people and organisations could all have misunderstood their own class interests, which, one assumes, do not include preserving the unity of the British labour movement.
*
Tomorrow – Part 2: The Yes Campaign as a Social Movement
* * *
References
[1] Red Paper Collective, The Question Isn’t Yes or No, Scottish Left Review 73 (November/December 2012), [2].
[2] Beyond politics, the prospect of an end to the British state seemed to infuse some No voters – particularly activists on the Unionist left – with a sense of existential dread and ontological uncertainty.
[3] Daniel Bensaïd, Leaps! Leaps! Leaps!, International Socialism, second series, 95 (Summer 2002), p. 77; Lenin Reloaded: Towards a Politics of Truth, edited by Sebastian Budgen, Stathis Kouvelakis and Slavoj Žižek (Durham, North Carolina: University of North Carolina, 2007), p. 153.
[4] John McTernan, Political success? Just climb onto your soapbox ..., Scottish Daily Mail (19 September 2014); Phillip Stephens, The World is Saying No to Scottish Separation, Financial Times (12 September 2014). For a definitive refutation of these idiotic comparisons, by two founders of the Radical Independence Campaign, see James Foley and Pete Ramand, Yes: the Radical Case for Scottish Independence (London: Pluto Press, 2014), pp. 38–40.
[5] Will Hutton, We have 10 Days to Find a Settlement to Save the Union, The Observer (7 September 2014).
[6] C.J. Sansom, Saying No will Arrest the Rise of Populist Nationalism, The Guardian (15 September 2014). See also Historical Note, in Dominion (London: Mantle, 2012), pp. 590–592 where Sampson actually compares the SNP to the inter-war fascist parties.
[7] Michael Keating, Nations against the State: the New Politics of Nationalism in Quebec, Catalonia and Scotland (Second edition, Houndmills: Palgrave, 2001), p. 24.
[8] Billy Bragg, Voting Nationalist in Scotland isn’t an Act of Class Betrayal, The Guardian (17 September 2014).
[9] James Forsyth, The Unionists Have Been Too Afraid to Make a Proper Case, The Spectator (13 September 2014).
[10] Tom Nairn, The Twilight of the British State, New Left Review
I/101–2 (February–April 1977), pp. 59–60; The Break-Up of Britain: Crisis and Neo-nationalism (Second edition, London: Verso, 1981), pp. 89–90.
[11] Fintan O’Toole, Forget Braveheart, Kilts and Tribal Nationalism, This is about Democracy, The Guardian (13 September 2014).
[12] Pauline Bryan, Powers for Political Change, Class, Nation and Socialism: the Red Paper on Scotland 2014, edited by Pauline Bryan and Tommy Kane (Glasgow: Glasgow Caledonian University Archives, 2013), p. 193.
 



1. The reality behind the referendum

2. The Yes campaign as a social movement

3. Project Fear and the ruling class panic

4. Understanding the result

5. What next?
 






In the second part of his analysis of Scottish politics after the referendum, Scottish historian and activist Neil Davidson examines the Yes campaign.



To understand the nature of the Yes campaign as it developed, especially in the last 6 months, it is instructive to compare with the two previous referendums on Scotland’s constitutional position. Monitors in 1979 reported “no activity; no cars to polls; no literature; really pathetic ... Political activity during the referendum campaign was significantly absent.” Similar reports [1] were made in 1997: “Apart from the media you wouldnot have known there was a referendum ... The campaign was almostnon-existent. No opposing campaign at all was evident.” Nowcontrast these dismal scenarios with the following picture, drawn byScottish journalist Paul Hutcheon in 2014:
Rather than consisting of activists manning jumble sales,the Yes movement was on its way to creating the 300 local communitygroups, 50 sectoral organisations and dozens of other spin-offs thatwould flood the country with pro-independence activity. Tens ofthousands of people across the country were now involved: fromself-generated local Yes groups, to National Collective and theleft-wing Radical Independence Campaign (RIC); from individualsmanning Yes cafes, to new recruits running drop in centres. Yesstaffers knew the grass-roots campaign was working when they learnedof large community debates they had not organised, run by localgroups they did not know existed. Yes Scotland was now almostredundant – it had become a ‘central services’resource for groups, providing literature, merchandise and emailupdates. By May 30 this year, the formal starting point of thereferendum campaign, Yes was the biggest grass-roots politicalmovement Scotland had seen.







Hutcheon [2] writes of “two campaigns”, one traditional and led by the suits, arguing in conventional media set piece debates, the other a “ground war”, “one-to-one”, door-to-door, intentionally bypassing the media. It was this “other” campaign, which drew in the previously marginalised housing schemes. In his research into the so-called “missing million” of Scots who either unregistered or choose not to vote, Willie Sullivan [3] points out that their reasons are not those they are commonly assumed to be:
One key point ... is that they are not apathetic about where they live, or about the desire for it to be better. Any suggestion that non-voters are uninterested and broadly disengaged beyond voting was not borne out by the research.
On the contrary, they had perfectly rational reasons for political disengagement: “Participants recognised that they have a choice in voting, but options arising through voting are set by others who are unlike them, and none of those options are felt to make much sense.”
Much of the credit for beginning the process of involving these Scots must go to the Radical Independence Movement (RIC). Starting as a conference in November 2012 attended by 800 people, it had grown by the following year’s event to 1,200 and it was from this point that it began to operate as an actual part of the campaign, rather than simply as a forum for discussion. Essentially a united front, involving members of the existing left parties (including the Scottish Greens) and the left-wing of the SNP, it helped initiate one of the most important aspects of the overall campaign – the voter registration drives in working-class communities. Two founder members have described part of the operation in RS21 [4]:
The mass canvass took place in over 40 localities. We are now reaching into all major settlements in Scotland. But because we recognised that the poorest, most densely populated communities must bear the most votes and the most ready support for a decisive political and social change, we canvassed these areas the hardest. RIC is also concerned with a scheme for voter registration and for the recording areas of greatest Yes support – for remobilisation closer to the vote. We recognised early that those voters who would buck the polling trend would be those voters who don’t talk to pollsters and hate politicians; those voters who have told our activists: “You are the only people to ever ask me what I think about politics.”
It would be wrong to credit RIC with all activities of this type – in the north and west of Edinburgh, for example, groups like Craigmillar Yes also conducted mass registration and canvassing drives, but it gave the campaign an initial push toward the left, not least by articulating what socialist demands might be achieved by independence. But initiative and creativity also emerged independently of any organised group and in the most unlikely places. Yes supporter Lesley Riddoch [5] gives the example of a woman from the village of Farr near Inverness who came to one of her meetings in Aberdeen. [Note to non-Scots: this involves a round trip of 225 miles.]
She went home and chatted to another mum as they watched their children at the playground. Neither had organised a political event before but they enlisted like-minded friends to produce hundreds of posters, laminate and nail them onto every road junction within a 10-mile radius of the village hall, and replace them up to four times to cope with rain and naysayers. On the night, the women organised a PA system, got badges, stickers and books, produced food and drink…and opened the night with a fabulous, local all-women band. Around 250 people packed into Farr’s tiny remote hall and the ensuing talk and discussion lasted almost four hours.
Even unionist opinion-makers in the London press [6] felt obliged to report the packed public meetings, the debates in pubs and on street corners, the animation of civic life. One comparison for the mood in in Scotland as Referendum Day drew near might be with General Election night on 2 May 1997. Kenyon Wright [7] recalled the atmosphere in Edinburgh after the New Labour victory:
The city seemed alive with new hope. The sun shone: birds sang in the flowering cherry trees in the gardens; above all every face seemed to wear a smile that conveyed a mixture of relief, surprise and joy. Strangers stopped to shake my hand, or give an ecstatic hug. Everything had changed. The long night was over. Scotland’s day had dawned at last.
That blissful dawn faded quickly enough, as it became clear that New Labour intended to maintain the neoliberal regime by other means, but my point here is a different one. The atmosphere of joy and recognition on 2 May 1997 is, from Wright’s description, clearly recognisable as same one which permeated Yes gatherings large and small in the final months of the campaign – but with this difference: where participation in the 1997 General Election was essentially passive, confined to the act of voting and then of celebrating the scale of the Tory defeat, the Yes campaign was an active process, marking the ballot paper merely the final moment in months of public meetings, canvassing, rallies and on-line discussion. This is why Yes Scotland needs to be seen as a social movement, not merely another political campaign. In Colin Barker‘s discussion [8] of “collective effervescence” (a term borrowed from Emile Durkheim) he describes patterns of behavioural change which many participants in the Yes campaign will recognise from their own experience:
Participants in collective action regularly report that they “discover” aspects of their selves, and their capacities, which they had not previously tested: speaking publicly, organising, taking initiatives which, before the event, they would not have imagined themselves doing. As a result, they felt “more alive”. These experiences, which might be termed “empowerment”, result from the necessity, imposed by the exigencies of collective action, of taking responsibility for new demands of speech and action which were, in their former pattern of existence, outside their everyday scope. What facilitates such experiences is the focusing of energy and attention on a new collective project, the concentrated “investment” of cognitive and emotional resources in pursuing a collective decision… New conjunctures, incidents and discoveries are liable to alter the appeal or resonance of various “frames” and “ideologies”. New possibilities and opportunities may disclose themselves, along with new measures of salience of commitments and social relations. Former patterns of obligation, loyalty and antagonism, may be recast. Previous cognitive, ethical and pragmatic assessments may be re-apprehended. The sequence of new incidents, actions and experiences provides actors with new materials against which to measure existing understandings, with which to confirm or refute arguments, and to assess competing arguments. Collective action, in its short-term and long-term results, provides “live” materials for altering the social and cultural context of meanings, for remodelling the comprehension of structures and totalities. What was formerly desirable may now seem irrelevant or insufficient, what was previously impossible now becomes an issue to be actively pursued.
The closest comparisons with the Yes campaign are therefore not to be found in Scottish history, but in contemporary Europe, as is suggested in this assessment by George Kerevan [9]:
The Scottish Labour leadership, abetted by the metropolitan media, wrongly tarred proponents of independence as tartan romantics – or even anti-English bigots. The reality is that, by the end, the Yes campaign had morphed into the beginnings of a genuine populist, anti-austerity movement like the ‘Indignant Citizens’ in Greece or the May 15 Movement in Spain. Put another way, it was class politics – not old-style nationalism – that fired the Yes campaign.
But now we must leave these scenes of mass political radicalisation – at least for the moment – and turn to the Dark Side.
*
Tomorrow – Part 3: Project Fear and the Ruling Class Panic
A substantially different version of these articles has appeared in New Left Review.
* * *
References
[1] David Denver, James Mitchell, Charles Pattie and Hugh Bochel, Scotland Decides: the Devolution Issue and the Scottish Referendum (London: Routledge, 2000), pp. 116–119.
[2] Paul Hutcheon, The Growth of the Yes Movement, The Sunday Herald (21 September 2014).
[3] Willie Sullivan, The Missing Scotland: Why over a Million Scots Choose Not to Vote and What it Means for Our Democracy (Edinburgh: Luath Books, 2014), pp. 19–20.
[4] Suki Sangha and David Jamieson, The Radical Independence Campaign, RS21 2 (Autumn 2014), p. 29.
[5] Lesley Riddoch, A Radial and Unexpected Shift Place in Scots has Taken Place ... Perhaps as Significant as the Big Vote Itself. People Power has Triumphed, The Sunday Herald (14 September 2014).
[6] See, for example, Jonathan Freedland, If Britain Loses Scotland it Will Feel Like an Amputation, The Guardian (5 September 2014).
[7] Kenyon Wright, The People Say Yes; the Making of Scotland’s Parliament (Glendaruel: Argyll Press, 1997), p. 263.
[8] Colin Barker, Empowerment and Resistance: “Collective Effervescence” and Other Accounts, in Transforming Politics: Power and Resistance, edited by Paul Bagguley and Jeff Hearn (Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 1999), pp. 25, 26.
[9] George Kerevan, Vote’s Biggest Loser is Scottish Labour, The Scotsman (20 September 2014).
 






In the third part of his analysis of Scottish politics after the referendum, Scottish historian and activist Neil Davidson looks at the No campaign.



Occasionally, writers have to resort to what might be called historically-informed speculation about the collective attitude of political actors. For the British ruling class in the referendum crisis, however, no speculation is necessary since its representatives have been admirably clear about their reasons for opposing Scottish independence. It is obviously not because secession would pose an immediate threat to the existence of capitalism. Indeed, withdrawal from the EU following an “in-out” referendum of the sort proposed by UKIP and supported by the Conservative right would actually involve far greater problems for British business. The real concerns are geopolitical, and were well expressed, six months before the referendum, by a Labour figure: George Robertson.




Photo: Kyoshi Masamune, flickr



Robertson has a career path characteristic of certain kind of reformist politician. A Scottish MP from 1978, opposition defence spokesperson from 1992, Minister for Defence in the Labour Government from 1997 and Secretary General of NATO from 1999, he was finally rewarded for his services to Western imperialism with a seat in the House of Lords in 2004: arise, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen. In a hysterical speech to the Brookings Institution in Washington on 7 April, Robertson asked who would cheer in the event of a Yes vote:
Not the nearly half of the Scottish population who might oppose separation. Not the English who would find themselves in a country that is minus a third of its landmass, without 10 percent of its GNP, and losing five million of its population. And this would be for them a much diminished country whose global position would be open to question.
Leave aside the implication that Scotland belongs to England – the key words here are “global position”:
The loudest cheers for the breakup of Britain would come from our adversaries and from our enemies. For the second military power in the West to shatter this year would be cataclysmic in geopolitical terms.
The only beneficiaries, Robertson [1] intoned, would be “the forces of darkness”, by which he appeared to include the national movements in Catalonia, the Basque country and Flanders.
These are not simply the twilight ravings of a Labour buffoon. The SNP is committed removing nuclear weapons from Scotland and there are virtually no other deep water bases on the UK coastline where the submarines which carry them can be docked. To construct an alternative would involve massive expenditure – the Ministry of Defence calculated the potential cost of relocating Trident from the Clyde to the south of England, at £35 billion – and will provoke resistance from the populations now expected to live with next to them. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office [2] regularly expressed fears that the UK might be removed as one of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council – with the power of veto which this position confers – as the result of an Argentinean conspiracy backed by other Latin American states and India, which would be well-placed to inherit the position of its former colonial master. Serious organs of ruling class opinion made similar judgements in the final weeks of the campaign. “Unionists elsewhere in the UK should admit more than a modicum of self-interest”, wrote Phillip Stephens [3] in the Financial Times: “The loss of Scotland would diminish Britain in almost every dimension one can think of.” The Economist
[4] agreed:
The rump of Britain would be diminished in every international forum: why should anyone heed a country whose own people shun it? Since Britain broadly stands for free trade and the maintenance of international order, this would be bad for the world.
In other words, Scottish secession would at the very least make it more difficult Britain to play its current role in “the international order”, if only by reducing its practical importance for the USA.
Finally, in this connection, the British ruling class were also aware that an immediate consequence of a vote for Scottish independence would be to place a question mark over the existential viability of Northern Ireland, since the Union has always been with Britain, not England, as Ulster Unionists of all varieties were perfectly well aware. This is not because Sinn Féin and the SDLP are particularly enthusiastic for Scottish independence: “While the unionist parties have repeatedly called for an independent Scotland to be rejected, the nationalist parties have remained quiet despite their backing for independence”, noted the Belfast Telegraph: “Both Sinn Féin and the SDLP have over the last two years taken an effective vow of silence on the issue – even though they continue to campaign for a united Ireland.” The article then quotes Sinn Féin’s Fermanagh and South Tyrone MLA Phil Flanagan [5] expressing general support for Scottish self-determination, before adding:
But it is not for us to lecture the people of Scotland on how they should vote. It is not for anyone to cross the Irish Sea and tell the people of Scotland what their own decision should be; we are all the better if we leave this in their hands.
These comments express more than political discretion, as James Maxwell [6] points out:
Despite [Sinn Féin] being the largest nationalist party at the Stormont Assembly for nearly a decade and steadily increasing its share of the vote at Irish parliamentary elections, support for a 32-county Ireland remains remarkably low. The most recent Northern Ireland Life and Times Survey, an authoritative account of political attitudes in the north, shows that 73 per cent of the Ulster electorate as a whole wants to remain part of the UK, with 52 per cent of Catholic voters content to maintain the union with Britain. (The figure for Protestants is 96 per cent.) A number of factors have eroded republican sentiment in recent years: economic crisis and austerity in the south, the growing indifference of the Dublin political class to the all-Ireland project, the emergence of a northern Catholic middle-class, much of which is employed in a public sector widely assumed to be dependent on British state subsidies.
Sinn Féin have established themselves in a governing-party niche from which – quite like the SNP in this respect – they pursue a social neoliberal agenda (which has also entrenched religious-“ethnic” divisions) in which the former left republicanism of at least some of the leadership is now largely rhetorical. Scottish independence would destabilise the situation in ways that no-one could foresee, thus threatening the Good Friday settlement. Nevertheless, it is difficult to see how they could avoid calling for a referendum on unification, however unwillingly, without losing significant levels of support, even though it would not be in conditions or to a timetable of their choosing. And so potentially the rump of the British state could be reduced still further.
These geopolitical considerations did not, of course, feature strongly in the arguments of Better Together. As the Scottish historian Colin Kidd [7] correctly noted: “The welfare state apart, Britishness inspires acquiescence rather than vocal commitment among ‘No’ supporters. Anxiety predominates.” Kidd shared these anxieties: “[Salmond] is taking major risks – on EU membership, cross-border pensions schemes, the currency, and an economy geared for centuries to an integrated British market.” It was these issues on which the No campaign [8] focussed, Darling even letting slip that the name which most aptly summarised the objectives of Better Together was “Project Fear”, the essence of which was to terrorise the population with threats to jobs, pensions and services.
On 13 February 2014 Conservative Chancellor George Osborne came to Edinburgh to announce that all three Unionist parties agreed Scotland would not be allowed to join a currency union with Rest of the UK (RUK) in the event of a Yes vote. Salmond was widely mocked for his unwillingness, in the first of his televised debates with Darling on 5 August, to say what Plan B for the currency would involve if RUK refused to agree to a currency union. In fact, as he pointed out subsequently, there were another three options – using the pound as a floating currency, adopting the Euro or establishing a Scottish currency – but his core position was that refusal would be irrational and self-defeating for RUK. That may well have been the case, although faced with a challenge from the right by UKIP it is unwise to rely on the capitalist rationality of the Tories, otherwise we would not now be looking at a referendum on EU membership and departure from the European Court of Human Rights; but from the perspective of the socialist left, the problem with Salmond’s position was precisely that RUK would have agreed to a currency union. A nominally independent Scotland would have remained under the tutelage of the Bank of England, which would have underwritten Scottish banks and financial institutions, and the Treasury, which would have underwritten Scotland’s historical debt and issued any new debt. As their price, the Bank of England-Treasury nexus would have require a fiscal compact setting a limit on the size of Scotland’s structural deficit relative to a fixed percentage of GDP. If either the structural deficit or the ratio of debt to GDP were above that fixed percentage at the point when the currency union was established, then the Scottish government would be required to implement a regime of cuts to reduce them to the agreed levels: failure to do so would trigger the end of the end of the currency union. This was a recipe for permanent subjection to the neoliberal regime.
The arguments of No supporters therefore oscillated between two claims. One involved the SNP deliberately imposing neoliberal policies as a matter of choice, the key evidence for this being the Salmond’s aim of cutting corporation tax by 3%. This was indeed an odious policy and one opposed by Yes campaigners outside the SNP, but it was scarcely convincing coming from supporters of a Labour Party that had actually cut corporation tax by 5%: the Scottish Labour manifesto in 2001 [9] even boasted that the New Labour government had “lowered corporation tax rates to their ever lowest level”. The other was that the SNP might wish to deliver reforms, but that would be helpless in the face of international capital. “The reality is that the left in and labour movement in Scotland, decimated by decades of deindustrialisation and defeats, are currently too weak to shape a new Scottish state”, wrote Seumas Milne [10]: “Instead the SNP and its business friends would be likely to do that – a neoliberal world where small states are at the mercy of corporate power without an exceptionally determined political leadership.” Ben Jackson [11] was similarly depressed:
If left-nationalists aspire to something more radical than a social-democratic Labour government, then they are of course correct to suppose that no such agenda will be forthcoming from any British government in the foreseeable future. But they are wrong to if they think that such an agenda will emerge in an independent Scotland. There is insufficient popular support in Scotland for such radical policies, just as there is insufficient popular support for it elsewhere in the United Kingdom.
The nature of the Yes campaign itself refutes these claims. What was perhaps most dispiriting about the arguments for No was the utter feeling of helplessness and despair which they engendered. As we have seen, the movement for Yes was occasionally referred to as an example of anti-politics, but this is actually more true of the No side, in the sense that it did not argue on political grounds at all, but simply pretended that inescapable economic facts meant that the choice to secede was irrational and self-destructive. “Do you honestly think that a UK company is going to situate in a more socialist Scotland when the Tory government had created the perfect low tax, low regulation, low wage capitalist environment?” Thus George Galloway [12], the Respect MP, on his speaking tour against independence; but consider the utterly defeatist implications of his statement: if financial markets and capitalist investment strategies would prevent an independent Scotland moving leftwards, they would also do the same to the UK. Socialism in a single country, the UK no less than Scotland, is certainly impossible, but these arguments – if taken seriously rather than as a stick with which to beat the Yes campaign – would mean there was no point in even beginning to initiate radical change of any sort. This is to capitulate to bourgeois political economy; there is no understanding of how a Yes vote, achieved on the basis of a mass left-wing insurgency would immediately change the balance of forces and open up a new field of possibilities.
 
The moment of crisis
Complacent and assured of victory for the majority of the campaign, the British ruling class were seized by sudden panic as it entered the penultimate week. A YouGov poll published in the Sunday Times on 7 September put Yes in the lead for the first time with 51%. The reaction was well captured by a headline in the Financial Times
[13]: “Ruling elite aghast as union wobbles”. This is sometimes treated as a “rogue” poll, but it was not quite as isolated as is sometimes represented. Two days later the Guardian
[14] reported: ‘The [new] poll by TNS found that support for independence has jumped by six points in the last month, putting the yes vote at 38% and the no vote at 39%, wiping out a 12-point lead for the pro-UK campaign led by former chancellor Alistair Darling”. According to Ashcroft’s data, only 48% of Yes voters had made their minds up before the final month of campaigning and it is at least conceivable that this was reflected in YouGov’s findings.
What happened next was instructive about how the British ruling class operates. Downing Street held a reception for business leaders [15]: “‘He left us in no doubt we should speak out’, said one chief executive who attended.” Campaign leaders from the Unionist parties made calls: “‘Those phone calls can be very persuasive’, said one figure familiar with the operation.” And, by Thursday 11 September, businesses were competing to warn of the dangers of Scottish independence. First the oil companies Shell and BP claimed that jobs were at risk in Aberdeen and Shetland; then a stream of banks and financial institutions including the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), Lloyds Banking Group, Standard Life and Tesco Bank announced contingency plans for the departure of their headquarters from Edinburgh to London; finally Asda, John Lewis, and Marks and Spencer and threatened the price rises that would follow. Many of these companies wrote to individual staff members highlighting the threat to their continued employment in the event of independence – a none-too-subtle hint about how they were expected to behave in the polling booth and a genuine example of intimidation, although it was of course not reported in that context. The example of the RBS is particularly interesting in relation to the unity of state and capital in this operation. On the evening of Wednesday, while the RBS Board were discussing whether to announce to its shareholders a plan to move its registered office to London, officials at the Treasury already were emailing the BBC about the decision, forty-five minutes before it had actually been made, although the BBC reported it immediately [16] as established fact.
These manoeuvres were in most respects simply an amplification of existing components of Project Fear, but now voiced by representatives of capital themselves. The panic of 6 September however also resulted in a new theme being introduced into the rhetoric of Better Together. The possibility of a Yes victory arose because of shifts in attitude among two groups: former non-voters who were registering in order to vote Yes, and Labour voters who were disregarding their instructions to vote No. Whether these shifts would have been enough to actually deliver victory it is impossible to say; it may have been that the distance which the campaign had to make up was simply too great. Nevertheless, the British ruling class genuinely believed that it was possible and the burden of responsibility which weighed on the Scottish Labour Party to save the Union was therefore immense. The theme with which it sought to do so was not exactly Hope – which is always a dangerous emotion to arouse if your intention is ultimately to bury it beneath new waves of austerity – but Vaguely Uplifting if Unspecific Sentiments about Our Shared Past, Present and Future. One figure was absolutely central to this endeavour: Gordon Brown.
Immediately prior to the referendum, John Curtice [17] of Strathclyde University told the Economist: “The truth is that David Cameron is reliant on Gordon Brown to save his skin.” He certainly did his best. During a speech at a Labour rally in Maryhill on the eve of the poll Brown strutted and fretted his hour upon the stage [18], impressing metropolitan journalists – apparently unfamiliar with the rhetorical techniques deployed by any half-way competent speaker at a trade union conference or left-wing meeting – with his “passion”: “And what we’ve built together with solidarity and sharing, let no narrow nationalism split asunder.” Nationalisms are always “narrow”, unless the subject is British nationalism, which now apparently encompasses the dreams and wishes of the entire global population, since at one point Brown claimed that, “through our membership of the UK” “we” would be able to fight for “our dream… our demand”: “A world not of a separate state, but a world of social justice people can believe in.” As George Monbiot [19] justly remarked:
There’s another New Labour weasel word to add to its lexicon (other examples include reform, which now means privatisation; and partnership, which means selling out to big business). Once solidarity meant making common cause with the exploited, the underpaid, the excluded. Now, to these cyborgs in suits, it means keeping faith with the banks, the corporate press, cuts, a tollbooth economy and market fundamentalism.
The overblown and barely coherent verbiage with which Brown treated his audience was mainly for internal Labour consumption, to stiffen the sinews and summon up the blood of the waverers, but he had other admirers. Tory intellectual Allan Massie called Brown’s speech “the rhetorical highpoint of the debate. It gave renewed heart to Unionists of all parties”. Tory MSP Murdo Fraser [20] spoke of how there had been “an urgent need for the No campaign to stop the this leakage of Labour support and who better to address this but Gordon Brown”, whose “late intervention and his powerful case for keeping the UK together” was, according to Fraser, “undoubtedly very significant in meaning Labour supporters fell behind the No vote”.
Anyone inclined to give Brown the benefit of the doubt should contrast his marked reluctance to show solidarity with any actual workers in struggle with his eagerness to please the City of London. In his last Mansion House speech prior to becoming Prime Minister, in June 2007, Brown [21] made his tenth and final obeisance to the assembled Masters of the Universe (London Branch):
Brown congratulated himself for presiding over a light-touch system of regulation and asked them to applaud him for “resisting pressure” for a crackdown. Moving to his peroration, he smothered them with more unction. “Britain needs more of vigour, ingenuity and inspiration that you already demonstrate”. He extolled the City for inventing “the most modern instruments of finance” – the very instruments that would soon afterwards bring the entire Western banking system to the edge of destruction.
Brown often invokes his father, a Church of Scotland minister. At St Bryce’s Kirk in Kirkcaldy [22], where John Ebenezer Brown usedto preach, there is now a food bank: welcome to the Britain we havebuilt together with solidarity and sharing.
Brown’s most important intervention in relation to theoutcome was actually made on 8 September when he – a backbenchOpposition MP – announced a fast-track timetable for furtherdevolution, beginning on 19 September, in the event of a No vote. Indoing this he was merely consolidating the desperate promises made byall three of the Unionist party leaders after the YouGov pollshowing Yes in the lead. And, sure enough, on 16 September, Cameron,Clegg and Miliband all appeared on the front of the Labour’sloyal Scottish tabloid, the Daily Record, their signaturesadorning a mock-vellum parchment headed “The Vow”,confirming that the Scottish Parliament would indeed be grantedfurther powers if only the Scots would consent to stay within theUnion. It is worth pausing for a moment to consider the meaning ofthis episode. Cameron, remember, had been so anxious to exclude athird option of further devolution from the ballot paper that he gaveSalmond everything else he demanded in order to ensure this outcome.Now, facing the unthinkable, he and the other Unionists hadeffectively changed the nature of the question within a fortnight ofthe ballot taking place. From being a choice between the status quoand independence it had effectively become a choice between devo maxand independence, even though tens of thousands had already usedtheir postal vote, unaware that the terms of the referendum hadshifted.
On the basis of Ashcroft’s polling, the majority of Novoters (72%) had already decided on their position before the finalmonth of campaigning and had done so onthe basis of concerns [23] about the pound (57%), pensions (37%), the NHS (36%) and defence and security (29%). What the Vow seems to have done was shift the No vote at the margins of the undecided and give some existing No voters, particularly in the Labour Party, a justification for voting No that was not simply based on fear. I noted earlier that, when the referendum was first announced, the majority position was for devo max. What happened in the course of the campaign was that, having no way of expressing their position in the ballot, voters in the devo max camp polarised, with the majority opting for independence as being closer to their desired outcome. The late reintroduction of devo max as the actual alternative to independence was enough to sway a sufficient number of voters into retreating from their recent conversion. The very success of the Yes campaign had pushed the political leadership of the British state into side-lining Better Together and offering their only remaining inducement: constitutional change short of independence. It is, however, almost certain that the Unionist parties would have offered this anyway.
On 11 September sixty English and Welsh Labour MPs arrived at Glasgow Central Station on the so-called “Love Train” or “Save the Union Express”. They were met, not only by their Scottish colleagues, but by Yes supporter Matt Lygate, who accompanied them along Buchanan Street on a rickshaw with a sound system playing The Imperial March from Star Wars and declaiming through a loudhailer: “Our imperial masters have arrived!” and “People of Glasgow! Welcome your imperial masters!” One notably humourless response [24] to this comedic highpoint of the campaign complained: “The implication is that Scotland, like Kenya or India, is just another colony, at last seeking its rightful independence.” In fact, most Yes supporters are perfectly aware that Scotland is not a colonised or oppressed nation. On the contrary, one of the main socialist reasons for independence is precisely because, as part of the UK, Scotland is itself an oppressor and one, in relation to its size and population, with a disproportionately important role [25] in both the British Empire and in the contemporary nuclear strategy of US imperialism. The point was more about Labour’s attitude towards its supporters; the assumption that they could simply be summoned to vote in obedience with the leadership’s wishes, than with Scotland’s position in the world order. But there is a sense in which to describe Labour as “imperial masters” is wrong, because it is of course not the master but the ever-eager servant of Empire. What better way for Labour to celebrate the centenary of the Social Democracy’s great betrayal of August 1914, than with another affirmation that its primary loyalty lies, not with the working class, but with maintaining the territorial integrity of the British state?
*
Tomorrow – Part 4: Understanding the Result
A substantially different version of these articles has appeared in New Left Review.
* * *
References
[1] Fred Dews, Lord George Robertson: “Forces of Darkness Would Love Scottish Split from United Kingdom”, Brookings Now.
[2] See, for example, Simon Johnson, Britain’s Enemies Will “Exploit Scottish Independence to Cut UK Power”, The Telegraph (17 October 2012).
[3] Stephens, The World is Saying No to Scottish Separation.
[4] UK RIP?, The Economist (13 September 2014).
[5] Noel McAdam, Sinn Fein Sympathy for Scottish Yes Vote, but It Won’t Take Sides, Belfast Telegraph (2 September 2014).
[6] James Maxwell, Scottish Independence: the View from Belfast, 2 July 2012.
[7] Colin Kidd, Reflections on the Independence Referendum, London Review of Books (11 September 2014), p. 14. The way in which the Kidd personalises the Yes argument as an expression of Salmond’s will is typical of No supporters. ‘Meanwhile, the English, even those who are inclined to support the Union, are increasingly wondering if they want to tolerate much more of this [i.e. Salmond’s behaviour]’, harrumphed Ed Smith: ‘Salmond may wink at the gallery and get a laugh – but would you trust his judgement in a crisis?’, New Statesman (5–11 September 2014), p. 52.
[8] Tom Gordon, One Year on: Will Better Together Change Their Tactics?, The Sunday Herald (23 June 2013).
[9] The Labour Party in Scotland, Ambition for Scotland (Glasgow: Scottish Labour Party, 2001), p. 11.
[10] Seamus Milne, Salmond’s Scotland won’t be an Escape from Britain, The Guardian (11 September 2014). See also Aditya Chakraborty, A Go-Alone Scottish Economy Would be Viable but Would it be Any Better?, The Guardian (16 September 2014). Similar arguments were made by one of the few Marxist political economists to address the issue. See Michael Roberts, Scotland: Yes or No?.
[11] Ben Jackson, The Break-up of Britain: the Left and Scottish Nationalism, Renewal, vol. 22, nos. 1/2 (2014), pp. 20–21.
[12] George Galloway, ‘Just Say Naw ...’: an Evening with George Galloway (Glasgow: Respect, 2014), [3].
[13] Tim Shipman and Jason Allardyce, Yes Leads in Scots Poll Shock, The Sunday Times (7 September 2014); Sarah Neville and Clive Cookson, Ruling Elite Aghast as Union Wobbles, Financial Times (12 September 2014).
[14] Severin Carrell, Scottish Independence: TNS Poll finds Single Point Separates Yes and No, The Guardian (8 September 2014).
[15] Kiran Stacey, George Parker, Mure Dickie and Beth Rigby, Scottish Referendum: How Complacency Nearly Lost a United Kingdom, Financial Times (19 September 2014).
[16] Judith Duffy, An Explosive Breach of the Rules: Salmond Blasts Treasury as its BBC Email is Exposed, The Sunday Herald (14 September 2014).
[17] Rise of the Ayes, The Economist (13 September 2014), p. 30.
[18] Magnus Gardham, Brown’s Plea: Vote No for the Sake of Our Children, The Guardian (18 September 2014); Nicholas Watt, A Scottish Plea and Scottish Play as Brown takes to Stage, The Herald (18 September 2014).
[19] George Monbiot, A Yes Vote in Scotland would Unleash the Most Dangerous Thing of All – Hope, The Guardian (9 September 2014).
[20] Allan Massie, In Truth, the SNP were Lamentable; Andrew Whitaker, Labour’s Big Beasts “Hauled No Camp Back from Brink”; both in The Scotsman (20 September 2014).
[21] Andrew Rawnsley, The End of the Party: the Rise and Fall of New Labour (London: Allen Lane, 2010), p. 476.
[22] Tim Adams, “It Wasn’t a Raucous Crowd at Gretna Green. Then Again, Silent Majorities Rarely Are”, The Observer (21 September 2014).
[23] Comparable figures for Yes voters were: disaffection with Westminster politics (74%), the NHS (54%), tax and public spending (33%) and oil (20%).
[24] Sam Wetherell,Exit Stage Right: the Case Against Scottish Independence, Jacobin.
[25] Neil Davidson, The Origins of Scottish Nationhood (London: Pluto Press, 2000), pp. 90–127.
 






In the fourth part of his analysis of Scottish politics after the referendum, Scottish historian and activist Neil Davidsonlooks at the detail of the referendum results.



Participation and outcome
By the time the electoral roll closed on 2 September 2014, 97% (4,283,392) of the Scottish population had registered to vote – 330,000 for the first time, including 109,000 of the 16- and 17-year-olds specially enfranchised for the occasion. This was the highest level of voter registration in Scottish or British history since the introduction of universal suffrage, with 118,000 people registering in August alone.




Photo: Dauvit Alexander, flickr



By the time the ballot closed at 10.00 p.m. on 18 September, 84.6% (3,619,915) had actually voted, compared with 63.8% in the 2010 British General Election and 50.4% in the 2011 Scottish Parliamentary election. The most recent General Election with comparable levels of Scottish voter participation to 2014 was 1950, the first to follow the Second World War and the establishment of the Welfare State, when 83.9% of those registered voted. But turnout in 2014 was also significantly up from the 60.4% who voted in the 1997 referendum what led to the establishment of the Scottish Parliament. Shortly after that event, Eric Hobsbawm [1] said:
We would have thought it impossible, twenty years ago, that only 60 per cent of the citizens would vote in the first election for a Scottish parliament in three hundred years, an election supposed to realise the historical ambition of the people of that country.
He went on the contrast the behaviour of the Scots unfavourably with that of black South Africans in 1994, before drawing this general conclusion:
Elections in the West are increasingly events managed by minorities, which do not involve majorities, at the cost of the integrity of the political process.
In 2014, Salmond could also draw on the South African comparison, but now to quite different effect. [2]
Last Monday ... I saw people queuing up – and it was not a short queue, [it was] a long queue – in Dundee to register to vote, almost reminiscent of the scenes in South Africa when some of a certain age remember 20 years or so ago people queued to vote in the first free elections.
Salmond was not, of course, comparing the Scots with the victims of Apartheid. This most astute of contemporary bourgeois politicians can legitimately be accused many things, but not of being an imbecile; he was simply drawing attention to the currently quite uncharacteristic popular enthusiasm being displayed for the political process. Whatever else might be said about the outcome of the referendum, no-one could claim that it was determined by a minority in conditions of generalised apathy.
Yet the nature of the outcome cannot be evaded. For, after these extraordinary levels of voter registration and only marginally less impressive levels of voter turnout, the Scots ultimately opted against establishing their own state by 55.3% (2,001,926) to 44.7% (1,617,989). Only 4 regions out of 32 voted Yes although, as we shall see, their location and composition is highly significant. Other than the number of votes for each side, and their breakdown to regional and constituency levels, what else do we know about the result? Here a certain amount of impressionism is unavoidable. Two opinion polls were carried out during and immediately after the referendum: one was by the polling organisation of Conservative peer Michael Ashcroft, the other by YouGov which accurately predicted the result [3]
Beyond these, I have had to rely on a combination of personal participant observation, information from others involved in the campaign and media reports. In spite of the difficulties, a number of tendencies are relatively clear.

Age: over-45s were most likely to oppose independence, particularly the over-65s, among who between two thirds and three quarter voted No; young voters (16-24) were almost evenly split and, while Ashcroft’s claim that 71% of the newly enfranchised 16 and 17-year-olds voted Yes are unsustainable because of the smallness of his sample, it is nevertheless clear that they did not form the anti-independence bloc that initially appeared possible. The only age cohort with an unambiguous majority for independence was 25–39-year olds, although (since the polls measure overlapping age-ranges) this may also be true of 40–54-year olds.
Gender and ethnicity: between 3% and 9% more women voted No than men, though that may partly reflect female predominance in the older age groups and the extent of female opposition to independence in any case reduced over the course of the campaign. Based on pre-referendum polling, as many as two thirds of Scots of Asian origin may have voted Yes – a fact of some significance in Glasgow where this group has long been regarded by Labour as voting fodder for the Sarwar dynasty. [4]
Class: Data compiled by John Mellon in June 2014 shows the level of support for independence to be highest among supervisors, small business owners and routine workers (e.g. assembly line workers, waiters and cleaners), with intermediate workers (e.g. secretaries and computer operators) and senior managers showing the lowest support [5] for independence.

As this suggests, the Scottish bourgeoisie was overwhelmingly against independence. With a handful of exceptions, notably Brian Souter of Stagecoach and Jim McColl of Clyde Blowers Capital, large-scale capital was committed to the Union: Yes-supporting businesses tended to be small- or medium-sized concerns on the borderline with the petty bourgeoisie proper, relying on local markets and suppliers. Yes-supporting employers, mostly grouped in Business for Scotland [BfS], were criticised [6] in the Unionist press precisely because of their irrelevance.
Close examination of Business for Scotland’s declared member list shows that the group has only a tiny handful of members who employ significant numbers of Scots, and literally none with a substantial cross-border trade. In other words, it could scarcely be less representative of the industries that provide the majority of Scotland’s private-sector jobs and which, according to the No campaign, are at risk from a Yes vote ... The Yes side’s 200, not all of whom are declared members of BfS, include just three identified as active directors of public limited companies. The vast majority are small businesspeople such as guesthouse and shopkeepers, or sole traders such as consultants, designers and accountants.
The contrast between them and the businesses supporting No – including Keith Cochrane of Weir Group, James Lithgow of Lithgow’s or Ian Wood of Wood Group – could not be more stark. [7]
The middle classes were also largely united in voting No, with their bohemian and cultural wings the main source of dissent. The working class – still the overwhelming majority of the Scottish population – was, however, deeply divided: support for Yes came most strongly from the poorest and most precarious communities, often in the peripheral housing schemes – indeed, it was from this group that most of the new voters emerged; support for No tended to be based among more securely employed and organised sections of the class, as is suggested by personal testimony [8] from one Yes campaigner in Edinburgh on the day of the referendum:
I visited two areas to get the Yes vote out. The first one was Dryden Gardens [in Leith] which was made up of mainly well-paid workers and pensioners living in terraced houses. On the knocker half of them had changed their vote [to No] or were not prepared to share their intentions with me. I remember being thoroughly depressed by the experience. Following this, I walked round the corner to some Housing Association flats that were more blue-collar with a large number of migrant families. Every Yes voter I spoke to had held firm and had already voted or were waiting on family to go and vote together. It was very uplifting.
It is important to keep in mind, however, that these were tendencies, not an absolute division; but Edinburgh, where the vote was 61.10% (194,638) for No, and 38.90% (123,927) for Yes, was illustrative of these class trends. Of all major cities in the UK, the Scottish capital has both the lowest percentage of total working age residents claiming Jobseeker’s Allowance and, outside of London, the highest average gross annual earnings per resident. It has both a disproportionately large middle class and a working class employed in the sectors supposedly threatened by independence, including higher education (the University of Edinburgh is the city’s third biggest employer) and finance (RBS, Lloyds and Standard Life are respectively the fourth, fifth and sixth biggest employers).
One striking feature of the working-class Yes vote was that it was concentrated in what were formerly the great heartlands of Labour support. In Dundee and Glasgow the Yes vote was respectively 57.35% (53,629) and 53.49% (194,779), with similar results recorded in North Lanarkshire and West Dunbartonshire; Inverclyde came within 87 votes of a Yes majority. These five regions alone accounted for over a quarter of the Yes votes. Partly because of these shifts in the Labour heartlands, the final result for the Yes side was better than had seemed possible when the campaign began in 2012.
Of the 51 polls conducted between 1986 and 2012, 39 showed support between 30 and 39%, only 3 showed it above 40%, while 9 showed it below 30%, but crucially, the majority of the latter were conducted after the establishment of the Scottish Parliament in 1999 – in other words, the lowest polling was chronologically nearest [9] to the decision to hold the referendum.
As recently as May 2013 two pollsters associated with Ipsos Mori claimed that, with two thirds of voters intending to vote No, the outcome was not in doubt. [10] The result was therefore a great achievement for the Yes campaign, but it is also important, if only for future reference, to record the greatest omission from its strategy.
If the strengths of the Yes campaign were breadth and diversity, one key weakness was a complete absence of focus on skilled and organised workers at their actual workplaces, although this is a common problem among European social movements which emerged since 2011. Of the trade unions, only ASLEF, the CWU, Community, the remnants of the NUM and USDAW openly supported a No vote. Similarly, only the Scottish areas of the RMT and the Prison Officer’s Association, and the habitually rebellious Edinburgh, Stirling, Fife and Falkirk branch of the CWU (the second-biggest in Scotland) supported a Yes vote. Some, notably the PCS, followed the lead of the Scottish TUC and tried to present both sides of the argument for their members to decide. It was clear, however, that even when unions could not formally endorse a No vote, the attitude of many full-time officials and lower levels of the bureaucracy were hostile to Yes.
The case of Unite is particularly interesting. Support for No was impossible, if only because more of the union’s members voted for the SNP than Labour in the Scottish Parliamentary elections in 2011 (not in itself necessarily a vote for independence, of course); but in local branches the picture was different. It was only to be expected that BAE Systems Director Ian King would write to workers at the Govan shipyard warning of the dangers posed by independence to their jobs and pensions; but in aerospace and shipbuilding more widely, senior Unite representatives actively courted Tory ministers and Labour No MPs for meetings to ‘defend the defence industry’. In some workplaces CEO’s and managers organised ’employee briefings’, which were in effect mass meetings to agitate for a No vote in which the union organisation was effectively on the same side as the employer. It is not possible to assess how widespread or successful these ‘partnerships’ of employer and union actually were, but it certainly added to the overall momentum of Project Fear.
Against this the Yes campaign had no answer. Unorganised or precarious workers could be reached in their communities; but where workers were faced with an alliance of employers and unions arguing for No, as was the case in defence-related industries, then a response was required to challenge these position on the shop floor, even if this had to be mounted from outside. The failure to reach, let alone convince, the organised sections of the working class at least contributed towards the victory of the No camp.
*
Tomorrow – Part 5: What Next?
A substantially different version of these articles has appeared in New Left Review.
* * *
References
[1] Eric J. Hobsbawm in conversation with Antonio Polito, The New Century (London: Abacus, 2000), 115. For a detailed discussion of ‘majority disengagement’, see Peter Mair, Ruling in the Void: the Hollowing of Western Democracy (London: Verso, 2013), pp. 17–44
[2] Ewen MacAskill, Buoyant Salmond Compares Vote to South Africa’s Freedom Election, The Guardian (10 September 2014).
[3] Lord Ashcroft Polls, Scotland Voted; YouGov, Final Prediction.
[4] Jessica Elgot, Why Are So Many Scots From Ethnic Minorities Voting Yes?, The Huffington Post (14 June 2014).
[5] John Mellon, Class Divisions and the Scottish Referendum.
[6] Andrew Gilligan, Small Firms Making Big Claims for Scottish Independence, The Telegraph (31 August 2014).
[7] It is also worth noting that Labour-supporting commentators fawned over leading capitalists, particularly Wood, who criticised the Yes campaign. See, for a particularly egregious example of this type of grovelling, see Catherine McLeod, There is Only One Real Team Scotland, The Herald (10 September 2014).
[8] Personal communication (9 October 2014).
[9] Mark Diffley and Christopher McLean, 35 Years of Scottish Attitudes towards Independence, The Times (15 March 2012).
[10] Robert Worcester and Mark Diffley, Why it Hard to See Much Hope for Salmond and His Political Dream, The Times (9 May 2013).
 






Historian and socialist activist Neil Davidson‘s recent
Radical Philosophy article Yes: a non-nationalist argument for Scottish independence has prompted questions about how his position on this question developed. He responded to the SSP’s Eddie Truman. An edited version of the reply appears below (the “questions” are interpolated to break up the text). Download Neil’s Radical Philosophy article as a PDF.



*
Eddie: Neil’s journey from militant hostility to Scottish independence to a supporter has been quite remarkable but I’ve never seen any explanation of how he came to make it, what was it that so fundamentally changed his mind. Here’s a recording of a debate between Neil and Alan McCombes in 2003 (Neil starts at 25:57).
Neil: People occasionally ask me about my supposed change of position on Scottish independence, so I’ll take the opportunity of Eddie’s comments to say what was involved.
The SWP actually adopted a position of supporting independence in the event of a referendum as far back as 1987, at Chris Bambery’s prompting. I think it’s fair to say, however, that this was treated by most Scottish comrades (not least in Glasgow) as a position which might, regrettably, have to be pursued in certain circumstances, rather than something to be actively advocated as part of a strategy for Scotland.
This was still our position when we joined the SSP as a Platform in the early 2000s. I tended to be put up to debate with those comrades in the SSP who were, shall we say, more enthusiastic about independence than the SW Platform – mainly because I’d written virtually all of our historical work on Scotland and much of the contemporary analysis too.
Why was my hostility so “militant”? I was genuinely concerned with some of the arguments used to support independence in the SSP, and on the wider left, since in many cases they seemed to involve a capitulation to left nationalism.
Q: Can you give examples of arguments you found problematic?
Many of the arguments were based on what I regarded as extremely dubious historical claims: that the Scottish nation had existed since the time of Wallace or – in extreme cases, Calgucus; that Scotland had been and still was oppressed within the UK in the technical Marxist sense; that Scots had been and still were more radical, democratic or socialist than the English.
I regarded all this, and still do, as a load of utter tripe. The attempts to minimise Scottish participation in the British Empire and to transform every political struggle from the Jacobite Risings to the Poll Tax as “national” in character regardless of its class basis are no basis for understanding how Scottish society and politics developed.
But more troubling were some of the contemporary positions adopted by some independentistas (and I’m not accusing Eddie of this) – above all the lack of interest in actual struggles which linked Scottish workers with others in the UK.
There was a barely concealed contempt for Scottish workers who voted for Unionist parties (“the Brits”), even though they were in the majority. There was a reformist assumption that independence itself would deliver a change for the better in working class conditions.
The main reason for supporting independence was the anti-imperialist one. This remained my emphasis down to 2007, and still shaped the ISJ article I wrote in that year.
Q: What shifted your position post 2007?
Three things happened that made me begin to emphasise independence as a strategy which the SWP should more actively pursue, rather than passively contemplate as an unlikely future scenario. One was the simple fact of an SNP government in Edinburgh – particularly once the party gained a majority in 2011.
It was obvious to me that once this had happened, “the actuality of the referendum” could not be long delayed. This meant independence was no longer simply an abstract possibility, but a reality in which our formal position would have to be put into practice.
The second was the way in which, over the decade, British politics became dominated by the imperialist wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, together with the attendant Islamophobia and increasingly right wing conceptions of Britishness.
(On reflection, I think I was too slow in working through what the practical implications of removing nuclear weapons from Scotland would mean – not just in the damage to NATO’s geopolitical strategy, but in the removal of the rest of the UK from the UN security council etc.)
The third, and I think my most original reason, derived from my work on neoliberalism, particularly in the 2010 book I coedited, Neoliberal Scotland. Devolution is now a neoliberal strategy of delegation (“of the axe”), and therefore independence offered at least the possibility of greater control over the state against austerity (“without illusions”).
I still think independence is a tactical issue, rather than one of principle, but I can’t see any circumstances in the short-to-medium term in which it would not be one which socialist should support. And once achieved, of course, the defence of Scottish independence (of a majority Yes vote) would of course become a matter of principle.
 






The ‘Yes’ campaign comprises many different groups beyond the Scottish National Party (SNP). Neil Davidson is a lecturer in Sociology at the University of Glasgow and a campaigner for the Radical Independence Campaign (@Radical_Indy). In this piece he chats with Joel Suss, editor of the British Politics and Policy blog, about the radical case for Scottish independence, the promises made by Westminster for more devolution, and the incredible levels of political engagement seen in Scotland.



*
What is the Radical Independence Campaign (RIC)? Where did it come from?
The Radical Independence Campaign began from a conference which was held in Glasgow in November 2012. The idea was to set-up a forum for people who wanted independence but a slightly more radical version than the SNP’s offer. 800 people came to that – a very large conference by Scottish standards – from a range of parties. There was also a group of people who had never been to anything like this before. A year after we held a second conference, which had over 1,000 people attend, and it became a fully-fledged campaign for radical independence. Rather than the slightly more vague social democratic message of the SNP, that meant talking about social conditions, cuts to disability benefit, the bedroom tax, Trident and so on.
We’ve been going into working class housing estates, going around knocking on doors, and doing something quite unusual in British politics – a voter registration drive, which is modelled in some ways on the experiences of the civil rights movements in American cities. This means that loads of people who have never thought about voting for a political party have signed up to vote in this referendum. This has had a galvanising effect on the campaign, pushing the ‘Yes’ camp into a more Left-wing position.
What’s the radical case for Scottish independence?
I have my own version of this, but probably things that everyone would agree with would be the removal of Trident nuclear weapons (also an SNP policy) and the withdrawal from NATO. We think it’s terrible being part of a nuclear alliance, and simply give up the weapons is not enough. There’s a strong anti-war element in RIC.
More centrally to what’s going on in Scotland itself, there’s a strong feeling in RIC that it’s possible reverse 35 years of neoliberalism – to which the economic arm of the SNP is still committed, if not as ferociously as the Tory and Labour party. Ours is a much more comprehensive and deep reversal. We’re not just saying that we should go back to the golden days of the 1960s and the welfare state, but we want to radically democratise current society – to open it up. The privatisations, the limit on trade union rights, the various taxes on people on benefits and with disabilities, and so on, will all have to be rolled back first of all.
In general, our campaign straddles different versions of the Left; left-wing reformists, revolutionaries, people who are more concerned with the environment, feminists, and so on. Clearly there are differing opinions on things, but the basic programme is to roll back neoliberalism as far as we can within one country and to get higher levels of democracy into Scotland.
If there is a ‘Yes’ vote like you want, do you think it possible that RIC’s vision will be implemented in Scotland? Alex Salmond has declared he would cut corporation tax and is non-committal on raising the top rate of income tax to pay for higher social spending, leading some commentators to argue that an independent Scotland would exhibit a ‘tartanised’ neoliberalism.
I think there’s two elements to this. One is that, in some respects Scotland already has retained some of the elements that suit democracy that England hasn’t; for example, the NHS is far less privatised, tuition is free for Scottish students, prescriptions are free, care for the elderly is free, and so on. These are not earth-shattering but certainly better than in other parts of the UK. So there’s an element of that just being preserved. And I think the SNP, for reasons of political survival, would have to commit to maintaining those kinds of things initially.
But the important thing is that a ‘Yes’ vote opens up a field of opportunity for the Left. We’ve involved people in a political conversation that simply isn’t happening elsewhere in the UK, which means it’s possible to work with these people to push things in a leftward direction. It could be quite a lie for me to say it’s all in the bag and everything will be fine in the event of a ‘Yes’ vote – I don’t believe that. I think we’re in for a long struggle no matter what happens. If it’s ‘Yes’, we will try and move things in a more democratic and more equal direction. If we do things correctly and rightly we should be able to get results. I don’t think it’s a guarantee at all, and I don’t think anybody’s saying that – the general tenor of the campaign is not: ‘vote for independence and everything’s going to be marvellous’. Rather, it’s: ‘vote for independence to open up the possibility of us being able to change our world for the better’.
What is RIC’s stance on the currency issue, Scotland’s relationship with the EU, and on keeping the Queen?
These are the areas of the biggest disagreement with the SNP, and why we are very keen to emphasise that we are not a nationalist campaign. A lot of the people that are voting ‘Yes’ are not nationalists, in the sense that they’re filled with a sort of Scottishness. Instead, they are voting for political reasons that they see independence bringing. There are probably some differences, but almost everyone would like to be Scotland to be a Republic and remove the monarchy – that’s pretty much a majority position.
There are some issues with the EU. Some of the people on the harder left, to which I belong, have huge problems with the EU, seeing it essentially as a machine for neoliberalism. The fact that UKIP are opposed to it for very different reasons underlines the insanity of a lot of their politics. Most British big businessman want to stay in the EU which indicates the reason why we’re opposed to it. There’s a tactical question here. If there was a referendum on the EU called by UKIP and the right-wing of the Tory party, would we immediately say we’re for withdrawal if the general drift of the campaign was a racist, xenophobic one? There are tactical questions about that, but certainly there’s a great deal of suspicion about the EU.
The general feeling in RIC is we should have our own currency and that there’s no point in being enthralled by the Bank of England, which you would be if you retained a currency union as Salmond wants. I understand the calculations Salmond is making here, he’s trying to make the least threatening proposal possible, but it’s just illogical and inviolable. What’s the point of independence if you’re interest rates and everything else concerned with financial policy is set by the Bank of England? We’d be tied into a neoliberal structure. How would that be independent? Joining the Euro means being dominated by the German-French axis which has brought such pain to Greece and Spain. Our own currency and own central bank has to be the starting point, and I think that’s certainly, of the full options, what most people in RIC would go for.
What are your thoughts on the last-ditch promises by the Tories, Labour and Lib Dems for increased devolution in the event of a ‘No’ vote. Would further devolution satisfy RIC and allow the opportunity you’ve talked about to be seized?
No, and it’s not meant to. Even with the maximum of the things they offer, the Scottish government still wouldn’t control anything. It wouldn’t control income tax, it wouldn’t control VAT. People are very sceptical about this because the opportunity to put ‘Devo Max’ on the ballot paper was there two years ago but was rejected by David Cameron. Alex Salmond would’ve preferred it to be on the ballot paper but didn’t get the chance. With thousands of people having already voted by post, they are now saying, ‘by the way, here is another option’. There’s not even any agreement among the three parties about further devolution, and there’s no guarantee that a Tory government will introduce a Labour set of proposals. They’re saying, ‘vote for this and we’ll do that’, but they’ve lied in the past. Why we should believe them this time is a real interesting question.
Couldn’t the members that make up RIC just as well pursue their political objectives within the the Union in UK-wide General Election?
If the views of the people are actually represented by the main parties, and people were able to choose between them in a generalised manner with some validity, but the fact is they’re all clustering around a kind of neoliberal consensus, on which there is some variation on what you can call the social aspects of neoliberalism. What people are asking for is something different than this. While the level of voting has been falling in general elections, in this event we expect over 80 per cent participation. When I talk to people they usually say something about how they don’t vote because all the parties are the same or they’re all liars or whatever, but that they’re voting for this.
The Left needs to get their act together and actually present people with a party to vote that actually does embody the issues that we want to talk about. The assumptions they make need to be broken, and people presented with something – that’s an urgent task. It can’t happen now with the current range of political parties that are standing because none of them are offering anything significantly different. It’s only been in the course of this campaign that it’s been possible to talk about getting rid of nuclear weapons, for example. Nobody contemplates that in Westminster.
Can you talk about the surge in political engagement and activity in Scotland that you’ve been seeing during the campaign, and how this might carry over into the future?
When visiting working class areas people say, ‘I haven’t seen a politician in a good ten years coming around this bit, or even someone from a party coming to speak with us’. These people are quite glad to see you and discuss what their future might involve. It’s astonishing in Scotland how people are actually talking about politics, in meetings, townhalls and so on, indicating that there’s a real engagement here. It’s not just the chattering middle classes that are speaking to each other – something’s actually penetrated quite deeply into the where the majority of the population actually live.
Even if it’s ‘No’, the fact that people have started to talk about politics is obviously a good thing. The task for the Left is to go back to people and say, ‘we haven’t forgotten about you, we haven’t just gone around to get the vote out of you, we actually want to talk to you in an ongoing way about how we change politics’. These conversations, about how to go forward after the vote, are already beginning to happen.
Some people are worried that if Scotland separates the Labour party will lose a big chunk of its support and the rest of the UK will be consigned to a perpetual Tory majority. Does that possibility concern you?
There are two things here. There’s the question of the Labour party, and then there’s the questions of the Left and the working class movement. The Labour party only has itself to blame for what has befallen. If they don’t win at the next general election it’s because of their own capitulation to neoliberalism and their own failure to offer anything to working class people, not because Scots have somehow betrayed them. This is really just a problem of the Left getting its act together, rather than Scotland leaving England in the lurch.
In terms of the Labour movement, a lot of this is just scaremongering. People will be able to belong to the same trade unions – people in Canada belong to the same trade union as in America, people in Ireland with those in Britain. The real question is not about structures of the state or the constitution of the union, but whether or not trade union leaders can take action to fight for their members. That’s the issue, not whether the border exists.
There’s also a way in which this referendum may have a galvanising effect on the English Left. If the Scots can have these incredible high-level political discussions amongst working-class and ordinary people, why can’t the rest of the UK be as inspired, have that kind of in-depth penetration into working class-communities? I think a ‘Yes’ vote might do that, it might focus minds considerably.
Note: This article gives the views of the interviewee, and not the position of the British Politics and Policy blog, nor of the London School of Economics. Please read our comments policy before posting.
Neil Davidson is a Lecturer in Sociology at the University of Glasgow. He is author of The Origins of Scottish Nationhood (2000) and Discovering the Scottish Revolution (2003), and co-editor of Neoliberal Scotland (2010).
 



Joint Deutscher Prize winner Neil Davidson looks at the debate provoked by his book
Whatever disagreements we may have with his interpretation of events, there is no doubt that Isaac Deutscher’s major works are great literary achievements which helped keep alive a critical approach to the Russian Revolution in the darkest days of the Cold War.
Since 1969 – two years after his death – a prize has been awarded in his name. As the citation says, it is ‘for a book which exemplifies the best and most innovative new writing in or about the Marxist tradition’. Despite some ephemeral or over-hyped works having received the prize over the years, the overall list remains remarkably impressive. Works such as Marcel Leibman’s Leninism Under Lenin (1975), Geoffrey de Ste Croix’s The Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World (1982), Mike Davis’s City of Quartz (1991) and James Holstun’s Ehud’s Dagger (2001) belong on the bookshelves of every reader of Socialist Review.
I am the second writer in a row from within the International Socialist Tendency to have been awarded the prize – last year it was won by Brian Kelly for Race, Class and Power in the Alabama Coalfields. I am proud to receive this recognition, not merely for myself, but for the entire IS intellectual tradition in which I received my education in Marxist theory and much else besides.
In Discovering the Scottish Revolution I have attempted to add a hitherto unknown bourgeois revolution – the Scottish – to the existing roster of the English Civil War, the American War of Independence, the French Revolution and so on. What makes the Scottish experience so interesting is how different it is from these revolutions, where the impetus came, at least initially, from below. The Scottish case instead prefigures the later ‘revolutions from above’ – the Italian Risorgimento, the German Unification and the Japanese Meiji Restoration – where feudal ruling classes realised that they would have to copy their British and French rivals or be overtaken in military and economic terms.
Between the 1690s and 1740s Scotland was at the epicentre of an intersystemic global conflict between capitalist constitutional England and feudal absolutist France which threatened to undo the settlement of 1688. The union of 1707 was consciously designed to preserve the feudal rights of the Scottish ruling class.
The choices before the feudal landowners narrowed throughout the first half of the 18th century. They could either transform themselves into capitalist landlords (difficult for all but the very wealthy), raise the level of exploitation of their tenants, or attempt to overthrow the British state by counter-revolutionary risings in alliance with France. Only the last option offered the chance of halting, let alone reversing, the northward spread of capitalism. Those who took it formed the social basis of the Jacobite movement.
We need to reconsider not only Scottish history during this period, but also that of England and Britain. We have to stop thinking of 1688 as being the conclusion of the English Revolution – which is only true if England is taken in total isolation from the rest of the world – and start thinking of 1746 as being the real conclusion of the British Revolution instead.
The Scottish Enlightenment systematically theorised the possibility of conscious human intervention to transform the world in a way that would influence both Hegel and Marx. The transformation of Scottish agriculture between 1760 and 1815 – the main practical consequence of Enlightenment thought – compressed into around 60 years what had taken 300 in England. No other nation would ever approach anything like this speed and intensity of development until Russia between 1928 and 1941 – an equally capitalist achievement, of course.
The book has provoked a major controversy within the Scottish Socialist Party (SSP). I have been accused in the letters page of the Voice of being (among other things) a ‘Unionist’ who regards the Highland Clearances as ‘progressive’ and who ignores Scottish popular traditions of struggle. Why this response to a discussion of events over 250 years ago?
Two ideas about Scottish history dominate in the SSP. One is that Scotland is oppressed by England and has been since 1296. The second is that popular movements in Scotland going back to William Wallace have all been linked to the struggle for national independence. There is barely a shred of evidence for these claims. There is, however, plenty of evidence for Scotland’s disproportionately large role in the British Empire and the way in which the British working class always consisted of both Scottish and English workers. The problem for my critics is that the secessionist agenda which they support is severely weakened without its historical underpinning.
A more serious debate has been over the lack of popular involvement in the Scottish Revolution. Some SSP members believe that it is more important to celebrate the religious revolutions from below of the 17th century, which did not transform Scottish society, than the revolution from above which did.
But there is no reason why bourgeois revolutions should be ‘from below’ at all – most of them have not been. The mainly top-down nature of events in Scotland means that they cannot be celebrated by Scottish socialists in the same way as French and English socialists can with at least some aspects of their revolutions. Too bad. We have two centuries of struggle on a global scale from which to construct our traditions and it is in that context that we should see the Scottish contribution.
What Deutscher called ‘Classical Marxism’ sees history as an essentially tragic process in which the tragedy will only be brought to an end by the achievement of socialism. That is the spirit in which I have approached the Scottish Revolution. It is one which I hope that Deutscher, whose own work so powerfully delineated the tragedy of another, quite different revolution, would have appreciated.
 



THE SCOTTISH Trades Union Congress (STUC) held its annual conference in Aberdeen last week. One of the highlights of the conference was when delegates voted to support the Chhokar family campaign.
The congress came alive during powerful speeches by Aamer Anwar and Mr Chhokar, the father of Surjit Singh Chhokar who was murdered two years ago. Many delegates were visibly moved by the account of the treatment the family has received at the hands of the Scottish justice system. The congress passed a number of other good resolutions, including those supporting asylum seekers and the Palestinian people.
However, during the emergency debate on the threatened closure of Motorola and Compaq union leaders gave little more than hand-wringing gestures. Throughout congress it was obvious there were tensions between STUC leaders and the Labour-dominated Scottish Executive.
A fringe meeting held by the Scottish Socialist Party (SSP) attracted nearly 40 people, the majority of them delegates, to hear Tommy Sheridan.



 


Neil Davidson
STUC delegate for the PCS union





 
 



>A photograph showing wreath-bearing politicians standing solemnly at the Cenotaph in London; a camera panning over endless white crosses somewhere in the French countryside; a lone bagpipe playing The Flowers of the Forest over an explosion of red poppies – these familiar scenes and sounds instruct us in how to perform remembrance of the First World War. We can expect to be, so to speak, bombarded by them even before the commemorations begin next August. What are they expected to teach us?
The war involved a tragic loss of life, especially of the young. Proportionally, Scotland suffered greater losses than every other nation except Serbia and Turkey. 26.4 percent of those mobilised; 10.9 percent of males of fighting age; 3.1 per cent of the population as a whole. The comparable figures for Britain and Ireland were 11.8 per cent, 6.3 per cent and 1.6 per cent. On the tragedy, everyone can agree; but ask why young and old had to die and the unanimity shatters immediately. Already the bookshelves are groaning under the weight of new volumes offering to explain the outbreak of war, in quite different terms. Some of these, like the efforts by Max Hastings and Jeremy Paxman, are essentially journalistic, respectively expressing the views of the conservative and liberal wings of the metropolitan elite. Others, like those by Christopher Clark and Margaret Macmillan, are genuine contributions to historical knowledge. As we shall see, however, in all cases the arguments have inescapably political implications.
The logic of conflict was set in motion by tensions between the metropolitan centres themselves. In this historical moment, threats to overseas markets and sources of raw materials would have been causes for war even if the territories involved had not been actual colonies.
There are essentially two dominant explanations of the war, both well represented in the centenary literature. One dates back to 1914 and was later enshrined in the Treaty of Versailles. It is, of course, that primary responsibility lay with Germany and to a lesser extent its allies Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire. Here is a recent example by Gary Sheffield, appropriately enough a former lecturer in Department of War Studies at the Royal Military Academy at Sandhurst:
“Britain went to war with Germany in August 1914 for similar reasons to those for which the country fought Hitler’s Germany in the Second World War: to prevent an authoritarian, militarist, expansionist enemy achieving hegemony in Europe and thus imperilling British security. Most historians argue that Germany and Austria-Hungary were primarily responsible for initiating the war (recent attempts to blame Russia are not wholly convincing). Whoever started it, the fact is that in 1914–18, Germany waged a war of aggression that conquered large tracts of its neighbours’ territory. As has often been pointed out, there were distinct continuities between the policy and strategy of imperial Germany and its Nazi successor.”
The ideological manoeuvre here is not exactly subtle: since most people who are not absolute pacifists tend to accept that Hitler’s Germany had to be fought, the comparison with imperial Germany nudges us towards the same conclusion in relation to the earlier conflict, thus conferring on it the undeserved dignity of a war against fascism. The focus on German untrustworthiness also neatly aligns with contemporary Europhobic fantasies about the emergence of a Fourth Reich within the EU.
Was there nothing authoritarian, militarist or expansionist in British behaviour then? Before the war Britain had allowed the death from starvation of five million inhabitants of Madras and presided over the invention of the concentration camp in South Africa. During the war Britain was allied with the feudal-absolutist Russian autocracy and engaged in violently suppressing the national aspirations of the Irish. By the end of the war – presumably in another of its regular ‘fits of absence of mind’ – Britain had ‘acquired’ several more oil-producing territories in the Middle East and helped establish the Zionist colony in Palestine. None of this exactly provides moral high ground from which to criticise Germany, which after all only sought what Britain already had – an empire.
The second dominant narrative is to move from what Clark calls an ‘overdetermined’ explanation involving German agency to an ‘undetermined’ one. From this perspective there are too many agencies involved for any ultimate cause to be identified. He begins his – in many ways highly impressive – book by invoking ‘contingency’ and ends by describing the war as ‘a tragedy, not a crime’, concluding that ‘the protagonists of 1914 were sleepwalkers, watchful but unseeing, haunted by dreams, yet blind to the reality of the horror they were about to bring into the world’. While this avoids making Germany solely or mainly responsible for the war, it also dispenses with the notion of responsibility altogether–or dissolves into a myriad of decisions leading to an unintended, if disastrous result.
Neither scapegoating (of Germany) nor absolution (of the Great Powers more generally) are adequate here. But nor is merely criticising the conduct of the war. In Britain, for example, it has long been acceptable to rail at the leaders of the British Expeditionary Force, the ‘donkeys’ of Alan Clark’s influential book and Oh! What a Lovely War! This sounds radical (and in Joan Littlewood’s show it actually was) but, as Clark’s own Conservative politics suggest, it can also function as an evasion rather than an explanation. Socialists should beware the easy satisfactions of denouncing Haig and Co for their stupidity, for this is both to insult and to exculpate them. They were not lacking in intelligence, nor necessarily unfeeling. They chose to send thousands over the top to their deaths because the military options were relatively limited and an ineradicable risk of being a soldier – although admittedly one under-emphasised by the Ministry of Defence – is to die in the pursuit of strategic objectives. After all, would the war have been acceptable if the levels of death and mutilation had been lower?
In fact, the generals, like the politicians and state managers, were trapped within a structural logic which first led to war and then determined their conduct of it. All historians obviously recognise that the main players were established or aspirant imperial powers; but this fact is rarely given any explanatory power, so long as ‘imperialism’ is simply regarded as coextensive with colonialism. Yet the concept, at least within Classical Marxism, does not simply involve relationships of domination by the metropolitan powers over the colonial and semi-colonial world, but also – and in this context, more importantly – relationships of rivalry between the metropolitan powers themselves, a rivalry which fused economic and geopolitical competition. For Connolly in Dublin, Maclean in Glasgow, Luxemburg in Berlin, Lenin in Zurich and Roy in Delhi, the outbreak of war may have been unintended, but it was not thereby avoidable, except by socialist revolution.
The example of the First World War is important for the left because it illustrates both the inherently warlike nature of capitalism and the way in which seemingly irrational decisions were in fact inescapable given the compulsions of competitive accumulation. All the major participating states were either already capitalist or in the process of completing the transition. Their empires were important to the metropolitan centres for economic reasons; principally as captive markets, less so as a source of raw materials (except in the case of Britain) and least of all as the destination of investments.
But even where colonies or ‘mandates’ had no direct economic rationale, this did not mean they were detached from the logic of capitalism. Once the race for imperial territory began in earnest during the closing decades of the nineteenth century, it became necessary for strategic reasons to seize territories which were often of no value in themselves–indeed, which were often net recipients of state expenditure–but which were essential buffers from which to protect those territories which were of economic value, like India. And in some cases the diplomatic alliances which eventually plunged the world into catastrophe had direct economic origins.
In the case of Russia, for example, grain exports and raw material imports for industry passed through the straits between the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara or the Dardanelles and the Aegean. Early in 1914 Russia and her allies forced the Ottoman Empire to grant autonomy to the partly Armenian provinces of eastern Anatolia in order to pull the Christian Armenians under Russian influence. As a result the Turks began to form an alliance with Germany in order to protect the integrity of their empire.
In the case of Britain, surely the most ‘capitalist’ of all the European Great Powers, economic specialisation, and the consequent lack of self-sufficiency in food and raw materials, made her dependent on these being constantly available from overseas, which in turn required the Royal Navy to protect the merchant marine. Challenged by the other European Powers, above all Germany, in the naval arms race from the 1890s, Britain began to create the continental system of alliances that would pull her into war.
In both cases the logic of conflict was set in motion by tensions between the metropolitan centres themselves. In this historical moment, threats to overseas markets and sources of raw materials would have been causes for war even if the territories involved had not been actual colonies. This has contemporary implications, not because war is necessarily imminent between the core states of the world system; but direct confrontation is scarcely the only form of geopolitical rivalry. And here again the First World War is relevant.
The key participants had already been engaged in conflict-at-one-remove before 1914. The Boer War can be seen as a proxy war between Britain and Germany who backed, encouraged, trained and supplied the Boers. In the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–5, Germany supported Russia and Britain supported Japan. Since the end of the Cold War we have once again seen war ‘by proxy’, where the dominant states jostle for influence by supporting different sides in inter- or intra–state conflicts. The different sides supported by France, Germany and the USA during the disintegration of Yugoslavia was perhaps the first example of this strategy in the post-Cold War world; the conflict between NATO and Russia over Georgia (and the divisions within the NATO member states over attitudes to Russia) is the most recent; but similar alignments are beginning to take shape in Central Africa where France is already in the dominant position among the Western powers, but where China is rapidly extending its influence.
If the argument here is correct, then we may be entering a world situation which resembles in several important ways that of 1914. The moment of maximum danger for humanity will come if the contemporary capitalist great powers no longer express their different competitive interests by proxy in the Global South, or assert their interests over lesser states in the developed world itself, but when they directly confront each other on the geopolitical stage. In this perspective the origins of the First World War are not a matter for academic dispute, but a warning of what may await us, with different participants but even greater destructive capacity. In that sense we commemorate those who opposed the war, not simply because they were right, but because we may have cause to emulate them.
 



>I share the general agreement among most people who attended the Radical Independence Conference (RIC) that it was a very impressive event, both in terms of size and in the range and quality of the discussion. What was perhaps most exciting was the sense of an emerging new left which – on the evidence of contributions from the floor – is in many respects more radical than many speakers on the panels. It is always possible to point out areas of weakness, particularly in the relative lack of trade union input (on which more below); but these can be rectified and it would be the worst kind of sectarianism to focus on these aspects rather than the achievement represented by the conference.
RIC demonstrated the possibility for socialist support for independence. There is nothing to be gained, however, from pretending that this position is currently anything but a minority one within the Scottish working class. If RIC is to be more than a one-off event then it will have to develop into a movement, mobilising existing support and seeking to extend and deepen it within Scottish society. Working-class people are currently faced with a savage UK austerity programme, in which the SNP government has in practice been complicit. To persuade people under this level of attack to treat independence as anything other than a diversion from their daily struggle for survival will require something other than lofty but abstract declarations about the self-determination or the virtues of republican government. (Especially since we note that one republic, close by, allows women to die for want of an abortion, while another, more distant, shoots down striking mineworkers; and both Ireland and South Africa had considerably more radical national movements than Scotland.)



There is nothing to be gained from pretending that support for independence is currently anything but a minority position within the Scottish working class



Part of the difficulty here is that there are no guarantees that independence would necessarily improve the conditions of the 99 per cent. The only thing which would inevitably occur is a crisis for the Rest of the UK in relation to its position within the imperialist state system, which is obviously something that socialists should welcome. Other than that – as I said on the democracy panel at RIC – independence represents a space of possibility, but one which could be filled with a continuation either of the neoliberal project or the beginning of a break to the left. (Although even here we have to stress ‘beginning’ – socialism in one country is no more plausible in Scotland than it was in Russia.)
Working alongside Yes Scotland and existing pro-independence groups where possible is obviously necessary. But one distinct way forward for RIC might therefore be to draw up objectives which Yes Scotland will not touch – removal of Trident, repeal of the anti-trade union laws, abolition of student fees for non-Scots; the list will suggest itself – which we want to see achieved by independence but, crucially, which we fight for now as part of the campaign. Participation in the Scrap Trident Weekend of action (13–15 April) is an opportunity to do so. Fighting for the kind of independence we want has two advantages. First, within the unions it would undercut the currently influential arguments of a trade union bureaucracy which is fixated on further devolution as a means of preserving their UK-wide structures (and those of the Labour Party). Second, it would mean that there was an agreed set of issues which local groups aligning themselves to RIC could sign up to. The key is to treat the struggle for independence not as an alternative to the struggle against neoliberal austerity and Western imperialism, but as part of it.
Neil Davidson teaches sociology at the University of Strathclyde and is on the Socialist Workers Party’s Scottish Steering Committee. His most recent book is How Revolutionary Were the Bourgeois Revolutions?.
 



>At the conclusion of their article, In Defense of Political Marxism (International Socialist Review 90, July 2013), Jonah Birch and Paul Heideman note that:
Advocates of Political Marxism like Robert Brenner, Ellen Meiksins Wood, and Charles Post share a tremendous amount with their critics like Jairus Banaji, Neil Davidson, and Ashley Smith in their common perspective on the necessity for revolutionary socialism from below. [1]
It is certainly true that members of Solidarity like Brenner and Post are revolutionaries who have made significant contributions to issues of central importance to the Left, many of which are perfectly compatible with the International Socialist tradition. [2] Others from the same organization, like John Eric Marot, have critically engaged with aspects of that tradition such as our attitude to the Left Opposition, but in comradely ways that helped to develop our collective understanding. [3]
One of the difficulties with Political Marxism, however, is its political indeterminacy. Not all proponents are revolutionaries: Wood inhabits a position close to that of Ralph Miliband and his successors on the editorial board of The Socialist Register, although she too has made important theoretical contributions, above all in relation to the nature of democracy under capitalism. Other Political Marxists, however, inhabit an almost exclusively scholastic universe in which ferocious declarations of adherence to what they take to be the Marxist method are completely detached from any socialist practice, resulting in a kind of academic sectarianism.
The uneven relationship of Political Marxists to socialist practice is not however the main problem with this theoretical tendency. If it was simply a provocative historical argument about the emergence of capitalism then it would have no necessary implications for contemporary politics – and several Political Marxists have produced historical works which contain important findings independent of how persuasive or otherwise one finds the Brenner Thesis, notably Brenner’s own Merchants and Revolution and Post’s The American Road to Capitalism.
But Political Marxism involves much more than this. In general, it rejects several fundamental aspects of historical materialism; more specifically, it misunderstands Marx’s method in Capital. It involves a tacit and, in my view untenable conception of human nature. More importantly, it involves a definition of capitalism of such extraordinary narrowness that – if taken seriously – would mean that most of the world has never been capitalist and is not capitalist even now. It inflates the supposed “separation of the economic and the political under capitalism” to the point where there is no longer a capitalist state as such, but simply the state under capitalism. Consequently, Political Marxism is incompatible with the theory of state capitalism: Brenner and Post are perfectly consistent in adhering to what is effectively a version of bureaucratic collectivism. In what follows I will explore these methodological objections to Political Marxism – although it is also open to empirical challenges that have to wait for another occasion.
 
Deconstructing historical materialism
Production, not property, is the basis of Marx and Engels’s own Marxism, and why their theory of social development privileges the development of the productive forces over productive relations. Contrary to what Political Marxists claim, neither Marx nor Engels ever revised this position. The notebooks that we now call the Grundrisse (1857–58) have a special significance for Political Marxists. It is here, they believe, that the new orientation on “social property relations” first appears. These claims are not, however, supported by the text itself. The following passage occurs in the course of a discussion of how landed proprietors can change the method by which they exploit their labor force:
The change in the form in which he obtains his revenue or in the form in which the worker is paid is not, however, a formal distinction, but presupposes a total restructuring of the mode of production (agriculture itself); it therefore presupposes conditions which rest on a certain development of industry, of trade, and of science, in short of the forces of production. Just as, in general, production resting on capital and wage labour differs from other modes of production not merely formally, but equally presupposes a total revolution and development of material production. [4]
And it is here in the Grundrisse, not The German Ideology, that he then writes:
It must be kept in mind that the new forces of production and relations of production do not develop out of nothing, nor drop from the sky, nor from the womb of the self-positing Idea; but from within and in antithesis to the existing development of production and the inherited, traditional relations of property. [5]
Marx reiterated the same points directly after completing these notes, in that most profoundly unfashionable of texts, the Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859). Birch and Heideman describe this as a “brief sketch.” [6] In fact, it distils all the key aspects of historical materialism as it had developed since 1845. Furthermore, Marx deployed these concepts in writing Capital during the following decade. By then he had published several statements of his theory of socioeconomic development, both individually and with Engels, and could easily have simply referred to these before applying his general theory to the specific case of the capitalist mode of production without repeating the arguments yet again. Nevertheless, in chapter 1 of volume 1, Marx quotes the 1859 Preface in order explicitly to defend it from criticism that it is only applicable to the contemporary capitalist society. [7] And it is here in Capital, not the Manifesto of the Communist Party that he adds: “The economic structure of capitalist society has grown out of the economic structure of feudal society. The dissolution of the latter set free the elements of the former.” [8] Similarly, at the end of the book he states:
For capitalist relations to establish themselves at all presupposes that a certain level of historical production has been attained. Even within the framework of an earlier mode of production certain needs and certain means of communication and production must have developed which go beyond the old relations of production and coerce them into the capitalist mould. [9]
At the very end of the notes that became volume 3 he summarizes the thesis yet again:
The sign that the moment of such a crisis [of a particular historical form of production] has arrived is that the contradiction and antithesis between, on the one hand, the relations of distribution, hence also the specific historical form of relations of production corresponding to them, and on the other hand, the productive forces, productivity, and the development of its agents, gains in breadth and depth. A conflict then sets in between the material development of production and its social form. [10]
It is, however, elsewhere in volume 3 that Marx gives what is perhaps the fullest statement of the position in his entire output:
The specific economic form in which unpaid surplus labour is pumped out of the direct producers determines the relationship of domination and servitude, as this grows directly out of production itself and reacts back on it in turn as a determinant. On this is based the entire configuration of the economic community arising from actual relations of production, and hence also its specific political form. It is in each case the direct relationship of the owners of the conditions of production to the immediate producers – a relationship whose particular form naturally corresponds always to a certain level of development of the type and manner of labour, and hence to its productive power – in which we find the innermost secret, the hidden basis of the entire social edifice, and hence also the political form of the relationship of sovereignty and dependence, in short the specific form of the state in each case. [11]
The phrases that Marx uses here – “the relationship of domination and servitude ... grows out of production itself,” the exploitative relationship “corresponds always to a certain level of the type and manner of labour, and hence to its productive power” – would appear to render this passage immune to misinterpretation, but alas, no. George Comninel quotes it and then goes on to give a textbook example of how to make a quotation mean the exact opposite of what it actually says:
For the “base” on which “the entire social structure” is founded is not said to be production in any general sense, but “the specific economic form in which unpaid surplus-labour is pumped out of direct producers.” Even “the entire formation of the economic community” grows up out of these class relations of production, not the reverse. Admittedly, the exploitative relations are once again problematically said to be “always naturally corresponding to a definite stage in the development of the methods of labour and thereby its social productivity” – which, if we recognize technology to be a product of class society, seems once again to leave the horse behind the cart. Yet this assertion is something of an aside, and if allowance is made for Marx’s inclination to associate historical materialism with liberal-scientific materialism – a tendency even more notable in Engels, and notably embraced by their followers – the statement poses no real problem. Indeed, the “direction” of this correspondence can be reversed from what is normally understood, and priority given to the exploitative relationship, as it relates to “the development of the methods of labour.” [12]
Against this farrago I will simply make three points. First, the “social edifice” to which Marx refers is clearly intended as something separate from either the forces or the relations of production and, given that he immediately goes on to link it to the state, it fairly obviously corresponds to what he describes metaphorically in the 1859 “Preface” as the “superstructure.” Marx does indeed write that the basis of “the entire social edifice” is found in the relations of production, but why does that rule out, as a conceptually prior process, the basis of the productive relations being found in the productive forces? Second, Comninel pretends that the productive forces can be reduced to “technology,” even though Marx is actually referring to (and I quote) “the development of the methods of labour,” which is about human capacities, not technology. Finally, and most outrageously of all, Comninel simply tells us that he intends to reverse what Marx actually says in order to make the passage fit his own preconceptions, although – as we shall see – he is scarcely alone among Political Marxists in doing so.
On the basis of the foregoing it is difficult to see how anyone could claim that Marx abandoned the centrality of the productive forces. His position might however still be false. The Political Marxist critique of what is usually, if wrongly, called “productive force determinism” has two aspects. One is that it has no explanatory power and fails to square with the known facts. According to Wood, “the proposition that history is propelled forward by the inevitable contradictions between forces and relations of production” is, in her view, “scarcely less vacuous than the general law of technological development in its simpler form.” [13] The other concerns the way in which it supposedly diminishes human agency.
But the productive forces do not “develop” themselves: they are not sentient, nor are they even independent variables, “calling forth” this or “selecting” that response from the relations of production. To say that forces of production have developed is simply to say that human beings have been motivated to change them and have then successfully done so in such a way that the social productivity of labor has risen as a result. [14] Human agency is quite as decisive here as it is in the class struggle. When people develop the productive forces it creates a situation in which they, or other people, can adopt new, more compatible productive relations, of which there are not an infinite number. But although developing the productive forces makes certain types of society possible, it does not make them inevitable: it is an enabling condition.
Here again the role of human agency is decisive. Ruling classes are never passive. By successfully preventing people from developing the productive forces to the point where they can lead to changes in productive relations, they have either ensured centuries of relative stagnation or the repetition of developmental phases that never progress beyond a certain point. In other relatively rare cases, this type of blocking maneuver led to outright regression, as it did across Western Europe in the fifth century, in the fourteenth, and again – although on a more regionalized basis – in the seventeenth; but even in these cases, the “anti-development” of the productive forces also led to transformations in productive relations: change does not always go in one direction. The process by which human beings first make progressive changes to the productive forces, then the productive relations and ultimately the superstructures can explain the two greatest social transformations that have occurred in human history: one was the transition from pre-class society (“primitive communism”) to various forms of class society (slave, feudal, tributary); the other was the transition from feudalism to capitalism.
 
Misreading Capital
Post in particular prefers to talk about “Capital-centric” rather than “Political” Marxism. [15] There are two problems here. First as I have just explained, Capital does not exist in a void, but within a larger body of writing in which certain operating assumptions about social development, which Marx has already explained, are assumed still to be valid. You can no more treat Capital in isolation from the 1859 Preface (or, for that matter, the Eighteenth Brumaire) than you can Lenin’s The State and Revolution from his conception of the party.
Second, even in relation to the specific contents of Capital, Political Marxists misunderstand what Marx is doing. Alex Callinicos has drawn our attention to the difference between “the abstract model of capitalist production outlined by Marx in Capital” and the concrete forms that capitalism has actually taken: “The first is intended to isolate the essential features of capitalism, common to all its variants; the second seek, within the limits set by these features, to identify the diverse historical forms they have assumed.” [16] In effect, Political Marxists do not seem to recognize that there is an abstract model in Capital. Apart from Brenner himself, they think that England was the only site of endogenous capitalist development and therefore assume that Marx takes English development as a model for the origin of capitalism because, in effect, it was the only example he had.
It is, of course, not in dispute that England was the country where capitalism developed to the greatest extent. It was for this reason that Marx made it the basis of his analysis, in the same way that he always took the most developed form of any phenomena as the basis of his analysis. But in his mature work Marx repeatedly states that capitalist development took place beyond England in space and before England in time. He certainly describes “the expropriation of the agricultural producer” as taking its “classic form” in England. [17] “Classic,” status does, however, rather depend on the existence of other, non-classic forms, which is presumably why passages of the following type occur throughout Capital:
Although we come across the first sporadic traces of capitalist production as early as the fourteenth or fifteenth centuries in certain towns of the Mediterranean, the capitalist era dates from the sixteenth century. Wherever it appears, the abolition of serfdom has long been completed, and the most brilliant achievement of the Middle Ages, the existence of independent city-states, has already been on the wane for a considerable time. [18]
Confronted with quotations of this kind, some Political Marxists simply deny that Marx meant what he wrote, as we have already seen in the work of Comninel. Take, for example, the question of the “so-called primitive accumulation.” Here is the famous passage from Capital where he traces the chronology of the different forms taken by this process:
The different moments of primitive accumulation can be assigned in particular to Spain, Portugal, Holland, France and England, in more or less chronological order. These moments are systematically combined together at the end of the seventeenth century in England; the combination embraces the colonies, the national debt, the modern tax system, and the system of protection. These methods depend in part on brute force, for instance the colonial system. But they all employ the power of the state, the concentrated and organized force of society, to hasten, as in a hothouse, the process of transformation of the feudal mode of production into the capitalist mode, and to shorten the transition. [19]
Wood is unhappy with this passage, with its unfortunate references to “Spain, Portugal, Holland and France”; so we are told:
We should first take note that Marx...is explaining the “genesis of the industrial capitalist,” not the origins of capitalism, nor the emergence of specifically capitalist “laws of motion,” nor specifically capitalist social relations, a specifically capitalist form of exploitation, or the imperatives of self-sustaining economic development. Marx is trying to explain how the accumulation of wealth was converted in the right conditions – that is, in already capitalist social relations (in England), from simply the unproductive profits of usury and commerce into industrial capital. As for the origins of the capitalist system, the “so-called primitive accumulation” – in Marx’s terms, the expropriation of the direct producers, in particular peasants – that gave rise to specifically capitalist social relations and the dynamic associated with them. Marx situates it firmly in England and in the countryside. [20]
Like the passage from Comninel discussed above, this is an extraordinary example of how to read a passage through a theoretical filter, translating as you go until its meaning is compatible with your own position. What does Marx actually say about “the expropriation of the direct producers, in particular peasants, that gave rise to specifically capitalist social relations and the dynamic associated with them”? Does he situate it “firmly in England and in the countryside”?
“The history of this expropriation assumes different aspects in different countries,” he writes in Capital, “and runs through its various phases in different orders of succession, and at different historical epochs.” More than one time and more than one place then. A footnote continues: “In Italy, where capitalist production developed earliest, the dissolution of serfdom took place earlier than elsewhere.” [21] Marx could of course have been factually wrong but, regardless of the accuracy of his views (which have in fact been confirmed by modern scholarship), it is not possible to claim, on the basis of either his early or his mature work, that he believed capitalist development was restricted to England, or even to England and the United Netherlands. He certainly believed that by 1640 the capitalist mode of production had become dominant in England to a greater extent than anywhere else, but that was perfectly compatible with believing that capitalist production had developed elsewhere, within otherwise fundamentally feudal economies.
Now, as Brenner himself admits:
“[Marx] did not explain exactly why the English landlords did not desire or lacked the capacity to maintain or reconstruct serfdom (as did their contemporaries in East Elbian Europe). Nor did he make clear what made it possible for the English lords to succeed in expropriating the peasants from their means of subsistence and in reducing them to commercial farmers and wage laborers, when their contemporaries in France could not accomplish this.” [22]
This was not an omission on Marx’s part; he saw no need for a special mechanism with which to explain the appearance of capitalism in England because he did not think that the development of capitalism was unique to England, but a general phenomenon, at least in Europe.
 
Defining capitalism
When confronted with those (very extensive) sections of Marx’s writings that contradict their views, Political Marxists either pretend that they mean something else, as Wood does in relation to primitive accumulation, or issue disapprovingly admonitions about Marx’s failure to understand his own theory. Comninel complains of “Marx’s very loose usage of the concepts of ‘capital’ and ‘capitalism’ in the historical sections of Capital, in contexts where he clearly does not mean the capitalist mode of production.” [23] Rather than speculate on what Marx really meant, would it not be simpler for Comninel to accept that Marx means exactly what he says and that, consequently, he and his co-thinkers have a different theory of capitalism than that of Marx? For Political Marxists, capitalism is defined by the existence of what they call market compulsion – the removal of the means of production and subsistence from the direct producers so that they are forced to rely on the market to survive.
In fact, there have never been capitalist societies, even mid-Victorian Britain or the United States today, where all economic relations have been market determined. In some cases this has been because of the retention of pre-capitalist relations such as led to the reassertion of “moral economy” against “political economy,” of the “just price” against the “market price,” which occurred in England and Lowland Scotland as late as the end of the eighteenth century. (Indeed, if capitalist social relations of production were already in place by or before the English Civil War, then what were these great social struggles actually about?) But more commonly it has been the imposition of public or state provision and regulation by capitalist states. In other words, “pure” capitalist social property relations have never been completely dominant anywhere, nor – unless socialists completely fail in their objectives – will they ever be.
For Marx, capitalism was defined not as a system of market compulsion, but as one of competitive accumulation based on wage labor. [24]
How then, does any amount of commodities, of exchange values, become capital? By maintaining and multiplying itself as an independent social power, that is, as the power of a portion of society, by means of its exchange for direct, living labor [power]. The existence of a class which possesses nothing but its capacity to labor is a necessary prerequisite of capital ... capital presupposes wage labor; wage labor presupposes capital. They reciprocally condition the existence of each other: They reciprocally bring forth each other.
[25]
Again, these are not simply the juvenile effusions of the young Marx. He writes in volume 1 of Capital that the emergence of capital as a social relation is the result of two types of commodity owners: on the one hand, “the owners of money, means of production, means of subsistence” and “on the other hand, free workers, the sellers of their own labor power, and therefore the sellers of labor.” He concludes: “With the polarization of the commodity market into these two classes, the fundamental conditions of capitalist production are present.” [26] Toward the end of volume 3, in a passage originally written in the mid–1860s, Marx gave what must, unfortunately, be one of his least accurate predictions: “It is unnecessary after the argument already developed to demonstrate once again how the relationship of capital and wage-labor determines the whole character of the mode of production.” [27]
We have, however, to be clear what wage labor means. Its classic “free” form is not the only or even the most typical form it can take. Shahid Amin and Marcel van der Linden argue that the notion of “free wage labor” is essentially an ideal type, “an analytic core surrounded by numerous rings of labor relations that we would like to call intermediary.” [28] Jairus Banaji argues that Marx used the term “mode of production” in two ways: one to refer to the technical process of production, or the labor process more generally; the other to encompass an entire epoch in the history of the social organization of production, in which particular laws of motion predominate. The existence of wage labor, for example, does not necessarily signify the emergence of the capitalist mode of production; wage labor also took place under feudalism, but primarily as a means of meeting the consumption requirements of the lords rather than contributing to the self-expansion of capital. It is rather that the existence of the capitalist mode of production determines that wage labor becomes the central means through which surplus extraction takes place. Equally, however, various types of unfree labor associated with pre-capitalist modes of production, including slavery itself, can also take place within the context of the capitalist mode of production and, in the terms Marx uses in the Grundrisse, both posit and produce capital. [29]
Even if some social relations remain, initially at least, those associated with pre-capitalist modes in the purely technical sense, the decisive fact is that these technical relations are subordinated to capitalist laws of motion. Political Marxists repeatedly highlight the radical difference between capitalism and preceding modes of production. This emphasis is useful up to a point, but beyond it we lose all sense of what capitalism has in common with other exploitative class systems. Indeed, if capitalism did not possess this commonality, then it is difficult to see how it could have successfully incorporated aspects of these earlier modes, as it has in most of the world outside of a handful of countries at the core of the system where, quite exceptionally, capitalism exists in more or less pure form. Feudal lords were able, in some circumstances, to transform themselves into capitalists, just as ancient slave owners before them were able, in other circumstances, to transform themselves into feudal lords. The continuing fact of exploitation is what makes these adaptations possible. In this respect, as in many others, it will surely be socialism rather than capitalism that is distinct from all previous modes of production.
 
Human nature against capitalism?
In the Brenner thesis the emergence of capitalism, in England at least, is an unintended, contingent outcome of the actions of the two main feudal social classes, peasants and lords. Brenner conceives of feudalism as a self-enclosed, self-perpetuating system that cannot be undermined by its own internal contradictions. It is claimed that Brenner has an explanation for the – in his terms, highly unlikely – appearance of capitalism: the class struggle. In fact, it is the outcome of such class conflicts that Brenner is interested in, not the conflicts themselves. In the case of England, the outcome of the rural class struggle acted as a mechanism (“an exogenous shock”) for establishing capitalist social relations of production, but in the United Netherlands ecological pressures played the same role. Why does Brenner need such a mechanism in the first place?
Essentially it is because Political Marxists cannot conceive of people willingly choosing to become capitalists rather than doing so only when the role was imposed on them. Stephen Miller makes the point that
[i]f capitalism were the deliberate design of sixteenth-century people, it would then seem to form part of the human DNA in manner of Adam Smith’s ‘... necessary ... consequence of a ... propensity in human nature ... to truck, barter and exchange ...’ How otherwise could sixteenth-century people have had the idea to bring capitalist relations of production into being? And if capitalism were “human nature,” how could people ever hope to supersede it. [30]
Identifying a propensity to “truck and barter” is very far from claiming that this inevitably leads to the type of capitalist society that currently exists. In any case, Smith was not an advocate of capitalism but of “commercial society” and the latter term was not a synonym – the former was not used in Smith’s day – but describes a different system entirely. Smith distinguishes between “those original principles of human nature” (“of which no further account can be given”) and “the necessary consequence of the faculties of reason and speech”) and claims it is “more probable” that the propensity to barter belongs to the latter set of properties. [31] As Dogen Göçmen has written, Smith’s refusal to place it alongside such “original principles” as “compassion and sympathy” means that he “formulates a hierarchical order” between these two conceptions of human nature in which the propensity to barter is situated lower down as a product of history, of our social being rather than what Marx called our species being. [32]
But there are as many problems with a conception of human nature that sees it as being uninterested in economic development as there are with a definition of capitalism based on the existence of market compulsion. The rejection of one form of bourgeois ideology should not blind us to the dangers of accepting another, albeit with the inversion of its value system. No mode of production is intrinsically alien to human nature. Human beings may not have a propensity for capitalism but they can develop such a propensity under certain conditions and without compulsion. What I am suggesting, therefore, is that the entire elaborate edifice of the Brenner thesis is based upon a conception of human nature in which it is seen as innately opposed to capitalism – indeed, in which it is seen as innately opposed to economic development as such – and will only be induced to accept capitalist relations under duress. While this may allow us the comforting thought that capitalism need not have happened, it also has certain other implications. For if capitalism is essentially a contingent or accidental historical outcome, then so too is the possibility of socialism. One does not have to accept, in Second International or Stalinist style, that human social development has gone through a succession of inevitable stages to reject the ascription of absolute randomness to key historical turning points as a viable alternative. Marx’s own position lends support to neither of these positions.
How did the new, capitalist way of organizing production first emerge? The elements that would eventually combine to create the capitalist mode of production – not only market competition but also wage labor and commodity production – pre-existed it by many centuries. Political Marxists are therefore right to insist that the existence of these elements does not in itself indicate the existence of capitalism as such. One can further agree with them that the socio-economic activities that ultimately ended up producing capitalism were not, initially at any rate, necessarily undertaken with capitalism as a conscious goal. Neither of these observations should be taken to mean, however, that capitalism was an unlikely outcome. There are very few ways in which exploitation or the social relations of production more generally can be organized. “Slavery, serfdom and wage labor are historically and socially different solutions to a universal problem which remains fundamentally the same,” writes Fernand Braudel. [33] Given this highly restricted range of options, the chances of something like capitalism arising were actually rather high, given certain conditions.
Alan Carling has argued that it originally emerged as a result of what he calls “feudal fission”: “It was probable that something like English agricultural capitalism would arise out of something like European feudalism.” Why? Carling identifies two characteristics of feudalism as crucial to this outcome: political decentralization and the demographic cycle. The first meant that no state was in a position to impose a uniform system of production, with the result that new systems could develop in the spaces where sovereignty did not hold sway. The second meant that population collapse was regularly of such severity that it left spaces of this type (following the desertion of hitherto occupied land, for example), which could be filled by property and productive relations of an ultimately capitalist nature:
If there are 10 or 20 independent fission experiments in each demographic cycle, the probability of at least one “English” outcome is very high, even if the probability is very low of an English outcome in any single experiment ... And England only has to happen once for capitalism to become established. That is why it is not as fanciful as one might suppose to suggest that the transition from feudalism to capitalism was almost inevitable – almost indeed a natural necessity of history. [34]
It is not the demographic cycle in general that is significant here, but rather the specific downturn associated with the general crisis of the fourteenth century, which was in turn massively intensified by the incidence of the Black Death. Why did this catastrophe lead people to turn to new ways of economic organization?
Political Marxists do not believe that anyone under pre-capitalist modes of production has any incentive to develop the productive forces. Or as Brenner puts it, the process whereby “individual economic actors adopt more effective techniques in bringing in new relations of production simply because the techniques are more productively effective decisively depends on the existence of capitalist property relations.” Why? Because only under capitalism “will the individual economic actors necessarily have the motivation ... to adopt new techniques.” [35] Wood appears to believe that saying human beings have the desire and capacity to improve their material conditions is the same as saying that they have always been subjugated by the needs of competitive accumulation. One consequence of this denial that there might have been any positive incentives to embrace capitalist production is a tendency to portray peasant life before capitalism as essentially based on a natural economy of self-governing communities, which have no incentive to develop the productive forces, and into which the lords or the church only intrude superficially and occasionally in order to acquire their surplus. I do not recognize this picture.
In a great passage from one of the early classics of Scottish vernacular literature, The Complaynt of Scotland, written by Robert Wedderburn but published anonymously in 1549, the character of “the laborer” [peasant] rages against the misery of his life:
I labor night and day with my hands to feed lazy and useless men, and they repay me with hunger and the sword. I sustain their life with the toil and sweat of my body, and they persecute my body with hardship, until I am become a beggar. They live through me and I die through them. [36]
Four centuries later the power of that final sentence is undiminished. Developing the productive forces seems to me to be at least as rational a response to the feudal exploitation it so vividly describes as the alternatives of “fight or flight” that are usually posed. People have wanted to do the former since the transition to agriculture; they have only had to do the latter since the transition to capitalism. The wish to better the circumstances in which we live has been one of the main impulses behind the attempts to develop the productive forces and it is intimately bound up with class society, not least because in situations where the direct producers have to hand over part of what they have produced to someone else, there is a very real motive – one might almost say, an imperative – to increase their output, a motive that need have initially nothing to do with market compulsion.
Peter Musgrave, like Brenner, assumes that risk is the main factor preventing peasants from opting for profit maximization. What could overcome these concerns? Musgrave argues that it could only have been such insecurity that the risk was worth taking because it could scarcely be worse than current conditions. [37] Increasing production, if it leads to greater disposable income, might give peasants the wherewithal to buy their way out of performing labor services, to hire wage labor to carry out work that would otherwise destroy the health and shorten the life of family members, or perhaps even to acquire heritable property which would remove them from feudal jurisdictions altogether. “Rather than retreating from the market,” writes Jane Whittle, “peasants used the market to escape from serfdom.” [38] And in conditions of crisis, such as those that shook European feudalism in the fourteenth century, the pressure on the ruling class to raise the level of exploitation, and consequently on the peasantry to look for ways of escape, was of course heightened still further.
 
The consequences of separating the economic and political
It is when we turn to the contemporary world, however, that the problematic aspects of the Political Marxist definition of capitalism for socialist politics become apparent. According to Benno Teschke, there is a “complete separation” between the political and the economic under capitalism:
Capitalism’s differentia specifica as a system of surplus appropriation consists in the historically unprecedented fact that the capital circuits of the world market can in principle function without infringing on political sovereignty. As a rule, capitalism can leave political territories intact. Contracts are concluded, in principle, between private actors in the pre-political sphere of global civil society. [39]
The qualifiers introduced by Teschke here – “as a rule” and “in principle” (twice) – suggest a certain conceptual unease, as if these rules and principles might not actually apply in reality, which is indeed the case. “Capital circuits” do operate outside the control of states in so far as they involve money capital; but money capital is ultimately dependent on the moment of production, which cannot escape territoriality and consequently a relationship with state power. Failure to distinguish between the logical development of categories in theory and their development in history leads to the danger of working with platonic or “ideal” conceptions of the capitalist economy and capitalist states which do not correspond to the operation of any actual capitalist economies or capitalist states. In this case, the danger is compounded by convergence with one of the key ideological positions of the bourgeoisie, now attaining something like its purest expression under neoliberalism, which is precisely that politics and economics are, or at least should be, separate realms. As China Miéville remarks, Political Marxists such as Teschke err in both of these respects, first by erecting an abstract model of capitalism and then by taking “capitalism at its own word”: “Rather than conceptualising the separation of politics and economics as a tendency, with an ideological component, he has understood it to be an absolute truth more important to the definition of capitalism than the actual composition of capitalism at any particular time.” [40] In fact, capitals can perform some of the functions of states and states can act as capital.
Throughout the history of the system capitalists have employed extra-economic means to recruit, retain, coerce and control labor. The self-expansion of the total social capital can never be completely based on unfree labor, of course, because it assumes and requires general labor mobility; but “general” does not mean “universal,” and individual capitals can employ, have employed, and continue to employ unfree labor. [41] As Vivek Chibber has noted, even the extent to which these supposed deviations from the capital relation have been discarded has not been because the system grows nearer to some abstract model, but because of successful resistance: “These practices were only abandoned once labour movements made their continuation impossible.” [42] In many cases the type of controls exercised by capitalists relate specifically to the use of violence, and only a tacit adherence to Weberian definitions of the state (“a human community which (successfully) lays claim to the monopoly of legitimate physical violence within a certain territory”) can explain failure to recognise this fact. [43] From the use of private armies by J.D. Rockefeller in America after the Civil War through to the current universal expansion of private security firms, violence has never been the monopoly of the capitalist state, for, as Timothy Mitchell argues, violence is not “contingent or external to the logic of history” but is “constitutive of both markets and monopolies.” [44]
War and preparations for war involving imperialist states throw these issues into the sharpest relief. Political Marxists have two explanations for the World and Cold Wars of the twentieth century.
One is that the world as whole was not completely dominated by the capitalist mode of production: between 1914 and 1945, conflicts were between capitalist and pre-capitalist powers; between 1945 and 1989, conflicts were between capitalist powers and those which at least claimed to be post-capitalist. In neither period, therefore, were conflicts generated by the pure ‘imperatives’ (to use Wood’s favored term) of the system itself. I am less concerned here with accuracy of this periodisation in relation to the spread of capitalist development (which I reject), than with the implications of the fact that capitalist imperatives now operate unimpeded: “For the first time in the history of the modern nation state, the world’s major powers are not engaged in direct geopolitical and military rivalry. Such rivalry has been effectively displaced by competition in the capitalist manner.” As a result, Wood claims, conflict between the states at the core of capitalism is unthinkable: “the classical age of imperialism ... is now long over.” [45] Wood further argues that the separation of the economic and the political under capitalism has ceased to operate, at least in the international arena level, as a result of the universalization of capitalist imperatives. As the rise of capitalist globalization requires states to become more deeply involved in management and organization of the economy, she writes, “The old capitalist division of labour between capital and the state, between economic and political power, has been disrupted.” [46]
Why then does Wood believe that the demarcation between the economic and the political has only broken down with the onset of neoliberal globalization? “Capitalist imperialism has become almost entirely a matter of economic domination,” she writes, “in which market imperatives, manipulated by the dominant capitalist powers, are made to do the work no longer done by imperial states or colonial settlers.” In this case we should surely expect the incidence of war to decrease, perhaps even cease completely. However, having identified the difference between capitalist imperialism and earlier commercial and territorial empires which depended on extra-economic power, Wood then tells us that “the universality of capitalist imperatives has not at all removed the need for military force.” And what is this military force for? To impose the capitalist economic imperatives which we have previously been told are already universal! In the light of this rather circular reasoning, it is perhaps unsurprising that Wood discovers what she calls “paradoxes” in the current global situation, such as “while market imperatives may reach far beyond the power of any single state, these imperatives themselves must be enforced by extra-economic power,” or “the more purely economic empire has become, the more the nation state has proliferated.” [47] On this analysis, military and political pressure up to the level of warfare will continue to be exercised by the imperial powers against states of the Global South, but not between those powers themselves.
The other explanation, advanced for example by Brenner, is that, while states generally act in support of capital, the system of multiple states which capitalism inherited from feudalism means that even the biggest cannot predict or control the outcomes of their actions, since every other state is also acting in a similar way; as a result, counterproductive outcomes can result. [48] At an extreme, these outcomes can involve catastrophes like the First World War, which is presumably why Brenner believes that a “global-state solution” would be in the best interests of capital. Now, if Brenner was simply pointing to the incommensurability of outcomes it would be difficult to disagree. His position goes further than this, however, to suggest that, not only are the consequences of certain actions unpredictable, but that from the point of view of capitalism, they are incomprehensible.
The theoretical difficulty behind these arguments is a conception of capitalism as essentially involving market competition on the basis of price, behind which lies the compulsion to achieve cost savings through technical innovation. Brenner famously distinguishes “horizontal” competition between capitals from “vertical” conflict between labor and capital, which is helpful up to a point, but inter-capitalist competition does not take place only through the market. [49] In 1920 Nikolai Bukharin described “the struggle for spheres of capital investment ... for the very opportunity to expand the production process” as an example of capitalist competition by other means. [50] Chris Harman has argued that other non-market forms of competition involve “spending surplus value on ways of manipulating the market, advertising goods, creating a ‘product image’, bribing buyers in firms and state agencies.” [51] Capitalist competition can be external to markets, but so too can the agents of competition be separate from capitals: they can be states, and competition between states tends to lead to conflict.
As Giovanni Arrighi notes, there are two kinds of competition between capitals. The first amounts to a form of regulated cooperation in which all benefit from the expansion of trade. The second, however, involves “substantive” competition in which the profits of one capital are achieved at the expense of another; the situation ceases to be “positive-sum” and becomes “zero-sum.” This type of competition is not restricted to firms, however, but involves states, beginning with the behavior of the Italian city-states during the Hundred Years War. [52] Arrighi thus concludes that “inter-capitalist competition has indeed been the predominant influence” in causing contractions in profitability, and this is only tenable “provided that we include inter-capitalist wars among the most important forms of that competition.” If we do not, then it can lead to “the virtual eviction of world politics from the analysis of capitalist dynamics.” [53] In this context, the situations that state managers and politicians face are similar to those which face individual capitalists. When a firm invests in new labor-saving technology to reduce its costs, rival capitalists ultimately must make similar investments, even at the risk that the initial cost of purchase, installation, and training will be so great as to threaten to force them out of business before the savings can be realized. Not investing means the virtual certainty of failure; investing means it is only a possibility. State managers and politicians behave similarly to capitalists in relation to national economies. But state managers and politicians also have to take decisions which, on balance, are likely to result in disaster because the alternative exposes them to even greater risk in the longer term, and this does not only apply in situations which are directly economic in nature. The trajectory of geo-economic competition ultimately ends in geopolitical rivalry.
 
Conclusion
I agree with Birch and Heideman when they write of the transition debate that “we do not think the political stakes ... are so high that they preclude collective organizing by people with differing views on the question.” [54] Indeed, it would be the height of sectarian dementia to refuse to work with comrades because of a dispute over, for example, the extent to which capitalism had developed in France prior to 1789. But, as I have tried to show, the Political Marxist conception of capitalism has implications for contemporary practice as well as historical understanding, above all in relation to what we can expect from inter-capitalist competition at the level of the state. These issues should not prevent cooperation with Political Marxists either, but they do suggest that a wholesale importation of their positions into the International Socialist tradition may be more difficult than Birch and Heideman think.
* * *
Notes
1. Jonah Birch and Paul Heideman, In Defense of Political Marxism, International Socialist Review 90 (July–August 2013), p. 50.
2. See, for example, Robert Brenner, The Paradox of Social Democracy: the American Case, in The Year Left 1985, eds. Mike Davis, Fred Pfeil and Mike Sprinkler (London: Verso, 1985); and Charles Post, Exploring Working-Class Consciousness: a Critique of the Theory of the ‘Labor-Aristocracy’, Historical Materialism, vol. 18, no. 4 (2010).
3. See, for example, John Eric Marot [2005], Trotsky, the Left Opposition and the Rise of Stalinism: Theory and Practice, in The October Revolution in Prospect and Retrospect: Interventions in Russian and Soviet History (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2013).
4. Karl Marx [1957–8], Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy (Rough Draft) (Harmondsworth: Penguin/New Left Review, 1973),p. 277.
5. Marx, Grundrisse, p. 278.
6. Birch and Heideman, In Defense of ..., p. 49.
7. Karl Marx [1867]. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, vol. 1 (Harmondsworth: Penguin/New Left Review, 1976), p. 175, note 35.
8. Marx, Capital, vol. 1, pp. 874, 975.
9. Ibid., p. 1064.
10. Karl Marx [1894], Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, vol. 3 (Harmondsworth: Penguin/New Left Review, 1981), p. 1024. This passage is from Chapter 51, Relations of Distribution and Relations of Production – one cited by Robert Brenner as the basis of his interpretation. See, for example [1976], Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe, in The Brenner Debate: Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe, eds. T.H. Aston and C.H.E. Philpin (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), p. 11, note 3.
11. Marx, Capital, vol. 3, pp. 927–28.
12. George Comninel, Rethinking the French Revolution: Marxism and the Revisionist Challenge (London: Verso, 1987), p. 167. See also Benno Teschke, The Myth of 1648: Class, Geopolitics and the Making of Modern International Relations (London: Verso, 2003), pp. 55–56.
13. Ellen Meiksins Wood, Marxism and the Course of History, New Left Review 1, no. 127 (May/June 1981), pp. 101–2.
14. See, for example, Nikolai Bukharin [1920], The Economics of the Transition Period, in The Politics and Economics of the Transition Period, ed. Kenneth J. Tarbuck (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1979), p. 121 or Vladimir Lenin [1899]. The Development of Capitalism in Russia: The Process of the Formation of Home Market for Large Scale Industry, in Collected Works, vol. 3, 1899 (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1960), p. 596.
15. Charles Post, Introduction, in The American Road to Capitalism: Studies in Class-Structure, Economic Development and Political Conflict, 1620–1877 (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2011), p. 2.
16. Alex Callinicos, Theories and Narratives: Reflections on the Philosophy of History (Cambridge: Polity, 1995), pp. 134–35.
17. Marx, Capital, vol. 1, pp. 90, 876.
18. Ibid., p. 876.
19. Ibid., pp. 915–16.
20. Ellen Meiksins Wood [1999], The Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View (London: Verso, 2002), p. 48.
21. Marx, Capital, vol. 1, p. 876, note 1.
22. Robert Brenner, Bourgeois Revolution and Transition to Capitalism, in The First Modern Society: Essays in English History in Honor of Lawrence Stone, eds. A.L. Beier, David Cannadine, and J.M. Rosenheim (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), p. 294. For a more general argument about Marx’s supposed explanatory failures, see Wood, Horizontal Relations, p. 175.
23. Comninel, Rethinking the French Revolution, p. 92.
24. Birch and Heideman write that “capital accumulation” is not the same as “competitive accumulation”: “long before capitalism, different groups of exploiters were fighting among themselves over control of productive assets – with the losers in these conflicts facing dire consequences.” But what they are describing is simply competition, not competitive accumulation; outside of capitalism the latter word simply means the piling up of material wealth. See Birch and Heideman, In Defense of Political Marxism, p. 45.
25. Karl Marx [1847–49], Wage Labour and Capital, in Collected Works, vol. 9 (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1977), pp. 213, 220.
26. Marx, Capital, vol. 1, pp. 874, 975. See also Marx, Grundrisse, p. 505.
27. Marx, Capital, vol. 3, p. 1019.
28. Shahid Amin and Marcel van der Linden, Introduction, International Review of Social History 41, Supplement 4, Peripheral Labor: Studies in the History of Partial Proletarianization (June 1997), pp. 3, 4.
29. Jairus Banaji [1977], Modes of Production in a Materialist Conception of History, in Theory as History: Essays on Modes of Production and Exploitation (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2010), pp. 50–52, 92–94; Marx, Grundrisse, p. 463.
30. Stephen Miller, French Absolutism and Agricultural Capitalism: a Comment on Henry Heller’s Essays, Historical Materialism, vol. 20, no. 4 (2012), p. 144; Adam Smith [1776], An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, edited by Edwin Cannan (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976), Book 1, Chapter 2, p. 17.
31. Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Book I, Chapter 2, p. 17.
32. Dogen Göçmen, The Adam Smith Problem: Human Nature and Society in The Theory of Moral Sentiments and The Wealth of Nations (London: Tauris, 2007), p. 159.
33. Braudel, The Perspective of the World: Capitalism and Civilization, 15th–18th Centuries, vol. 3, (London: Fontana, 1985), p. 63.
34. Alan Carling, Analytic Marxism and Historical Materialism: the Debate on Social Evolution, Science and Society, vol. 57, no. 1 (Spring 1993), pp. 52–54.
35. Brenner, The Social Basis of Economic Development, p. 45.
36. [Robert Wedderburn] [1549], The Complaynt of Scotland wyth ane Exortatione to the Three Estaits to Be Vigilante in the Deffens of their Public Veil, with an appendix of contemporary English tracts, re-edited from the originals by J.A.H. Murray (London: Scottish Text Society, 1822), p. 123.
37. Peter Musgrove, The Early Modern European Economy (Houndmills: Macmillan, 1999), p. 51.
38. Jane Whittle, The Development of Agrarian Capitalism: Land and Labor in Norfolk, 1450–1550 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2000), p. 310.
39. Teschke, The Myth of 1648, p. 267.
40. China Miéville, Between Equal Rights: a Marxist Theory of International Law (Leiden: Brill, 2005), p. 221.
41. Jairus Banaji, The Fictions of Free Labour: Contract, Coercion, and So-Called Unfree Labour, Historical Materialism, vol. 11, no. 3 (2003), pp. 79–80.
42. Vivek Chibber, Capital Outbound, New Left Review, II/36 (November/December 2005), p. 155.
43. Max Weber [1919], The Profession and Vocation of Politics, in Political Writings, edited and introduced by Peter Lassman and Ronald Speirs (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), pp. 310–11.
44. Timothy Mitchell, Dreamland, in Evil Paradises: Deamworlds of Neoliberalism, eds. Mike Davis and Daniel Bertrand Monk, (New York: The New Press, 2007), p. 30.
45. Ellen Meiksins Wood, Empire of Capital (London: Verso, 2003), pp. 143, 153.
46. Ibid., p. 168.
47. Ibid., pp. 153, 154.
48. Robert Brenner, What is, and what is not, Imperialism?, Historical Materialism, vol. 14, no. 4 (2006), pp. 84–85.
49. Robert Brenner [1998], The Economics of Global Turbulence: the Advanced Capitalist Economies from Long Boom to Long Downturn, 1945–2005 (London: Verso, 2006), p. 25.
50. Bukharin, The Economics of the Transition Period, p. 62.
51. Chris Harman, Explaining the Crisis: a Marxist Reappraisal (London: Bookmarks, 1984), pp. 43–4.
52. Giovanni Arrighi, The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power and the Origins of Our Times (London: Verso, 1994), p. 227.
53. Giovanni, Arrighi, Adam Smith in Beijing: Lineages of the Twenty-First Century (London: Verso, 2007), pp. 130, 132.
54. Birch and Heideman, In Defense of Political Marxism, p. 50.
 



Award-winning historian Neil Davidson considers the precedents for army disaffection and revolt
The crime for which George Galloway was expelled from the Labour Party was appealing to British soldiers not to carry out illegal orders during the invasion of Iraq. Since the invasion was itself an illegal act, Galloway was effectively committing the offence which the ruling class refer to as ‘incitement to mutiny’. This may explain some of the hatred with which they have responded to his election.
In the end, all revolutions succeed or fail depending on whether they have been able to break the military power of the existing state. Generalised violence against the mass of the population is not, of course, the preferred method of bourgeois rule, since regimes that depend mainly on repression to maintain themselves in power tend to be unstable and insecure. But in a crisis, when the very existence of the system seems under threat, the military will always be the final barrier against the working class and its allies.
We are not yet in a revolutionary situation, alas, but any weakening of the command structure, such as implied by Galloway’s eminently moderate invitation for the troops to obey international law rather than criminal orders, threatens to weaken the final bulwark upon which our rulers depend. The one thing armed forces are not supposed to do is think, at least in other than instrumental ways; part of the otherwise incomprehensible nature of military discipline is precisely to instil obedience to orders, no matter how pointless, illogical or perverse. The Victorian Poet Laureate Tennyson spoke more truthfully than he perhaps intended when he wrote of the Light Brigade at the Battle of Balaclava, ‘Theirs not to reason why ...’
Refusal to obey orders or, even worse, to establish an alternative source of command, everywhere carries the most severe of penalties, including – as in the British army until 1998 – death. Mutiny is therefore a serious business, and not one which members of the armed forces of any country undertake lightly. In general, it occurs only when they are either supremely confident or extremely desperate. For this reason, the question of how sections of the armed forces have, in the past, abandoned their posts, or even changed sides, is of considerable interest to socialists. The subject is vast, and this article can only touch on main issues and try to draw broad conclusions for the present.
The earliest mutinies with any social significance occurred during the transition to capitalism. Feudal armies were not permanent institutions, but temporary assemblies put together by the crown for specific objectives. They consisted of the king’s vassals (barons, knights, etc.), their retainers and usually their tenants. In this sense, the whole of society was militarised. The rise of the absolutist state, from around the mid-15th century, saw the growth of larger armies and the necessity for soldiers to be trained to a much higher level of technical competence than hitherto in the effective use of the new technologies of artillery and musketry – the so called ‘Military Revolution’.
But the absolutists were opposed to the mass training or recruiting of their own subjects, for fairly obvious reasons. Soldiers therefore tended to be mercenaries, preferably from outside the regal domains altogether – as in the role played by Swiss mercenaries for the French monarchy – but certainly from outside the areas where war was being waged. For this reason there were very few mutinies in early modern Europe. During the first successful bourgeois revolution, the Dutch Revolt against Hapsburg Spain (1567–1609), ‘Spanish’ troops mutinied, but over their pay and conditions, and not from any sympathy with their opponents or desire to overthrow the dynasty.
 
The New Model Army
The first serious mutiny took place during the English Revolution, but it was a mutiny within the revolutionary forces, not those of the Stuart state. By 1647 the soldiers of the New Model Army had several grievances, including opposition to being sent to Ireland to suppress the Catholic rebellion and resentment at not receiving their arrears of pay. The situation produced several innovations. Within the New Model Army itself rank and file soldiers elected representatives (‘agents’ or ‘agitators’) and came under the influence of the first real political organisation in modern history, the Levellers.
The demands of the men quickly generalised from their immediate concerns to the broader issue of who should have the franchise. Indeed, it was difficult for them to ignore the contrast between their ability to elect representatives within their own ranks, and the way they were prevented from doing so in the wider society they were sworn to defend. The actual rebellion followed on from the inconclusive outcome to the famous Putney Debates, but was easily overcome by a combination of (actually quite limited) repression and successful appeals to the loyalty of the troops in the face of Charles’s attempt to restart the civil war. The significance of this episode is that it was essentially a dispute over the extent of democracy in the post-revolutionary state, in which the more consistent democrats lost.
The New Model Army was an ideologically committed army, with a membership drawn from a relatively homogenous social group of independent farmers and small producers. The British bourgeoisie had no intention of allowing such body, or a standing army of any sort, to be recreated. Nevertheless, for the century between the consolidation of the English Revolution in 1688 and the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789, the British army had several differences from most of those in continental Europe. It no longer relied on mercenaries, but on an army raised from volunteers and supplemented by men forced into service or ‘pressed’ – although the latter phenomenon was considerably more important in the navy. Men enlisted for economic reasons, and nowhere in the 18th century was this truer than the Highlands of Scotland. This was a society in crisis even before the Battle of Culloden in 1746, and it entered a period of total disintegration shortly afterwards.
One effect of this was massive levels of recruitment to the British army. The regiments were often composed of men from the same estates. They received agreement that they would be allowed to retain their local regimental identities and not be sent outside the British Isles. Both promises were regularly broken, with the result that there were at least 16 serious mutinies by Scottish Highland regiments between 1743 and 1804. There is, however, little conclusive evidence that these mutinies were inspired by the great social upheavals that took place during these years. Indeed, the Highland regiments were in the vanguard of the counter-revolutionary onslaught against the American and French Revolutions.
Far more significant were the naval mutinies at Spithead and the Nore in 1797, since the British state relied on the navy for protection to a far greater extent than it did on the army. Here we encounter for the first time, not just opposition to bad conditions, but a possible political direction which is opposed to the existing state. The extent to which political influence of Jacobin radicalism influenced the sailors is still widely disputed by historians, but it is surely significant that the fleet contained several thousand Irishmen, given the proximity of the mutiny to the revolt of the United Irishmen the following year. The notion of going on strike – meaning here the ‘striking’ or lowering of sails – may actually originate in these events.
What changed the political significance of mutinies was, from the middle of the 19th century, the introduction of conscription – that is, of the systematic, compulsory enlistment of men of a certain age who met certain (initially relatively low) physical standards. This coincided with the consolidation of capitalism in Western and Central Europe and North America. Some states, like Imperial Germany, theoretically insisted on a period of military service for all males. Other states only used conscription in actual war situations, as did both sides in the American Civil War. It was mass involvement in the civil war that produced the understandably bitter phrase, ‘It’s a rich man’s war but a poor man’s fight’, although of all wars fought by capitalist states the North’s cause is historically one of the most justifiable. Initially Britain avoided conscription precisely because of its reliance on the navy.
Outside of the Balkans, Europe was at peace between the conclusion of the Franco-Prussian War in 1871 and the start of the First World War in 1914. In other words, the latter event was the first major war to have taken place since the completion of the bourgeois revolution in the main European states. Conscription was universal between 1914 and 1918 and it was during this great imperial slaughter that the first explicit connection was made between the struggle for socialism and the revolt in the armed forces. (There is a precursor in the 1905 revolt of the Kronstadt sailors which was one of the opening episodes of the 1905 Russian Revolution.)
Two elements were necessary for these connections to be made. The first was that socialists who were called up did not try to evade the process by going on the run or pleading conscientious objection, but that they ‘went with their class’, as the saying had it. This was important, because when the massed armies and navies of the combatants began finally to crack under the unrelenting pressure of the slaughter and deprivation, there were socialists alongside them who could try to explain their situation and what could be done about it. Second, mutinies either in the field or at the rear took place in the context of a rising movement in both workplaces and communities against, not just the war, but also the system that had produced it. These two conditions varied from country to country, and so, consequently, did the extent of the revolt in the armed forces. In no case did the latter rise above the level of consciousness or struggle that had been displayed by the working class of that country as a whole.
Essentially, the army and navy mutinies varied in significance depending on whether or not the country involved was suffering defeat, with all the heightened social pressures that involved. The Russian Revolution of 1917, as Trotsky pointed out, was a combination of a peasant uprising for land and a working class uprising for socialism. Below the officer corps the Tsarist army consisted of members of both classes and so their rebellion – which in many places simply involved mass desertion-linked the two great revolutionary classes and effectively broke the ability of the Tsarist regime to resist.
In Germany a revolt by sailors at Kiel, in opposition to a suicidal attempt to engage the British fleet, effectively began the revolution of 1918. On the Allied side, however, the role of mutinies played a less significant role, which reflected the fact that the revolutionary wave itself was weaker in Britain, France and the US than in Central and Eastern Europe. At the end of the war these were mainly about the speed and equity of demobilisation, although at least one important naval mutiny, by the French Fleet in the Black Sea, was directed against intervention against the Bolsheviks in the Russian Civil War.
Mutinies played a generally far smaller role in the revolutionary movements at the end of the Second World War. Discipline did not break down among the Axis Powers. In Germany, unlike in the First World War, the Wehrmacht fought on to the end. In part this is because of the savage reprisals which deserters could expect – the ruling class was famously obsessed with avoiding the collapse of 1918 – but also because of fear of what the advancing Russian armies would do in retaliation for the atrocities committed by German troops in the east. This could have been mitigated had the advancing Russians taken an internationalist attitude, but in fact Stalinist propaganda throughout Europe was conducted solely on a nationalist basis that blamed the entire German people for Hitler (e.g., ‘Let every man kill his own Boche!’).
In the case of the Allies, such mutinies that did occur were again principally concerned with demobilisation. This was certainly the case with the British army in Egypt, although revolutionaries, including Trotskyists like Duncan Hallas, were involved. There seem to be two main reasons. On the one hand, most politically conscious soldiers saw the Second World War, to some extent, as one against fascism, and not simply an inter-imperialist conflict like the First. They were therefore less willing to take action which might hinder its prosecution, however justified. On the other, there was no revolutionary movement in Britain and the US at the end of the Second World War, although there was a strong leftist and reformist mood, and in the US a very large strike movement. But soldiers were interested in returning home to take part in the new world they thought was opening up for them, not in overthrowing the state of which they were a part. The main exceptions, and they were very important indeed, occurred in the colonies. Events such as the mutiny of the Indian Fleet in 1946 were clearly part of the opening rounds of the struggle for liberation in Asia. (The hostility of both Congress and the Communist Party to the mutineers is also indicative of the betrayals that were to follow.)
 
The revolt of the GIs
The final episode I want to discuss, which in a sense still casts its shadow over all succeeding events, is the American experience in Vietnam. This subject has been discussed with great clarity and sensitivity by Jonathan Neale in The American War, but some brief observations can be made here.
First, by the time of the war in Vietnam the class experience of the army had come to represent the class and racial structure of society to a far greater degree than previously. In the Second and – especially – the First World Wars the level of casualties among the officer class was, in relative terms, extremely high, something which they were increasingly determined to avoid. On the other side, however, black participation in the fighting was far more extensive – there had been black troops in the world wars, of course, but they were often restricted to non-combatant roles at the rear. This was now reversed. It was the American working class who died in the jungles of Vietnam.
The revolt of the GIs was different from those of the world wars, in that it did not take the form of a classical collective refusal to serve. On the one hand it saw an intense degree of politicisation, including the production of regular anti-war, or at least anti-army, bulletins and newspapers. On the other, it saw a drugged withdrawal from active service. At its most extreme, it involved a guerrilla strategy of selectively assassinating particularly gung-ho or oppressive officers through the use of fragmentation bombs (‘fragging’).
In the end, large sections of the US combat forces in Vietnam were simply unreliable for one reason or another, and this was recognised by the more intelligent sections of the officer corps. Colin Powell was among those who suggested to Secretary of State Henry Kissinger that it might not be entirely sensible to send black US troops to oppose the black nationalist movement, the MPLA, which was on the verge of power in Angola during 1976. There is at least a case for arguing that, uncharacteristic though it was, this was the most effective mutiny in military history.
What had happened? Essentially two things. In the battlefield was an enemy whose increasingly successful struggle against superior force and technology had belied US propaganda claims about their supposed minority status among the population. At home a mass movement that involved the friends and relatives of the troops acted to remove the usual sense of isolation that troops beginning to doubt their role usually feel.
The precise circumstances of Vietnam are unlikely ever to be repeated, even in Iraq, but several elements are still in place. The fact that conscription has largely been abandoned by the imperialist powers (except where they are colonial-settler regimes like Israel) does not mean that mutinies are no longer likely to occur. Apart from any other consideration, no formally democratic government is likely to dare to reintroduce conscription, which is a victory of sorts. But the majority of private soldiers and naval ratings still come from the working class (the class basis of the air force tends to be slightly different) – and often from the poorest and worst educated sections of the working class at that, as the role of Lynndie England in the Abu Ghraib atrocities has demonstrated. To say in advance that this layer of people cannot be won to socialist politics is effectively to write off whole sections of the working class.
This does not mean that troops will automatically achieve class consciousness, but this is also true of working class people in civilian life. What makes the situation of those in the army more difficult is the sheer level of indoctrination which they receive and the sheer isolation from their background. Indeed, the incredibly high levels of suicide and mental illness among ex-soldiers are partly explained by the removal of the ‘world’ to which they have become accustomed in the ranks.
On the other hand because – unlike the police – the army is far less likely to be used regularly against the home population, there are greater opportunities to connect the intense class divisions within the armed forces with those in the outside world. The prospect of what used to be called ‘disaffection in the ranks’ escalating to the point of refusal to fight, let alone any further action, is likely to be enhanced by three factors.
The first is division within the ruling class, including the chiefs of staff themselves. Where the leaders are divided on tactical questions – and they are of course unlikely to question the fundamental political or moral positions of their class – it can produce a situation of institutional paralysis that reduces to some extent the risks involved in disobedience.
The second is resistance on the ground against invasion and occupation. Without this ruling classes would rarely question the correctness of their strategy, let alone split over the issue. But it also true that without the prospect of stand-off or defeat a large enough number of troops are unlikely to question their role – even if only from the point of view of self-preservation. But without one final factor, the effect of battlefield violence, death and the loss of comrades is just as likely to turn to blind hatred towards the enemy as to a refusal to fight.
That final factor is an active mass movement ‘at home’ articulating reasons for opposing the war and supporting those in the armed forces who do so. Only this factor, the creation of the mass movement, is within the power of socialists to build, although the more we build it the more likely divisions are to appear within the ruling class. A movement like the Stop the War Coalition can give potential dissidents in the forces the confidence to refuse orders. In this context, the importance of developments like Military Families Against the War cannot be underestimated, and it is important to understand just how rare it has been for this to happen during a war. Although the stories about returning GIs being spat on by protesters during the Vietnam War are mainly lies, it is vital that the movement continues to emphasise that it does not see individual soldiers as the enemy, and that we, rather than the politicians and generals ordering them to their deaths, are their true allies.
 



Robin Cook’s death means there will be a by-election – the first since the general election – in the Scottish constituency of Livingston.
The Scottish Socialist Party (SSP) is mounting a national mobilisation to maximise its vote.
For decades Livingston has effectively been run as a one-party state with Labour dominating the local council and holding seats in both the British and Scottish parliaments.
This has led to the situation where some Labour politicians try to gain local credibility by opposing policies which other Labour politicians have imposed. There are certainly enough to oppose.
Among the major issues facing voters in Livingston are the building of a private prison in nearby Addiewell, the moving of important acute services from St John’s hospital to Edinburgh, and the reduction of local fire services.
On top of all this, the important question of the war and civil liberties refuses to go way.
Labour has picked Jim Devine, Cook’s agent, as its candidate. Devine is a full time official with Unison and has clearly been chosen for his association with Cook and because he is perceived to be on the left.
The SSP will be pointing out to voters the contradiction between Unison’s opposition to the war and privatisation and Labour’s support for them.
The SSP candidate is local party organiser Steven Nimmo.
Steven says, “We think that the problems of war and globalisation raised by the tremendous Make Poverty History and G8 demonstrations are as important to voters as local issues like health and the fire service.”
Four of the SSP MSPs are currently being excluded from the Scottish Parliament because of their protests over repressive policing at the G8 summit. They will all be in Livingston for the campaign.
The SSP is kicking off the campaign this Saturday. To take part gather at Craig’s Farm, Craigshill, Livingston at 12 noon.
 



Writer Neil Davidson examines the hypocrisy surrounding the debate on ‘Britishness’
The Lone Ranger and Tonto are trapped on the edge of a cliff by angry Native Americans. The Lone Ranger turns to Tonto and says, “Looks like we’re surrounded, Tonto.” Tonto replies, “What do you mean ‘we’, paleface?”
This is a politically correct version of an old joke.
Chutzpah is a useful Jewish term best illustrated by the story about the man who murders his parents then asks the court to let him off because he’s an orphan.
I am reminded of this joke by the current clamour for Muslims, and by implication, all non-whites and non-Christians, to adopt British culture and values.
Tory MP Boris Johnson expressed his shock in the Daily Telegraph that “too many Britons have absolutely no sense of allegiance to this country or its institutions”. Why might this be?
Johnson, we can be sure, has never suffered a racist attack. It is unlikely that he has ever been singled out for stop and search by the police on account of his hair-style, clothes or accent – bizarrely different though they are to those of the majority of people living in Britain.
We know that he has not been confined to a low paying job or forced to live in sub-standard housing. We can be certain that his religion – the state religion, at least in England – has not been attacked by commentators whose arrogance in denouncing it is equalled only by their ignorance of its tenets.
Yet if he had experienced these things, as Muslims regularly do, he might be less mystified as to why some of them feel a less than perfect allegiance to “this country and its institutions”.
In fact, what is remarkable is that, despite the way non-white immigrants to Britain have been treated over the last 60 years, they have nevertheless variously argued, pleaded, and demanded that they be treated as British.
They want British national identity to be extended to them on the same basis that it is to the English, the Scots and the Welsh.
The Irish are a more complex case, of course. Yet, despite all the rhetoric about equal opportunities and multiculturalism, in all that time the British state has maintained the levels of institutional racism that form the daily background to their lives.
But now the British political classes and their echo-chambers in the media are demanding that people whose
Britishness has been denied or downplayed for so long must abandon their religious identity.
These identities have in some cases at least been maintained as a defence against the hostility of their social environment, as a consolation for the pain which they have to endure.
We are informed that multiculturalism – which in this context means people being able to follow their preferred religious and cultural practices – is a form of apartheid.
Now if this meant that British society had forced many minority groups into segregated ghettos, it would be an interesting if wildly exaggerated analogy.
But the implication is rather that these groups have segregated themselves, subjected themselves to an internal exile because of their rejection of those good old British values of justice and fair play enjoyed by millions around the world from Ireland to India.
These are currently being displayed to the mysteriously unappreciative inhabitants of Iraq.
To put obstacles in the way of people becoming British, then to denounce them for failing to do so, takes chutzpah on a truly cosmic scale.
The insolence of these establishment demands is staggering, especially when we remember how Muslims in particular were once praised for the very characteristics for which they are now denounced.
In the 1970s, it was common for “Asian” people to be praised by right wingers for their supposed commitment to family values and small-scale capitalist enterprise.
And, if they were Muslims, they had a sternly moralistic religion as well. How different, it was claimed, were these virtuous shop-keepers from the feckless African-Caribbean one parent families who had failed to adapt to the “British way of life”.
Equally, Labour Party politicians were quite happy for Asians to remain ghettoised as long as they voted for their candidates. One politician now sitting in the House of Lords used to refer to the inhabitants of his Midlands constituency as “my Asians”.
 
Propaganda
One of the pleasures of Respect MP George Galloway’s victory in Bethnal Green & Bow is the blow it delivered to that kind of patronising complacency.
But now the propaganda needs of the ruling class are different. The tight, enclosed family characterised by religious observance is no longer seen as a model of middle class industry, but as an incubator of terrorism.
Patterns of community voting, now that the votes are no longer guaranteed to the Labour Party, are a thing of scandal, a demonstration of the way in which immature young minds are being influenced by clerics, quite possibly of foreign origin.
The cry goes up, “Why don’t they accept our values, our way of life?” Let’s take a closer look at these notions.
The definition of a national culture as “a whole way of life” was introduced by the brilliant but deeply reactionary poet and critic, T.S. Eliot.
It was taken up by the socialist writer Raymond Williams. It is, however, an incredibly dangerous idea for the left to embrace, as recent events have proved.
First, a living culture is not static. It is not something which at some point in history can be declared finished, and to which everybody thereafter must conform.
The culture is whatever the people who live within a society do at any one time, with all the contradictions that involves. In that sense, multiculturalism is simply a social fact, not a social policy, and cannot be undone.
Second, cultures have never been purely national, less so than ever today. Why should they be anyway?
In a recent article in the New Statesman magazine called, Why Britain is Great the historian Tristram Hunt praises David Blunkett for “speaking of his patriotic ardour for English music, poetry, drama and humour”.
If Blunkett is seriously saying that he appreciates these things more than the culture of other countries simply because they are English then he’s an even bigger fool than we had supposed.
This a naked appeal to nationalism which no one takes seriously other than as a stick to beat the immigrant population or their descendants. The people who talk about the superiority of British national culture watch US films, eat Indian food, buy German cars, take their holidays in Italy
Third, and most important, there is no culture can be said to embody a single set of values.
Leave aside the absurdity of claiming values such as “tolerance” and “justice” as particularly British as if other people did not also embrace them.
By this I do not mean that each different class or group has its own culture but that the values within each culture are contested.
The values of the managers of British Airways are not the same as those of the mainly white union members who struck in support of mainly Asian sacked workers.
These differences in values are ultimately based on differences of class interest – the great unmentionable in this entire debate.
When Hunt writes, “Like other Western and non-Western nations, we have a history of promoting the type of gender, racial and sexual equality reviled by misogynistic mujahids”, we should respond like Tonto.
Every single attempt to broaden democracy in Britain, from the first attempts to extend the vote, through decolonisation, to the decriminalisation of abortion and homosexuality has been forced from the hand of the ruling class.
Here we have another example of that old ruling class chutzpah again. First, resist democratic reform until it is no longer safe to resist. Then, claim the achievement of these reforms, which you fought like hell to prevent, as part of our national heritage.
 
Alternative
I am not arguing, incidentally, that the left needs to create an alternative national history to counter that of the right – the people’s story as a counter to our island story. This is a strategy that has always proved disastrous in that it remains fixated on the nation.
There is one final argument which is used to attack the Muslim population. This is slightly more subtle, in that it does not rely on exclusively British values, but on the universal values of the Enlightenment.
Now I agree that we need to defend the Enlightenment against irrationality, but perhaps we should start at home, or with our closest ally.
The president of the US favours intelligent design as an explanation for the origins of life. Schools in several US states are now teaching creationism as an alternative to Darwinism. And gay marriages will continue to go unrecognised because of what is written – along with prohibitions on eating shellfish, owls and other abominations – in the Book of Leviticus.
It is certainly clear that socialists need to take a stand against these forces of darkness and unreason.
Indeed, non-Christians might reasonably ask what it is in the Bible that apparently compels Tony Blair to bomb, invade or occupy five countries in eight years. Is it statements such as, “I come not to bring peace, but a sword”?
But this is not what pro-war columnists Nick Cohen or Francis Wheen mean by defending the Enlightenment. What they mean is that Muslims should be forced to stop allowing their religion to influence their lives.
For these people “the Enlightenment” is only a series of rational beliefs based on evidence. Except when it comes to the existence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, of course. Like the existence of Allah, they are an article of faith.
But the Enlightenment, or at least the radicalised Enlightenment associated with Marxism, is more than this. It is not enough to denounce people for being deluded by their priests or imams.
We have to understand what in their social conditions might lead people to accept these beliefs in the first place and to do so as a basis for engaging with them in joint activity.
To say to Muslims – or people of any faith community – that they must agree to abandon their beliefs before we will deign to have a conversation or join a march with them is the worst kind of sectarian abstention.
It is also to make the elitist assumption that other people are incapable of changing their minds through the process of action and discussion. One of the most significant events in recent years has been the mass entry into active political life of the Muslim population in the anti-war movement.
It is this, not the harangues of those demanding adherence to some mythical British “culture” or “values”, that has allowed people from different groups to see themselves as one – not as British, but as part of the worldwide resistance to war and capitalist globalisation.
Neil Davidson was the joint winner of the Isaac Deutscher Memorial Prize in 2003 for his book Discovering the Scottish Revolution 1692–1746. This is available from Bookmarks, the socialist bookshop. Phone 020 7637 1848 or go to www.bookmarks.uk.com.
 



Pierre Broué
The German Revolution, 1917–1923
translated by John Archer, edited by Ian Birchall and Brian Pearce
Brill, Historical Materialism book series, 2005, Euro 129
‘This not a German event. There no longer are any “German events”.’ [1] With these words to the founding conference of the United German Communist Party in December 1920, its president, Paul Levi, declared the inseparability of the German Revolution from the global struggle for socialism. There had, of course, been many events in Germany during the preceding three years. And what events they were. Apart from Russia, no other country could boast of a comparable succession of revolutionary episodes in such a relatively short period of time.
But Germany was not just inseparable from the world revolution in the years following 1917. it was also central to its ultimate success or failure. In October 1923, only three years after Levi had optimistically greeted the formation of the United German Communist Party as the harbinger of the working class’s ascent to power, the party proved itself incapable of seizing the opportunities presented by the capitalist crisis. That defeat, that refusal to even seriously engage in battle, was a decisive precondition for the rise of Stalinism in Russia and Nazism in Germany itself.
An understanding of this moment in German history is therefore of considerable importance to contemporary socialists. Where should we turn to gain such an understanding? In his own book on the German Revolution, first published in 1982, Chris Harman noted that he had written it for ‘all those who are – like myself before I began work on the book – frustrated by the need to pull together a fragmentary knowledge of the German Revolution out of a plethora of different sources, some out of print and many of the best only available in German or French.’ [2] Thankfully, one of the French works to which Harman alludes, perhaps the best of all, Pierre Broué’s The German Revolution, has at last been published in English. [3]
Broué does full justice to the importance of his subject. This is a work conceived on an epic scale, comprising 900 pages of carefully researched text, plus a chronological table and biographical notes. The editors are particularly to be congratulated for giving up to date English references for Broué’s original Russian and German sources wherever these were available. The main problem with this excellent edition is that the publishers have neglected to provide an index – a quite extraordinary omission in a book of this size and one which is likely to prove the biggest obstacle to anyone trying to negotiate their way through it. Those prepared to try will, however, find it worth the effort.
Revolutions – even failed revolutions like the German – occupy definite periods of time, starting from the moment at which the victory of the contending class becomes possible and ending in either victory or defeat, but one way or the other with the passing of the ‘revolutionary situation’, at least for the immediate future. The periodisation of even successful revolutions has posed significant problems for historians; with unconsummated ‘revolutionary situations’ these difficulties are multiplied. [4] Prior to Broué’s book first appearing in 1971, most discussions of Germany focused either on the few months between November 1918 and May 1919 when the most obvious ‘revolutionary’ activity took place (insurrection in Berlin, civil war in the Ruhr, the short-lived Bavarian Soviet Republic), or on the entire period from the end of the First World War to the triumph of Hitler in 1933. Broué’s focus on the six years between the strike by revolutionary metal workers in April 1917 and the aborted insurrection of October 1923 is wider than the first timescale, but narrower than the second.
Broué was one of the first modern Marxist historians to fully explore the decisive significance of the latter date. The British historian A.J.P. Taylor once famously wrote of the failed bourgeois revolution of 1848 that ‘German history reached its turning-point and failed to turn.’ [5] Taylor makes too many untenable assumptions about the nature of ‘normal’ capitalist development for this to be true of 1848, but for the year 1923 the notion of a ‘turning point at which history failed to turn’ is apt. Broué notes that ‘even today, the international Communist movement has not devoted to this unprecedented disaster the minimum attention which it affords to victories or even to defeats of less importance.’ [6] Only two writers at the time seriously attempted to understand the significance of what had happened, Trotsky in The Lessons of October and Levi – by then writing from a left Social Democratic perspective – in his introduction to the German edition of the same work. [7] Since then, outside of the ranks of the revolutionary left, only a handful of books have approached a comparable level of understanding. [8]
At the heart of Broué’s account therefore is the question of why the revolution failed. He recognises that Germany (and the West more generally) was not identical to Russia, but rightly does not see this as decisive. Neither was it because of any lack of revolutionary capacity on the part of the German working class. His answer is ultimately that the collective hero of his book, the Communist Party (KPD), the organisation which should have provided the necessary leadership to workers, was unable to play the same role in Germany as the Bolshevik Party had played in Russia.
The founding of the KPD was inspired in equal parts by rage at the betrayals of a Social Democracy that had led the German working class into the disasters of war, and admiration for what the Bolsheviks had achieved in Russia. But it was born in the very course of the revolution itself. Only a handful of leaders had any serious prior experience in the movement and many of them – above all, Rosa Luxemburg – were to die at the hands of the counter-revolution before the party or the revolution was more than months old. The neglect of socialists to build a revolutionary party prior to the outbreak of revolution was not, of course, some special failure on the part of the Germans: no one outside of Russia fully understood the need to build such a party before the October Revolution. Nevertheless, this fact meant that the KPD had to develop in conditions which called for a party already schooled in the class struggle.
The problems and dangers this late birth bequeathed were perfectly well understood and articulated by Levi at the founding conference of the United Communist Party of Germany in 1920. [9] Unfortunately, those who thought like him were unable to prevail. On the one hand the party carried out policies which were wildly ultra-left. In some cases this led to abstention: it initially refused to participate in the general strike of March 1920 to stop the right wing Kapp Putsch – possibly the greatest moment in the entire history of the German working class – because the moment, apparently, was not yet right for socialist revolution. In other cases it led to attempts to force the pace of struggle without support from even a large minority of the broader class: in ‘the March Action’ of 1921 the KPD attempted an insurrectionary movement which involved, among other things, sending unemployed comrades into the factories to attack workers who refused to go on strike at its behest. But in reaction to these absurdities, the party just as often pulled so far back that it committed the opposite error of accommodating to existing reformist structures of the labour movement.
Of these twin errors, Broué writes: ‘The logic of both of them alike would lead the party to disaster, either as a sect isolated by the policy of putchism, the theory of the offensive – or in dissolution within a general unity, the price of conceding too much in order to forge a united front at any price.’ [10] The consequence was a cumulative loss of self-belief by the leadership: ‘Convinced by the leadership of the International of the magnitude of their blunder [in March 1921], they lost confidence in their own ability to think, and often failed to defend their viewpoint, so that they systematically accepted that of the Bolsheviks, who had at least been able to win their revolutionary struggle.’ [11]
There were, of course, members of the KPD who attempted to change its direction. Two individuals dominate Broué’s book. The first is Paul Levi – the only significant leader that the KPD had after the annihilation of the original leadership in 1919. If Broué’s book does nothing else, it restores to the historical memory of the left one of the few figures involved in the Communist International outside of Russia – whatever his faults – who was capable of independent thought. The second is Karl Radek, the Bolshevik leader most involved in German affairs.
As Broué writes, ‘They had been the most important leaders of the party between 1918 and 1923, and were as completely eliminated from Bolshevik history as Trotsky had been, and whenever it was deemed necessary to mention their names, they were merely branded with the traditional epithets of “enemies of the people”, “traitors” or “renegades”.’ [12] But their reputation suffered even among the ranks of the revolutionary left: Levi because of his expulsion from the KPD in 1921 for breaching discipline and his subsequent retreat to reformist politics, Radek because of his capitulation to Stalin during the late 1920s. Broué devotes two chapters (45 and 46) to reassessing their contribution, not in order to exculpate them from their mistakes, but simply to treat them with the seriousness they deserve.
What emerges from Broué’s account is that many of the political positions which we tend to associate with the individual geniuses of Lenin or Gramsci were actually much more widespread and originated during the strategic debates within the KPD: ‘Lenin, in ‘Left Wing’ Communism: An Infantile Disorder, did no more than to systematise the themes which Radek and Levi had developed against the German opposition and the KPD, although, no doubt, with wider vision and less rancour.’ [13] Similarly, Radek’s arguments in The Development of the World Revolution and the Tactics of the Communist Parties in the Struggle for the Dictatorship of the Proletariat (1919) – one of the texts which anticipate ‘Left Wing’ Communism – also argues for the difference between Russia and the West in ways which clearly anticipate those of Gramsci in his Prison Notebooks.
Radek noted that, as a result of the absence of a revolutionary peasantry, but the presence of a more confident, experienced bourgeoisie and the greater strength of reformism: ‘The illusion of a quick victory arose from the incorrect interpretation of the lessons of the Russian Revolution, the conditions of which, although within an identical historical framework, were by no means the same as those of the European revolution.’ [14]
This is a work of committed socialist scholarship, but it never reads – as many socialist histories unfortunately do – merely as Political Journalism with Historical Examples, where the subject has merely been chosen to illustrate a point the author wants to make (‘the need for the revolutionary party’, or whatever). There are lessons for us here, not least about the pointlessness of small groups of revolutionaries trying to force the working class into struggle through their own ‘exemplary’ actions. But these arise from Broué’s narrative and analysis, and rarely appear as pre-packaged programmatic points superimposed on the text. Nevertheless, it would be unrealistic to expect a work of this size and scope to be flawless, and indeed there are some problems and omissions here.
Some involve relatively minor theoretical issues. Broué too easily accepts that the German bourgeois revolution was ‘incomplete’, prior to the November Revolution of 1918, which brings with it the inevitable corollary that the November Revolution was in some sense its completion. [15] This position is a strange one for a Trotskyist like Broué to hold, given that (as he himself notes) it was the official position of the Stalinist regime in the German Democratic Republic. Trotsky himself provided a more realistic assessment: ‘As to the German Revolution of 1918, it was no democratic completion of the bourgeois revolution, it was proletarian revolution decapitated by the Social Democrats; more correctly, it was a bourgeois counter-revolution, which was compelled to preserve pseudo-democratic forms after its victory over the proletariat.’ [16]
Some important episodes pass by with far less attention than they merit. The short-lived Bavarian Soviet Republic, for example, is dealt with in a handful of pages. [17] Yet this debacle demonstrates in microcosm the reasons why the failure to build a revolutionary party in advance was disastrous. Harman’s shorter book spends proportionately far more space discussing this episode and, in this respect, is stronger as a result. [18]
By far the greatest weakness, however, is the obverse of the book’s greatest strength: its minute reconstruction of the political and theoretical life within the KPD and the relationship of its various factions with the Communist International. Now, these are important issues. The role played (and, in the end, not played) by the KPD is absolutely central to the outcome of the revolution; the influence of the Communist International, for good or bad, was inescapable. But Broué’s relentless focus on these themes is undertaken – for the most part – at the expense of the society which the KPD sought to transform.
Perry Anderson once wrote, ‘Any decent history of a communist party must take seriously the Gramscian maxim, that to write a history of a political party is to write the history of the society of which it is a component from a particular monographic standpoint.’ Such a history, writes Anderson, ‘must be constantly related to the national balance of forces of which the party is only one moment, and which forms the context in which it must operate.’ [19] Broué fails to do this and indeed, almost tends to reverse Anderson’s formulation, so that the history of Germany is seen through the filter of the KPD – and Broué’s book is ostensibly a history of the revolution, not the party.
In the end, revolutions are made by social classes, not organisations, and what is missing here is a sense of the changing condition of the German working class, of its consciousness, its readiness or otherwise to fight, and so on. However, the working class do at least appear in motion from time to time: the ruling class does not, at least in any serious sense. But without a sense of who the revolution was being made against – a class whose representatives were very far from being passive during these events – the picture we receive is misleadingly partial. In fairness to Broué, this approach was quite common in the late 1960s and early 1970s; it identifies the book as belonging to its time far more than, say, the failure to discuss the role of women of which Eric Weitz complains in the Introduction.
The greatest problem, however, is not one that Broué or perhaps anyone could have dealt with. It is the issue of what would have needed to happen for the German Revolution to be successful. This raises issues of historical causation too vast to be adequately discussed here, but the outlines of an answer can be suggested.
The death of Rosa Luxemburg and those of the other capable leaders, notably Jogiches and Levine (and not the heroic but politically inept Liebknecht, with whom Luxemburg broke shortly before their assassination), removed the possibility of the KPD developing an understanding of how to operate within the short time available to it. If they had survived then it is just possible that the KPD might have seen the possibilities of the strike in response to the Kapp Putsch, would not have committed the absurdities of the March Action, would have taken a decisive lead in October 1923 – and of course a different response to each of these would have changed the conditions under which the subsequent events took place.  
The role of the individual in history was as crucial in a negative sense in Germany as it was in a positive sense in Russia. But we have to have the courage to accept the implications of this, which are that, after January 1919, the chances of the German Revolution succeeding were greatly reduced. After the expulsion of Paul Levi in 1921 they were virtually non-existent. And this was not only a problem in Germany, but for the entire International: ‘After Liebknecht and Luxemburg were killed, and after Paul Levi left the movement, there was no person in the international Communist movement, and in particular in Germany, comparable to the Bolshevik leaders.’ [20]
The working class response to the Kapp Putsch still offers us a tantalising glimpse of what might have been, as Broué recounts in some of his most gripping pages:
‘But the German workers did not hear [the KPD’s] appeal for passivity. On 14 March, a Sunday, it was possible to judge the ardour and the scope of their resistance. One after another the trains ceased to move. By five o’clock in the evening there were in Berlin no trams, no water and no electricity ... In Chemnitz the workers’ organisations decided immediately to recruit 3,000 men to the workers’ militia ... The reality was that by the 15th, the Kapp-Luttwitz government was completely paralysed. The Belgian socialist Louis De Brouckere wrote: “The General Strike now grips them with its terrible silent power”.’ [21]
In spite of problems which I have sketched out here, Broué’s magnificent work is imbued with the spirit of this moment. It is in the same spirit that we should read it today.

Notes
1. P. Broué, The German Revolution, 1917–1923 (Leiden and Boston 2005), p. 449. The price of this book may put off some readers – make sure you get it into your local or university library.
2. C. Harman, The Lost Revolution: Germany, 1918 to 1923 (London 1982), p. 12.
3.
The German Revolution is fifth in an excellent book series from the journal Historical Materialism, consisting of out of print classics, books hitherto untranslated into English and new works of Marxist scholarship. One subsidiary reason for wishing this volume every success is that it might encourage some enterprising publisher finally to translate Broué’s biography of Trotsky (1988) into English.
4. I discuss the problem of periodisation in relation to the bourgeois revolution in Discovering the Scottish Revolution, 1692–1746 (London and Sterling, Virginia 2003), p. 9.
5. A.J.P. Taylor, The Course of German History: a Survey of the Development of German History since 1815 (London 1961), p. 69.
6. P. Broué, as above, p. 899.
7. L.D. Trotsky, The Lessons of October, in The Challenge of the Left Opposition (1923–1925), edited with an introduction by N. Allen (New York 1975); P. Levi, Introduction to Trotsky’s The Lessons of October, Revolutionary History, vol. 5, no. 2, (Spring 1994).
8. There are two main exceptions. One was by Franz Borkenau, an Austrian Comintern functionary turned Social Democrat, in a study of the Third International originally published in 1939. The other was by E.H. Carr, the senior civil servant turned Times leader-writer turned historian, in his History of Soviet Russia. See F. Borkenau, World Communism (Ann Arbour 1962), chapter 14, Germany in 1923, and E.H. Carr, The Interregnum, 1923–1924 (Harmondsworth 1969), chapter 9, The German Fiasco. Both books are highly recommended. Despite his reformist politics, Borkenau’s exhilarating account of the revolutionary upheavals in Europe at the end of the First World War is more evocative of the excitement, more alive to the possibilities of those days than many more tediously correct versions. (Broué subjects Borkenau’s Kautskyite views on the supposed inescapable patriotism of the masses in August 1914 to a brief but searching criticism in P. Broué, as above, pp. 47–49.) Carr’s book is, for me at any rate, the outstanding volume in his entire History.
9. P. Broué, as above, pp. 450–451.
10. P. Broué, as above, p. 857.
11. P. Broué, as above, p. 577.
12. P. Broué, as above, p. 840.
13. P. Broué, as above, p. 855. For details of the earlier arguments of Levi and Radek, see pp. 302–304, 309–313.
14. P. Broué, as above, pp. 308–9.
15. P. Broué, as above, pp. 3–5, 289. This was also the view of at least some of the German revolutionaries during the November Revolution of 1918. See P. Broué, as above, p. 131.
16. L.D. Trotsky, Introduction to the First (Russian) Edition [of Permanent Revolution] (Published in Berlin), The Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects (New York 1969), p. 7. A similar view was actually taken in 1957–58 by internal KPD critics of the Stalinist interpretation of November 1918. See P. Broué, as above, pp. 844–845. The classic statement of the case for the bourgeois nature of German society before 1914 remains D. Blackbourne and G. Eley, The Peculiarities of German History: Bourgeois Society and Politics in Nineteenth-Century Germany (Oxford 1984).
17. P. Broué, as above, pp280–281.
18. C. Harman, as above, chapter 7, The Bavarian Soviet Republic.
19. P. Anderson, Communist Party History, in R. Samuel (ed.), People’s History and Socialist Theory (London 1981), p. 148.
20. P. Broué, as above, p. 872.
21. P. Broué, as above, pp. 355, 356.
 

