


The decision of the N.E.C. of the Labour Party to proscribe the youth paper Keep Left, to make an inquiry into Young Guard, with a view to measures against it, represents a serious blow to the Young Socialist organisation and to the Labour movement as a whole.
This decision, forced through by the Rightwing, must be linked to its measures against the C.N.D. and the Committee of 100, and the tide of tales and allegations about “Communist” influence in the Ban the Bomb movement, and as part of the attempt by a section of the leadership to bring the whole movement to heel, its heel, whilst itself refusing to carry out the policy of the movement officially established since 1957.
 
May Day Incidents
It is in this light that one must look at the hullabaloo about the demonstrations made during the May Day meetings in Hyde Park and Glasgow. Gaitskell and Brown seized upon these incidents in an attempt to create the conception, which they must know to be false, of organised attempts by “Communists” and Fellow-travellers who had, they said, infiltrated the C.N.D. in large numbers and influenced its policy and work. It could not occur to them that serious minded young Socialists, as well as many other loyal Party members, felt indignant with the refusal of a section of the leadership to carry out the Conference decisions, and to openly flaunt this defiance at every opportunity.
Most members of the Labour Movement, we included, find that these demonstrations at a Labour meeting and on May Day were mistaken. One must see what really happened and why. In the first place these demonstrations against a section of the leadership – not against the Labour Party, for those concerned are active and loyal members – were entirely spontaneous, unorganised, uninfluenced by any political tendency. Secondly, when the Young Socialists and CNDers chanted anti-Bomb slogans the platform, particularly Gaitskell, Brown and Padley (this new and odious recruit), replied with provocative jibes on the level of the “shut yer gob” episode of some years ago. Thirdly, that Gaitskell chose not only to ignore but to contradict the anti-Polaris theme of the Glasgow meeting as decided by the official Labour Movement of that area. Who provoked whom?
 
Convenient Pretext
The truth is, and it is already clear that many C.L.P’s and Union branches feel the same way, that these incidents were partly provoked by the platforms themselves and, in any case, have been blown-up, out of all proportions, as a very convenient pretext to take measures against the C.N.D. and against the Young Socialists.
As the Times rather naively remarked the Labour youth movement is always in opposition and on many occasions has been disbanded by the N.E.C. The Labour youth movement has always been, and will always be in opposition to the policy of the Right-wing leadership of the Labour Party. Youth rebels against their unimaginative, capitulationary, and thoroughly class collaborationist section of the Labour movement.
This year’s conference of the Young Socialists revealed not only this rebellion against the dead-hand of Right-wingism, but a new and higher level of political responsibility and understanding, as witnessed by the decisions of that conference and above all the carrying by an overwhelming majority of the resolution on the United Socialist States of Europe moved by Birkenhead Y.S. Further it elected a National Committee which, all things considered, is far to the Left of those of the past.
 
Welcome CND Youth
And this is at an early stage in the life of the Young Socialist Movement, for, thanks to the policy of the leadership tens of thousands of active, enthusiastic and sacrificing young people are kept away from the Y.S. Instead of welcoming these tens of thousands of young men and women who want to end tests, ban bombs and stop war, the Right-wing meets them with intrigue, suppression and proscription!
The whole Labour Movement must say: Hands off the Young Socialists. They must fight for the freedom of youth and this means above all freedom within the Labour movement itself, freedom to express its rebellion against capitalism and its ills. The Young Socialists must have the right to produce their own papers, to elaborate their own policies within the framework of the general aims of the movement. Lift the proscriptions! Fight the Tories and not the militant Socialists!
 




The death of Leon Trotsky’s widow, Natalya Ivanovna Sedova-Trotskaya, at the age of 81 was announced in Paris on January 23rd. Though inevitably overshadowed by the great work and fame of Leon Trotsky, Natalya was a revolutionary Marxist of great ability, devotion and courage.
Natalya and Leon Trotsky met in Paris in 1903 whilst engaged in revolutionary work. From those days she fought side by side with Trotsky against Tsarism, Kerenskyism and later the monstrosities of Stalinism.
In the early part of the October Revolution, when Trotsky was chairman of the Soviet of Peoples Comissaries, not only did Natalya aid Trotsky but she was a propagandist and educational officer in the trade unions. Later she was appointed to head the arts, museums and monuments in the Commissary of Education at a time when Trotsky was chairman of the Supreme War Council and founding the Red Army. In this period both Natalya and Trotsky lived and worked closely with Lenin, and his wife Krupskaya.
As a companion, comrade, collaborator, suffering exile, hounded from country to country, witnessing the murder of her sons, friends and comrades at the hands of Stalin and, eventually in 1940 the murder of Leon Trotsky himself, Natalya remained loyal to the fundamental ideas of revolutionary Marxism with a courage and devotion that has few parallels in history.
Even to a few months ago, in her 80th year, Natalya was fighting for the rehabilitation of Leon Trotsky, her sons and the Bolshevik-Leninists vilified, slandered and murdered by Stalin’s secret police.
Though Krushchev continues to repeat the slander and lies invented by Stalin against Trotsky, by lifting one corner of the curtain on the crimes of Stalin at the 20th Party Congress, by rehabilitating such men as Tuchachevsky he has proved the complete correctness of Trotsky’s criticisms of Stalinism. The condemnation of Stalin is a condemnation of the entire bureaucracy and the policies they pursued.
Krushchev cannot draw the political conclusions of all this, if only because the bureaucracy cannot reform itself. As Natalya herself explained the final reckoning will be made by the Russian people themselves, truth is concrete.
Unbounded faith in the future of mankind, in the correctness of Marxism and the triumph of world Socialism – this was the source of Natalya’s and Trotsky’s titanic willpower and determination. From the same source, inspired by example, the future leaders of revolutionary Socialism will find the power to continue the struggle to the very end.
 




THE Krushchev regime has announced the re-introduction of the death penalty for person convicted of stealing state and public property on a very large scale. Punishable by the death penalty, too, is the crime of forgery, also for convicted criminals who terrorise fellow prisoners. At the same time deportation to “work settlements” in Siberia for from two to five years is to be the penalty for idlers, speculators and shirkers. Penalties for drunkenness are to be tightened up. For producing illicit liquor the penalty is to be sentences up to a year, plus a fine.
Forty-four years after the revolution this presents a grim picture of the “Socialism” which the Stalinists have claimed has been organised in Russia for many years. It is true, as the successes of the sputniks have shown, that due to the state ownership of the means of production, remarkable successes have been achieved in the field of technique, increase of production and education. In all these the base established by the revolution has been sufficient to bring Russia from a backward “under-developed” semi-colonial country to the ranks of the advanced industrial countries. This alone is sufficient justification for the revolution.
However the isolation of the revolution resulted in the usurpation of power by a corrupt bureaucracy. What this meant was shown by Krushchev’s exposure of the crime of Stalin at the 20th
Congress of the Russian Communist Party. But the reforms introduced by Krushchev did not change the situation fundamentally. The bureaucracy, or millions of officials in control of the army, industry, the state and the Communist Party continued to maintain their control. Their basic privileges remained intact.
Krushchev introduced reforms because the bureaucracy was becoming more and more of a hindrance to the development of Russian society and threatened to bring it to a standstill. Hence his de-centralising of the control of industry and agriculture. This helped for a time by giving the opportunity for more initiative on the part of the lower ranks of the bureaucracy. But it could not solve the problem. It gave the opportunity for greater “initiative” for swindling and corruption too.
 
Draconic Action
Wherever control is autocratically exercised such evils are inevitable. At the same time things are now getting so bad that they in turn threaten to devour the fruits of Russia’s advance.
Hence the search for scapegoats and the attempt to take draconic action in order to keep the swindling and corruption of the bureaucracy within bounds, while endeavouring to appease the criticism of the masses. At the meeting of the Central Committee in January the following instructive exchanges took place. After dismissals of Ministers in Kirghizia and other republics Krushchev remarked to the Prime Minister of this Republic, Mr. Rassakov: “You moved him (man guilty of falsifying figures of production) to the post of minister. It seems that the best punishment for a man who has committed a crime is to appoint him Minister.”
 
The Top Layers
Mr. Rassakov, “That was our serious mistake. We appointed him minister of internal affairs” (In charge of the police!). Mr. Krushchev “Yes. It’s the same as putting the wolf in the sheepfold.”
What is interesting is that the ministers thought nothing of protecting one of their bureaucratic brothers. It was obviously thought “normal” to falsify figures, to swindle, to cheat. That is the atmosphere in the top layers of the bureaucracy.
 
Terrible Contradictions
In an endeavour to explain away the existence of these terrible contradictions in a “Socialist” society Kommunist, the theoretical organ of the Russian Communist Party. writes on the decrees, “It is not due to any supposed increase in the number of parasites. It is due to our successful advance towards Communism which sharpens the antagonisms between the new and progressive, to which the future belongs – that is the emerging Communist society – on the one hand and the survivals of capitalism on the other.” This is quoted with approval in the Daily Worker of May 5th.
 
Class Struggle
They have forgotten the criticism by Krushchev of Stalin and the “theories” he advanced to justify his crimes. Stalin argued that as society advanced towards Socialism so the class struggle increased and the need for further and further repressive measures was necessary. Krushchev pointed out that this was nonsense. Successes of Socialism should ameliorate not increase antagonisms in society. Now they return to this discarded theme. Why?
In spite of the successes of Russia, inequalities remain. The masses have no control over industry or of the state. Arbitrariness and bureaucracy still continue to dominate Russian society.
There is still want and misery. In this atmosphere, where the needs of the masses, are the last consideration of the ruling clique, in the cracks of society all sorts of speculators and swindlers flourish. Many of them have grown rich by means of speculation on necessities. The masses are aware of the cynicism, privilege, luxury and swindling at the top. Life is still drab for the masses, especially in the agricultural areas. Hence the prevalence of drunkenness as a symptom of the attempt to escape for a while from the round of dreary existence.
 
Collectivisation
The last time similar legislation was introduced in Russia was in 1932, after the excesses of Stalin’s “complete collectivisation” of agriculture had reduced the masses to penury and semi-starvation. Now on the basis of successes and an undoubted big rise in the standard of living, nevertheless these drastic measures are considered necessary.
 
Control by the Masses
The only real solution to the problem is one of course that the bureaucrats can never pose – their removal from the backs of the Russian workers – they are the most pernicious parasites and drag on the development of production and of Russian society. Socialism can only flourish, and society move towards Socialism, once capitalism has been abolished as in Russia, by the direct participation and control by the masses in all fields of social life, the state, industry, trade unions, science and culture. Till then, Russian society will zig-zag as it has done for 30 years from repression to adventurism and back again to repression. Only the overthrow of the bureaucracy and the organisation of workers democracy in Russia with full rights for all tendencies within the working class can solve the problems of Russian society.
 




Readers of the Newsletter have once again been treated to a repetition of false accusations against the Marxists in the Labour Party. By their own actions the Newsletter grouping has isolated itself from the Labour Party. They endeavour to hide this fact by abusing their opponents and trying to make them responsible for what is a consequence of the policies of the people who control the Newsletter and the S.L.L.
The first set of falsehoods concerns the discussion, last summer, in the Liverpool Trades Council on the proscription of the Socialist Labour League.
The facts have already been given by Brian Deane in the August 1959 issue of the Socialist Fight. The Marxists in the Liverpool Trades Council voted for two things; they condemned the N.E.C. for having one attitude towards organisations such as the Fabian Society which peddle their views unhindered inside the Labour Party and organisations of the Left who suffer limitations and expulsions; it also condemned the adventuristic policy of forming the S.L.L. as an independent party.
This motion more clearly stated the issues than the one sponsored by the S.L.L. comrades. Contrary to the facile generalisations a la Hunter-Healy, Marxists do not support self-styled “Marxists” when they make serious mistakes. The whole policy of the S.L.L. in forming an organisation which they conceive of as an independent organisation was, and remains, adventuristic in the extreme in the present conditions in Britain. The subsequent isolation of the S.L.L. and its decomposition – the loss of Peter Fryer and many of those who founded the Newsletter – is itself a swift practical confirmation of this.
No serious Marxist can concede an inch to the twins of opportunism and sectarianism which is exactly what is contained in the industrial and political tactics of the Healy Group. If this was true yesterday, in the struggle against the mistaken policies of Stalinism it is just as true today, in the mistaken policies of some so-called Trotskyists.
 
Newsletter’s Smokescreen
For good measure, and as it were to thicken the fog, the Newsletter – whose editors are experienced in the matter of strange bed-fellows, in short, of unprincipled alliances – state that the Marxists in Liverpool voted along with Jack Braddock “the extreme right-wing member of the Council”. This nonsense is intended to impress those who may not have the means of knowing better. What the Braddocks do is for them to explain, but just to put the record straight, we will point out the following:
For many years, long before the Newsletter ever existed, the Marxists in Liverpool fought a principled struggle against the opportunist policies of Jack and Bessie Braddock, as well as some other opportunists who have, for their own reasons, found themselves “anti-Braddock.” It is interesting to note that those struggles were being fought at a time when Bessie Braddock was invited to sit on the Editorial Board of Healy’s Socialist Outlook and when they both had shares in this paper.
 
The Method of Amalgams
Jack and Bessie Braddock have not changed. They have always been a mixture of militancy and opportunism and one may now add, of machine politics. To suggest that they are “extreme right wing” is to destroy the meaning of words and to reveal a complete lack of knowledge of the situation in Liverpool. This irresponsible characterisation by the “Newsletter” is necessary in an attempt to distort the entirely correct policies of our comrades. Their unrestrained hostility to the Socialist Fight leads them to the most ridiculous of positions.
The second amalgam comes in the form of a reference, in the article mentioned above, to a tiny “tendency” producing the Socialist Current – a tendency which has nothing in common with the Socialist Fight, but, as we shall see, has something in common with the Healy Group.
The above paper called for an unprincipled alliance – with the right-wing against the Stalinist leadership of the E.T.U – a policy which is as false and as incorrect – as it is possible to conceive. But this miserable tendency in fact only put into words what the Healy Group for a time put into practice; namely, an unprincipled alliance with all and sundry against the leadership of the E.T.U. It was for this reason that the regroupment of the militants in the E.T.U., which had serious possibilities a few years ago, destroyed itself.
Supports of Socialist Fight have consistently fought for the democratisation of the E.T.U. and for a militant working-class policy. There are hundreds of active members of the E.T.U. who can bear witness to this.
Falsehoods and innuendos will not advance the movement forward one inch. The S.L.L. and the Newsletter will have to come down to serious politics some day. No matter what its organisational activity a refusal to understand and learn from experience will condemn this tendency to sterility and isolation.
 
Tell the Truth
The people around the Newsletter have had many favourable opportunities for carrying out important political and industrial work. Their failure to pursue a consistent Marxist policy, which presupposes a democratic life within their organisation; their refusal to reject unprincipled arguments and alliances, to steer clear of opportunism and adventurism, has unhappily resulted in the ruination of those possibilities.
We appeal to the members of the S.L.L. and the readers of the Newsletter to consider the experience of the past few years and to demand an accounting from its controllers. Let them deal with real arguments instead of inventing policies to cover their own zig-zags in policy.
 




The largest and the most important strike in the history of
Nigeria is now taking place. 150,000 Nigerian administrative service
workers, members of the 17 Government Unions, have been on strike for
more than three weeks. All transport, power and communications
systems throughout Nigeria have been paralysed. The Government has
imposed a strict news censorship, and so far only one London paper
has reported this important strike.
The strike is being led by the Nigerian Trades Union Congress
and is in support for the demand of 2/6d a day minimum wage.
Despite the tremendous difficulties – the lack of funds, all
sided offensive by the Nigerian Government, arrests of leaders and
suppression of the press – in its fourth week the strike is still
solid and the strikers determined. Only 200 have scabbed, these have
been given large military escort protection. The rest of the 500,000
workers in Nigeria are in sympathy with the strikers and only waiting
for a lead from the Union leaders to demonstrate their sympathy and
solidarity in action.
On the 21st of May the Nigerian Trades Union Congress sent a
letter to the Government stating:–

The cost of living was officially stated to have
	increased by over 200 per cent.
 
(a) Recognising this the Government had given
	corresponding increases to European employees – the salary of a
	European employee is £400 a year.
(b) Corresponding increases
	had been made in the supplementary allowance for the families of
	European employees;
 
In view of these facts the N.T.U.C. asked for a minimum
	wage of 2/6d a day;
 
One month’s general strike notice was given in support
	of their demands.

The Governor of Nigeria – Sir Arthur Richards who earned the
reputation of being a “firm man” for quelling the Jamaica
riots – replied that he would not meet a deputation of the workers
as no purpose could be served by the discussion; that increased wages
would not offset increased cost of living(!) but would only cause
inflation(!); and called upon Africans to help in the equitable
distribution of foodstuffs.
A second appeal to the Government to receive a deputation was made
on June 11th, again this was turned down. Meanwhile the
Government re-enacted its Defence Regulations which were repealed
only a month previous, following which a number of Trade Union
leaders were released after having served four year sentences. The
Defence Regulation on Press Censorship empowers the Governor to close
down any newspaper which publishes news without it first being
censored by the Government, or which criticises any action of the
Governor or his officials. The penalty for contravention of this
Regulation is a fine of £500 or two years imprisonment.
When on June 21st 150,000 administrative workers came out on
strike, immediately the Government suppressed two newspapers, the
African Pilot and the Daily Comet. The European
community threatened the editor of the latter with lynching. The
Government also took the following steps:–

It threatened not the pay the strikers their June salary
	and to forfeit all their pensions, gratuities and contractual
	rights.
 
It arrested and later discharged four railway workers’
	strike leaders on charges of participating in an illegal strike.
 
It promised that there would be no victimisation of the
	workers if they resumed their duties immediately.
 
It publicly accused the strikers of sabotaging the
	transport communication systems, leading to the derailment of a
	train at Oshodi, and of cutting the telephone lines between Lagos
	and Minna.
 
It arrested ten alleged leaders of the strike. Action
	was withdrawn against one when they appeared for trial.

The leaders of the strike, on behalf of the workers, replied with
five demands. At a great mass rally at Lagos the workers swore on
oath not to return until their demands are met. Their demands are:–

Pay the strikers for the period during which they have
	been on strike.
 
Guarantee their pensions and other rights.
 
Give an assurance that there will be no victimisation of
	strikers.
 
Immediately release the strike leaders.
 
That their original demands be granted.

The high standard of militancy and class awareness of this
comparatively young working-class is further demonstrated by the
treatment given to the president of the Nigerian Trades Union
Congress, Bankole, who advised the workers to return to work.
He was ragged by the strikers and had to be rescued by the police!
Later he was deposed and Imoudu, a young Trade Union leader
just released after four years in gaol, was elected President of the N.T.U.C.
The average wage of a Nigerian worker is 10d a day. A year
ago it was raised from 5d to 10d a day. Along with this, discontent
with the dictatorial and arbitrary administration of the British
imperialist Government has been growing steadily. In an attempt to
stem this rising tide the British Government issued in March a White
Paper which announced “great democratic” changes in Nigeria. That
these constitutional changes were illusory is clearly demonstrated by
the Government’s action in face of the elementary demands of the
workers. The White Paper has turned out to be but a flimsy cover for
the dragon tooth and claw of British imperialist domination.
Workers everywhere must protest against the policy of the
British Government in Nigeria. Resolutions demanding the release of
the strike leaders, freedom of the press and speech, and the granting
of 2/6d a day by the British Government should be sent to the
Colonial Office immediately. Every organised worker should demand
that the British Trades Union leaders conduct a serious struggle in
support of the Nigerian worker’s demands.
 




The whole policy of the Labour Government during the 20 days truce has been to stand still on the demands of the dock workers. The employers have pursued a provocative policy by offering 18/– instead of the 24/– demanded by the dockers. To this insulting “offer” the Labour Government and the trade union leaders have replied, not with action, but with timidity and delay.
A Commission of Enquiry has been appointed after 30 days of negotiation between the union leaders and the bosses. This is how the labour and trade union leaders react to capitalist provocation. Troops ad threats for the dockers – silk gloves for the bosses ...
Because of their fear of another national stoppage, Donovan was forced to reject the employers’ offer. For the same reason the Labour Government is forced to try to obtain concessions from the employers. The Commission of Enquiry will most certainly, in order to avoid another stoppage and for no other reason, recommend a wage increase.
The dockers’ National Strike Committee has extended the 30 days truce until the results of the Commission are made known. If then, the recommendations do not meet with the demands of the dock workers, the union leaders will be instructed to give 21 days strike notice. Thus the dockers have given the Labour Government and the T.U. leaders every opportunity to obtain by negotiation their just wage demands.
 




THE DOCK WORKERS HAVE GIVEN THEIR TRADE UNION LEADERS 30 DAYS IN WHICH TO GAIN THEIR DEMANDS OF 25/– A DAY AND A 40 HOUR WEEK.
The strike, which has lasted for more than five weeks, was part of a movement begun by the London Dockers and Stevedores in July this year. Despite the efforts of the Union misleaders and His Majesty’s “Communist” Party to undermine the morale of the dock workers, their feeling and confidence is still very high. They expect, and are prepared, to come out again if the bosses continue to resist their just demands.
Twice, the bosses and Trade Union leaders have reached a deadlock. But these leaders have issued no report to the Strike Committees, or to the rank and file. Instead, they are endeavouring to whitewash the bosses.
The Strike Committees, knowing well the aims of Donovan and Deakin, are counter-acting their efforts to compromise with the bosses, by issuing a resolution which calls upon the trade union leaders to call a national stoppage if the wealthy shipowners refuse to grant the demands of 50,000 dock workers. This resolution will go to all Transport and General Workers Union Branches throughout the country.
 
Public Support Growing
The action of the Strike Committees in returning to work solid, has impressed the whole Labour movement. The thirty days’ truce, which was necessary for the Dockers to prepare their organisations and win public support, has gained the dock workers the support of wide sections of the working class, in whose opinion the Dock workers have given the Trade Union leaders every possibility to prove the success or failure of negotiating machinery. In the event of failure, the organised workers will consider the dockers thoroughly justified in once more taking strike action.
A great number of Union Branches, District Committees, Trades Councils, and Labour Party Branches have passed resolutions of support and solidarity with the dockers’ struggle. The opposition to these resolutions has come mainly from His Majesty’s Communist Party.
The lying press reports and statements of Labour Ministers could not deceive the public for long. Apart from the growing sympathy and working class solidarity, the Strike Committees are contacting other sections of the workers and bringing their case before them through leaflets and public meetings.
 
Stalinist Policy Exposed
The strike-breaking policy of the Communist Party was exposed from the beginning in its attempts to smash the dockers’ strike. The “Daily Worker” of October 9th, printed the following statement:
“Merseyside area committee of the C.P. has pointed out that the dockers have achieved public recognition but that to continue attacking the Union would mean playing into the employers’ hands and weakening their own unity”
This slanderous and strike-breaking statement received great prominence in the capitalist press. Between Donovan and the C.P. there was no difference. By saying that 50,000 dockers were “attacking the Union” the C.P. was playing Donovan’s game. This statement issued by the Mersey area Committee of the C.P. was not the result of a hasty local decision; it expressed more openly the real policy of the Communist Party.
Because the growing pressure of the rank and file, the Daily Worker instead of directly saying “Go Back to work”, persistently featured the strike breaking speeches of Issacs and Donovan. For example, to give a few headlines during the strike: “GO BACK AND CASE WILL BE CONSIDERED”, “SOUTHAMPTON DOCKERS TO URGE KEY PORTS TO RETURN”, “DOCKERS AT THREE PORTS GOING BACK”, “TILBURY MEN WLL GO BACK ON CONDITIONS.”
Instead of giving space to the dockers’ case, which the rank and file members of the Communist Party expected and demanded the Daily Worker reported for a few issues only, dockers’ meetings. But rank and file members of the C.P. were soon to learn that the policy had not changed. Barratt and Dickens, two leading Stalinist union officials continued their policy of strike-breaking.
The dockers must be on their guard. The Communist Party is trying to sabotage their national movement, and it will spare no effort to undermine the confidence of the dock workers and prevent any future struggle for better conditions.
 
What Was Gained?
The Trade Union leaders and the C.P. are attempting to undermine the morale of the dock workers by stating that the strike has won nothing, except empty bellies for the dock workers and their families! They claim that negotiations could have achieved more for the workers. To these strike breakers, the national rank and file movement forged during the strike; the unity and confidence of this important section of workers; the fear struck into the hearts of the cowardly Labour and Trade Union leaders; and the defeat of the capitalists who had hoped to smash the dockers’ organisations and worsen their conditions – to these strike-breakers, all this means nothing!
In actual fact, the present struggle of the Dock workers is distinct from all other industrial movements of recent times, insofar as it has established the basis for a rank and file movement; has raised the struggle against the conservative Union leadership to a new and higher level; has raised the most fundamental political questions facing the working class. If the unity and the national movement of the dockers were the only gains from the five weeks’ strike, in themselves, they are entirely sufficient to justify the action of the dock workers. These gains mark a tremendous victory against the sabotage of the Donovans and Deakins, Isaccs’ and Wikinsons, the Pollitts and Gallachers.
 
We Stood with the Dockers
The class conscious and politically minded dockworkers recognise that the only Party which came to their aid is the Revolutionary Communist Party. In discussions with the dock workers and the leading militants among them, they have said time and again that the Socialist Appeal is the only truthful workers’ paper. As one leading dock worker put it: “The Labour Party has replaced the Liberal Party; the Communist Party has replaced the Labour Party; and the Trotskyists are the only real Communists.”
It is recognised by all the leading dock workers that the Revolutionary Communist Party and the Socialist Appeal rendered invaluable aid to their struggle, both in the formation and organisation of the national movement, and during the strike in gaining the support and sympathy of other sections of the workers.
 




Despite their militancy and desire to struggle, the London
dockers and stevedores have returned to piece-work on the pre-Second
Front rates of pay. In accordance with their wartime agreement they
have given 28 days’ notice to the employers terminating all
piece-work agreements.
This return to work postpones the struggle of the London
dockworkers for 25/– a day guaranteed pay. In the meantime,
however, a national delegate conference of the T. & G.W.U. Docks
Section, which was forced by the actions of the London dock workers,
has instructed the Union leadership to go forward for 25/– a day
and support the demands of the London dockers.
The feeling of the dockers and stevedores at the moment is one of
frustration and bitterness. For weeks the union officials had tried
to get the men back to work. Each time their strike-breaking policy
was mouthed they were howled down. But after more than two months of
struggle the very committee which was formed to replace the
reactionary strike-breaking Union leadership, the Progressive
Committee, supported the plausible back-to-work formula of Barratt,
the Stalinist General Secretary of the Stevedores’ Union.
The real nature of this back-to-work agreement is already making
itself clear. The employers have suspended more than 1,500 men for
refusing to piece-work during the dispute. Though the suspensions
have been lifted in the East India dock, the main body of the men
will be forced to take their suspensions. The dock workers ask: If
we had defeated the bosses is it possible that they would dare
provoke us with these vicious acts? It is clear to them that the
return to work on the bosses’ conditions was a victory for the bosses.
What Donovan, the General Secretary of the T.&G.W.U.
Docks Section, could not do, Barratt, who claims to be a
“Communist”! – and the hesitancy of the Progressive Committee
succeeded in doing: they got the men back to work knowing that
this would break the back of the dock workers’ struggle.
The case for the return to piece-work was presented by the
Progressive Committee as a means of strengthening the dockers’
struggle by legalising their so-called “go slow” policy. The
Progressive Committee stated that at the end of their 28 days’
notice they would be in a better position to lead the struggle. Only
on this understanding did the men agree to return to work. What
actually happened? Within ten days of making this pledge, the
Progressive Committee decided to dissolve! It claimed that it had
fulfilled its purpose. From this, one is entitled to ask: was it
the purpose of the Progressive Committee to get the men back to work,
that is, to break the struggle? This is clearly what it amounts
to. Instead of using the 28 days to thoroughly organise and
prepare the struggle, which is what a truly Militant Committee would
have done, the Progressive Committee decides to disband!
The reaction of the dock workers to this act, which is either a
product of naive faith in the Donovans or of underhanded Stalinist
work, is one of disgust and amazement. A number of members of the
Progressive Committee and outstanding dock leaders expressed their
opposition to this policy and intention to organise rank-and-file
committees. All serious militants will strive to organise militant
rank-and-file committees.
Never have workers shown such militancy as the London dock
workers. Everything was there – national support, solidarity with
other ports. Only a militant leadership based upon a clear
understanding was needed. The responsibility for the present
situation must rest where it belongs: firstly on the shoulders of the
Donovans and Barratts, secondly on the Progressive Committee, which,
through its lack of organisation and hesitancy left the dock workers leaderless.
The Progressive Committee has done some good work, but all this
has been destroyed by its most recent act. The main lesson of the
London struggle is the need to organise rank-and-file committees,
establish permanent national contact, and prepare for the inevitable
struggles of the future.




DOCKERS: The struggle is only beginning.
 
Form your rank and file committees!
 
For a militant union leadership




 




The first round of the Stevedores’ and Dockers’ fight for
25/– a day national minimum has ended with a temporary victory for
the Bosses. The Dockworkers’ struggle, which was opposed by the
Union leaders, has been sabotaged by the Stalinists.
 
Barratt Withdraws 28 Days’ Notice
The London Stevedores have learned with disgust that their
General Secretary, Barratt, has withdrawn the 28 days’ notice to
the employers terminating all piece-work agreements. They have called
him to a mass meeting to explain his actions which are contrary to
union rules.
Barratt and the Progressive Committee had advised the
dockworkers had advised the dockers to return to piece-work for 28
days in order to strengthen the hands of the Union Leaders and the
Progressive Committee. On this understanding the men agreed to
return. Within a few days, they received the astounding news that
the Progressive Committee had decided to dissolve! Now they have
learned that the 28 days notice has been withdrawn! Thus, the Union
leaders have them back at work, confused and leaderless.
Until recently many sincere militants could not believe that
Barratt – a “Communist”! – and the Progressive
Committee – a “militant committee” – would be partners to
such a disgusting sell-out. It is now clear, no matter what excuses
are offered – and plenty will be invented – that Barratt and the
Stalinists have deliberately smashed the dock workers’ struggles.
His Majesty’s “Communist” Party held special meetings to bring
their members into line – a Party line of strike-breaking.
 
Bosses And Stalinists Fear National Link-Up
The first militant rank-and-file committee was formed on the
Liverpool docks.
The London dock workers welcomed this committee, and immediately
subscribed £8 8s 6d. For the committee’s expenses, as a
gesture of solidarity. Against the Union officials and the
Stalinists, who tried to prevent a national link-up, this committee
established contact with London and other important ports. Every
militant dock worker throughout the country hailed this important
step forward, every capitalist newspaper met it with abuse; every
Trade Union official and Stalinist stooge tried to smash it.
Realising that the creation of militant rank and file committees
in Liverpool and London by the dockers, was the only way was the only
way in which the dock workers could fight the bosses attacks and
prevent the sabotage of their struggles by the Union “leaders”,
Donovan and the Stalinists began a national campaign against these
committees and their attempts to form a national movement. This
campaign was, and still is, principally directed against the
Trotskyists and our revolutionary communist policy.
This reactionary campaign, has caused the Liverpool and London
rank and file committees to disintegrate and dissolve, in spite of
the attempts of the militants to maintain them. The supporters of the
Stalinists have left the Dockers and Stevedores high and dry, while
the sincere militant dockers continue the struggle for rank and file
committees, based upon a genuine workers’ programme. The very fact
that these militants are accused of “Trotskyism” shows that both
for the bosses and the reactionary Union leadership, Trotskyism and a
militant workers’ struggle are one and the same thing.
 
Stalinist Excuses
Already the Stalinists are busily engaged in fabricating excuses
for the disgusting role of Barratt and the Progressive
Committee. The most ridiculous, but typical excuse is that the
Dockers and Stevedores did not prove militant enough that they did
not back the Progressive Committee with action! Anyone connected with
the dockers knows the situation; the rank and file were demanding
strike action and were prepared to make any sacrifice to defeat the
bosses; they had national support, and felt confident.
The truth of the matter is of course, that the Stalinists are
trying to place the responsibility for temporary defeat, which
rightly belongs to them, upon the shoulders of the dock workers as a
whole. The Progressive Committee persuaded the men to return to work,
not vice versa.
Another of the excuses made by the Stalinists is that all militant
rank and file committees are “against the unions”. Every thinking
worker knows how false this is. It is certainly true that all
militant rank and file committees worth anything at all are opposed
to the strike breaking and class collaborationist policy of the Union
“leaders”. It is precisely because of the betrayal by the Union
officials that such committees are formed. The very meaning and
significance of the Trade Unions is that they are organisations of
the working class against the capitalists. Militant rank and file
committees along the lines of the Shop Stewards Committees, are not
only necessary in day to day struggles, but also vitally necessary in
the struggles to tear the Trade Unions away from the capitalist
agents and convert them into militant class organisations. Who knows
this better than the Stalinists?
The fact that the Trade Unions are controlled by bureaucrats like
the Donovans and Condons, who are protected by the union
constitutions, a labyrinth of rules and organisational procedure, in
no way alters the need to fight within these unions against all
anti-working-class policies. Any suggestion of forming new unions at
this stage will play right into the hands of the Donovans and the
capitalists.
 




One of the first acts of the new Labour Government has been to
send troops to the Surrey Docks to unload several ships. This can
only be taken as a deliberate attempt to use men, who were
conscripted under the slogan of fighting fascism, to impose the
employers demands upon the workers at the docks.
The soldiers have “no heart to do it” ... “they
sympathise with the dockers” and “hope the Labour Government will
recall them”, as a couple of soldiers put it to a reporter from the
Socialist Appeal. The dockers don’t want them to do it, but
they bear them no antagonism because they know they are under
military discipline.
The fact that their own Union leaders oppose the constitutional
action of the dockers condemns these Union leaders as reactionary
bureaucrats.
This experience has demonstrated clearly to all militant
dockers that they can expect nothing from the Union bureaucrats.
It is this realisation that has caused the dockers, for the first
time, to form a rank and file committee and to establish contact with
other workers throughout the country. The Progressive Committee is an
excellent step in the right direction, but its basis must be
extended. This committee would have the unswerving loyalty of every
dock worker, not only now but after the struggle, if it went before
the men and asked for elected representatives from every section of
the docks. Such a representative committee, thoroughly organised and
prepared, could secure victory for the dock workers. This is a step
which the members of the Progressive Committee must consider immediately.
Contact has already been established with other ports. This
contact must be secured and fully organised. To facilitate this and
at the same time create a national consciousness amongst the dockers,
the dockers must instruct their Union leaders to call a conference of
all dock workers to discuss wages, conditions and organisation. Mr.
Donovan, Secretary of the T.&G.W.U. Docks Section, will try
to side step this demand because it will pose the question of
electing new and militant officials subject to annual election.
The bosses are provoking the dockers, the dockers only answer can
be through organisation and preparedness. Only in this way can
victory be secured.

Withdraw the troops!
 
Demand that the Labour Government force the employers to
	concede to the dockers’ demands!
 
For 25/– a day guaranteed pay.

 




THE special conference of Common Wealth held in London on
September 16th, rejected by 118 votes to 89 the resolution proposed
by Sir Richard Acland and his supporters. This resolution called for
the dissolution of Common Wealth as an organisation so that its
members could enter the Labour Party. Following the decision to
maintain Common Wealth, Acland and Wintringham have resigned, and
along with their supporters will enter the Labour Party, leaving C.A.
Smith, ex I.L.P. chairman and former claimant Marxist, as leader of
this organisation.
 
THE fact that this life or death choice faced Common Wealth so
early after the ending of the war is no accident. The ending of the
Coalition was the ending of Common Wealth. The General Election, from
which only one Common Wealth candidate was returned, and in which it
lost most of its deposits, dealt the death blow to this organisation.
The decision to maintain Common Wealth will not prevent its steady
disintegration. This process is determined by far more formidable and
real forces than C. A. Smith's “ethical standards”. Common Wealth
is in an impasse. The entire situation demands that the sincere
socialist members of Common Wealth should review their position, and
by a thorough consideration of the programmes of the various parties,
particularly the programme of revolutionary Marxism, choose their
path.
WHAT is the future for Common Wealth?
IN order to answer this question correctly it is necessary to
understand the social basis and evolution of this movement as a
separate organisation of the lower middle class, moving in the
direction of the organised labour movement.
**********
THE crisis of capitalism on a world scale gave rise to a growing
radicalisation amongst all sections of the population, and most
significantly amongst the middle class which looked to the Left for a
solution to its problems. This development represented a break of the
middle class from Big Business and a progressive evolution towards
the organised labour movement. Out of this general situation Common
Wealth was formed in July 1942, by an amalgamation of the “1941
Committee”, led by J.B. Priestley, and a number of people gathered
around Sir Richard Acland.
TWO conditions gave rise to a separate organisation of the middle
class. On the one hand, their desire to criticise the Tories through
the official labour movement was prevented by the coalition politics
of the Labour leaders, which had tied the labour movement to the
capitalists and their war programme. On the other hand, certain
sections of the middle class, having broken with the capitalists,
feared the direct link with the labour movement and its discipline.
THE treacherous coalition policies of the Labour leaders during
the war gave the opportunity for Common Wealth to develop, both as an
avenue of expression for the anti-Tory and coalition tendencies, and
as an electoral machine. During the war period Common Wealth had
phenomenal successes in the by-elections. Thousands of workers, as
well as middle-class elements, voted for Common Wealth candidates
because they offered an alternative to the coalition. But these
successes were only to be shortlived. The ending of the coalition
ended this situation. Common Wealth went to the polls during the
General Election with a programme no different from that of the
Labour Party. It was no surprise, therefore, that it should suffer
eclipse. The working class and the radicalised middle class, seeing
no difference in the policies of the two parties, gave their votes to
the Labour Party, which is more formidable with its giant electoral
machine. The leadership of Common Wealth led this organisation
light-mindedly into the General Election. It is now obvious to Acland
and his leading supporters that there is no future for this movement.
**********
THE ephemeral character of Common Wealth was always clear to
Marxists, who understand that in the present epoch of social
revolution a Party not based upon revolutionary theory cannot
withstand the test of events. Such parties come over to revolutionary
working class movement, or go over to capitalist reaction or simply
disintegrate. This law is clear from the experience of the I.L.P. and
other such organisations in other countries which have disappeared in
the course of the imperialist war. The only parties which can
possibly have a future are those which have stood the test of events.
It is no accident that the Fourth International is the only
international organisation. Only a revolutionary party based upon
revolutionary Marxist theory can develop and grow into the present epoch.
AT one time the Stalinists characterised Common Wealth as a
fascist movement. Revolutionary Marxists continually opposed this
false and entirely opportunist characterisation, made by a party
which had betrayed every meaning of Communism, and which acted as the
direct agents of reaction within the labour movement. Revolutionary
Marxists welcomed the evolution of the middle class towards organised
labour, but pointed out that there was no basis for a separate
organisation of the middle class. We considered that it was the task
of all sincere socialists to help the middle class to find its way
into the ranks of the labour movement. The only conceivably valid
reason for maintaining a separate organisation would be for that
organisation to have a revolutionary Marxist programme. We
explained that it the middle class failed to make an alliance with
the working class it would be used by Big Business against the
working class and its struggle for Socialism. Marxists have
always understood that it is not only permissible, but obligatory for
the working class to make an alliance with the middle class, provided
that such an alliance is directed against Big Business. Anyone
who impedes or opposes this process can only aid the capitalists.
THE experience of every revolutionary crisis teaches that the
working-class must win over to its side the middle classes, which do
not remain “independent” but end up either in the camp of the
capitalists, or the camp of the revolutionary working-class. The
failure of the working-class, its defeat and prostration, can only
send the middle class, which no less than the working-class demands a
change, into the camp of Big Business. A separate organisation
of the middle classes can only assist this latter reactionary process.
**********
DURING the imperialist war in Europe, Common Wealth revealed that
it had no difference in programme with the official labour movement.
It supported the imperialist war and the traitorous coalition.
Despite its talk of a “fully Socialist policy” its only
difference with the policy of the Labour leaders was of a secondary
nature; it called for a measure of electoral freedom. Not only did
Common Wealth Members of Parliament support the Coalition between
labour and Big Business, but they hailed Churchill as the leader of
the struggle for “Freedom” and “Liberty”. The “difference”
between Common Wealth and the Labour leaders was, therefore, only one
of degree.
EVEN today Common Wealth has no fundamental difference with the
policy of the Labour Party. Acland is quite open about this, but C.A.
Smith prefers to be a little more concealed. In a statement by C.A.
Smith and his supporters on the National Committee we read some very
correct criticisms of the Labour Government's policy:
“Typical of Labour policy is the announcement of Sir
Stafford Cripps that the cotton industry will not be nationalised,
but that the Government is bringing together the employers and the
employed to discuss its reorganisation.
“Precisely! Not Socialism, but capitalist
reorganisation ... So cotton magnates again breathe freely realising
that Labour won't hurt them.” ...
“Other aspects of Labour policy will be less popular
with big business... These activities will annoy big business but not
eliminate it.” (Common Wealth Review, September, 1945)
AFTER reading these criticisms of the Labour Government's policy
one is amazed to read that the:
“C.W. no more need be in opposition to the Labour
Government than the Parliamentary Labour Party of 1906–14 was in
opposition to the Liberal Government of which it formed the Left Wing
...” (Ibid.)
THE criticisms of the Labour Government turn out to be
meaningless! If these criticisms are justified and we suggest that
they are, then one could only draw the conclusion that a
revolutionary party with a revolutionary programme is necessary. The
political differences between Acland and C. A. Smith disappear, both
are agreed to become the Left Wing of the Labour Government – if they
are permitted. But the matter does not end here. Later in the same
Statement we read:
“Common Wealth demands a fundamental change –
political, economic and moral – of our national life, and this cannot
be realised by an extension of social insurance plus one or two
measures of nationalisation”
HAVING recognised the fact that a change is necessary, one must
ask: How is such a fundamental change to be accomplished? Quite
correctly, not by the Labour Party. By Common Wealth, whose programme
does not fundamentally differ from that of the Labour Party?
Certainly not! Only a party based upon Marxism, a vanguard of the
working class, can lead the struggle for a fundamental change. The
middle class is incapable of leading such a struggle.
ONE of the alleged programmatic differences between Common Wealth
and the Labour Party is the issue of nationalisation without
compensation. This is a thoroughly progressive and correct
demand, which, if understood, can mean a world of difference between
the policy of the Labour Party (State-Capitalism) and the policy of
any other party. But this can only be of fundamental difference if it
is linked to a revolutionary programme. By itself it is
meaningless since to expropriate the capitalists is a revolutionary
demand which can only be carried through by the organised working
class under the leadership of a revolutionary Marxist party. It is
necessary to understand that correct criticism along with occasional
correct demands are meaningless, and under certain conditions
reactionary, unless they are linked to a Marxist programme, which can
only be advanced by a revolutionary Marxist party.
**********
C.A. Smith and those who wish to maintain Common Wealth do so on
the basis of the following argument:
“If, according to our prophecy it (the Labour
Government) does not (adopt a “fully socialist” policy), why
disband Common Wealth in order to become entangled in the Labour
wreckage? Now is the time to stand firm to maintain our socialist
integrity and to preserve an organisation ready to join forces with
the socialists at present in the disillusioned with its gradualist
Labour Party when they are finally reformism.” (Common Wealth
Review, Sept. 1945)
THE failure of the Labour Government would have the opposite
effect to that envisaged in the above statement, if we fail to win
the workers to a revolutionary Marxist programme. Precisely the
middle class, characteristically empirical and hysterical, would
swing in the direction of reaction. The middle classes integrated in
the Labour movement would, by itself, be no guarantee against this
most dangerous possibility, which can only be prevented by the
building of a strong revolutionary communist party. A separate
organisation, of the middle class, fundamentally reformist, could
only assist the swing to-wards reaction as a result of bitter
disillusionment with the Labour Government. THE new turn towards
organised labour is a progressive one insofar as it expresses the
desire of the middle class to integrate itself with the organised
working-class movement. Many of these who will enter the Labour Party
do so because of their belief in reformism. These considerations
however, are totally different from those of Acland and his leading
supporters who are seeking a comfortable place within the Labour
Party. The cynicism of these gentlemen has nothing in common with the
sincere desires of those who wish to take their place in the Labour movement.
THE new leaders of Common Wealth (C.A. Smith, etc.) have no
fundamental difference with the Labour Party policy. Amongst their
supporters, however, are many who seek alternative policies to the
reformism of the Labour and Stalinist parties. These members of
Common Wealth, some of whom came from the C.P., I.L.P., and Labour
Party, have been convinced by the two months experience of the Labour
Government and its complete absence of socialist measures that an
internationalist socialist movement is necessary. We appeal to all
who seek a revolutionary internationalist programme to study the
programme of revolutionary communism of Trotskyism.
 
WE of the Revolutionary Communist Party invite members of Common
Wealth to open up discussions with us. To others, who still have
faith in the reformist policies of the Labour Party, we strongly urge
that they join the Labour Party; for we believe that this experience
will reveal their error. There is absolutely no excuse for
maintaining a separate organisation with a programme no different to
that of the Labour Party. Such organisations are doomed to failure.
We are confident that all sincere socialists will learn that only the
policy of Marxism, of Trotskyism, can lead the workers and their
allies, the middle classes, to Socialism. There is no middle road.
 




From:

Ted Grant
J. Deane
G. Hanson
Dear comrades,
Discussion in the Party on the question of entry has naturally
provoked a crisis in the organisation. The comrades will know that on
the P.B., the C.C. and in the Party generally we have maintained that
under the given conditions, the best tactic for the party is the
maintenance of our independence.
The discussion has not convinced us that in the present situation
entry would constitute a superior tactic. However, faced with the
overwhelming majority of the leadership and the trained cadres, and a
substantial section of the rank and file are in favour of entering
the Labour Party, and given that the objective situation will be a
difficult one for the Party, we believe that a struggle would be
sterile. We say this for the following reasons.
With the development of the Labour movement and the tendency
within it at the present time, it is possible that entry would have
to be undertaken in any event a few years hence. The historical
tendency in the labour movement has been for the Labour Party to
reflect the developments taking place within the working class. At
periods of quiescence the right wing has always maintained its hold
over the Labour movement as a whole. Just as in the trade unions and
the shop-stewards committees in periods of lull, the reactionary and
backward elements, play an important role. With the upsurge of the
workers they are swept away and younger and more militant elements
are pushed forward by the workers. Similarly in relation to the L.P.
As the political expression of the trade union movement, in the event
of a crisis affecting the regime, the L.P. will be shaken to its
depths and an entire reshuffle of the leading strata would take
place. Under these circumstances the question of entry would be posed.
Taking all the above factors into consideration, and the undoubted
fact that even under the best conditions with a unified leadership
imbued with confidence in the tactic, only small gains could be made
in the immediate period ahead; with the prospect of building an
entirely new leadership, all the advantages of conducting a struggle
and attempting to continue with the open organisation, would be
cancelled out. This is particularly applicable, as the possibility
exists of entry in the future.
Therefore, given the above mentioned conditions, the objective and
subjective conditions would be unfavourable for the maintenance of
the independent Party.
Particularly is this so as certain necessary safeguards are agreed
on by all – entrists and non-entrists alike. 1) A theoretical
journal, and 2) A tight organisation.
Entry is a tactical issue and does not involve questions of
principle. Above all, it is necessary to maintain a due sense of
proportion and to see the problem as purely a practical one as to the
best method of the deployment of forces we possess.
Under different conditions, if really favourable prospects for
growth presented themselves, for the independent party, then it might
be necessary to maintain a small grouping even against the
overwhelming majority of the party. But the present situation is
entirely different. Nationally and internationally, the main task
consists in maintaining the organisation and preparing for the great
historical tasks which history will pose before us in the future.
We do not believe there are great opportunities for the growth of
our movement at present wherever we operate. In this period the most
important task consists in the maintenance of the unity of the
organisation, the intensification of the education of our cadres and
raising the theoretical level of the entire organisation. These tasks
will pose themselves as vital for the future, whether we are inside
or outside.
Under these conditions, we do not believe it is in the best
interests of the movement to wage a struggle on this issue.
 




At 10.45 a.m. on August 21, Jimmy Deane died of pneumonia
after a long illness in a Liverpool nursing home. He was one of the
last in the generation of pre-war Trotskyists, who together with Ted
Grant, fought to keep alive the flame of genuine Trotskyism under the
most difficult circumstances.
An outstanding representative of the Trotskyist movement, Jimmy
was a giant of a man in every way, whose presence always made itself
strongly felt. This exceptionally talented man was a model of a
proletarian revolutionary, and despite being incapacitated by a
severe stroke and ill health, remained a committed Marxist to the end.
Jimmy’s family had a long and proud revolutionary history
stretching back more than a century. Jimmy’s grandfather, Charles
Carrick Wilson, had been a member of the old Social Democratic
Federation, the original British Marxist organisation, and was
Labour’s first councillor in Liverpool. Later he became an alderman
and deputy Lord Mayor of Liverpool.
In the stormy years prior to the first world war, the Irish
revolutionary trade union leader, Jim Larkin, a good friend of the
family, made frequent visits to the Deane household. Jimmy’s mother
Gertie, who also became a life-long Trotskyist, also knew James
Connolly, H.M. Hyndman, Harry Quelch and other leading figures. At
this time, Gertie became an active suffragette and close friend of
Mary Bamber.
“In 1937 I met Eric Brewer and joined the Labour Party,”
recalls Jimmy. “I had already formulated ideas in my head about
socialism and fighting for Marxism. I joined the Labour Party because
at that time the Labour Party in Walton was more left than the ILP.”
He attended the 1937 Labour Party Conference as a delegate from the
Fairfield Division, sponsoring a motion calling for an international
working class embargo on all goods and arms going to Franco.
While a member of the Labour Party, Jimmy Deane was won over to
Trotskyism and joined the Militant Group in the middle of 1937 at the
age of 16. Through him, his mother Gertie was recruited, and then his
brothers Arthur and Brian, who also played an important role in our
movement. When the old Militant group split and the Workers’
International League was formed in 1938, the Deanes, along with Eric
Brewer, Tommy Birchall and Harry Matthews, were won over to the new
group, and commenced a long association with Ted Grant.
Tommy Birchall had joined the ILP in 1934 and became a Trotskyist
the following year, joining the Marxist League in the ILP.
“The comrades decided to join the Labour Party,”
recalls Tommy. “There we came into contact with Jimmy Deane and his
mother Gertie Deane and others, including Arthur Leadbetter. Here
they were able to build great influence, including getting five
comrades on the Trades Council and Labour Party, which in those days
was a joint body, from Kirkdale. In Walton, there was a good grouping
around Jimmy and Gertie Deane with representation on the Trades Council.
“The comrades developed a good base on the Trades
Council and Labour Party. By the 1938 May Day demo, we were strong
enough to organise our own section on the march. We hired a horse and
wagon and one comrade made a huge plywood tank and we marched with
the slogan ‘Not a man, not a gun for imperialist war’. The
comrades also carried banners and photos of Marx, Engels, Lenin and
Trotsky. It was about this time we became linked to the Workers’
International league. By now our group had grown to about 35–40 in
number, of which Kirkdale made up 14–15, the rest being distributed
between Granby, Walton and Fairfield. This was just about prior to
war taking place.”
During the war, Jimmy, because of his trade, was in a reserved
occupation and went to work in Cammell Lairds shipyards, where he
became a shop steward. He played a very active role in the WIL, which
was selling over 2,000 copies every issue of Socialist Appeal
in Liverpool. He intervened on behalf of the group in the Barrow
strike of 1943. Typically, they were attacked by the Stalinists, who
at this time were fervently pro-war and against all strikes. But when
the Stalinists attempted to slander Jimmy Deane and Arthur Farrager,
the whole thing backfired. Asked why they weren’t doing their bit
for King and Country, Jimmy replied: “I’m doing my utmost – I’m
a blood donor,” to cheers of delight form the workers.
In 1944, the WIL fused with some other remnants of the “official”
Trotskyists to form the Revolutionary Communist Party. In the years
that followed, heated disputes with the International leadership and
their shadows within the British party developed over a whole series
of questions. (See History of British Trotskyism by Ted Grant, Wellred, 2002.) In these,
Jimmy had consistently supported the line of the majority of the RCP
around Haston and Grant.
In the immediate post-war period, Jimmy became a full-time
organiser on trade union work, and concentrated a lot of time on the
dockers’ struggles. He was elected to the RCP’s central
committee, and from there, onto its Political Bureau. Jimmy had many
funny stories to tell about these years. One was about how Ted Grant
was finding it hard to concentrate on writing an editorial for the
Socialist Appeal. Comrades were nagging him to get on as the
deadline was rapidly approaching to take the paper to the printers.
But Ted wasn’t having any of it – so they locked him in the
office until he had finished the job. After a long while, not a sound
came from the office, so they opened the door to find the window wide
open and no Ted. Eventually they found him in the local cinema
viewing the latest western!
In the crisis in the RCP in 1948–49, when the antics of the
so-called leaders of the International and the pressures of the
period served to demoralise Haston and the other leaders, Haston came
out in favour of entry into the Labour Party. This position was
opposed by Jimmy and Ted Grant. However, rather than engage in a
faction fight, they hoped to save the leadership by remaining
neutral. This turned out to be a mistake. Haston gained a majority
and the International demanded fusion with Gerry Healy’s group in
the Labour Party. This led to the destruction of the RCP and the
expulsion of all those who challenged Healy’s undemocratic regime.
Both Ted and Jimmy were expelled and left with some 30 people
nationally, concentrated in London and Liverpool. They had no
alternative but to rebuild the movement from scratch. Figures like
Jimmy Deane and his brothers Arthur and Brian, Alec Riach, Sam Levy
and others helped to gather funds to launch a new publication called
International Socialist, with Ted Grant as its editor.
In early 1950 in Liverpool, Jimmy Deane drew the young 16-year-old
Pat Wall into the tendency. Pat had joined the Labour Party during
the general election, and within two weeks had been made secretary of
Garston CLP. “He was very keen to find out more about economics and
the theories of Marxism, and was told by councillor Bill Sefton (who
ended up in the House of Lords) to go over to Walton and ask the
Deanes,” recalls his life-long partner and comrade Pauline Wall.
“After that he read and read and read. He devoured all the Marxist
classics.” Pat played a leading role for the tendency on Liverpool
Trades Council and in the Labour Party, serving to develop and train
up a group of younger comrades such as Terry Harrison. Pat had become
a Labour councillor in Liverpool and later in Bingley, and after a
battle with the right wing and an investigation by the NEC, later
became Labour MP for Bradford North. He remained a committed
Trotskyist until his tragic death in August 1990.
The 1950s and early 1960s were the “dog days” of the tendency.
Jimmy played a leading role in holding things together and developing
the tendency. Although the group was recognised as the official
section of the International in 1957, the British section was always
in opposition to the political position and intrigue of Mandel,
Pablo, Frank and Co. They demanded that the official British section
should unite with the International Group to fight Gerry Healy. This
was vigorously resisted by a large part of the tendency, but was
eventually pushed through. Under the pressure of the International, a
shaky fusion took place at a conference at Sevenoaks in Kent in
September 1964. Jimmy Deane – the then national secretary of the
group – mistakenly heralded this as “a very important step
forward for the Trotskyist movement in Britain.” He continued: “In
adopting its statement on unity, the conference showed its mature
attitude towards the differing experiences of comrades and towards
the existence of secondary tactical differences.”
Unfortunately, there was a lot of wish-fulfilment in this. As
usual, the leadership of the International displayed bad faith,
immediately commencing their manoeuvres against the British
leadership. The “secondary differences” soon developed into sharp
differences and things fell apart within a matter of months.
The tendency had learnt a painful lesson on the impossibility of
shortcuts. Unification with the Mandelites turned out to be a farce.
A misguided attempt to collaborate with the Tony Cliff group in
developing the Young Guard paper also ended in failure. In
both cases, the main mover was Jimmy Deane, who had illusions in the
possibilities of unification. After the failure of these attempts,
Jimmy became disillusioned and moved away from active involvement in
the movement. He left Britain for a job in India, although he always
remained loyal to the ideas. One can say he was a victim not only of
the period, but also of the crimes of the so-called leaders of the Fourth.
When I visited him a few years ago, he insisted we leave the
nursing home and that I escort him to the nearest pub. Jimmy was
always fond of a drink. So we went for a couple of pints and he
reminisced about the old days, and especially the vital role Ted had
played. He displayed total scorn for the other leaders of the
Militant who had hared off in an ultra-left turn. Jimmy was
very close to Ted, and they kept regularly in touch over the years.
Even when Jimmy lost his power of speech, Ted would still phone him
periodically and talk to him about what was going on.
An electrician by trade, Jimmy had always had a great feel for
workers, especially the youth, and remains a source of inspiration to
all those who have ever known and worked with him. This proletarian
revolutionist with his thick Liverpool accent, boundless enthusiasm
and impressive presence was a man of tremendous ability, and will
fondly remembered by all who worked with him. We send our condolences
to Arthur, Brian, Dorrie, Fred and the rest of the family.
 




IT IS with great sadness that we have heard of the death of
Jimmy Deane. When I joined in 1958, Jim was general secretary of the
organisation that became Militant, Militant Labour and the Socialist
Party (CWI section in England and Wales).
He had already been active for over 20 years building the
Trotskyist forces. Alongside Jock Haston and Ted Grant, he played a
leading role during the war in the Revolutionary Communist Party, the
precursor to later Trotskyist organisations, including Militant.
He was an important internationally known leader. His family’s
council house in Hurlingham Road, Liverpool was corresponded with and
visited by Trotskyists from around the world.
The family came from a rich strand of the workers’ movement. Jim
and his brothers Arthur and Brian recruited their mother Gertie. Her
father was in the Social Democratic Federation and was one of the
first Labour councillors in Liverpool.
Jim made a number of international missions for what remained of
the Fourth International; the organisation set up by Trotsky to
replace the Stalinised Third International.
These included a period in India trying to unite groups in
Calcutta, Bombay and Madras into one all-India organisation.
As an electrical engineer, he courageously volunteered, with
another skilled building worker John Smith, to go to Morocco. This
was in response to a request from the Algerian FLN, fighting for
National Liberation from France, to help them break through the
electrified, Moroccan/Algerian border fences.
All other groups claiming to be Trotskyists then opposed the FLN
or, like the Socialist Workers’ Party in Britain, didn’t support
national liberation struggles.
I first met Jim at a national committee meeting in London. We used
to travel to these in the back of an old Post Office van driven by
his brother Brian, secretary of the Liverpool branch, accompanied by
Pat Wall and others.
Jim’s respect among workers was clear to me when – despite
having moved to London many years before I became active – he was
greeted by so many delegates to Liverpool trades council and Labour
Party, when he made the occasional visit to their joint open meetings.
We maintained a considerable influence in that body, which had
attendances of between 100 and 200 even, in that period of late
1950s, early 1960s. We benefited from a long tradition of Trotskyism,
which Jim had contributed to with his speeches at dock and factory gates.
Jim was a commanding figure with authority both politically and
with practical organisational ideas. He instilled confidence in what
was a very small organisation but almost totally made up of
industrial workers. When he asked me to move to London to organise
the youth work in 1962, I felt proud to accept.
Despite having to hold down his job to help keep a large family,
Jim kept the administrative work going in that difficult period and
our flag flying nationally and internationally, with polemical
correspondence. He made a huge theoretical contribution, writing very clearly.
He was the most enthusiastic in supporting a new journal to
replace Socialist Fight, our spasmodically produced paper. So
the Militant monthly was launched in October 1964, with
younger comrades holding key responsibilities, including Peter Taaffe
in Liverpool as editor.
It was Jim at the executive committee who recommended that Peter
Taaffe – who had been playing a key role on Merseyside, and in
national and international debates – be brought down to London to
replace himself as general secretary, as Jim had to go to India for
his job. This was unanimously accepted by the executive and national committees.
Jim’s advice was that the youth should be given their heads and
shouldn’t wait for older, tired and more conservative comrades. In
a sense he laid the basis for our success.
Jim never really re-entered activity on his return from India, due
to his job and ill health, but he still had the thirst for the
struggle. He spoke at our 1983 meeting in Wigan, against the Labour
leadership’s witch-hunt of Militant supporters.
Tony Mulhearn, a leader of the Liverpool council struggle against
Thatcher’s government, reminded us recently how Jim was welcomed
and spoke at one of the large public meetings in 1986. He
congratulated the comrades on their success and said how the
Trotskyist pioneers had always looked forward to the day when they
would be able to speak to mass audience of Liverpool workers.
As Peter Taaffe said in his book The Rise of Militant:
“Without the struggles of past generations of Marxists,
particularly the pioneers of Trotskyism in Britain, the success of
Militant would not have been possible. The youthful adherents who
joined the ranks of what became Militant in the early 1960s, stood on
the shoulders of those who maintained the Trotskyist traditions in
the most difficult period.”
Jim’s contribution was of major importance and will not be
forgotten, and his approachability and kindness will always be
remembered. Our condolences and sympathy go to all his family and
friends.
 




Mersey and Lancashire busmen are conducting a struggle for a decent minimum wage.
Cardiff workers have been on strike against the scandalously low wage rates and the insulting offer of the National Arbitration Council.
 
Every Transport Worker Must Join This Fight for a Living Wage
The wage rates of public transport workers are far below the national average wage for all workers. While the cost of living has increased, the real wages been reduced. Last October, the Union were mandated to negotiate for an increase of 30/–, or not less than 20/–. For months nothing has been heard of this claim until the strike of the Cardiff men and the heightened discontent nationally, compelled the employers to offer a sop through the N.J.I.C. Even this shameful offer of 7/6, which has been accepted as “reasonable”! by the officials, would not have been made without the strike of the Cardiff men.
 
One Industry – One Union!
The organisation of transport workers into two different unions plays into the employers’ hands. We have seen how an official meeting of the G.&M.W.U. refused admission to members of the T.&G.W.U. The bosses and their agents know that divided we fall, united we stand. The official unifying committee has not raised a whisper on behalf of the unite interests of busmen and tram-men.
Rank and file committees representing ALL workers engaged in the public transport industry must be formed. End the disunity, One Union for all transport workers!
 
Organise Thoroughly!
If the Union Leaders and Labour Ministers were interested in aiding the workers and preventing a prolonged struggle, they would have intervened on the side of the workers. In one day they could compel the employers to grant an increase of 30/–. Instead, they ask the workers to accept the offer of the N.J.I.C. and to remain at work!
The transport workers can only rely upon their own organised strength by:

Union and Solidarity
 
The formation of committees representing all Transport Workers in every garage and depot.
 
The formation of a Central Strike Committee and a National Rank and File Committee.
 
Organisation of Pickets against any attempted black-legging.
 
Appeal to the Public and all Working Class Organisations for support.

The Revolutionary Communist Party (Trotskyist) offers its complete support to the transport workers. We believe it is the duty of all working class parties worthy of the name, to assist every section of the working class struggling for better conditions.
 




“Nationalisation is not intended primarily to benefit the miner. There is the coal consumer to be considered, the interests of the nation, our export trade, and all that.” So spoke Mr. Shinwell, “Socialist” Minister of Fuel and Power, in Glasgow on January 17th.
In simple language this statement means that the coal industry is not being nationalised in the interest of the miners and workers who placed the Labour Government in power, but in the interest of the capitalists and industrialists. By the “coal consumer” is not meant the worker-consumer, but the big industrial consumers who will sit on the Consumer’s Council and have a directing influence upon the administration of the mines.
Speaking a few days later to the American Chamber of Commerce in London Mr. Shinwell placed his finger on the issue. He said: “We have to cheapen the cost of production because this industry ministers to the needs of the basic element of production.” Shinwell this makes it clear that the Nationalisation Bill is a state-capitalist measure, dictated by the needs of capitalist economy.
The nationalisation, reorganisation, and consequent increased production will mean cheaper coal. The export industries, particularly the steel and auxiliary industries, will buy coal at a cheaper price and will therefore be able to reduce the price of export commodities and compete more efficiently on the world capitalist market. This is “primarily” the purpose of the Nationalisation Bill.
Lest there be doubt that the needs and conditions of the miners were the last consideration in the Nationalisation Bill, Mr. Shinwell again stated in his speech to the American Chamber of Commerce:
“But there must be a proviso that such cheapening must be consistent, so far as practicable, with decent and human standards of living for those employed in the industry.”
 
Coal-Owners Compensated
If one considers that the cost of the nationalisation scheme, to be paid from public taxes, will be in the region of £20 million a year, and that £150 millions will be loaned to the Coal Board from the proceeds of the industry. To pay these fabulous sums and at the same time reduce the price of coal for industries and export can only mean increased sweat for the miners.
Precisely here is the role of the traitorous union leaderships. The leadership of the Mineworkers’ Union has undertaken the production drive on behalf of the Government. Horner, a “Communist”, is the Dr. Ley! The miners are to be exhorted to increase their already inhuman sweating – for the benefit of capitalist industry and the coal owners who are guaranteed a profit of £9½ millions a year in the form of compensation.
 
Capitalist Managers to Stay
The entire administration is, according to Mr. Shinwell, “to be in the hands of a business corporation, administering this great national industry for public well-being.” “This is to be a fair field for men of business capacity and other qualifications.” The mines will not only minister to the needs of capitalist industry but it will remain in the controlling hands of capitalist managers and technicians.
Small wonder that the coal-owners have accepted the Government’s Nationalisation Bill! Their only demand is that compensation should be paid in cash and not Government bonds. Not a thing is to be changed – except that the whole burden, the whole cost of reorganisation and the production of cheaper coal is placed on the shoulders of the miners and the workers as a whole.
 
“Unofficial Disputes To Stop” – Shinwell
All the disciplinary measures necessary to drive the miners will be used by the Labour Government. Forseeing an increase in miners’ strikes against low wages and filthy conditions, Mr. Shinwell, in his Glasgow speech stated: “I consider that unofficial disputes should stop. I am contemplating as a last resort drastic action.”
The present Nationalisation Bill of the Labour Government in no way differs from the measures taken in other capitalist countries – including Germany. It is a measure dictated by the needs of capitalism and has nothing in common with socialism.
Only the operation of this industry under workers’ control and the abolition of compensation can solve the problems of the coal industry and better the conditions of the miners and the working class.
 




THE REACTION OF THE DOCK WORKERS TO THE 19/– A DAY PROPOSED BY THE EVERSHED COMMITTEE OF ENQUIRY INTO DOCK WAGES, HAS BEEN ONE OF BITTERNESS AND DISGUST.
The immediate reaction of the London Central Strike Committee was to condemn and reject the proposals of this committee, which are 6/– below the demands of the dockers, and to call upon the Union leadership to give 21 days’ strike notice.
As we go to press, the National Strike Committee, meeting in Liverpool, has decided to accept the Evershed proposals. But this is not the end of the struggle. Within a short time the dockers will be on the move again in their fight for a decent wage.
The role of the Donovans, the Deakins and the Labour Government in the wage negotiations will serve to teach the dockers and the working class as a whole that they have acted in the interests of the capitalist class. Following the age-old method of killing the workers’ claims, the Government appointed the Evershed Committee of inquiry 6 days before the termination of the 30 days truce. This was done to avert another national stoppage which most certainly would have taken place as a result of the provocative 2/– increase offered by the employers. This “impartial” committee was composed of one capitalist, an ex-chairman of the Metal Box Co. Ltd., to university professors – priests of capitalist education – and one individual well trained in the methods of class-collaboration – an ex-president of the AEU. The chairman of the Committee, Mr. Justice Evershed, is a protector of capitalist law. From such a committee, composed of the representatives of capitalism, no one, least of all the militant dockers, expected much more than is offered.
The Labour Government had every opportunity and possibility to obtain the 25/– a day demanded by the dockers. Instead of a Commission composed of capitalist agents it could and if a real workers’ government representing the interests of the workers, would have appointed a commission composed of representatives of the dockers. Thus the workers would have been assured of proposals in their interest and not, as now, in the interest of the employers.
 
Union Leaders Betray Rank and File
The leadership of the dockers’ unions has earned the bitter opposition and hatred of the rank and file. When the employers made their offer of 18/–, Donovan and Deakin were compelled to recommend to a national delegate conference the rejection of this offer. The fact that they have now accepted 19/– only indicates that they have been engaged in backstage collaboration with the employers and the Government in reaching a suitable compromise. Bert Aylwood, the organiser of the London Central Strike Committee, speaking almost a week before the end of the 30 days’ truce, nailed the policy of the union leaders:
“We gave 30 days’ notice when we resumed work to give the employers one week to meet the issue (25/– minimum wage). If they did not, the Transport and General Workers Union officials could then give Mr. Issacs 21 days’ notice that a dispute existed.
“Instead of that, the union agreed to discuss something less than 25/–. There are vested interests in the Transport & General Workers Union and the Stevedores Union who are trying to fog and bamboozle the issue so that at the end of the 30 days we will not know where we are.”
The opposition to the official union leaders was clearly shown at the handpicked national delegate conference of the T.&G.W.U. held on 14th December. 14 delegates voted against the acceptance of the Evershed proposals. An official meeting of union members was called on the 15th December. Out of more than 10,000 union members in London, about 80 attended the meeting. As soon as the officials read the proposals the vast majority of these walked out leaving the officials on the platform! Deakin and Donovan (despite the fact that the former was recently elected General Secretary – how this happened no one knows!) have no support whatsoever from the rank and file. The power lies in the hands of the National Strike Committee.
 
Only a Militant Policy Can Preserve the Rank and File Organisation
All the recent events show that the power lies in the hands of the National Strike Committee, which because of its courageous and militant leadership has won the support of dock workers throughout the country. But any compromise or sell-out of the dockers’ struggle can soon end the unity and organisation won by the strike. Such a compromise would again place the dock workers in confusion and frustration – ready material for the machinations of Deakin and Donovan. The politically conscious elements on the National Committee must prevent such a degeneration. All the weaknesses must be corrected. Nothing should be permitted to stand in the way of full and serious preparation for the future struggles, and for the removal of the traitorous union leadership and the revival of union democracy. On the basis of a militant policy the present national organisation forged by the dockers can become a most important factor in the struggle of the British working-class for Socialism.
 

