   A VISIT to the front lines in the struggle for industrial unionism at the Goodyear Rubber plant in Akron lends new courage to union men who have struggled hard for the great day that is now dawning. The almost unbelievable resourcefulness and the splendid courage and determination shown by the rubber workers proved beyond the question of a doubt that the strength of a giant lies smouldering within the ranks of the American workers in the basic industries. The solid ranks of industrial unionism are fanning this spirit into a flame. We do not have to witness the demoralizing sight of the members of one craft union walking through the picket lines of another striking craft union to go to work. There is no question of craft distinction in this strike. If you work in the Goodyear plant, you are either in the rubber workers’ union and out on the picket line or you are a scab. On Tuesday morning, February 25, the embattled workers, picketing in violation of a court injunction, calculated to destroy their strength, faced down an army of police and special deputies sent out to enforce the injunction. The picket line holds solid with a picket post at each of the 168 gates of the plant. Around the eleven mile fighting front the slogan is: “Nobody goes in the plant.” Those hard bitten cynics who say that the American worker will not fight shall have to change their minds after this forceful demonstration. The suddenness with which the strike came made it difficult for the strikers to prepare adequate facilities for its conduct. These deficiencies are being rapidly overcome. The present headquarters is not adequate for an assembly hall for the strike but will serve very well as a commissary and headquarters for the strike leaders and field captains. A second and larger assembly place is needed for large gatherings of the strikers and, of equal importance, so that the workers from the other rubber plants and all other Akron workers may come to the proper place to get correct information regarding the strike and to get instructions as to how they may best assist. On this question there is a second important factor. The management of the company has complete access to the radio, to the advertising columns of the daily papers and to a very large extent to the news and editorial columns also. It is vital that this propaganda of the bosses be counteracted by the strikers. The most effective weapon for this purpose is the daily strike bulletin issued at a regular hour and widely distributed. Once started, the strike bulletin easily becomes self-supporting. The experiences of the Minneapolis truck drivers, the Toledo Chevrolet strike, the St. Louis Gas House strike, and many others stand as living proof of the value of a daily strike bulletin. The rubber workers will find such a paper eagerly received and closely read by all workers. Outside the city of Akron it is difficult to get accurate information about the strike because of the manner in which the daily papers are suppressing it. This is done because the bosses in steel, auto, and the other big industries do not want the workers to know of this powerful demonstration of industrial union strength. But the rubber workers do want the other workers to know about their fight and they want their support. The strike committee should send systematic press releases to all papers in the country. The daily strike bulletin is the best instrument with which to do this. It is heartening to observe that the Committee for Industrial Organization is sending money and men to aid the Akron strikers. This strike is of vital interest to the industrial union movement and the most practical work that the C.I.O. can do is to give the strike unstinted support. The Akron strike must be won. The craft unionists must not be permitted to sell the strike out in an effort to stifle the rising sentiment for industrial unionism. There is a grave danger of such a thing happening. Especially when Secretary Perkins’ “ace mediator,” McGrady, is reported to have been ordered to Akron to effect a “settlement.” A very large part of the responsibility in this strike rests with the C.I.O. The workers are furnishing the fighting forces. They must have leadership, a leadership conscious of the full import of the forces moving today in the national struggle and capable of guiding the strikers through the treacherous“settlement” proposals which have wrecked every attempt at unionizing the big industries. The Goodyear strike in Akron must be won. All labor must rally to support the fight. The workers in every city can aid by opening an intensive organization drive in all Goodyear agencies. Carry the fight to Goodyear! Get the strike news from the rubber workers, not from the bosses’ papers! Fight to build industrial unionism!  F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page Last updated: 7 May 2018 by ETOL 


   The most pleasant surprise experienced by the Local 574 committee which was sent east to visit the national leaders of the industrial union movement was to learn of the popular national support which 574 enjoys. Wherever we called – and we talked with many important labor figures – we found that the General Drivers’ Union was known and admired. All inquired not about what we have done – this they knew – but what the union intended to do next They expressed satisfaction with our account of the present healthy condition of 574 and its excellent prospects. In every big industrial center we found the workers and the progressive union leaders in very good spirits. All are highly enthused over the new possibilities of effective union organization now opening up for them through the strong movement for industrial unionism. Every sincere, intelligent leader and the overwhelming majority of the workers in the heavy industries are completely convinced of the ridiculousness of craft unionism. They tell you convincing stories to show that their beliefs are not based on pure theory.  Craft Unionism Disastrous A union is created in a steel plant, an automobile factory, a rubber plant – it matters not where, for the story is the same. All the workers band together in one embracing unit. They prepare to do battle with the employers, to fight for higher wages, shorter hours, a decent living. Then, on the eve of action, the craft union officials sweep down with their paper claims of jurisdiction, their program of division. It matters not that they have been unable to organize in these plants. They poise, motionless, like birds of prey, until they see a good opportunity, and then they swoop down for the kill. It is a sorry sight that they leave in their wake. They gain a few members for the various crafts, but most of the workers are driven back into the ranks of the unorganized, embittered by the experience. The bosses seize the chance and intensify their anti-union campaign. Active unionists are fired. No organization remains to defend them. The cloak of a special “labor board,” which the government has obligingly provided for the craft union officials, quickly proves its impotence. The union is gone and with it the rights of the workers. We were shown the spot where a year ago the Akron rubber workers made a huge bonfire of union cards after such an experience. But now the whole picture is changing. Hope has taken the place of despair. “Get these craft union leeches off our backs,” say the workers in the basic industries, “give us a free hand to organize industrially, and we will show the world a union movement the likes of which has never before been seen.”  Workers Want Action And these are not mere words. Beginning with a series of sit-down strikes, the workers in the Goodyear plant at Akron have shattered the fetters which restrained them, and, swarming to the picket lines by the thousands, they have demonstrated the value of industrial organization combined with militant struggle. Nobody scabbed on a craft union card in this strike. One union for all and all on the picket line. The craft union leaders would have liked very much to pluck this union, but they did not dare. All eyes were on this strike. The lessons to be drawn from such action would have been too obvious. The strike of the building service workers in New York is a second example. Here again the sweep of the movement was tremendous. The strike spread like wildfire. Elevator operators, caretakers, janitors, over one hundred thousand workers fighting as one, and fighting very effectively, against the real estate czars. The craft unionists do not like these manifestations; they do not like the zest with which the workers take to the ideas of industrial unionism; they do not like the manner in which the workers apply the power which is theirs when they are organized industrially. But the workers do like it; they have enjoyed the thrill of the first taste; they hunger for more. The craft unionists are finally beginning to understand that they are sitting on a powder keg. The discovery has shocked them deeply.  “Rule or Ruin’’ The craft union controlled Executive Council of the A.F. of L. has ordered the Committee for Industrial Organization to dissolve. The C.I.O. has refused. What action will the Executive Council take at its next session? Will it expel the International Unions affiliated with the C.I.O.? This is very doubtful. As a matter of fact, the order to dissolve was issued to the C.I.O. only with great reluctance on the part of most of the members of the Executive Council. Not because of any sympathy they might have for industrial unionism, but because they were well aware that the demand would meet with refusal, that their bluff would be called, had to be called, by the C.I.O. Daniel J. Tobin came into the Miami session of the Council with his usual self-centered, narrow-minded, hard-boiled attitude. He demanded the immediate expulsion from the A.F. of L. of the affiliates of the C.I.O. (Tobin, the charter revoker, who probably still thinks that 574 is smashed because he revoked its charter. 574 has done better without him than it ever did with him. The A.F. of L. will probably some day enjoy the same pleasant experience.) There are other Tobins in the Council who also believe in “rule or ruin,” who are drunk with imaginary power – Hutchinson of the carpenters, for example. They support him. The slightly more intelligent of the craft unionists opposed this program. They understood better than Tobin the weakness of their position. The order issued was a poor compromise which will return to haunt them at the next session of the Executive Council. There will be much bluster and tall talk, biit their efforts to “purge” the C.I.O. will be as ineffective as were Meyer Lewis’ efforts to “purge” 574. Another development in the fight at the top is the quiet, unadvertised and methodical manner in which the International Unions are paying per capita tax to the A.F. of L. on additional members. It has long been a recognized custom for International Unions to pay a tax on only part of their membership. Even Tobin that great exponent of the sanctity of per capita tax, has followed this practice. Voting strength in the A.F. of L. convention is based on the paid-up membership of the International Unions. Hence the campaign to pay in for every possible member. There is a vital issue at stake; the jobs of the craft union office holders vs. the welfare of the workers of America. Every vote counts.  Role of the C.I.O. To properly understand the role of the Committee for Industrial Organization, we must first recognize the background of the committee members. None of these men can boast of a clear record of progressivism. Some of their past actions are downright reactionary, and to say the least, undemocratic. This is a matter of record. True, they are now supporting a progressive cause: the movement for industrial unionism. But their prime motive is one of personal ambition. The members of the C.I.O. have one distinct advantage over their fellow officeholders, the craft unionists: they have been able to correctly estimate the mood of the working masses. They realize that the workers are determined to have industrial unionism, that they will sooner or later unseat every leader who stands in the way of this objective. Understanding this, the members of the C.I.O. have declared themselves for the industrial form of organization. They are assuming the leadership of this movement in a cautious and hesitant manner. They stand with one foot firmly planted on the old; with the other foot they feel gingerly about for a safe place to implant themselves in the new. Many workers look upon the C.I.O. as a messiah. There is a strong tendency to render it blind allegiance. This is a dangerous attitude which can very well detract in a large measure from the ultimate gains to be made through industrial unionism. We need something more than industrial unions. We need a democratic freedom of action to apply the power which this form of organization creates. The workers should support the C.I.O. in its stand for industrial unionism, but, at the same time, they must constantly put forward demands for the elimination of the machine control which now exists in the A.F. of L. and the restoration of true democracy in the local unions. Our long conversation with John Brophy, director of the C.I.O., gave us a very comprehensive picture of the present activities of this group, the principal work of the committee is confined to the educational field. Books, pamphlets, news releases and editorials sent to labor editors, speeches, and other mediums of expression are being used to clarify the issues throughout the national labor movement The C.I.O. has not however, taken the initiative in solidifying the industrial union groups in the various industrial centers and co-ordinating the movement on a national basis. As yet the strong feeling of the workers is only a seething ferment, evidencing itself in sporadic heat lightnings, which give warning of the impending storm. Organized action to rid the movement of the evils of craft unionism is yet to come. Through the medium of its participating International Unions, the C.I.O. has lent aid and direction to the local unions in important strikes; a notable example is the Akron rubber strike. The proposals to organize the steel industry. put forward by the C.I.O. proved a great embarrassment ‘to the craft unionists. On the other hand, the craft unionist Executive Council has set about a deliberate campaign to eliminate the Federal Unions. This type of local was created in an attempt to forestall industrial unionism. It has since become a staunch supporter of and a potential springboard for the industrial union movement. Federal Union charters are no longer issued. The Federal Unions are being dissolved into the craft Internationals wherever this can be done. These charters are being revoked on a wholesale basis on the slightest pretext. The very air is charged with a feeling of impending change. Events are moving at a rapid pace. The next period will see many significant happenings. Labor is preparing, in its gigantic, lumbering way, for a tremendous stride forward. Local 574 can look ahead with complete confidence. We are on the side of progress.  F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page Last updated: 7 May 2018 by ETOL 

r to Gerry Healy



Marxists’ Internet Archive: ETOL Home Page: Trotskyist Writers Section: Farrel Dobbs

Farrell Dobbs
Letter to Gerry Healy
December 8, 1954
“The problem is not one of unification”

Written: December 8, 1954
Source: Education for Socialist Bulletin…
Transcription\HTML Markup: David Walters

Dear Burns [Healy],
We have just concluded a most
fruitful convention which gave an inspiring demonstration of high
morale in the ranks despite the witch-hunt pressures and from which the
party emerged with a class-struggle line realistically applied to the
present conditions.
A redraft of the political resolution, prepared after the recent
national elections, will be sent to you under separate cover. The
convention adopted the general line of the redraft as definitive in
determining the line of the press and the policy in branch activities.
However, the redraft will now be submitted, with some editing to
further discussion in the party, after which the Plenum of the NC will
adopt a final definitive draft by authorization of the convention.
The convention formally expelled the splitters and unanimously
approved the Open Letter published by the Nov. 1953 Plenum as well as
the subsequent general course of the leadership in the struggle against
Pabloism. In a discussion among the leading comrades right after the
convention, we took up the current problems in that struggle and
decided to send this letter to you personally setting forth our general
views.
Looking back upon recent events we now feel we made a mistake in
orienting toward establishment of a parity commission with the
Pabloites no matter on how limited a basis. Illusions can be created
that become an obstacle to the realization of our fundamental
objectives.
Beginning with the Open
Letter, the forces rallied around the International Committee have
denounced Pabloism as a revisionist-liquidationist tendency guilty of:
junking the Transitional Program; renouncing the inevitability of
political revolution against the Stalinist bureaucracy and visualizing
its self-reform; covering up Stalinist betrayals; adopting a
conciliatory attitude toward alien political tendencies generally;
liquidating the movement through “deep” entry tactics; organizing a
secret personal faction; suppressing democratic discussion inside the
movement; gagging leading comrades in the executive bodies and in the
sections; carrying through minority-provoked splits and bureaucratic
expulsions—all as part of a conspiracy to achieve these
revisionist-liquidationist aims through a minority coup d’etat at a
rump congress.
The Open Letter and then the International Committee itself added to
this general denunciation the demand that the Pabloite usurpers be
removed from the central apparatus in order to restore internal
democracy in the world movement. Full democratic discussion was called
for on all issues in dispute before the necessary decisions are made at
a democratically organized congress.
It is on this line that the major sections have been rallied around
the International Committee with the consistent demand that Pablo and
Pabloism must go. The split with Pabloism is therefore already
definitive and what remains is a mopping-up operation to save whatever
confused elements we can, accepting unity only with those elements who
are prepared to break definitively with everything Pabloism stands for.
Thus, in the most basic sense the problem is not one of unification.
Our task is to consolidate the forces that have broken with Pablo and
carry the split deeper into the Pabloite ranks.
Organization of a common congress with the Pabloites is not in any
sense a task of the parity commission. We agreed to the commission in
the first place only to help the Ceylonese comrades find a tactical
bridge toward full support of the Trotskyist forces. We had no idea of
a congress of any kind until the groundwork has been fully laid for its
complete rejection of Pabloism and the projection of a Trotskyist
perspective. Consequently there can be no basis for discussion with the
Pabloites of any organizational matters or any questions of formal
authority.
At most the parity commission could merely organize a discussion and
it isn’t actually needed even for that. Our task is precisely the one
defined at the latest meeting of the IC—to pass immediately to the
preparation of our own documents for the Fourth Congress. In doing so
we will naturally run our own discussion and the documents the IC
finally elaborates through its own discussion will definitely be the
authentic documents of the Fourth Congress.
The notion of a parity commission serves at most as simply a device
for marking time before the definitive split with Pabloism is made
openly in the fullest formal sense. Time is on our side in the task of
clarifying the confused and hesitant elements who remain identified to
some degree with the Pabloite formal structure. The gratifying
developments you report in Germany and Italy underline this fact. But
we must be careful not to feed any illusions among the Ceylonese,
Germans, Italians or others that there can be any long cohabitation
with the Pabloites. These comrades must not get the idea that they can
avoid a clean break with Pabloism with the expectation that we will be
coming back into the old setup on the basis of a modus vivendi with
Pablo.
If our approach to the parity commission question gives any wrong
impressions on this score it would impede the full mobilization of the
real Trotskyist forces. Judging from the eagerness with which the
Pabloites are pushing for a quick session of the commission, they sense
this very fact and are anxious to use the parity commission device to
sow new confusion and promote new illusions. We therefore think it
necessary to slow down a great deal on the commission action and stall
off even a preliminary meeting indefinitely while we take plenty of
time to work out our own perspectives and fully develop our own
strategic and tactical course. Since the parity commission must in any
case be strictly limited to the exchange of discussion material and
nothing more, there is no need for haste in arranging a meeting and
plenty of good reasons that can be advanced for delaying it.
Our platform permits no common executive body with the Pabloites. It
requires just the opposite since our stress is on the consolidation of
the Trotskyist forces and a definitive separation from Pabloism. Hence
nothing of an executive character gives any urgency to a parity
commis-sion meeting. Our documents will not be designed for “common”
discussion with the Pabloites but for clarification of the Trotskyists
and the elaboration of the Trotskyist platform. We have nothing to
negotiate with the Pabloites concerning the character and scope of
discussion material. In fact we take a dubious view even of the
proposed IC demand to have our own spokesmen in Pablo-dominated
sections. That stipulation would work both ways and we don’t really
need it, certainly not nearly as much as the Pabloites do. Thus all the
parity commission can really do is exchange documents and there would
be no point to a hasty meeting merely to agree that this would be done
later on. And the IC will not be in a position to submit any documents
to a parity commission until they have been thoroughly discussed among
the IC supporters and approved by them.
We fully agree with the decision of the International Committee to
concentrate now on the preparation of the basic discussion material
intended to fully clarify our own forces and rally the confused
elements to our side. We will undertake the drafting of a document on
“World Perspectives” as the IC has requested but it will not be
possible for us to promise it by Dec. 30 as suggested. While we have no
intention of delaying the project, we do think it important that we be
allowed whatever time will be found necessary to do a workman-like job
on the draft. If you agree with us that there is no need for a forced
pace in preparing the IC documents, we assume you will also agree to
our undertaking the assignment on a necessarily elastic time schedule.
In addition to the discussion material already projected by the IC
we believe a thorough analysis of the structure and functioning of the
world movement along realistic democratic-centralist lines will be
needed. In the so-called “unity” resolution of the rump congress, Pablo
still harps on his pet theme of a “centralized world party.” We must
spell out not only our rejection of Pablo’s false organizational line
but also what we want the organizational norms to be as required by the
realities of the movement. Considerable discussion will first be
required among ourselves on this general subject and we plan to write
further about it later on.
We shall look forward to further direct consultation with you on the
points we have raised in this letter and on the manner in which these
views should be introduced among our co-thinkers.
Comradely, Smith [Dobbs]
[Postscript Omitted]

Back to the Dobbs Table of Contents Page 
Back to the International Committee  of the Fourth International Page
Back to the Marxists Internet Archive



ell Dobbs: Cuba Crisis - Week of the Brink (9 November 1962)



Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Farrell Dobbs
The Cuba Crisis
The Week of the Brink
(9 November 1962)

From International Socialist Review, Vol.24 No.1, Winter 1963, pp.3-8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





Farrell Dobbs, National Secretary of the
Socialist Workers Party, four times its presidential candidate, spoke
before the Militant Labor Forum in New York City, November 9, on the
Cuban-US Crisis and the threat of nuclear war. The transcript of the
tape recording is published here substantially unchanged.




COMRADE Chairman, comrades and friends, if there are any
of you here tonight who did not live with fear during the period of
extreme tension following Kennedy’s nuclear war threat, then I can only
say you must have been on the granddaddy of all drunks. Throughout the
world, attention was focused on the Soviet ships sailing toward
Kennedy’s naval blockade around the embattled revolutionary island of
Cuba. Everybody was wondering, will they keep coming, will Kennedy
carry out his threat to fire on them, and what will it bring for us? It
was as though an announcement had come from the astronomers that a
fiery object from outer space was heading toward us and the people of
the world were watching with fear and horror to see if it was on a
collision course with our planet, and would incinerate us all.
The threat of nuclear war, which had seemed somewhat remote,
suddenly and dramatically exploded into an immediate danger. The people
of the United States became vividly aware that this country won’t be
exempt in a nuclear war. Never again will a general war be fought in
which people in other lands will be destroyed wholesale, civilians and
all, their cities leveled, their country ravished, while the United
States experiences no destruction within its boundaries. That day is
past. The people of America are aware that we, like the rest of the
world, will be the victims of a nuclear war, and they’re aware that
there is no place to hide.
A most meaningful manifestation of that realization occurred in
Washington during the crisis. A Pentagon spokesman was briefing the
press. At one point he came to the question of civil defense, whereupon
the hardbitten, cynical reporters laughed in his face. Fallout
shelters? Evacuation of cities? Everybody knows it’s a fake and a
fraud. As LeRoy McRae, our candidate for Attorney General said during
the election campaign, the shelter program was one of the greatest
consumer frauds ever perpetrated on the people here in New York by the
Rockefeller administration. Everybody realized that. So they lived with
fear and they lived with hope that maybe the threat would go away.
Kennedy kept the brutal pressure on, hour by hour, and day by
grueling day, until Khrushchev, acting under the pressure of Kennedy’s
threats, stated that the Soviet Union would withdraw the missiles that
Kennedy held to be offensive weapons. The whole world breathed a deep
sigh of relief. But nobody was quite the same as they were before that
grim speech of Kennedy’s on October 22. There is a new consciousness in
people’s minds that nuclear war is a clear and present danger. Some new
thoughts are percolating as to why there is the war danger and new and
more intensive searches are going on among people to try to determine
what can be done to prevent war. I won’t try tonight to deal with the
tactical issues at the peak of the crisis, although they have a certain
importance in probing into the full meaning of the crisis. I won’t do
that because that is not the real key, in my opinion, to an analysis of
the lessons of the crisis.
Let me say first that the main, immediate fact that emerges from the
crisis is that nuclear war has been averted — only temporarily—but it
has been averted, and that means we have gained precious time in the
fight for world peace. To use that time effectively we need to analyze
the fundamental lessons of the Cuban crisis. What truths about
imperialism were made more evident? How have the various peace programs
stood the test of this crisis? How can the peace forces better oppose
the imperialist war drive? Discussion of these questions and the
arriving at common conclusions by more and more people will have to
develop as a process. All I propose to undertake tonight is to make a
start in the discussion of some of these basic factors.
 
LET me pose first the question: Who was proven the
aggressor in the Cuban crisis? Was it Cuba? The Cubans were defending
their sovereign right to make social changes within their country that
they thought would better serve the welfare of the population. Measured
in terms of the history of this country, the Cubans can present strong
arguments in favor of their position by quoting such figures as Sam
Adams, Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, Frederick Douglass and Eugene
V. Debs, just to mention a few. The Cubans have right on their side.
The right of a people—as it’s written in our own Declaration of
Independence proclaiming the American Revolution of 1776—to take
affairs into their own hands and reshape things in whatever way they
see fit to make a better life for themselves. Was it the Soviet Union
that was the aggressor? What did the Soviet Union do? Did the Russians
try to overturn the Cuban revolutionary regime? No. The Soviets gave
the Cubans defensive aid, economic and military. That was a progressive
act and they are to be commended for that act, because it was in
keeping with the rights of the Cuban people.
It was not Castro. It was not Khrushchev. It was Kennedy, who
precipitated the nuclear war crisis and used the issue of Soviet aid to
Cuban self-defense as his pretext. You talk about George Orwell’s
“double-speak” in the book 1984. You got it in spades
from Kennedy during this crisis. Defense is aggression. That was
Kennedy’s line, and he is going to stop such interferences with his
imperialist aims if he has to bomb every Latin American from 90 miles
off our shores to the southern tip of South America. He said in effect
to the Cubans, “Disarm or we will attack you”; and to the Soviet Union,
“Submit your ships to search and seizure on the high seas or we will
fire upon you, and if that brings us to nuclear war, so be it.” The
imperialist ruling class of the United States stands as the only
governing power in the world that has ever used nuclear weapons against
other human beings. It did so at Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945. Now
this same gang of imperialist mobsters, this bipartisan cabal in
Washington, stands as the only governmental power that has deliberately
threatened to plunge the world into nuclear war when hydrogen bombs of
megaton range exist, one of which could virtually level a whole city
like New York. And they call the Cubans “aggressors.”
There is no question who was and who is still the aggressor. The
Soviets are removing their missiles from Cuba and Kennedy is still on
the prod. He is now broadening his definition of what he calls
“offensive” weapons. If defense is aggression, then so long as the
Cubans have any arms with which to defend themselves against attack,
they have “offensive” weapons that “threaten” the United States. Cuba
will possess “offensive” weapons so long as there is a zip gun in a
back alley in Havana. Kennedy’s definition just begins with missiles.
Why? Because the imperialists are preparing new violations of Cuban
sovereignty. They are determined to overturn the revolutionary regime
in Cuba. They are determined to turn back the clock and restore
exploitation of Cuba by American monopoly corporations. That is why the
Cuban revolution still remains in grave peril of United States
aggression.
It is our duty to defend from within this country the rights of the
Cubans. Back them in their demand that the United States withdraw from
Guantanamo. Kennedy wants to dictate what weapons the Cubans can have
because they are “threatening” the United States from 90 miles away,
and he has a military base right on Cuban soil. It is our duty to
support the demands of the Cubans that Kennedy call off that naval
blockade, that he call off his violations of Cuban air space, that he
quit arming counter-revolutionary gangs to help overturn the Cuban
revolution and that he lift the economic embargo against Cuba. These
are points stressed by the Cubans as just minimum assurances it would
be necessary to have before they could put an ounce of trust in any
promise Kennedy might make that he would not invade Cuba. We should add
our own demands to these points raised by the Cubans. We should demand
that the Kennedy administration restore diplomatic relations with Cuba.
Lift the travel ban. Let the people of this country go down there and
see for themselves what it is all about. Restore trade with Cuba. Give
the Cubans economic aid and pay them reparations for the damage that
has already been done to them by the United States.
 
NOW look at the lessons of the Cuban crisis from another
point of view. Ever since people began to grasp what the horror of
nuclear war would probably be, there has been a notion advanced that
the imperialists would not risk nuclear war in trying to maintain their
rule. It has been argued that they would hold back because they would
risk their own destruction in a nuclear war. This contention has been
counterposed to the Marxist analysis of the historic role of ruling
classes. Marxists hold that the whole history of class struggle
demonstrates that no ruling class will peacefully yield up its
privileged minority rule upon demand from the majority. The ruling
class will try by all available means, through force and violence, to
impose its minority will on the majority in order to preserve its
privileged position. Well, who has been proven right? In that intensive
period beginning with his October 22 nuclear war speech, John F.
Kennedy has reaffirmed Karl Marx. He left no room for speculation. If I
may comment in this connection on the answer to a paragraph I read in
the Worker during the heat of the crisis, let me say:
The father of Caroline Kennedy is prepared to risk the death of his
daughter in nuclear war in order to preserve the capitalist system and
maintain imperialist exploitation over peoples in other countries. He
proved it. There is no room for argument. The facts are in.
These facts, and the surrounding circumstances in the crisis, offer
fresh proof that the war danger stems from the basic nature of
capitalism. The roots lie in class exploitation within a capitalist
country, in our case the United States. Capitalist exploitation breeds
social injustice, creates class inequities within our society. Madison
Avenue describes us as a society of equals, but it just happens that
the capitalists are more equal than workers, and that is built into the
capitalist system, and that’s the way it is going to remain under
capitalism. Out of this class inequality a surplus accumulation of
capital becomes amassed in the hands of our native capitalists and they
have to do something with it, in order to make more money for
themselves. This thirst for new riches impels the capitalist ruling
class into a drive toward exploitation of peoples abroad. An intricate
network of imperialist oppression develops, imposed by a combination of
political trickery and military force. The consequent social
injustices, in turn, provoke class struggles on a world scale that lead
to colonial revolutions for independence from imperialism and to social
revolution to overturn the whole capitalist system and lay a foundation
through workers’ states for an advance to a socialist society. Cuba
represents a new high-water mark in this rising tide of world
revolution that has been gaining in momentum since World War II.
The imperialists, and before all others, the imperialist rulers of
the United States, are striving desperately to stem and reverse this
revolutionary tide. Their immediate aim in the case of Cuba is to
proscribe social revolution from the Western Hemisphere, to keep it a
private preserve of capitalism. Profits must come before people. What
difference does it make if Cubans again become unemployed by the
hundreds of thousands in a land of only seven million? What difference
does it make if people again have to live in straw-thatched huts with
dirt floors? What difference does it make if the children again have no
shoes and are again put on starvation rations and subjected to
debilitating diseases of malnutrition? What matter if they are again
denied an education? You cannot violate the sanctity of capitalist
private profit. It says right in the constitution of the United States
that the Cubans can’t do that. And the imperialists intend to stop it.
They intend to restore Jim Crow in Cuba. They intend to put an end
to this business in which racial discrimination and segregation are
actually outlawed to unite all workers and enable them better to act in
common to improve their conditions. They intend to restore
discrimination and segregation in order again to split the Cuban
workers and enable the imperialists to exploit them. Throughout this
whole crisis it has been asserted over and over again that there is no
change in the basic policy of Washington with respect to Cuba. And by
that they also mean there is no change in their aim to smash all
revolutionary gains made by working people throughout the world. They
are girding for nuclear war precisely for the purpose of restoring
imperialist supremacy over the world. Their aim is to make the world
safe for the investments of the Rockefellers and the Kennedys.
 
IN THE view of the Socialist Workers Party the fight for
peace must stem from frank recognition of these iron facts. War can be
prevented only by stripping the imperialists of their ability to make
war. That can be accomplished only by political class struggle to
abolish capitalist rule wherever it still holds sway, including in the
United States. All the workers states that have come into being since
October 1917 have the same inalienable right as the Cubans to prepare
the strongest possible military defense of their countries. But
military defense, vital though it is to them, is not the primary key to
world peace, to holding back the imperialist war drive. Not while the
imperialists retain the power to make war. Reasonable though it would
be to have peaceful coexistence between nations; reasonable though it
would be to let the different social systems engage in orderly
competition to prove which is the superior system—the imperialists
won’t go for that. They won’t go for it because they are wholly aware
that they would lose in peaceful competition between the rival social
systems. The imperialists won’t agree to peacefully coexist a minute
longer than they absolutely have to with countries having a
non-capitalist social system. Kennedy just made that plain, too, in the
Cuban crisis.
A serious question therefore arises as to whether one can fight for
peace under a slogan of peaceful coexistence with capitalism. The
policy based on that slogan was first shaped by Stalin as the head of
the Soviet Union and it has been continued in all its main essentials
by the Khrushchev regime. To touch briefly on some of its basic
aspects, the policy assumes that Soviet military power can serve as a
key deterrent against imperialist war with nuclear arms. On that key
premise, the anti-capitalist, antiwar masses of the world are diverted
from class struggle opposition to imperialism into pressure groups
supporting Soviet diplomacy. More concretely, within capitalist
countries such as ours, rebels against capitalist policies are diverted
from independent working class political action into support of
so-called “peace loving” capitalist politicians. This policy has been
known in the terminology of the Communist Party as the popular front,
or people’s front, or mainstream politics, or similar phrases which add
up to the same thing. Within the framework of this basic policy the
Soviet leaders have sought to assert unquestioned authority over all
anti-imperialist forces in carrying out their international line.
Repeatedly, they have acted unilaterally in taking important steps
touching the interests of working people in other countries, in other
workers’ parties. That has been part of the history of Kremlin policy,
and it appears to have been repeated in Moscow’s negotiations with
Washington concerning the Cuban crisis.
It also appears that the Cubans are asserting their right to be
consulted and to have a voice in any negotiations, as shown by their
opposition to Khrushchev’s offer to allow United Nations’ inspection of
Cuban military installations. In the first place the Cubans have a
sovereign right to have any kind of arms they want. What right has
Kennedy to insist that he can have missiles here in the United States,
or anywhere else in the world, and yet say to the Cubans that they
can’t have a missile that can strike the United States? Where’s the
justice in that? Who made him God? The Cubans have a right to whatever
weapons they can get to defend themselves. Moreover, since the United
States has made it abundantly clear that it is still preparing for
attacks on Cuba, what right has Kennedy to demand that the United
Nations—which in the last analysis has always functioned as a front
organization for American imperialism—what right has he to demand
that the UN go down and inspect the Cuban defenses? Why, it would be no
less unjust if he would demand that Castro take the top Pentagon brass
on a tour of the Cuban defenses so they could better prepare an
invasion. It is an outrage and the Cubans are right in standing their
ground on this. At the same time Castro spoke correctly when he told
the Cuban people in his speech a week ago last night that the
inspection issue is not a question to be discussed with the
imperialists. There remains an unbreakable alliance between the Cuban
and Soviet states, he said, and these are things they will discuss and
work out among themselves. We can expect more to be said on the subject
in due course by the Cubans, if not by Moscow. And people who are
seriously interested in the question of worker’s democracy, should pay
close attention to what is said. The disagreement poses the question of
democracy in relations between workers’ states, as a corollary to the
issue of democracy within revolutionary parties. Worker’s democracy on
both counts is vital to the forces fighting against imperialism and for
world peace.
 
I HAVE described briefly the policy of peaceful
coexistence and popular frontism, as developed by Stalin and continued
by Khrushchev. Now let us ask, what have been the results of this
international policy? It didn’t prevent World War II. It didn’t prevent
the imperialists’ intervention in Korea, nor is it preventing the
present intervention in Vietnam. It hasn’t stopped Kennedy from
threatening nuclear war in his attempts to overturn the Cuban
revolution. It doesn’t seem to be working, does it? Of course, it’s
true that the Soviet retreat on the missile issue under pressure of
Kennedy’s threats warded off the immediate danger of nuclear war. It’s
true that Khrushchev has stripped Kennedy—for the moment—of a phony
pretext for an invasion of Cuba. These are important facts, and they
are not to be taken lightly. But there are also other facts that we
should keep in mind in analyzing the lessons of this latest war crisis.
Popular front politics within the United States didn’t get to first
base in stopping Washington from shaping its nuclear war policy. Soviet
military power didn’t stop Kennedy from threatening a nuclear attack.
And the Cuban revolution remains in grave danger. These are iron facts.
They once again call into question the international policy of the
Soviet leadership. They compel serious thought about the need for class
struggle opposition to imperialism. Military self-defense by the
revolutionary countries, as I said, is important to their security. But
class struggle action is the key to the fight against imperialist war.
In that connection I want to call your attention to Castro’s speech
on the issue of UN inspection. You will find the entire text in the
Nov. 12 issue of The Militant. Right now I want you
to note particularly this headline on the back page: “Our principles
are powerful, long-range weapons.” That headline pinpoints the essence
of what Castro has to say in his speech. It pinpoints the fact that the
Cubans, learning as they struggle and learning their lessons well —
because they know imperialism won’t allow them time for second guesses
— are shaping a policy increasingly permeated with the concepts of
class struggle defense against imperialism. You’ll find at the
literature table back there a Pioneer pamphlet containing the Second
Declaration of Havana. It develops the same concept. It’s worth
your while to study the speeches and documents put out by the Cuban
revolutionary movement. They are thinking out loud, learning the
lessons of the struggle as they go forward, and we have something to
learn from them.
Now let me turn to an altogether different publication, the Worker.
I do so in undertaking to deal briefly with the question: What are the
fruits of Communist Party policy within the United States? The
Communist Party has followed the popular front line of supporting
“peace loving” capitalist politicians for more than twenty-five years.
They have generally supported the Democrats, usually by campaigning
against the Republicans. You will recall that they supported Kennedy in
1960 by calling for the defeat of Nixon as the main danger. Well, Nixon
is no prize package, and on top of everything else, he just proved he
is also a sore loser. But the argument is still phony. In one instance
the Communist Party did not support the Democrats. They supported
Wallace in 1948. But, as the record shows, the “peace loving” Henry
Wallace backed Truman in the Korean War. That should have taught the
leaders of the Communist Party something. Yet they repeatedly prove
that they learn nothing and they forget nothing. They simply turned
from Wallace back to support of Stevenson and Kennedy by opposing
Eisenhower and Nixon.
 
TODAY Kennedy’s party has decisively proved where it
stands on the burning question of war and peace, and his nuclear war
threat had bipartisan support, all the way. Well, did the Communist
Party then speak out against Kennedy and his party after he made his
nuclear war speech on October 22, about two weeks before the elections?
No. They did not. Do you know what they did? They denounced publicly
the candidates of the Socialist Workers Party instead. They accused the
Socialist Workers Party of being for “peace without peaceful
coexistence.” This is their clever way of emulating the cartoon figure,
Senator Snort, who wrote a book entitled, How to Fog an Issue.
As I said, no sane person could but welcome peaceful relations between
nations. Nobody but a madman wants a nuclear war. But the question is,
what kind of a policy should be followed in the fight for peace? And
the whole object of the Worker’s attack on the SWP is
to say that if one does not agree with the policy of Khrushchev, if one
does not agree with the policy of the Communist Party—which they call
“peaceful coexistence”—then you are accused of being against peace.
Then comes another gem in the Worker attack. They
say that the Socialist Workers Party’s policy represents “a soft-sell
on anti-Soviet slander.” Again the familiar Stalinist technique, twist
and distort things so that to disagree with a certain policy of
Khrushchev’s becomes anti-Soviet. In other words, Khrushchev and the
Soviet Union are synonymous. Do you know what’s that like? That’s like
trying to tell workers that if they criticize the policies of David
Dubinsky they are scabbing on the ILGWU. You would have a hard time
putting that over here in New York, particularly up in the garment
district. But it is the same kind of an argument. It contributes
nothing but confusion to the search for effective ways to fight against
imperialist war. Such political dishonesty is impermissible among
genuine communists. The CP leaders resort to this simply as a cover for
continuing their same old bankrupt policy. They smear the pro-Cuba,
pro-Soviet SWP, and at the same time they continue to seek political
coexistence with the anti-Soviet, anti-Cuba, Social Democrats—people
who could not even make a demonstration against Kennedy’s nuclear war
threat without having at the top of their banners a blast against the
Soviet Union and a disclaimer on Cuba where they call for a
“democratic” counterrevolution.
The Worker then sets out to justify continued
support to the Democratic Party by a complex exercise in verbal
gymnastics. They find there are two power centers down in Washington,
one in the White House, and the other in the Pentagon. The Pentagon
gang, they say, are in a coalition with the ultra-right, the Republican
leaders and Wall Street. They are acting independently of the White
House in moving to aggravate the crisis. That’s what they say, word for
word; you can read it in the Worker. Poor old
peace-loving Honest John is getting diddled. We must save him from this
Pentagon cabal so that he can show his better self and really be
Caroline’s daddy again. What to do then? According to the Worker,
on the eve of the elections, the fight for peace can at present be
strengthened by giving a rebuff to the menace of Rockefeller (Mr.
Imperialism). That’s what they said, word for word. Fight for peace by
voting for Kennedy’s war party. I agree with Sylvia Weinstein, who in
her speech at the election rally last Friday night said, “that means
beat Mr. Imperialism by voting for Mr. Invasion.” I think she summed it
up quite well.
The Worker has also opened a polemic against the
SWP over the peace question. We welcome such a discussion. We think the
more discussion between all tendencies the better. But we regret the
factional distortions that have been introduced by the Worker.
They attribute to the Socialist Workers Party the view that if one is
not for socialism he is really anti-peace. That statement simply takes
facts and turns them upside down and inside out. The purpose of it is,
of course, to oppose a class struggle political policy and try to
defend their class collaborationist line. Actually, the Socialist
Workers Party welcomes and supports all antiwar manifestations. We
recognize—we’re not entirely stupid, you know—we recognize that
people cannot be expected to leap in one stride to socialist
conclusions when they set out to do something to stop a nuclear war. We
support all partial steps going in the direction of opposition to the
imperialist war policy. We support, for example, the demand for
unilateral action by the United States in ending nuclear tests. We
believe all tests should be stopped, but we also think people fighting
against nuclear tests from within the United States should concentrate
on demands that the United States government stop them. It is supposed
to represent us and carry out our wishes. So that’s where we should
direct our demands. We favor demands to withdraw all American troops
from abroad, to dismantle all military bases. Let the people of the
rest of the world run their own affairs as they see fit, while we
concentrate on clearing up the social mess created by the capitalists
here in our country.
We urge all fighters for peace to break with capitalist politics. As
is the duty of all socialists, we campaign day in and day out for
independent working class political action. We seek constantly to
explain why working class political action must lead to adoption of a
socialist program. Because of the brutal truths about imperialist
policy revealed in the Cuban crisis, new fighters for peace are bound
to be aroused. If socialists advance a class struggle program to them,
more headway can be made in the fight for peace. More can be done to
defend the Cuban revolution. We can make progress in explaining to
American workers the need for our country to follow the revolutionary
example of the Russian, Chinese and Cuban workers.
 
Summary
LET us take first the missile question: “Why do I think
that the Soviets put missiles in Cuba and why did Castro accept them?”
Well, I’m not going to try to guess what Khrushchev had in mind, or
what Castro had in mind, or what the circumstances were in their mutual
relations. Did Castro ask for them? Did Khrushchev insist that he take
them whether he wanted them or not? Was their a mutual agreement about
it? I do not know, but I would take it for granted that the facts will
slowly come to light in the next period. I am quite confident that
there will be more information coming from the Cubans, because one of
the things you will notice in Castro’s speech is that it sets a new and
very good example in moving away from the practice of secret diplomacy
between governmental powers behind the backs of the people. In
reporting his discussion with U Thant, Castro gives a refreshing view
of a revolutionary leadership telling the workers the truth. That’s
what Khrushchev should also be doing.
Until we have more information, I think we should take it rather
slowly on the missile question for two reasons: 1) This is not what is
most germane to the basic meaning of the crisis and the lessons to draw
from it. 2) It’s not a very wise thing to make snap judgements on
tactical questions without having all the facts. There is an expression
for that here in the United States—drug store quarter-backing. On
Monday at the drug store lunch counter the experts decide what mistakes
the quarterbacks and the coach made in the football game the previous
Saturday.
Anybody who has had trade union experience will recognize that it is
a chancy thing to be too categoric from too far away about a tactical
move made in a given struggle. I would make only this general
observation: We should study this aspect of the Cuban question, as we
dig more deeply into the lesson of the crisis, in a sense similar for
instance to the problem that arose over the question of Soviet
resumption of nuclear tests.
The Soviet Union had the right to resume nuclear tests as it did,
after the tacit ban on tests which had come about, you will recall,
when the Soviets unilaterally declared a moratorium. Our party felt
that, even though the Soviet Union had this right, its breaking of the
moratorium on tests gave propaganda advantage to the imperialists among
people who were strongly opposed to nuclear testing and who had been
bringing more and more pressure to bear on the United States government
over the issue. In short, you come down to a question of the strategic
interrelationship between military defense and political defense of the
workers states against imperialism. From that point of view, there is a
real question as to whether the missile issue involved tactics which
put military above political considerations in the defense of Cuba.
Since so many of you are preoccupied with the question here tonight,
that in itself is objective testimony to the fact that revolutionary
leadership has to be sensitive about taking military defensive steps
which may interfere with the mobilization of political defense.
 
TURNING now to another question asked tonight: Why
wouldn’t class struggle against imperialism also heighten the danger of
nuclear war? It is true that the more the imperialists get crowded, the
more likely they are to take long chances, as they just demonstrated in
the Cuban crisis. But without the strongest class struggle opposition
to stay their hand, the imperialists will become bolder in their drive
to overturn all past revolutionary conquests and will throw the world
into war anyway. Imperialism is either going to be defeated everywhere
or it’s going to make war. But the imperialists are not entirely free
agents in deciding when they can make war. They have tactical problems,
too.
Take the case of the Brazilian government during the Cuban crisis.
It voted in the OAS to back Kennedy against Cuba. At the same time the
foreign minister spoke at a street meeting of Brazilian workers and
students where he admitted the right of the Cubans to establish a
socialist regime within the Western Hemisphere. Now, what does that
mean? It means that the pressure of class struggle was impeding the
firm mobilization of a capitalist government behind the imperialist
attack on Cuba. The wider the class struggle, the greater will be the
mobilization of humanity on the side of revolution, and the lesser will
be that portion of the human race that remains under the influence of
imperialism.
Let me try to make that concrete in United States’ terms by one
simple example. You all know that not a single Democrat or Republican
politician in Congress said one word in opposition to Kennedy’s line in
the Cuban crisis. Let’s assume that there had been just one actual
representative of the working class to speak within Congress against
Kennedy’s policy and tell the class truth about the Cuban crisis. It
would have had a very significant effect on the minds of the American
people. As it was, though, nowhere in the councils of government,
nowhere in the top leadership of the unions was there a voice speaking
out against Kennedy’s line. People were subjected day in and day out a
drum fire of propaganda in support of Kennedy all during the crisis.
They couldn’t know the class truth. It is significant to note reactions
the night after Kennedy spoke, when Carl Feingold, the SWP candidate
for senator from New York, got on TV and called Kennedy’s policy by its
right name and denounced it from hell to breakfast. I’ll give you an
example. I happened to get the call at the office from a woman who
said, “I want to tell you that I listened to your Mr. Feingold last
night, and my eyes remained glued to that television screen. I couldn’t
turn away, my attention was riveted until he finished. I want you to
know that it gave me a tremendous inspiration to hear your candidate
get on that television and tell the truth and I’m going to vote for
your candidate in the election.” Her example shows that insofar as we
can mobilize forces to break through the curtain of lies drawn around
the American people by the imperialists, it can have an effect.
 
A QUESTION is asked: Who won’t recognize the United
States as the aggressor, especially because of the missile propaganda?
For the moment a lot of people have been taken in by the way Kennedy
was able to utilize the missile issue. I think that is a fact. But in
time the truth will come out. Missiles or not, Kennedy did provoke
quite a few protest actions in the capitalist sector of the world.
You’ll find in the Militant a round-up on some of these protest actions
in various countries, including a very interesting one. While the head
of the ILA was announcing his refusal to load any ships at the New York
docks that were headed for Cuba, the Ceylon waterfront workers union
officially put a boycott on United States ships. That was the Ceylonese
way of saying “Hands off Cuba!”
So let’s look at the missile issue in still another way. Suppose
there were tactical errors on the military defense side involving the
Soviet Union and perhaps involving the Cuban leadership. What is going
to be the attitude of the anti-imperialist masses of the world? Are
they going to join Honest John because a couple of leaders on the
anti-imperialist side made a tactical mistake? Well, if that was the
way things worked out in the class struggle, you wouldn’t have a single
trade union in the United States today, because our boys at the top of
the union movement don’t need to take a backseat for anybody when it
comes to making blunders. In fact Kennedy will succeed for a while in
doing a snow job on the American people precisely because the leaders
of the mass organizations in this country are truckling to him. But he
won’t fool the world, and he won’t change the relationship of forces in
the world revolutionary struggle through his propaganda.
 
ON THE question of what independent socialists can do
within the peace movement, this is a big subject in itself, and I can
only briefly touch on it in passing. A big problem in the first hours
after Kennedy’s speech was not what kind of protest action to mobilize
but how to impel the people heading the so-called “respectable” peace
organizations into calling any demonstrations at all. They wanted to
take ads in the newspapers and start firing telegrams to Kennedy. That
was one of the very first problems. It constitutes a good starting
point to examine the peace movement in terms of the Cuban crisis. What
kind of a juice was there in the various peace formations? Did they
really stand up for peace? Did they really call things by their right
name? These questions require study, particularly since a lot of young
people turned up in the demonstrations where they occurred around the
country, young militants who wanted some fighting leaders. One of the
most important things that socialists can do—independent socialists
about whom the question was asked, and organized socialists as well —
one of the most important things they can do is to work in the peace
movement to help these young people to develop a class struggle policy
and to effectively employ the kind of energy, the kind of courage, the
kind of determination that they bring to the fight for peace.
I come now to the last question, the problem of speaking to
audiences that aren’t sympathetic to the Cuban Revolution as is the
audience here tonight. I would suggest to you that things are a little
different than they were before October 22, even with an unsympathetic
audience. There is better than an even chance that Kennedy is going to
overreach himself concerning the momentary propaganda advantage he has
gained in this country on things like the missile issue. There is a
whole series of questions that will arise as he presses his offensive
against Cuba. For instance, I would suggest one question to put to your
audience that helps introduce a new dimension into the Cuba discussion.
What right has one man to push the American people to the brink of a
nuclear war just because he doesn’t like what is going on in Cuba? I am
speaking in the terms now of cutting through his missile propaganda
which won’t stand up indefinitely. Now is the time, more than ever, to
go back and explain carefully to people what they are doing in Cuba,
what they are trying to accomplish. Put it in terms of the things that
the working people of this country are struggling for. They are doing
the same things in Cuba that the NAACP is organized to do in the United
States. They are doing the same things in Cuba that organizations in
this country fighting for higher old-age pensions, better medical care,
more schools, adequate housing are trying to do. Those are things they
are doing down there. Examine the Cuban situation from that point of
view.
Of course, the imperialists still harp on the question of Cuban
elections. I thought Dick Garza handled that matter well in a
discussion with a radio commentator. He brought out that the United
States, after it won independence from England, went quite a few years
longer than the Cubans have yet gone before they had what passed for
elections here. And then the elections were rigged by the ruling class.
If you want a little background you can get it by reading Charles A.
Beard’s An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution.
From another point of view concerning elections, you might put the
question, what would happen in strikes in the United States, what would
happen when there is police brutality in Harlem, if all the people in
the United States had guns in their hands like they have in Cuba? It is
entirely possible, you know, that there would be some changes made in
this country.

ell Dobbs: The 1960 Elections (Spring 1960)



Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Farrell Dobbs
The 1960 Elections
(Spring 1960)

From International Socialist Review, Vol.21 No. 2, Spring 1960, pp.35-37.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.




Farrell Dobbs is the Socialist Workers Party’s candidate for President of the United States in the 1960 elections. He was the SWP presidential candidate in 1948, 1952 and 1956.



WE ENTER the sixties amid changing political conditions that forecast the opening of a new and higher stage in the American class struggle. Events are pushing the unions away from support to capitalist political parties and toward the formation of an independent labor party. This necessary turn in union policy, which the union bureaucrats can’t block indefinitely, points in the direction of a fundamental showdown between labor and capital. Although labor is by far the stronger in potential class force, its victory in a showdown is not automatically assured. In the long run class political consciousness will be decisive in determining the outcome of the battle. Today the capitalists have a big class advantage, stemming from policies consciously designed to serve their own interests at the expense of society as a whole. Labor stands in an opposite position; it remains crippled by illusions that social progress can be made through collaboration with the enemy class. Despite growing necessity, the unions have failed to develop an independent class policy in industry and politics; and they have still to arrive at the anti-capitalist, pro-socialist outlook fundamental to a solution of society’s basic problems. These class needs can be met only when the workers unseat the capitalist-minded union bureaucrats – in short, labor faces an increasingly acute crisis of leadership.
There exists within the general labor movement a revolutionary-socialist tendency capable of projecting the independent class policy the unions require. But this politically class-conscious section of labor has been thrust into isolation from the workers through a combined attack by the union bureaucrats and the capitalist witch hunters. Only now are favorable conditions developing for fusion of the revolutionary-socialist program with the mass power of the unions.
An opening step toward such a fusion can be taken through the presidential campaign of the Socialist Workers party which is now getting under way. To understand why the SWP campaign holds promise of gains which will help to strengthen class political consciousness among the workers, let us examine the broad lines of social conflict developing on a world scale and the political repercussions that result within this country.
Across the globe peoples long subjected to imperialist exploitation are rising up against their oppressors. They want to develop their own industries in order to raise their standard of living. They are determined to free themselves from foreign interference and decide for themselves what, economic and social order will best serve their needs. Their search for the right answer impels them, erratic though the course may be, in the direction of socialism.
China has advanced along this road to the abolition of capitalist property relations and establishment of a workers state based on nationalization of the means of production and the introduction of planned economy. Earlier social overturns of a similar nature took place in Yugoslavia and across Eastern Europe. Together with the Soviet Union these workers states now encompass one-third the earth’s surface and close to half of all humanity. Viewed in combination with the colonial rebels elsewhere in the world they constitute a formidable anti-imperialist force.
The power of the anti-imperialist forces is further strengthened by the great forward leap in Soviet scientific, technological and military potential. American imperialism no longer has the atomic monopoly and general military superiority with which it launched the cold war some fourteen years ago. A country that can send a rocket to the moon, as the Soviet Union has done, can also deliver rockets armed with hydrogen warheads against an imperialist aggressor anywhere on earth, including the United States.
These revolutionary advances on the world arena have brought a power stalemate which compels American imperialism to slow down its cold-war offensive and adjust its diplomatic policy to a temporary, uneasy truce in international relations. Although the imperialists try to use this act of tactical expediency to parade as peace lovers, they have actually made no basic change in their foreign policy; on the contrary, they are using the lull in the cold war to intensify their preparations for hot war.
The situation becomes doubly dangerous for world labor because imperialist political deceit is accompanied by Stalinist misrepresentation of the true state of affairs. Dressing up old-line Stalinist policy in new verbiage, the Kremlin bureaucrats call for universal disarmament, peaceful coexistence and friendly competition between rival social orders. They dangle this line before the insurgent world masses as a sure road to socialism by “gradual” means.
Reasonable though this approach may seem – and no matter how great a popular response it may evoke – the imperialists would never agree to such a course. The Stalinist bureaucrats understand this fact and they have shaped their real policy accordingly. What they actually aim for is a deal with imperialism to divide the world into spheres of influence with an agreement to maintain the status quo within each sphere. They are ready to help preserve capitalism outside the Soviet orbit in the hope this will enable them to save their own privileged position in the area where they now rule.
Stalinist policy runs directly counter to the needs of the masses in the capitalist sector of the world and it clashes with the democratic aspirations of people within the Soviet bloc countries. Workers’ uprisings in 1956 against the Stalinist regimes in Poland and Hungary laid bare the basic antagonism between the ruling bureaucracy and the masses within the workers states. In crushing the Hungarian revolt the bureaucracy strengthened itself temporarily, but didn’t win a permanent lease on life. The status quo can’t be frozen indefinitely in the Soviet bloc countries; new political explosions will occur and they will cause repercussions throughout the world labor movement.
It is equally impossible to freeze the status quo for very long in the countries under capitalist rule. The very forces that have acted to compel a slowdown in the imperialist war drive are also operating to prevent any lasting social stability under capitalism. Although the world labor and colonial movements face a general crisis of leadership, this obstacle does not halt the struggles for social improvement. Mass action simply takes longer to gain enough momentum to break through the barriers and then it develops in distorted forms; but the masses keep asserting themselves.
These trends upset the schemes of American imperialism, making it more determined than ever to impose its will by all possible means, including war. The imperialist belligerence stems from social contradictions within the United States itself. Growth of the productive forces within the country threatens a deep crisis of over-production. There is increasing danger of a severe economic slump that would bring on catastrophic unemployment and lead to a social explosion at home, unless the capitalist class can expand its exploitation of peoples abroad.
But one-third of the world market has been closed to capitalist exploitation by extension of the Soviet bloc to China and Eastern Europe. Elsewhere lesser imperialist rivals are stiffening their competition with American capitalism. In the one-time colonial preserves strong opposition to imperialist domination has developed; and in the case of Cuba a colonial revolt has flared up right on the United States’ doorstep.
Instead of forging ahead toward unrestricted exploitation of the world, American imperialism finds its expansionist drive slowed down, if not turned back. Still determined to achieve its objectives, the capitalist ruling class is using the cold-war lull for an attack on American labor to safeguard capitalist privileges nationally and to get into a better position to drag the country into war.
Imperialist military adventures are not ruled out because of the horrible dangers in an atomic war. Truman risked atomic war when he plunged the country into the Korean conflict. Eisenhower had no compunction about the war risks involved in a military occupation of Lebanon. The bipartisan government at Washington continues the fantastic military buildup, quarreling only as to whether enough is being done. Generals and capitalist politicians openly advocate a policy of “limited” wars, disregarding the risk of triggering World War III.
Only the revolutionary advances abroad have prevented a general war so far. These limited advances have allowed precious time for the extension of class-struggle opposition to imperialism; but peace can be assured only when the workers within the imperialist countries take independent class action against the imperialist warmakers.
An anti-war struggle of this kind can’t be waged under the leadership of Stalinists, social democrats or union bureaucrats. In every case these misleaders of labor are shifting further to the right in their political line, abandoning any pretext of real socialist policies, if they ever had any. A new leadership must take the helm before labor can get started on the class-struggle road to peace.
In the United States the present capitalist attack on the unions begins to open the way for the rise of a leadership capable of projecting the policy labor needs. Changing economic and social conditions should help the process along.
Within the framework of a series of boom-recession cycles the country is drifting into economic decline. Even though a full-scale depression has not yet struck, the cyclical ups and downs in the economy are generating feelings of insecurity in the population. Many are being thrust directly into personal economic crisis by the persistent rise in chronic unemployment which is spreading across wider areas of production; government figures for January show that over four million are now jobless during boom times. The AFL-CIO predicts the present boom will slack off by July; and capitalist economists speak of a general economic slump by 1961. For workers this will mean a sharp rise in unemployment, in many cases so prolonged that jobless benefits will become exhausted.
Economically the workers are put in double jeopardy because of bureaucratic misleadership in the unions: they are hurt by the crisis trends under capitalism; and they have no independent class program to defend their interests. The politically-bankrupt union bureaucrats support the imperialist war policy and count on the arms program to provide jobs. They look to the capitalist government for social benefits through legislation and for help in collective bargaining with the bosses. To impose their false policy on the workers, they strangle union democracy and connive with the bosses to suppress so-called “wild-cat” strikes.
Changing times are now beginning to break up these well-established forms of bureaucratic control over the unions. The bosses don’t intend to allow the class peace so necessary to the bureaucratic policy. They are resisting, not granting, concessions to labor; and the government is backing them up in what is rapidly becoming a general war against the unions.
The bosses are cutting production costs through automation, speedup and other devices intended both to squeeze more out of the workers on the job and to whittle down employment so far as they can. They resist wage demands and chip away at the escalator clauses pegged to the cost-of-living index; without resorting as yet to outright wage cuts, they put the workers in a position where rising prices and stiffening taxes eat into their purchasing power.
Union demands are met by counter-demands calculated to tear down long-established job conditions and to weaken union control generally. The bosses force strikes and drag them out in a war of attrition against labor. Strike insurance, professional scab agencies and direct government support to strikebreaking attacks are reappearing in new forms.
On the political front the bosses use their Democratic and Republican agents in government to hamstring the unions through anti-labor laws. They will probably go a little easy on demands for further laws until their stooges have got themselves re-elected in the fall. In the meantime they have the new Kennedy-Landrum-Griffin law to work with; and among its many provisions hostile to labor this law clears the way for open FBI intervention in the unions. The future will see these imperialist political police attempting to give all of labor the same treatment they have been dealing out to radical workers all through the witch hunt.
The basic shift in capitalist tactics undermines the position of the union bureaucrats, discrediting their whole line based on “labor statesmanship.” In the long steel strike – which clearly revealed the changing class relations – the union ranks were ahead of the leadership in giving battle to the bosses. They won a victory in the sense that the open corporation attack was halted temporarily. But the wage settlement was the poorest in years; the escalator clause was mangled; there was no reduction in hours without reduced pay to help safeguard employment; and the contract terms open the way for the McDonald bureaucracy to make “statesmanlike” concessions to the bosses on work rules.
This experience illustrates the widening gap between bureaucratic policy and the workers’ needs; and the gap will become wider still when the next economic slump hits. Mass protests against unemployment reached a post-war high in the spring of 1959, a trend that forecasts an even greater outburst next time there are mass lay-offs. The fight for an effective union policy in industry will intensify, along with labor demands upon the government for meaningful social legislation. Life under capitalism will drive the workers toward class-struggle economic and political positions. In the long run the union bureaucrats won’t be able to stop it; but they can and will continue to inhibit and distort the labor struggle.
At the present stage of developments the task for socialists remains primarily one of advancing a class-struggle program for labor. This will help union militants to clarify their thinking and prepare a sound programmatic basis for future action when the ranks decide to take union affairs into their own hands. In presenting their political analysis socialists should also pay close attention to developments in the mass movement as a whole.
Formation of the Negro Labor Council within the AFL-CIO implies action going beyond the announced aim to fight for equal rights in industry and democratic rights in the unions; it may serve to stimulate more effective union support to the general civil rights movement and thereby sharpen both the Negro struggle and the class struggle, particularly in the South. The outbreak of student demonstrations against Jim-Crow lunch counters in the South gives further impulse to mass action in the fight for equal rights; and it marks a shift of initiative toward younger Negroes capable of greater militancy.
Social ferment is increasing among youth on college campuses and in the high schools. Many are becoming rebellious against conditions under the capitalist two-party system. They are searching for a new political course and, though they have not yet become socialist-minded, they are willing to listen to socialist ideas.
Rising social tensions, generated by the twin threats of war and depression, are beginning to counteract conformist pressures long imposed by the witch hunt. People in many walks of life are asking searching political questions; they are thinking for themselves; and they begin to recognize the need to fight boldly to maintain freedom of thought, expression, association and action.
In addressing people newly interested in socialist ideas it will be well to keep in mind the political circumstances under which their thinking has been previously conditioned. Take, for example, a person who came of age after 1946. Throughout his adult life he has been subjected to an atmosphere of cold war, hot war and witch hunting. He has experienced or seen others experience periods of temporary economic hardship in times of slump; but he has at most, only hearsay knowledge of severe depression conditions.
A person in this position knows union life only under the domination of an iron-handed bureaucracy which preaches class peace, extols the virtues of capitalism and stifles democracy within the organization. He has little idea of the tremendous power inherent in the working class; and he has had virtually no access to a true, complete history of past labor struggles which would help him to understand that power.
To reach people who find themselves in this situation it will be helpful to start from the big concerns in their minds today and present the socialist answer to these problems in clear language and comprehensible terms; then go on from there to deal with even more basic political questions. By weaving in the class lessons to be drawn from world labor history, a sense of class power and a deeper knowledge of sound class principles can be developed.
Groundwork can be done in this way to get across a basic class-struggle program: formation of an independent labor party in opposition to the capitalist parties; labor support to the civil rights struggle and promotion of a political alliance between the unions and the minority peoples; an economic policy designed to serve labor’s needs; a working class policy to defeat the imperialist war conspiracy and attain world peace; a program to establish workers’ democracy throughout the world labor movement; a socialist perspective for the United States.
These are the lines along which the Socialist Workers party will conduct its presidential campaign. Vigorous efforts will be made to use every possible medium to reach people becoming interested in socialist ideas and draw them closer to the movement. This calls for a strong turnout of active socialist campaigners and equally strong financial support.
If socialist-minded people throughout the country back the SWP campaign to the best of their ability, 1960 can be made the best year for revolutionary socialism since the cold war began.






The following is the text of the opening campaign speech of Farrell Dobbs, Socialist Workers Party mayoralty candidate in New York City, delivered at the Grace Carlson mass meeting on Friday evening, June 22:



* * *
Next November the people of New York will go to the polls to elect a new city administration. Grave social and economic problems – problems which daily grow more acute for the working class – make this election an extremely important one.
Runaway prices, heavy taxes, frozen wages, wielded like huge knives in the hands of the capitalist robbers, have slashed the standard of living of the great mass of the people. Rationing, the black market, shortages, have made this wound deeper. And finally, inferior goods, shoddy but nonetheless expensive, have deepened right to the bone this cut in the standard of living.
 
Masses’ Plight
This has been the economic fate of the great mass of the people under the fake “equality-of-sacrifice” program enunciated by Roosevelt in the spring of 1942. But it certainly has not been the fate of America’s Sixty Families.
Corporation profits have reached unprecedented peaks during the course of World War II. Monopoly trusts and cartels have gorged themselves with wealth, coined out of the blood of workers in uniform and the toil of workers in the factories. Tax rebates, subsidies, entire plants have been handed over to the corporations by the government under its reconversion program.
What are the workers getting under this reconversion plan? Mass layoffs are already under way, and the profit-bloated capitalists propose to give unemployed workers only a pittance for relief. Wage slashes are in store for workers who manage to hold their jobs. To enforce this brutal policy, the capitalist politicians propose compulsory arbitration and government strikebreaking.
 
Heroes for a Day
Workers in uniform are now coming back from the war fronts, especially from Europe, and they find that despite all the talk about heroes, they are heroes only for a day. They become forgotten men the very next day. For tomorrow, all that the capitalists can offer to the veterans of World War II is what they offered to the veterans of World War I – Hoovervilles and bonus armies. And now the capitalists are demanding workers in uniform for a permanent conscript army to support Wall Street’s schemes for world domination.
What do the capitalist political parties here in New York City offer to the workers under these critical conditions? They offer them Tammany politics! A farce enacted in the back room of a political bawdy house! A farce which the capitalist press tries to palm off on the workers as good Shakespearian drama. A fraudulent pretext of giving the workers an opportunity to select representatives in the government who would protect the workers’ interests.
 
Political Tricksters
And in this farce the trickster Sidney Hillman, the confidence man David Dubinsky and the Stalinist betrayers – they enact a grotesque imitation of independent labor politics by lining up, some with the Republican Party, the others with the Democratic Party. Thus the New York labor party movement, split as it is today, officially throws its support to one or the other of the two capitalist political parties.
In these circumstances, the Socialist Workers Party becomes the major political force which will carry on the fight for independent working-class political action in this election campaign. We intend to make that fight on the basis of a program keyed to the real needs of the working class. We call upon every believer in independent working-class political action to pitch in and help us in this fight.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 November 2018




I can sum it up in a few words: It is mighty good to be home. Comrades, on behalf of the 18 I wish to express our deep appreciation to the Civil Rights Defense Committee, and its many supporters for the care given to our families. A thing like that is very important to a man, especially when he is in prison. What I am talking about could be defined roughly as the human element in the class struggle.
We all have our sorrows, our joys, our needs, our desires. And I believe that many of you have had experience in strikes and on picket lines. In a strike the question of how valiantly a man will fight is often dependent on his knowing that if he goes to jail, his family will be taken care of; or if he is injured, he will be given medical care and hospitalization; or if he is killed, his family will not be left to want. Everyone who has been in a strike struggle knows right down to the ground just what I am talking about. That is the human element in the class struggle that gives such tremendous power to class solidarity, that makes it such a mighty force.
Millions of trade union fighters have rallied to the defense of the 18 throughout our entire case, and particularly when we were in prison; and have rallied to the defense of Kelly Postal, Local 544-00 secretary-treasurer, who was railroaded to jail through a frameup by Tobin in the Minnesota courts. This defense movement has cut across political lines. It has cut across organizational boundaries. Virtually all of the working class political parties have supported us – that is, all except the Stalinist betrayers of the working class who are selling out the interests of the workers at every opportunity, and making opportunities when they don’t find them.
Why have we received such tremendous mass support? Because every thinking person understands that his own civil liberties are at stake in this fight. But it must be realized, comrades, that the danger of the Smith “Gag” Act is actually heightened by the fact that its first victims are no longer behind bars, serving as a grim reminder of the existence of this vicious piece of class legislation. For what happened to the 18 can happen to any trade unionist, to the members of any working class party, to any liberal. That is why the release of the 18 from Roosevelt’s prisons must be taken as a signal to redouble our efforts in the fight to repeal this Hitlerite Smith “Gag” Act.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 5 November 2018


ell Dobbs: Class Reality in America (Fall 1959)



Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Farrell Dobbs
Class Reality in America
(Fall 1959)

From International Socialist Review, Vol.30 No.3, Fall 1959, pp.122-123.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The Status Seekers
by Vance Packard
David McKay Company, Inc., New York. 376 pp. $4.50
“A number of influential voices have been advising us
that whatever social classes we ever had are now indeed withering away.
We are being told that the people of our country have achieved
unparalleled equality ... Such a notion unfortunately rests upon a
notable lack of perception of the true situation that is developing.
Class lines in several areas of our national life appear to be
hardening. And status straining has intensified.”
With this opening theme Vance Packard undertakes in The
Status Seekers to probe class reality in American society.
Although lacking in class-struggle perceptions, the book is
nevertheless valuable for its factual analysis of present-day class
relations and class trends. On the whole it packs a wallop similar to The
Hidden Persuaders in which the same author examined devious
advertising techniques used to manipulate public opinion to
ruling-class advantage.
Among various economic changes affecting the class structure of
society, three factors examined by Packard are particularly revealing.
“A trend toward large, bureaucratic organizations,” i.e., the growth of
monopoly capitalism. Shrinkage in the scope of small business, in the
number of self-employed. And throughout industry the breaking down of
jobs into narrow, simple specialties at lower-skilled wage rates.
With his productive role fragmentized and impersonalized a worker
tends to become bored on the job, losing any basis for pride of
initiative or creativity. In this situation he also has little
aspiration. “And it is not because he is lazy. He is just realistic.”
The only visible way left for him to advance in the world is “by
acquiring material possessions.”
But a worker does not move up into another social class just by
being able to buy a limousine, either by cash or installment.
“In terms of his productive role in society — in
contrast to his consuming role—class lines in America are becoming
more rigid, rather than withering away.”
Among middle-class people, divided by the author into a
“semi-upper” class and a “limited-success” class, social climbing runs
rampant. Several chapters are devoted to forms of status seeking in
general practice. Snob appeal prevails in planning the home, impels the
shopper toward prestige stores and brings submission to oppressive
social manipulation of community life.
Concern with status prerogatives on the job is illustrated by the
case of a Ford executive:
“As his position improved, his office grew larger,
his name went on the door, he received a rug for the floor and a spot
in the indoor garage. Then came keys to the executive washrooms ...”
Status striving exerts a price in human happiness going
beyond the worry of trying to live above one’s income. Friends are
sought or discarded according to their usefulness in gaining higher
status rather than for the warmth they may bring into one’s life.
Acceptance or exclusion hinges even more brutally on questions of
“differentness” in color, national origin, or religion.
“Members of minority groups who have managed to
succeed financially ... seek to move out from the blighted,
over-crowded central areas where their people have been confined.”
However their new neighbors “make no distinction between
these successful, well-educated people, who by all socio-economic
standards are their own kind of people, and the masses who have the
same foreign-sounding names or dark skins ...” To give another example:
“In the past, the Jews have survived by being able,
in many cases, to prosper in their own enterprises. This assured them
they would not be at the mercy of a prejudiced Gentile employer ...
Now, however, many Jews face the economic necessity of working within
the hierarchy of the large corporations ... And it is the rare large
corporation that considers Jews on their qualifications alone in
filling all its ranks. Some corporations shun Jews almost entirely.”
Prejudice and social snobbery have given impetus to the
exclusive private school as an educational medium. It is coming to loom
“larger than the family coat of arms” in determining whether a young
person is acceptable in upper circles. The private school, of course,
remains democratic: “You can’t tell a millionaire’s son from a
billionaire’s.”
In a chapter on religion Packard puts church membership at more than
104 million. He examines the reasons why about two-thirds of the
nation’s Catholics are in the lower class and touches briefly on the
special attention paid to organized labor by the church hierarchy. A
contrast is drawn between the tendency of upper-class churches to
generate a feeling the social system is pretty fine just as it is, and
the policy of lower-class religions to offer consolation for failure.
Inability of the latter preachment to allay social unrest is
suggested by the remark:
“As you get near the bottom of the social scale,
there is an abrupt rise in a disorder called anomie—feeling
isolated, loosely attached to the world, and convinced that things are
tough all over.”
Politically, a similar state of mind finds its
reflection in the “frustration-boredom” factor conditioning voting
trends. Analysis of election returns indicates a significant yearning
for a political housecleaning and new faces. A tendency is growing “to
vote against the party that has been in control of the Administration,
faces being equal. And the longer the party has been in power, the more
compelling this urge becomes.

er from Farrell Dobbs to Gerard Bloch 



Marxists’ Internet Archive: ETOL Home Page: Trotskyist Writers Section: Farrel Dobbs
 Farrell Dobbs 
 Letter from Farrell Dobbs to Gerard Bloch 
 February 12, 1955


Written: 12 February, 1955
Source: Struggle in the Fourth International, International Committee Documents 1954-1963, Volume 1, pages 8-9. Education for Socialists bulletin; issued by the National Education Department of the Socialist Workers Party (US). No copyright.
Transcription/Proofing: David Walters and Andy Pollack
HTML Markup: David Walters
Public Domain: Encyclopepedia of Trotskyism On-Line 2005. This work is completely free to copy and distribute. Please cite the Encyclopepedia of Trotskyism On-Line  if the contents herein are reproduced.

Written: 12 February,
1955
Source: Struggle in the Fourth
International, International Committee Documents 1954-1963, Volume
1, pages 8-9. Education for Socialists bulletin;
issued by the National Education Department of the Socialist Workers
Party (US). No copyright.
Transcription/Proofing: David Walters and
Andy Pollack
HTML Markup: David Walters
Public Domain: Encyclopepedia of Trotskyism
On-Line 2005. This work is completely free to copy and distribute.
Please cite the Encyclopepedia of Trotskyism On-Line if the contents
herein are reproduced.

Dear Comrade,
Sorry we failed to acknowledge receipt of your letters
of December 23 and 28, 1954, and the enclosed documents. We did,
however, promptly comply with all your requests contained in the
letters.
There has never been any doubt in our minds that Pablo was involved
in one way or another in the emergence of a pro Stalinist faction in
the LSSP, even though this faction was later repudiated by Pablo. He
was compelled to repudiate also Clarke, Lawrence, and Mestre, after he
first directed them onto the liquidationist road. William Silva’s
remarks only corroborate what we had suspected for some time.

Your letter to the IC dealing with the question of unity is a well
reasoned document representing undoubtedly the views of all the
organizations adhering to the IC, at least in its fundamental
assessment of the problem. To our knowledge, no one of the adherents of
the IC has any illusions about the possibility of establishing unity
with the Pabloites. No one has any sympathy for the conciliationist
position of the LSSP.
Some tactical differences have manifested themselves on the best way
to deal with the Ceylonese and other conciliators. We believe, however,
that those differences are largely episodic and are mostly due to
misunderstanding.
How shall we treat this problem of the conciliators? Their only
concern is to avoid taking a clear stand and they think they can do it
by working out a formula for a modus vivendi between the
Trotskyists and the Pabloites. But there is no such modus vivendi
possible. The organizations affiliated with the IC have categorically
rejected Pabloite political and organization methods. They had first
hand experience in bitter, irreconcilable struggle and splits with
Pablo’s agents in their own ranks.
They are fully aware of the great harm Pabloism has done to the
world movement and are in no mood to soften up on this question.
The truth is that if we had thought out the parity committee
question to the end when the proposal was first made, it would have
been rejected at that time. There are many reasons for rejecting this
proposal, but not the least of them is that it should have been
rejected for the good of the Ceylonese. The best way to deal with the
Ceylonese is to make them realize beyond a doubt that there is no room
for maneuvers between the Trotskyists and the Pabloites. From this
point of view, the parity committee is not an aid but a hindrance in
winning the Ceylonese to unqualified support of the IC.
The misunderstanding within the IC grew out of the acceptance of the
parity committee proposal, while no one really wanted it or expected to
accomplish anything through it. It was accepted under the false concept
which you even repeat in your last letter, that to reject the proposal
would place on the IC the onus of responsibility for the split.
However the question of the onus of responsibility for split is not
at all so simple. In the first place, we are not dealing here with a
mass movement in which one must be concerned that the masses who are
generally yearning for unity do not consider us an anti unity force. We
are dealing with comparatively small vanguard groups of more or less
politically alert people. They know who was responsible for the split
in France, England, and elsewhere. If they don’t know it, then we had
better get busy explaining it. The split was due to the attempt to
impose an alien line and alien organizational methods on the Trotskyist
world movement. If this is not known the task then is to continue to
explain this.
The split was brought about by Pablo. It was brought about by
underhanded methods of deceit and subterfuge or outright brutality, as
in France. It makes no sense to talk at this stage of the onus of
responsibility for the split. We must work instead to complete the task
of ridding the movement of Pabloism and to unite the Trotskyist forces
within the framework of the IC. We should demand of the Ceylonese to
join us in this task.
The IC however has been caught on the hook of a maneuver to
establish “responsibility for the split.” You proposed to get off the
hook by combining the acceptance of the parity committee proposal with
a number of political demands which would be unacceptable to the
Pabloites and would in turn hook the Ceylonese. This proposal was too
obvious a maneuver. To accept the parity committee proposal for a
discussion leading to unity, and at the same time pose a series of
demands which add up to a rejection of Pabloism and agreement in
advance with the IC position, would be interpreted by everyone and
especially the Ceylonese as a maneuver which smacks of ultimatism.
We are convinced that the majority of the IC rejected this proposal
not out of conciliationist considerations but because the proposal
offered a poor solution. However, by accepting without qualifications
the parity committee proposal the IC gave the impression it believes
reunification is on the order of the day.
The correct course as we see it now would have been to reject
outright the parity committee proposal as a cheap maneuver by Pablo to
gain new advantage for his assault on Trotskyism and prevent his being
thrust into oblivion. If Pablo seriously entertained the idea of unity,
he would never have gone through with the rump 4th congress. That act
itself represented a consummation of the world split. The struggle to
reconstitute a Trotskyist world movement requires at this stage a blunt
political and organizational confrontation, not maneuvers. This would
be a line that would express our convictions. It would be simple to
explain and would confront vacillators with an unmistakable choice
between Pablo and the IC.
But this line was not the one that was taken. We were as much in
error on this as anybody. We propose now that this become the line at
the next meeting of the IC. We believe you should adopt a resolution
along these lines for the benefit of the Trotskyists in the first
instance.
What we do then with the parity committee proposal after that
becomes secondary. There are two possible courses open.
One is to declare openly that upon further consideration of the
parity committee proposal we have decided to reject it because the
world movement would gain nothing from such maneuvers, and explain why
this is so.
The second course is to leave the parity committee on ice and
proceed with our own course. We would continue with the struggle of
winning people away from Pabloism, prepare our own documents, carry
through our own discussion, and prepare a congress.
If the Pabloites wish to summon a meeting of the parity committee,
we can tell them we have nothing to take up we are not ready, we are
busy with our own discussion.
These, in brief, are our views on this question. We will appreciate
your comments on the general line of this letter and, if you agree with
that line, we would like your thoughts on the alternate tactical
courses outlined with regard to terminating the parity committee.
Fraternally,
Smith [Dobbs]

P.S.: The Latin American comrades complain that their correspondence
remains unanswered by the IC. Can you clarify this?


Back to the Farrell Dobbs Internet Archive
                    |
                  Back to the Marxists Internet Archive



ell Dobbs: Hoffa and the Teamsters (Summer 1966)



Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Farrell Dobbs
Hoffa and the Teamsters
(Summer 1966)

From International Socialist Review, Vol.27 No.3, Summer 1966, 121-126.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

HOFFA AND THE TEAMSTERS: A Study of Union Power
by Ralph and Estelle James
D. Van Nostrand. 430pp. $6.95



“If one strolls through Greenwich Village in downtown New York one will eventually come upon the narrow, dingy building which houses the headquarters of the Socialist Workers Party ... Up two flights of rickety stairs at 116 University Place one finds the ramshackle office of Farrell Dobbs, leader of the Party and little-known candidate for President of the United States in 1960.
“This now-obscure man and his tiny organization provide the key to understanding the emergence of Jimmy Hoffa and the origin of many of his methods and beliefs. Although Hoffa has not spoken to Dobbs for over twenty years, his public speeches and private conversations still give Dobbs credit for the institutional framework and imaginative ideas which have grown famous as Hoffa’s collective bargaining trademarks.
“Dobbs served as the guiding genius behind the formation of the Central States Drivers Council (CSDC). Then, at the very brink of success, he stepped aside for a full-time career as a Marxist politician, creating a vacuum which was soon filled by Jimmy Hoffa. The CSDC became the vehicle which propelled Hoffa into national prominence.” – from Hoffa and the Teamsters, by Ralph and Estelle James.



Since the government first began its “investigation” of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters leadership some ten years ago, there have been a spate of books, innumerable magazine and newspaper articles, consisting in the main of tendentious and biased accounts of the issues in dispute. At long last there appears a book on Hoffa and the Teamsters whose claim of undertaking an objective appraisal is well merited.
This important book is doubly unique. Its authors delved into their subject with praiseworthy objectivity and the Teamster president gave them extraordinary access to union affairs. The result is a refreshing effort to present an unbiased study of the nation’s largest trade union.
Both authors teach economics, Ralph James as associate professor at the University of California and Estelle James as assistant professor at Stanford University. When they first met James Hoffa about five years ago, they seem to have approached him with somewhat prejudiced minds. Their initial attitude was perhaps due to brainwashing by the capitalist news media as well as to ignorance of the Teamsters’ side of things. Hoffa responded by challenging them to make their own investigation of the union and he offered to open the doors for them to get a picture they could never find in books. They accepted the challenge and he made good on the offer.
Across an extended period the Jameses found themselves in the thick of Teamster activity, either or both being involved according to the given situation. They went to the union’s 1961 convention where they also attended caucuses. Later they sat in at a meeting of the International Executive Board. Introduced as “assistants” to Hoffa, they observed contract negotiations and grievance sessions with employers, trustee meetings about pension fund matters and union strategy conferences related to these affairs. They talked with various Teamster officials and staff members through opportunities afforded by their free access to the union headquarters. Files were opened to them dating back through the Hoffa, Beck and Tobin regimes. All in all, they got a rather extensive picture of the Teamsters, at least at the leadership level.
Seeming puzzled by Hoffa’s frankness with them when “no assurances were ever given about the conclusions we would reach,” the authors state:
“Whatever his motivation, deep appreciation and approbation is hereby expressed to James R. Hoffa ... who had the courage to offer such novel exposure and who kept it up, no matter where we wanted to dig. Hoffa wanted us to get a feeling for being on the inside. And we most assuredly did.”
All was not beer and skittles for the Jameses, as an excerpt from their description of the experience will explain:
“The Teamsters’ criminal lawyers and several vice-presidents were virtually persuaded at one point that we were agents for the FBI, and a trusted staff member was instructed to ascertain whether I [Ralph James] actually had a university affiliation. On the other hand, many members of the Teamsters’ inner circle believed we had been bought off by Hoffa. The Justice Department seemed to agree with this consensus and refused to answer our questions on even the most innocuous topics, presumably for fear that they would be leaking information to the enemy. We were frequently asked ‘who was paying’ for our transportation and other expenses, the implication being that Hoffa must be picking up the bills. As a matter of fact, we covered all costs ourselves; had it not been for our shoestring budget we would have accompanied Hoffa on additional trips.”
After noting that a few of Hoffa’s associates became convinced they were trying to do an honest, objective job, the authors add:
“The purpose of this book is neither to praise nor to damn Jimmy Hoffa. Rather we wish to contribute to a greater understanding of one of our most powerful and least comprehended public figures – the president of the country’s largest union, a man who was made notorious by the McClellan Committee eight years ago and whose name is now a household word.”
Looking into the Teamsters from the outside and with little background experience in unionism, they have done remarkably well in digging out the facts and presenting them in an unbiased manner. If more writers from academic circles tended to emulate their objectivity when dealing with the labor movement, it would represent a gain for historic and social truth.
The political climate in which the Jameses carried out the project is reflected in their presumption that the Justice Department looked upon the Teamsters as “the enemy.” There are ample grounds for the presumption. Beginning in 1957 the McClellan Committee of the US Senate conducted a two-year smear attack on the Teamsters, using Hoffa as the central target. The Justice Department followed through with six felony indictments against Hoffa and other Teamster officials. First came trials on bribery and wire-tapping charges, both resulting in acquittals.
 
Mail Fraud Charge
The next attack took the form of an indictment for mail fraud which was dismissed by the court. Prosecution for allegedly taking a payoff from an employer resulted in a mistrial. Convictions were finally obtained against Hoffa and other defendants, in one case on jury-tampering charges and, in a separate one, for alleged fraud in administering the Teamsters’ pension fund. In both instances the convictions have been appealed and the cases are now pending before higher courts.
Parallel events have demonstrated that the government’s vendetta against Hoffa and the Teamsters is actually aimed at the whole labor movement. A case in point is enactment of the anti-labor Kennedy-Landrum-Griffin law. The whole attack – smear campaign, felony prosecutions, anti-labor laws and all – seems designed to make every union official fearful of governmental persecution if he gets out of line. It hasn’t worked with the Teamsters who have fought back as best they seem to know how. But it got swift results with Meany, Reuther and the rest of the craven heads of the AFL-CIO. They violated the most elementary principles of labor solidarity by rushing to expel the Teamsters from the AFL-CIO as soon as the capitalist government opened its assault on that union.
In refreshing contrast, the Jameses brushed aside the propaganda smear and sought to dig out the facts for themselves, especially in the case of the Teamsters’ pension fund.
“We have not been trained as detectives,” they write, “nor do we possess the vast supply of men and money with which the Justice Department and its 29 grand juries have investigated every action of the Pension Fund in recent years. We are not seeking to uncover crime, but rather to evaluate the economic merits of a large, rapidly growing and unique investment program. Despite the various shortcomings in our knowledge, we believe we have pieced together the over-all pattern of this complex puzzle.”
They devote over 100 pages to the subject, buttressing their findings with detailed statistical tables.
Their conclusions about the government’s charges are worth quoting:
“In the context we have developed, the fraud indictment seems deceptive, and the resultant conviction both inadequate and unwarranted, for one cannot be legally defrauded unless one accepts the misrepresentation and acts in direct consequence thereof. A more pertinent description of the CSPF [Central States Pension Fund] investment problem emerges from a study of the loans granted: the entire program appears ill-conceived by any standard of financial soundness, and the trustees from both sides of the table [employers and union] are responsible.
 
Nature of Pension Fund
“In fact, Hoffa long believed that this would shield him from prosecution on the Pension Fund issue; to indict him, he thought, the government would have to indict others on the board, and Kennedy would not dare to cast his political net so wide. Had Hoffa more clearly revealed the CSPF investment policies at the trial, the judge would probably have thrown up his hands and directed a verdict of acquital. Instead, Hoffa portrayed the Fund’s investments in glowing terms, and the jury found him guilty.”
These conclusions, which in effect render a verdict of not guilty, show both honesty and moral courage on the authors’ part.
Fair-minded though the Jameses strive to be, conceptions stemming from an academic background in capitalist economics creep into their evaluations of union policy. They appear to credit the capitalist thesis that unions must rely heavily on “forcing” workers to join up. Remarks about the Teamsters’ grievance procedure imply acceptance of the capitalist myth that arbitration of worker-employer disputes can be “impartial,” when in truth the class struggle knows no neutrals. In similar vein, they seem to think it valid for the government of the employers to impose legal bounds on the use of union strength.
Despite such misconceptions about the realities of class struggle, however, their study makes important factual contributions to the recording of Teamster history. I feel qualified to make that statement from personal knowledge since, as the book explains, I participated in Teamster struggles of the Thirties in the Mississippi Valley.
For years there has been argument within the Teamsters over who was “first” to establish an area-wide council. Behind the argument lies a desire by various individuals to claim credit for initiating this type of collective bargaining mechanism which laid the basis for the union’s present scope and power. The Jameses cut through superficial evidence related to formation of just any kind of loose area setup. They get to the heart of the matter when they say of the Central States Drivers Council, “This was the first, and for many years the only, example of area-wide bargaining in the Teamsters.” (Emphasis added)
They sketch out the development of centralized bargaining with employers through the CSDC and the use of leverage techniques in extending the union power from terminal to terminal. While Hoffa gets due credit for his role in bringing the CSDC to its present strength, account is also taken of the contributions made by the founding leaders of the CSDC. Hoffa’s efforts, as Teamster president, to extend CSDC policies throughout the trucking industry are described, especially concerning the 1964 national contract for intercity and local cartage workers.
Primarily the book is a study of Teamster leadership with sparse mention of the rank and file. This is not necessarily, or fully, explained by an assumption that the authors deliberately chose Hoffa as their central theme. “It is always an intriguing intellectual game,” they write, “to speculate on the importance of personalities in history.” Although valid enough up to a certain point, such intellectual preoccupation risks something else: a deformed view of the interrelationship between subjective and objective factors, also between leaders and ranks.
“Underlying Hoffa’s collective bargaining policy has been a vision of power aggrandizement for himself and the union,” they assert, “the building of an industry-wide contractual structure under a single unified command – his own.”
Here the appraisal of a subjective factor, Hoffa’s personal ambitions, gets mixed up with the objective role of the union itself. Implicitly, an organizational form developed historically for working class defense against capitalist exploitation, in this case the Teamsters union, becomes categorized as a mere instrument of “power aggrandizement.” Through erroneous lumping together of Hoffa and the union, the authors miss the real point. Evidence revealed by their study indicates that Hoffa tends to identify the union with himself more than himself with the union. And a tendency of that nature violates correct principles in leadership-membership relations.
Healthy, constructive relations between leaders and members must be based upon mutual understanding, confidence and trust, along with reciprocal cooperation in carrying forward the aims of the organization. These needs, in turn, require democratic patterns throughout the whole organizational structure. Leaders should be democratically selected and subject to replacement at every level in the leadership apparatus. There should be union democracy in deciding policies and union discipline in carrying them out, with the exercise of leadership authority remaining subject to critical review before the rank and file. These conceptions are different from Hoffa’s methods which the Jameses describe and characterize as a tendency toward “one-man operation.” Comparison of 1938-39 methods in the CSDC with those employed today should help to throw further light on the subject. Take, for instance, contract negotiations and grievance procedures.
Not much goes on in industry that the workers don’t know about, including what the employers may think are their private trade secrets. As a body, therefore, workers have rich practical knowledge of their industry. They know what material gains they can realistically demand in a given situation and experience has taught them how the employers will try to wriggle out of meeting their demands. It follows that involvement of the union ranks must be an integral part of fully meaningful contract negotiations. Leaders are not elite thinkers who divine what is necessary and possible and, like Moses, miraculously guide the ranks into the promised land. Their task is to help the workers classify and generalize their demands and to take the initiative in fighting to establish, maintain and strengthen union control on the job.
That’s the way we went about it in the 1938-39 Teamster campaign to establish centralized bargaining and uniform contract terms for over-the-road drivers in the Central States area. Moreover, all employers looked alike to the union area committee. None were subjected to special demands, nor did any receive special favor. As against all employers, the union forces stood in full solidarity, maintaining fair and equitable internal union relations in an open and aboveboard manner.
A much different concept emerges from the Jameses’ description of Hoffa’s methods. To quote them in part:
“Hoffa’s bargaining strategy is a sequence of power maneuvers and propaganda steps designed to steer the rank and file, local union officials, and management toward his predetermined end ... He reminds the employers that he is an eminently reasonable man, but the passionate rank-and-file feeling must be deferred to ... He establishes an aura of complicity by revealing inconsequential tidbits about his problems with local union leaders ... Simultaneously, a very different picture is conveyed to the local Teamster leaders and membership ...
“He portrays the employers as harsh, uncompromising, and struggling over many detailed points. He stresses the likelihood of a prolonged strike ... As the showdown nears, Hoffa impresses upon the employers that they must think ‘realistically’ and meet his demands ... Hoffa splits the employer group by playing off one interest against another ... In the face of these diverse pressures, threats, and promises, the employers capitulate ... Another victory is chalked up, and Hoffa’s reputation for invincibility is reinforced.”
The contrast between the two methods speaks for itself.
Hoffa still maintains what is known as an “open end” grievance procedure. The concept it involves, which had been developed earlier by Teamsters Local 544 in Minneapolis, Minnesota, was incorporated into the first Central States over-the-road contract of 1938. The “open end” meant that the union maintained unconditionally its right to strike at any time to make the employers abide by the contract terms. Grievances were never submitted to a so-called “impartial” arbitrator.
They were never allowed to pile up without decisive union action, as is so widely the case among trade unions today. With instinctive working class solidarity, born from bitter experiences with chiseling employers, the Teamsters area committee of 1938-39 started from the assumption that the worker was in the right and the employer in the wrong. Nothing more than full compliance with the union contract was demanded of employers and nothing less was tolerated. As in everything else, all employers looked alike. They either complied with the contract terms, or else.
As the Jameses describe things, Hoffa has drastically modified union handling of the “open end” grievance procedure.
“Here particularly,” they say, “he has built the stage on which to demonstrate his flair for the dramatic, his love of intrigue, and his grasp of the intricacies of motor freight. Every three months Hoffa assembles management and union representatives at a Chicago hotel for a grievance-settling ritual ... When the routine cases are out of the way, Hoffa bursts into the room, demands to know the remaining problems, and quickly solves them.
“In regular grievance cases, neither union nor management representatives dare to question his interpretations; in complex change-of-operation sessions, all rely on him to reconcile the conflicting interests of employers, local chieftains, and workers. Meetings are often halted until Hoffa is available for consultation. Then, head cocked, deliberating only a moment, he launches upon a series of unchallenged explanations. The onlooker becomes aware that here lies the center of power for the entire show.”
The change in concepts, as described, is not for the better.
Hoffa’s political limitations as a trade union leader are reflected in what the authors term his “bread and butter” philosophy. He has been unable to rise above peanut politics with Democratic and Republican office holders. The limitation has been very costly to the Teamsters. Restrictive laws passed by the capitalist politicians have weakened the Teamsters’ inherent power to defend their class interests. A nine-year vendetta has been waged against them by the capitalist government, under both Democratic and Republican administrations. To a politically class-conscious worker the answer to these attacks is self-evident. The Teamsters should take the lead in breaking with capitalist politics and launching an independent labor party. Their perspective should be to build a class political movement oriented toward the workers taking governmental power away from the capitalists.
Such a shift in policy would take more than a change of mind on Hoffa’s part. The whole official machine in the Teamsters is entangled in horse-trading ties with capitalist politicians at all levels of government, where-ever they can swing a “sweetheart contract,” to use a union term. To cut the union loose from this crippling entanglement, it will take a major upheaval in the ranks. Such an upheaval is in the making under the worsening objective conditions of the times, and those who lead it will have to be tied closely to the union ranks in a thoroughly democratic way.
The book concludes with comment on current speculation as to who will take Hoffa’s place if he goes to jail. Like everyone else, probably including Hoffa himself, the authors don’t know for sure. Only one thing does seem certain on this point. Whoever heads the Teamsters, he had better have the courage of a Hoffa and, in addition, possess sufficient political class consciousness to meet the needs of changing times. Otherwise he may not have a very prolonged term in office.
 
Postscript
In 1941 a fight developed between Daniel J. Tobin, then president of the Teamsters, and Local 544 in Minneapolis, led by members of the Socialist Workers Party. Tobin demanded that the local surrender its autonomous rights and submit to arbitrary rule by a trustee of his designation. The local rejected his demand and fought back, but in the end Tobin succeeded in taking dictatorial charge of its affairs.
The conflict had its roots in policy differences about the impending entry of the United States into World War II. Tobin supported such entry, the Local 544 leaders opposed it. No purely trade union issues were involved, except as they came up tactically in the struggle stemming from the basic question of war.
Tobin flooded Minneapolis with his henchmen and, in the battle that followed, he got support from the mayor of Minneapolis, the governor of Minnesota and the president of the United States. At the height of the conflict, leaders of Local 544 and of the Socialist Workers Party were indicted under the Smith Act, a thought-control law. Eighteen were convicted and, after losing an appeal to the higher courts, were compelled to serve terms in federal prison.
Clearly this episode in Teamster history had political implications reaching beyond purely trade union questions. It is, therefore, surprising that the Jameses treat it rather superficially and even quite one-sidedly in their book. One gets the impression that they fail to perceive the true political dimensions of the subject, and that they tend to view it as more or less a side issue in essential Teamster history. A reading of a further article on the 1941 struggle by the same authors [1] fails to change that impression.
Important facts are missing from their presentation. Some of the facts reported are misinterpreted, not in my opinion deliberately, but most likely because they are examined out of context from the full factual story. Here is an example:
“At first (1935-1936), Tobin tried unsuccessfully to suppress them [the leaders of the Minneapolis local]. Then he bided his time until 1941, when, in the most dramatic exception to his non-interventionist policy, he expelled them from the Teamsters ...”
The first part of the quotation is accurate. In 1935 Tobin revoked the local union’s charter with the International, but in 1936 he was compelled to reinstate it. The next passage in the quotation, however, can only be interpreted as an arbitrary deduction by the authors, or as their acceptance of an unverified assertion by some apologist for Tobin. A series of ascertainable facts challenge the flat statement that “he [Tobin] bided his time until 1941.” Lacking these facts, the Jameses give the impression that, ever since 1936, Tobin had just been looking for a chance to crack down on Local 544. They slur over the whole question of subsequent working relations between Tobin and the Minneapolis local, for example, during the over-the-road campaign. The fallacious notion is implied that the war question was little more than a pretext used by Tobin to help carry out long-held intentions, that it was not the basic issue behind the dispute.
Mistaken appraisals of this kind generally result, even though unintentionally, from hasty and oversimplified conclusions about complex questions. It would seem better to go a bit slower in undertaking objective analysis of such an important question, at least until there has been more thoroughgoing research of the kind the Jameses demonstrate elsewhere in their valuable study of Hoffa and the Teamsters.
 
Footnote
1. The Purge of the Trotskyites from the Teamsters, The Western Political Quarterly, Vol.XIX No.1, March 1966, pp.5-15.



A notable feature of the debate between Farrell
Dobbs and Norman Thomas was that it brought out strikingly to what
extent the thinking of the Social Democracy, in the person of Norman
Thomas, had drifted to the right, becoming virtually indistinguishable
from middle-class liberalism. In their past debates with revolutionary
Marxists, Social Democrats have customarily placed the main stress on
their “agreement” as to the  goal 
of socialism but their disagreement as to the means of
attaining this goal, putting forth gradualism or the patching up of
bankrupt capitalism as the most effective and “economical” way of
gaining socialism. Norman Thomas dropped all this. He was frankly
pessimistic about the working class, not only discarding all talk about
attaining socialism but openly flaunting the Marxist doctrine.
Especially noteworthy was Thomas’ open acknowledgment of his betrayal
of his pledge to oppose World War II. He also avowed his determination
to stay in the camp of the war-mongers and support not only the next
war when it breaks out but the actual preparations for it, especially
those already undertaken under the cover of the Marshall “Aid” Program.
In this connection Farrell Dobbs succeeded in exposing and smoking out
Thomas completely. — Ed.
* * *
Comrade Chairman, Comrades and Friends, The question we
are debating today — “Which Program Will Lead to a Socialist America?”
— is not a new one. We are actually dealing here with a century-old
struggle waged by the adherents of scientific socialism against all
pretenders who have advocated, under a socialist label, programs and
theories that have nothing in common with socialism. This struggle has
been in progress since the. day the Communist Manifesto
of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels was first published in 1848.
Seen in this light, the only correct one, it is easy to understand
that the issues in this debate go far beyond mere rivalries in an
election campaign, whose immediate outcome will settle nothing
fundamental. Let me pose these basic questions:
Why has the bankrupt system of capitalism survived? Why has the
Russian Revolution degenerated? Why has the scourge of fascism
lacerated mankind? Why have the devastations of one world war been
followed by another, with a third and more terrible war in open
preparation?
There is only one answer to these questions, and it has been given
by history: Bankrupt capitalism has survived beyond its time, and
inflicted untold evil on the world, primarily because of the betrayal
of the program and principles of socialism by those who pretended to
speak in its name.
The imperialists were able to dragoon the socialist working class of
Europe into the First World War in 1914 thanks only to the betrayal of
the Social-Democratic leaders. For years they had spoken in the name of
socialism, but when the decisive test of war came they acted as agents
of capitalism. For years before the outbreak of war they had preached
international working-class solidarity and threatened revolutionary
action in case of war. But when the war broke out they forgot their
promises and supported the war of the imperialists. They set the
pattern in World War I which Norman Thomas followed in World War II.
The great Russian Revolution of 1917 was led by real socialists, honest
disciples of Marx, who had fought capitalism in war as in peace. Lenin
and Trotsky hoped to extend the revolution to Germany and then to the
other European countries, and establish the Socialist United States of
Europe.
That would have sounded the death knell of capitalism, and it was
entirely possible. The war-tortured masses of Europe had been raised to
their feet by the Russian Revolution and were ready for the great
transformation.
But here again the pseudo-socialists, who controlled the great
Social-Democratic parties and trade unions, intervened to play their
tragic role of deception, sabotage and betrayal. They continued to
preach socialism in words, but in practice they placed themselves at
the service of the capitalist class and its regime. The
Social-Democratic leaders saved tottering capitalism, and took over the
responsibility of government when the capitalists were no longer able
to rule in their own name.
When Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg worked to pave the way for
the socialist solution in Germany in 1918 and early 1919, they were
murdered at the instigation of the self-proclaimed socialists
Scheidemann and Noske, who were in power at that time in Germany under
the “socialist” President Ebert.
By their policies, by their actions, the Social Democrats helped to
drag mankind to the edge of the abyss. It was this ruthless crushing of
the German socialist revolution that opened the road to Hitler and
enabled Stalinism to rise in Russia.
Stalinism is not an aggressive crusading force for international
workers revolution, as the American imperialists falsely and cunningly
represent it, and as some victims of their propaganda mistakenly
understand it. On the contrary, Stalinism is a a timid, cowardly,
national reformist movement which began with the repudiation of
revolutionary internationalism and thereby broke fundamentally with the
doctrines and the tradition of Bolshevism. That is the real reason for
the purges. The Stalinists had to massacre a whole generation of
revolutionary internationalists to achieve their aims.
Stalinism is a new variety of reformism which has nothing in common
with the revolutionary internationalism of the Bolsheviks. But at
bottom, Stalinism has very much in common with the reformist Social
Democrats.
It is not an accident or a misunderstanding that the Stalinists have
consistently and unceasingly fought the Marxist internationalists, the
Trotskyists, with every weapon from frame-up and slander to mass murder
and individual assassination, while they have frequently collaborated
in the most intimate manner with the reformist socialists of the
Social-Democratic camp in all countries of the world, including the
United States.
Of course, Stalinism and Social Democracy are not identical. There
is a fierce rivalry between them for control of the labor movement. But
it is the rivalry of bureaucratic cliques and not the rivalry of
irreconcilable ideological opponents. They are both reformists to the
marrow of their bones. They both fear and hate the proletarian
revolution above everything else, and never hesitate to unite against
it as they did in Spain and France in 1936 and the subsequent years.
And they never cease to hound and slander the Trotskyists, precisely
because the Trotskyists are the consistent and uncompromising advocates
of the workers revolution.
The prolonged survival of capitalism, with all its frightful
consequences, is due primarily to the influence and the treacherous
work of these two reformist currents in the labor movement, one falsely
calling itself “socialist,” and the other “communist.” All the might of
American imperialism could not save international capitalism, nor save
itself, without their aid.
Consider the situation throughout the world for the last 34 years.
We have witnessed the complete bankruptcy of capitalism as a social
system, above all in Europe. The working people of Europe showed
themselves eager to find the socialist solution. Despite deceit and
treachery, the European proletariat fought over and over, again, in one
country after another, to put an end to decaying capitalism and to
establish a socialist order.
But in every crisis, whenever the capitalists were no longer able to
rule in their own name, they turned to the so-called socialists and to
the reformist labor parties — alone, or in combination with the
Stalinists — to save their rule.
A similar situation is again unfolding in Europe today. The British
Labor Party is working with might and main to prop up senile British
imperialism, thereby only paving the way for a return of reaction. The
decrepit French empire was saved after World War II by a coalition of
Stalinists and reformist Socialists, thereby paving the way for the
coming of General de Gaulle to power. And that can mean nothing else
than the establishment of a military-police state which will attempt to
crush all workers organizations with the economic and military help of
American imperialism. It was likewise a coalition of Stalinists and
Socialists that salvaged Italian capitalism, only to be booted cut of
office when their services were no longer needed.
These are the bitter fruits of opportunism and class collaboration
policies, practiced with equal vileness by Social Democrats and
Stalinists.
We of the Socialist Workers Party have nothing to do with these
brands of so-called “socialism” or “communism.” We are orthodox
Marxists, because we know that Marxism is the only revolutionary
socialism of the working class, and that is the only genuine
socialism. History has demonstrated the spuriousness of every other
brand.
Marxism is a theory of social evolution which affirms that
capitalism is obsolete and bankrupt, and that it must be, and
inevitably will be, replaced by a higher form of social organization
which Marx and Engels called socialism, or communism.
Marxism teaches that socialism will not fall from the skies. Neither
will it be gained by any appeals to the good will and compassion of the
capitalist exploiters, as the Utopians, who preceded Marx, used to
think, and as some people still seem to think.
Socialism can be realized only as the outcome of the class struggle
of the workers.
The Communist Manifesto of Marx and Engels, in
which the principles of scientific socialism were first proclaimed to
the world 100 years ago, begins with the words: “The history of all
hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles.”
The class struggle is the motive force of history. Politics has no
serious meaning except as the expression of conflicting class
interests. Marx and Engels asserted, and we repeat after them, that
there is an irreconcilable conflict of class interests between the
workers and their capitalist exploiters. The political program of a
working-class party must be determined accordingly.
All the political actions and judgments of a workers party must
always be directed against the capitalist class, and never be taken in
collaboration with them. The class struggle is the central and
governing principle of socialist politics. It is by carrying the class
struggle to its necessary conclusion — that is, to the victory of the
working class and the abolition of capitalism — that the socialist
society will be realized. This is the teaching of Marxism. There is no
other way.
And every attempt to find another way, by supporting the
capitalists, by conciliating them, by collaborating with them, in peace
or in war, has led not toward the socialist goal but to defeat and
disaster for the workers.
“Whenever revolutionary socialists discuss the socialist road for
their own country, they talk in terms of a worldwide struggle. This is
especially necessary today when we discuss “Which Program Will Lead to
a Socialist America?” Involved is not only America but the entire
world. For everybody knows that American monopoly capitalism is the
main bulwark, one might even say the only bulwark, of tottering
capitalism the world over.
The tyrannical Greek monarchy, the moth-eaten British empire, the
paralytic French regime, the Vatican government in Italy, the puppet
regime of the Japanese Mikado, the corrupt and bloody dictatorship of
Chiang Kai-shek in China — all of them would have crumbled into dust
long ago, were it not for American support.
Let me add, that the monstrous Stalinist regime of police
oppression, forced labor and bloody purges could never survive the
American socialist revolution.
This role of American imperialism as the main powerhouse of world
reaction places tremendous responsibilities on American socialists.
Among these is the responsibility to learn from the lessons of the
terrible defeats of the European working class, and to teach these
lessons to the American workers. This is what we Trotskyists are trying
to do.
 
Bourgeois Liberation Versus Marxism
The American working class, so powerful in its trade
union organizations, is on the verge of a great political awakening.
All the more incumbent is it upon socialists, or those who want to be
socialists, to educate this working class in the true program of
socialism. And that is the program of Marx and Engels, of Lenin and
Trotsky.
There can be no greater crime than to miseducate or deceive this
working class upon whom so much depends for the salvation of mankind.
It is a crime to offer them a program of middle-class liberalism under
the label of socialism. That is essentially what the program, and even
more the practice, of Norman Thomas and the Socialist Party sums up to.
Some 12 years ago there was a glimmer of promise that the Socialist
Party would once again become a potent factor in the class struggle of
the workers for socialism. Those were the days when the Old Guard gang
of conservative and contented bureaucrats broke with the Socialist
Party and founded the Social Democratic Federation. Those were the days
of revolutionary-sounding resolutions against war and capitalism, when
revolutionists were invited to come into the party. That promise didn’t
last very long.
The approach of war made it clear that the brave words of the party
resolutions would soon be put to the test, and Thomas and the group
around him shrank from the test.
The split with the Old Guard had taken place precisely over the
anti-war resolution. But Thomas and the others, who reject the
socialism of Marxism, the socialism of the class struggle in war as in
peace, turned against the revolutionists who remained true to the
struggle against imperialist war and again sought unity with the Old
Guard war-mongers.
The Socialist Party, as represented by the heroic, fearless
revolutionary socialist, Eugene V. Debs, has changed its character
beyond recognition under the leadership of Norman Thomas. The
middle-class liberalism of war-supporting Norman Thomas has no more in
common with the militant socialism of the anti-war fighter Debs than
Stalinism has in common with the Bolshevik Party of Lenin. The
Socialist Party today represents not a continuation of Debs’ tradition
but a complete break with this tradition.
Trotsky once said that Norman Thomas calls himself a socialist as a
result of a misunderstanding on his part. Trotsky did not mean this
remark as a personal insult, but simply as a reference to the fact that
by rejecting Marxism and the class struggle as the guiding line of
politics, he could not carry on a consistent struggle against the
capitalist rulers and their government.
This remark was made in 1940, a year before America entered the war.
The evolution of Socialist Party policy since that time under the
guidance of Thomas has amply demonstrated the correctness of Trotsky’s
appraisal.
Ever since America entered the war, for profit and plunder, in
December 1941, Thomas has found himself in fundamental agreement with
the United States State Department on all the fundamental questions of
foreign policy while critical on secondary points.
Henry Wallace, whom we oppose just as Thomas does but for opposite
reasons — Thomas criticizes Wallace because he is friendly with the
Stalinists; we say the Stalinists have once again betrayed the workers
by supporting the capitalist politician Wallace — Wallace didn’t miss
the mark very far the other day when he characterized Thomas as a.
fellow-traveler of the bipartisan foreign policy of the
Republican-Democratic coalition.
To make that characterization more precise and accurate, I would add
that he is a critical fellow-traveler of this imperialist foreign
policy, but a fellow-traveler just the same. He supports all their
major decisions and invariably limits his criticisms to methods of
executing them and similar secondary matters.
He supported the war of the American imperialists but insisted that
they conduct it as humanely as possible. Consider his comment on the
dropping of the atomic bomb on defenseless Hiroshima, the most terrible
atrocity in the history of the human race.
When this Japanese city and its doomed population were blasted into
atomic dust, Norman Thomas wrote in the Socialist Call,
August 20, 1945: “Certainly that bomb should not have been dropped on a
crowded city without warning.”
Not without warning! Such humanitarianism is on the same plane as
criticizing an assassin because he has failed to inquire about his
victim’s health before plunging a dagger into his heart.
The so-called socialism of Norman Thomas and the Socialist Party
turns out in practice to be nothing but critical support of American
imperialism. The capitalist rulers understand that very well. That’s
why they have such a benevolent attitude toward him and give him so
much free and friendly publicity in their press.
The Socialist Workers Party is an irreconcilable opponent of
American imperialism. They understand that too. That’s why they
persecute and prosecute us. And even deprive a legless veteran, James
Kutcher of Newark, New Jersey, of the right to make a living as a
clerical worker for the simple reason that he is a member of the
Socialist Workers Party.
It is true that the Stalinists derive their policy directly from the
Stalinist bureaucracy in the Soviet Union and sell out the interests of
the American working class every time, in response to every twist and
turn of Stalinist diplomacy. That’s why we are the irreconcilable
opponents of the Stalinists and their so-called “communism.”
But it is equally true that Norman Thomas derives his basic policies
from the American State Department, as shown by his support of the
imperialist war from 1941 to 1945 and his present support of the
Marshall Plan which is nothing but the program of preparation for
another world war. That’s why we are irreconcilable opponents of Norman
Thomas and his so-called “socialism.”
 
Our Program
In contrast to the Socialist Party and the Stalinists,
the Socialist Workers Party pursues on all questions, especially the
war question, a policy independent of both the Kremlin and Washington.
Our policy is designed to serve the interests of the working people and
not of their masters or bureaucratic betrayers.
Our Election Platform demands the taking of the war-making powers
out of the hands of Congress. We are opposed to all secret diplomacy.
We stand for the withdrawal of all troops from foreign soil. We demand
the complete independence of the colonial peoples. We place no
confidence whatever in the United Nations, or in the Marshall Plan, or
the Baruch Plan, or any other plan, scheme or subterfuge designed to
cover and promote the predatory aims of American imperialism.
Our program, for war as for peace, is summed up in two fundamental
propositions which proceed from the principle of the class struggle as
the guiding line of working-class politics.

No support whatever to the government of the capitalists in war
or in peace.
In place of the capitalist government which rules America and
seeks to rule the whole world and seeks to dominate the peoples of the
entire world — in the interests of a small minority — we advocate a
government of workers and farmers which would rule in the name and the
interests of the immense majority at home and offer peace and
friendship to all the peoples of the world.
 

The War Question
The question of war, in which all questions of socialism
are concentrated, now has a burning urgency for all the people
everywhere who live in dread of the terrible things in preparation, in
these twilight days of the long-outlived and utterly reactionary
capitalist system.
What hope can we ever have of socialism, or even of the preservation
of the remnants of democracy, or even of the salvation of the human
race, if we don’t resolutely oppose the endless wars which capitalism
inflicts upon mankind?
I wish to put this burning question before you now as the central
and decisive issue of our discussion, as it is the center of all
discussions taking place throughout the world. I will begin by asking
Norman Thomas not what he is doing, but why?
I ask him point-blank to explain to this audience why he betrayed
his promise to oppose the Second World War.
I ask him to explain why he supports the present bipartisan foreign
policy of the United States government, which is nothing but a sinister
preparation for a Third World War, that threatens the life of the whole
human race on this planet.
I want to ask him to explain to this audience why he is doing that,
and how he reconciles it with the principles and traditions of
socialism.
It is not necessary for me to ask Norman Thomas what position he is
going to take in the impending war. You and I already know. His whole
course shows that he is going to support the same American imperialist
gang that he supported in the last war. This time for the domination
and enslavement of the world by the most bloodthirsty enemies of the
human race, whose twin headquarters are Wall Street and Washington.
And it is not necessary to ask us where the Socialist
Workers Party will stand. We proved in the last war, not without risks
and sacrifices, that we are opposed to this imperialist gang in war as
well as in peace, as every genuine socialist must be.
The war which the cold-blooded financiers and militarists are
preparing will be a war of aggression by American imperialism for the
domination and enslavement of the whole world. Irreconcilable
opposition to this projected war will be a defense of the human race.
We take our position in this defense for the life and freedom and
independence of mankind. And no one worthy of the name of socialist can
do otherwise.
One of the aims of this war for the conquest of the world, by
reducing a few hundred cities and a few hundred million people to
atomic ashes, will be the conquest of the Soviet  Union, the
overthrow of its system of nationalized economy and planned production,
its dismemberment and reduction to colonial status, the reestablishment
of the rule of capitalists and landlords under a fascist regime serving
as the agents of the American imperialist overlords and sharing their
blood-drenched profits with them.
An essential part of the war program of American imperialism will be
the cementing of alliances with the most reactionary elements in all
countries against their own people.
In the period of preparation of this third war for so-called
“democracy” we already see in the first line the reactionary,
authoritarian Vatican and its army of priestly enemies of human freedom
throughout the world; the ecclesiastical vultures who blessed the
dictator-murderer, Mussolini, and sprinkled holy water over the head of
the butcher Franco.
Reaching its foreign tentacles into this country, our “democratic”
ally, the Vatican, has only recently given us a demonstration of its
love for free speech and democracy by instigating the exclusion of the
liberal Nation from the public schools of Newark and
New York; by working night and day to undermine and destroy the
American public school system; and by uniting and organizing all
reactionary forces in the trade unions — through the instrument of the
priest-controlled “Association of Catholic Trade Unionists” — to drive
out all militant unionists.
Those who wish to enter this so-called “democratic” coalition for
the Third World War must begin by kneeling to the Pope, for he is the
first and most powerful ally of the American State Department.
Those who support the coming war for so-called “democracy” under
American leadership must shake hands in friendship and smoke the pipe
of peace with all the dethroned monarchs who have found ready asylum in
America and England in flight from the wrath of their own people; and
the King of Greece who is supported on his bloody throne by American
money, arms and generals.
They must shake the blood-stained hand of the dictator Chiang
Kai-shek; unite with the reactionary feudal gang in Turkey, and with de
Gaulle, the American candidate for military dictator of France.
And finally, gagging and protesting, but going along just the same,
they must accept the partnership of Franco, who will soon be rebaptized
as a “democrat” and furnished with American arms and money for his part
in the holy war for “democracy” and “freedom” and the “rights of man,”
and the sacred profits of American financiers.
The Socialist Workers Party will not go along with this alliance. It
is madness! It is a conspiracy against humanity! And it will not
succeed! The threatened peoples of the world will never consent to
become the colonial slaves of Wall Street.
And the American working class — the greatest social power in the
world — will soon discover that they are marked as the first victims of
this imperialist war against humanity, and they will rise up against it.
The alliance of the American imperialists with all the reactionary,
privilege-seeking elements throughout the world is a great and fearsome
power. But the alliance of the great American working class with the
oppressed and freedom-seeking peoples of the world is a still mightier
power. And in the end it will prevail.
The victory of this alliance will bring peace and socialism to the
world.
The Socialist Workers Party will fight in this alliance and for this
victory at all costs and with all its strength.




THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT is today the victim of the most thorough-going governmental attack since the days of the Palmer raids. This assault, carefully planned and conducted in a most deliberate manner, daily becomes broader in scope and the methods utilized become more brazen. Its purpose is to prepare the American workers for docile submission to regimentation in industry and service in the military machine when Roosevelt, acting for Wall Street, plunges the United States into World War II. The ground for the campaign was prepared by Congressman Martin Dies and his “Committee on Un-American Activities.” He is now preparing to go back over the same ground and plow a little deeper. A pretense was made at investigation of fascist groups. Dies now announces that this phase of the work of his Committee has been satisfactorily cleaned up. Few people are so naive as to accept this statement at face value. The truth is that Dies has made a few motions in this direction for the record and that he is now prepared to get down to serious business in the attacks on the workers’ organizations. According to his own announcement, these are his intentions in the next stage of the campaign.
The task of the Dies Committee is to stir up public suspicion toward union leaders and militant rank and filers through a mud-throwing campaign. The real job is to be done by Roosevelt’s political police, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which is the spearhead of the entire anti-union drive. Thurman Arnold, head of the anti-trust division of the United States Department of Justice, is Roosevelt’s number one hatchet-man in the courtrooms. It is their ambition to make full preparations for M-Day, which is the War Department’s name for the day on which the American worker will be compelled to go to war.
Present-day appropriations for the Federal Bureau of Investigation are roughly fifteen times as large as they were in 1917, the year of United States entry into World War I. The FBI operates in all fields, finding grounds on whatever slender pretext for federal jurisdiction in labor cases. When this is not possible, the FBI gives full aid to the local police and courts.
J. Edgar Hoover, head of the FBI, testified before the House Appropriations Committee in November, 1939, that the FBI has organized a “general intelligence division” which has compiled extensive records of individuals, groups and organizations engaged in what he calls “subversive activity.” All of these are earmarked for arrests in mass when Roosevelt plunges the country into war. The immediate objective of the government is to cull out of the trade union movement in advance of the war as many of the militant elements as possible. By this action they aim to terrorize the workers, and especially the working class leaders, so that there will be a minimum of resistance to the war plan. The record of government action against the unions shows what Roosevelt-Arnold-Hoover consider as “subversive activities” and just who they intend to terrorize.
The social outlook of J. Edgar Hoover is quite aptly characterized by his speech at the meeting of the International Association of Chiefs of Police in July, 1935, in which he termed as “Enemies of society” even those who are advocates of the prison parole system. This federal fink-herder wrote Chairman Matson of the National Labor Relations Board in November 28, 1939, complaining that a Board field examiner was speaking in favor of a pardon for an imprisoned labor leader. The case in question was one in which the FBI had no jurisdiction, but Hoover is interested in keeping all labor leaders in jail no matter how they are put there.
The FBI has on several occasions sent out public requests that it be given notice of all working class meetings, parades and demonstrations so that they may have snoopers present. There have already been cases, for example, the Minneapolis WPA strike, where they sent agents-provocateur as well as snoopers. They have requested the trade unions to advise them of any “known subversive elements.” This is their not too subtle method of trying to make stool-pigeons out of the workers.
Industrial mishaps of whatever nature are today followed immediately by noisy FBI investigations of “sabotage.” When an old scow capsized in the Hudson River, Hoover thought it was the work of enemies of the U.S. government. These are dress rehearsals for the spy scare. It is only a short step from this to the branding of strikes as “industrial sabotage” and the prosecution of strike leaders as “agents of foreign powers.”
Thurman Arnold, during the early stages of his “antitrust” campaign, sent a letter to the Indianapolis Central Labor Union of the AFL, setting forth a list of what he called unquestionable violations of the Sherman Anti-Trust Law. These boil down in their essence to a demand for docile acceptance by the workers of all employer methods and practices which Arnold can force down the throats of the trade-unionists. Federal grand juries have returned wide-scale indictments against trade unions and trade union officials on charges of “criminal conspiracy in constraint of trade,” “interference with inter-state commerce” and any other charge which the FBI can dig up which will give Arnold an opportunity to wield the axe upon the trade union movement through the courts.
The Sherman Anti-Trust Law was enacted by Congress in 1890 as a result of the pressure from the workers and farmers who demanded that the huge trusts and monopolies be curbed by the government. It was first used, not against the trusts, but against the American Railway Union in 1894. Thereafter, the courts often invoked it against the unions, acting under pressure from the employers. The worker-farmer revolt against this practice became so strong that in 1914 Congress passed the Clayton Act specifically exempting labor from the “conspiracy” charge which the courts were justifying on the basis of the Sherman Law.
Today, under the “great liberal” Roosevelt, who is the real head of the FBI, the Department of Justice and its anti-trust division, the old practices are again revived. Workers are already in the federal prisons as a result of this drive. Others are under heavy bond pending appeal of convictions to higher courts; still others are now on trial or are under bond awaiting trial. A considerable number are under probation to federal officers with jail sentences hanging over their heads.
The first union victory in the fight against the “anti-trust” campaign was recorded on May 6 when a Federal District Court ordered a verdict of acquittal in a case against the Washington, D.C. local union of the AFL Teamsters. According to the latest reports Roosevelt-Arnold-Hoover were “undecided” whether an appeal would be taken to a higher court in a further attempt to jail these trade unionists.
The workers have little fear of the city police or any other local police agency against whose acts of violence they have had to defend themselves in strikes. Above all, they have little or no confidence in the cop as being in any way their friend. It is different with the FBI. There is much confusion in the minds of the workers on this point. Roosevelt understands this and is taking full advantage of the fact.
A feeling of awe towards all federal authority is drilled into the minds of the workers during their school days and then carefully nurtured by clever propaganda throughout their adult life. This is the primary advantage of the FBI as an instrument for the campaign against the unions. There has been a careful special buildup to augment the standing of the FBI in the eyes of the workers. The highly dramatized campaign against Dillinger, Machine-gun Kelly, etc., provided the stage for the buildup. A series of movie plays glorifying the “G-Men” has reinforced the drive. News reels of the “G-Men” in training, accompanied by the inevitable sadist speech by J. Edgar Hoover, have been a powerful supplement. The radio has contributed its share through the Gang Busters serial and through numerous other devices. These factors have been a big help to Roosevelt in his anti-union drive.
The methods employed by the FBI in arresting workers and bringing them to trial are deliberately calculated to create the general public impression that they are dangerous characters. The most popular hour for the arrest of trade unionists by the FBI is between 3 a.m. and 5 a.m. in the morning. The daily press is often tipped off in advance of the arrest so that they may obtain pictures of the “G-Men” herding the workers off to jail handcuffed and fastened together by a chain. Put in jail and still half asleep, the workers are given the old tough-cop–good-cop act. The first “G-Man” who talks to them acts very hard-boiled; a little later another “G-Man” comes in who pretends to be friendly and wants to “help” the worker. If he doesn’t get a “confession” he then tells the worker hair-raising stories about what happens to those arrested by the FBI who do not “tell all.” A companion action to this phase of the program is the frequent searching of workers’ homes without even so much as the formality of a warrant.
Bail bond for workers arrested by the FBI has been uniformly high and, not satisfied with this, the FBI has in many cases interfered with the efforts of the unions to secure bond. And, once presented, the bond is submitted to a super-technical scrutiny; if any technicality can be found to justify the action, the bond is rejected. Another popular practice of the FBI is to prevent the arrested worker from establishing contact with a lawyer until the last minute before he is arraigned for hearing, so that he has little time to confer with his counsel to prepare a defense.
A good example of FBI methods is the case of the arrests and convictions of seven officers of local unions of the AFL Teamsters in Federal court at Sioux City, Iowa. In this case the FBI made minute measurements of a stretch of highway at the boundary between Minnesota and Iowa in order to establish jurisdiction for the Federal Court. High bail was set for the accused workers and all manner of interference was put in the way of their efforts to obtain the bail bond. Almost a year and a half had elapsed since the time of the alleged unlawful act. During this period the FBI had taken all of the time it considered necessary to prepare its case. The seven trade unionists were rushed to trial without opportunity to prepare adequate defense. One defendant had less than 48 hours from the time he was first able to see a lawyer until he was brought to trial. The men were all sentenced to two years in a Federal penitentiary and are now under bond pending an appeal to the higher court.
A part of the whole plan is for the FBI, both by example and by direct collaboration, to stir up similar actions by the local police and prosecuting attorney. A chain of interrelated actions against the workers is thus set in motion, both by the federal cops and the local cops. One agency supplements the other. A typical example of this is the case of Republican presidential aspirant Thomas E. Dewey’s attempt to smear the Building Service Employees International Union of the AFL through the George Scalise case. The Building Service workers do not need the help of the cops-and-robbers minded Dewey to administrate their union. However, Dewey insists that they shall have his full interference whether they want it or not. During the second day of the proceedings of the union convention just held at Atlantic City, Dewey’s henchmen broke into a session, placed four officials of the union under technical custody and disrupted the meeting so badly that it was necessary to adjourn. When W.L. McFetridge, one of the four, was later elected to succeed Scalise as president of the union, the New York Daily News came out on May 8 with the headline: “Man Sought by Dewey Heads Scalise Union.” A swarm of FBI agents snooped around the convention headquarters, eavesdropping on conversations and spreading malicious gossip among the delegates.
There has been a veritable epidemic of seizures of the books and records of trade unions by the FBI and local police and prosecuting attorneys. In all parts of the country bosses serving on federal and county grand juries have been eagerly poking their long noses into the records of the unions that have been brought into the grand jury room.
The employers are rapidly falling into step with Roosevelt’s anti-union drive on their own initiative and by their own methods, to say nothing of the whole-hearted cooperation they give to the FBI and the local cops. Damage suits are instituted against the trade unions at every opportunity. Finks are planted in the unions to institute suits for accounting and then the union records are dragged into court and pried into by attorneys and accountants, hired and paid for by the employers’ association.
The boldness of the drive against the leading officials of trade unions demonstrates Roosevelt’s urgent desire to get the job done. It is also unmistakable evidence of his contempt for those very leaders who give him their unconditional support. The next item on the Roosevelt-Arnold-Hoover agenda will be a sweeping follow-up campaign directed against a much broader strata of the trade union movement.
Some trade unionists seek reasons to consider Roosevelt innocent of any complicity in this campaign. They point out that he did not appoint Thurman Arnold to the post of attorney-general when Frank Murphy was elevated to the United States Supreme Court. They credit Roosevelt when the Department of Justice does not always get the full appropriation which it requests. But they are only deceiving themselves and others. These little incidents do not affect die general line. Make no mistake about it. Roosevelt is the head man of this anti-union drive.
The AFL is at present bearing the main brunt of this attack. But this does not mean that the CIO can afford to remain silent or hope to escape it. Fines and sentences have already been imposed upon leaders of the CIO Fur Workers Union. This is only a beginning. There seems to be a general belief in the CIO that it is safe to stand aside and permit the AFL to stand up as best it can against these attacks. This attitude is obviously motivated by factional considerations resulting from the struggle inside the trade union movement. Such a policy will in the end bring grave consequences to the CIO movement. Even in the AFL, although additional unions are constantly falling into the line of fire, there is a strong tendency on the part of those unions not involved to ignore the whole matter more or less. They will pay heavily for this ostrich policy.
The trade union movement is confronted by a vital threat to its very existence. Roosevelt is preparing to sterilize the unions. There are many willing hands to help him. The failure of the movement to defend itself can only intensify the attack and result in the unions becoming tied land and foot by the government. Then they will be unable to perform their natural functions as independent organizations of the workers.
The carefully planned anti-union drive of the government must be met head-on. The defense of the unions must be just as carefully and thoroughly worked out as the attack. Facts must be recognized. Every section of the movement is affected. The independence of the labor movement is at stake. A powerful united campaign of defense must be launched with the full participation of all trade unionists.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 15 March 2018





Among those to answer roll call as a delegate to the Democratic Convention was Phillip Murray, CIO vice-president and Chairman of the Steel Workers Organizing Committee. His presence at the Chicago gathering is of more than passing interest to the CIO workers. Why was ne there? What benefits did he hope to bring to the workers by his participation? Did he hope to find a broader solution to the problems of the steel workers whose plight he so eloquently described in his recent testimony before the Monopoly Committee of Congress?
To answer these questions one must first summarize his telling indictment of the steel trust.
 
Murray’s Story of the Steel Trust
Last November and December industrial production in the nation as a whole surpassed the all-time peak in 1929, but with fewer workers. In the Pittsburgh industrial area production rose 6% from August 1929 to November 1939. But during this period man hours of work declined 19%. 24% of the working population of Pennsylvania was unemployed last December, the point when industrial production was higher than in 1929.
The cry of industry and of government for almost eight years has been:
“Give us greater productivity. Increase our efficiency. Lower the production costs of our commodities, and thereby breath greater buying power and this will afford the cure for all the unemployment evils confronting the nation.”
Productivity has been increased; and labor’s reward is a lower annual income, a shorter work year and more men thrown out in the Streets. Corporation profits, on the other hand, Surpassed the 1929 profits in the last quarter of 1939.
 
Growth of Monopoly
Factual investigations reveal that the trend in American industry today is toward greater monopolistic control. Technology is building a new monopoly in the steel industry. Eighteen Steel companies went out of business in the 1930’s through mergers and consolidations. Eight others merged but kept separate identities. Only two new companies were formed as the result of mergers. Fourteen plants or departments are now on the steel industry’s death list. 22,950 workers employed in them will lose their jobs. Control of steel production is being concentrated into the hands of fewer and larger companies. Eighteen Small independent companies operating hand mills will soon go. They employ 23,350 men.
 
Machines Replace Men
Modern automatic hot strip mills can handle most of the demand for flat rolled products. 126 men in the automatic mills produce the same tonnage as 4,512 men in the hand mills, a 97% reduction in man hours. The strip mills are displacing 84,770 men. 38,470 of them have already been disconnected from the industry. They are thrown out, not one by one, but a thousand to fifteen hundred at a time. In one case 3,000 workers were told to go home and not come back.
The continuous butt-weld type mill displaces 100 workers. Where 136 men are required for ah operation in the hand mills only 36 are required in the continuous mills, a reduction of 75%.
Since 1923 the number of man hours per ton of steel output has declined 36%. A little more than 6 workers can turn out as much steel now as 10 could in 1923. Almost half of the decline has occurred since 1936 when labor displacement by strip mills began. From August 1936 to September 1939 technology reduced the number of man hours per ton of ingots produced from 18.7 to 14.7 man hours per ton. This is a reduction of more than 21%.
 
Steel Ghost Towns
Strip mills have reduced entire communities to ruin. Events during the last three years in Newcastle, Pennsylvania, a steel town of 50,000 people, are typical. 4,500 hand mill workers have been permanently displaced in this town. A few years earlier 1,200 Bessemer workers were displaced. There have been a total of 5,700 victims of technology in Newcastle during the 1930’s. 64% of the town’s population is either on relief or trying to get it. As the plight of Newcastle grew worse, WPA wages were reduced $5.00 a month and the number of WPA jobs cut more than 50%.
 
Unemployment Cancels Raises
Between August 1936 and September 1939 hourly wage rates in steel rose more than 27%, or from 66.8 to 85.1 cents per hour. The amount of wages per ton of ingots produced in August 1936 and September 1939 was the same, $12.50 a ton. Despite a 27% increase in average hourly wages the total wages per ton of ingot produced did not increase. This is the result of a reduction of 21% in man hours per ton of ingots produced.
The claim that increased wage rates are responsible for technological improvement is not valid. All automatic strip mills were completed, under construction or authorized to be constructed before the steel wage raise in 1936 and 1937.
An insignificant number of steel workers are employed a full five-day week for 50 weeks a year. The average employed worker is idle ⅕ to ⅖ of the year. The bosses avoid hiring former hand mill workers in the strip mills. Those employed are given work as laborers or semi-skilled workers. They receive only one-half to one-third of their former daily earnings. The new steel technology is not creating new jobs elsewhere to compensate for jobs directly eliminated in the steel industry.
 
Workers Bear Burden
Technological improvements have been very profitable to the bosses and very costly to the workers. The same labor cost of production has been maintained despite an increase of more than one-fourth in hourly wage rates. Fourteen million dollars have been eliminated from the total monthly pay envelopes of the steel workers. Production efficiency has been raised by one-fifth. 30,000 workers have been displaced. Finished steel prices have increased 9%.
In other words, the industry produces the same amount of steel with 30,000 fewer workers. The employed workers are receiving more than 26% higher wages per hour but they are idle one-fifth to two-fifths of the year. 30,000 then have been displaced entirely and are getting no wages at all.
 
What Unionism Did
The SWOC Chairman supported this vivid description of conditions in the steel industry with verifiable statistics and instructive illustrations. He next turned to the role of the SWOC. If the steel workers had not organized, the situation would have been more serious. The SWOC has prevented, by increasing the hourly wage rate, a reduction of total monthly pay rolls by more than one-fourth. It has also, by reducing hours, prevented thus far the permanent elimination of 58,000 steel Workers from their jobs. If it were not for the SWOC there would today be 88,000 instead of 30,000 steel workers thrown out in the street.
Murray recognizes that important as the Union has been it has fallen short of a complete solution of the steel workers’ problems. He goes on to say
“Having won an increase of fourteen and one-half million dollars in total monthly payrolls, however, the SWOC has been helpless to prevent the steel industry from taking it away through technological improvements.”
 
Congressional Action Needed
Pointing out that collective bargaining in the steel industry is on a company-wide basis, while the problems of technological improvement are industry wide and national in character, the CIO spokeman concludes: “Consequently, in the absence of universal collective bargaining. Congressional regulation of the introduction of large technological changes is necessary.”
 
Political Action Needed – but Against the Bosses
Murray recognizes that the steel workers must supplement trade union action with political action if they are to find a solution to their problems. But why does he turn to the Democratic Party? They will give lip service but they will not act. The Democratic Party, just as the Republican Party, is a political organization of the steel bosses, not of the steel workers.
One of Murray’s fellow delegates at the convention was Mayor Kelly of Chicago whose police carried out the Memorial Day massacre of the strikers in Little Steel. In the Ohio delegation sat the men who called out the National Guard to help the steel bosses in the same strike. Roosevelt, to whose renomination Murray was pledged, has been in the White House during these very years in which the steel bosses were grinding the workers down under the heel of technological change.
The SWOC Chairman told the Monopoly Committee that there should be a national unemployment conference of leaders of government, industry, labor and farm groups. The Democrats put it in their platform. Platform promises, however, are taken lightly by the Democrats and the Republicans. The conference may never be held. If it is held it will wind up in a discussion of how to keep down labor trouble “in the interests of national defense,” and not in any clear-cut program to aid the unemployed and underpaid workers.
The corporations are interested in only one thing: profit. As in the past so it will be in the future; the Democratic and Republican politicians will do the bidding of the corporations. Murray and all other labor leaders who support them are very popular with the Democrats and Republicans just before elections. When the election is over the bosses get the benefit of political representation and the workers get a few crumbs at best, sometimes tear gas and bullets.
“I say to the leaders of industry’, Murray told the Monopoly Committee, “keep your economic theories in text books. So far as the workers of this great nation are concerned, they want to know only one thing. When do they get jobs? When are they going to be protected from losing their jobs everytime a new contraption or a new invention is discovered. When are their children, the youth of this nation, who are roaming the streets today, going to get jobs? This is the question. This is the big problem of today.”
 
For an Independent Labor Party
He is one thousand percent correct. but the workers won’t get action on this vital problem from the Democrats or the Republicans. Nor will they get results through a third party of employer-loyal Senator Wheeler as John L. Lewis would have had the CIO membership believe.
The acute problems of the steel workers which Phillip Murray has so. eloquently described can no longer be solved by trade union action alone. Unions the workers must have. They are an indispensable instrument. working class political action is today equally indispensable.
The workers can depend upon no one except those of their own class. The next step toward the solution of their problems must be the election of candidates to political office – local, state and national – from the workers’ own ranks by the workers’ own political party. An independent labor party based on the trade unions must be formed.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 22 May 2020




SEATED ON ONE SIDE of the conference table are worker representatives of a trade union. Handicapped by lack of academic training, laboriously computing figures with the stub of a pencil, they make their arguments for higher wages, shorter hours, and better working conditions. They must depend almost entirely upon their own personal experiences and observations for the facts which support their arguments.
They know what they have to pay the landlord, the grocer, the clothiers for the necessities of life. And how hard it is to make ends meet on the wages they are getting. They know the haunting fear of unemployment. But their knowledge of economic trends beyond the scope of their own direct experiences is more or less limited.
Seated across the table are the employers and their skilled aids – trained lawyers, accountants, statisticians. Better educated than the workers, well informed on local, regional and national economic conditions, they argue glibly, using a slide-rule instead of the worker’s pencil stub and paper. They are armed with imposing statistics obtained through the service of the employers’ vast national organizations created to combat labor. All the tested methods of beating down the workers have been previously studied by them. They juggle the figures to support their claim that they have lost money since the first day that the business was launched. They hold the workers responsible for conditions elsewhere. The workers cannot ask for a raise in a St. Louis plant they contend because the employer is already paying more than is received by the workers in a similar plant in Birmingham, Alabama or even in Bombay, India.
The workers know that if they are forced to go on strike they will have to depend largely on their own resourcefulness to find means of subsistence. They are aware of the fact that many other trade unionists will make every possible effort to aid them. But experience has also shown that the trade union movement has not found a way to gear itself to present a solid front in these strike struggles against the employers.
The boss, on the other hand, is assured in advance not only of the solid support of the boss class itself, but also of the police and the lackeys of the employers in the apparatus of government. He will eat regularly while the government does his fighting for him. If he is a big boss he may hire his own private thugs to help. If he is a little boss he will merely hire scabs to do the work and leave the rough stuff in exclusive charge of the police.
The foregoing is symbolic of the relative position of the workers and the employers in the day to day class struggle. Sometimes the workers are at less disadvantage. Again, they may be under even greater handicaps. Taken in its entirety, this is an accurate reflection of the relation of forces.
In general the bosses are much better prepared than the workers in employer-union conflicts. The reasons do not lie in any inherent weakness in the working class. Actually the workers are much more powerful than the bosses. The weakness of the workers lies in a leadership which has failed to recognize the class struggle in its real significance and to prepare the fight accordingly. To put it more accurately, the official trade union leadership has subordinated itself to the leadership of the political agents of the employers.
Beginning with the vast majority of the national leaders of the trade unions, reaching far down into the secondary stratum of the union leadership and including a section of the more privileged trade union membership, there exists a portion of the working class which looks with favor upon the system of individual enterprise. Compared with the conditions of the many poorly-paid and unemployed workers, they find themselves in fairly comfortable circumstances. They see a bright side to things as they are. They are capable of viewing social and economic problems from the general point of view of the employers. Sincerely deploring the plight of the less-fortunate workers, they are mentally incapable of taking decisive action to aid them. They decline to risk their own privileged position in the interests of this struggle.
The employers, understanding this, have pursued a conscious policy of nurturing a contented section in the official trade union movement. There are comparatively few communities in the country, including the smallest, that do not have a trade union group, based on the relatively better-paid skilled workers, which enjoys very good relations with the local Chamber of Commerce. These groups extend themselves into the gradually thinning ranks of the small minorities of skilled workers in the mass production industries.
 
AF of L Policy
The American Federation of Labor was built up into a substantial national organization primarily on this foundation. Its officialdom is dominated by those whose ideology and outlook is that of the individual who enjoys a certain degree of comfort and who therefore finds no serious fault with the present social structure.
This leadership continually reminds the workers that they “must learn to crawl before they can walk.” Main emphasis is placed on lobbying for “liberal” legislation as a means of struggle for unproved wages and working conditions. Direct struggles against the employers through strike actions are subordinated to this program and, in general, discouraged if not sabotaged.
The traditional political policy of the AFL in promoting favorable legislation is to reward political “friends” and punish political “enemies” – by votes. The term “friends” does not mean representatives of the workers. The “friends” do not always vote for the bills endorsed by the unions. They are considered “friendly” if they vote for the majority of them.
The AFL officialdom rejects independent working class political action. They advise the workers to confine themselves solely to trade union activity and let the bosses organize the political parties and run the government. The “friends” may be Republicans, Democrats or so-called “Independents.”
Now that the mass production workers have broken the strangle-hold of the craft unions and have successfully established their industrial unions, a new pressure has developed on the political front. The bosses have few crumbs to offer to these great layers of the working class. The membership of the industrial unions find themselves in constant conflict with the bosses. They have the grave problems of low wages, poor housing, unemployment, industrial diseases in the most aggravated form. They are little impressed by the time-worn dictum about the “long road” to the realization of their aims. Especially when those “aims” are only a few cents more an hour or a few hours less work per week. There is little satisfaction in “progressing” from starvation to mere malnutrition. They want action. And on the political as well as the economic front.
 
CIO and Labor’s Non-Partisan League
The leadership of the Congress of Industrial Organizations pretended to give the industrial workers a vehicle for independent working class political action through Labor’s Non-Partisan League. But it is only a pretense. The LNPL is not an independent working-class political party. It is nothing but a new method of applying the hoary AFL “reward your friends and punish your enemies” policy.
A typical example of the policies of the LNPL is found in the record of the Labor Voter, a publication issued by the LNPL of Illinois. This publication was launched during the 1936 presidential campaign. Seven issues appeared, giving unqualified endorsement and support to Roosevelt and the New Deal. Publication was then suspended for a period of two years. It was revived again during the 1938 election campaign with the publication of issue No. 8. This time the paper endorsed 94 Democrats and 33 Republicans for seats in the United States Congress and the Illinois legislature. The publication was again suspended.
An examination of the record does not speak well for these political “friends” who are backed by the officialdom of the AFL and CIO. Few workers can remember a time when one of these “friends” appeared before a union meeting to urge the workers to go on strike and use their economic power in the struggle for their rights. But many workers can recall incidents where the “friends” have gone before meetings of the workers urging them not to go on strike, or to call off a strike already in progress, to say nothing about statements issued by them against the workers. They have many, many times helped the bosses to cram an unfair contract down the workers’ throats or to force the workers to accept an insincere boss promise and no contract at all.
When the time comes for a show-down these “friends” of labor show that their real allegiance is to the bosses. Their promises to the workers were not made in good faith.
In fact, the record shows that the policy of supporting “friendly” politicians is in reality a matter of supporting those who are least hostile.
Some of the most serious defeats have been suffered where the unions depended on “friendly” government officials instead of militant class struggle policy. For example, in Little Steel, the CIO workers got a large scale demonstration of betrayal by the very people they had worked so hard to elect into posts in the government.
When a politician takes a more or less bold course in opposition to the workers or piles up too long a record of anti-labor actions the workers turn sharply against him. The alibi-artists in the trade union movement find it difficult to apologize for him and sometimes he does not survive the next election.
However, he is replaced not by a workers’ representative, but by another slick politician who is also subservient to the bosses. He, too, is palmed off on the workers as their “friend.” The union leadership must be put on record as approving or disapproving all action of these “friendly” politicians. Nothing must remain unmentioned or covered up.
They will try to evade this responsibility, claiming that there is danger of embarrassing the “friends” and risking the election of “enemies.” The workers must insist upon an end to such “friends” and the election of government officials from the workers’ ranks by the workers’ own party.
The workers do not elect bosses or boss stooges to lead the unions. Such an action would be patently foolish. It is done only in company unions. It is just as ridiculous for them to elect such people to political office. The theory that the workers are not capable of governing themselves is false to the core. Unthinking people in the trade unions who repeat this prevarication do an injustice to their class. Every worker who has participated in trade union life knows that the working class has a tremendous capacity for efficient administration.
Those parties which have represented themselves as labor parties are only substitutes for the real article. They confine themselves to competition for political posts of the lower rank. They do not seriously challenge the boss’ political parties for the key positions in the government. Occasionally they elect a mayor; very rarely a governor or a congressman. They avoid putting up workers as candidates. Lawyers, drug store proprietors and professional politicians have been more popular with them as standard bearers.They buckle under just like the Republicans and the Democrats when the bosses really turn on the heat.
 
For an Independent Labor Party
An independent labor party, sponsored and launched by the trade unions, will represent the political power, not only of the organized workers, but also of a broad strata of the unorganized industrial and agricultural workers who will give it their support.
Farmers, small merchants, professional people and other middle-class elements will also in large numbers follow the independent political leadership of a dynamic working class as opposed to the present leadership of a decaying boss class.
Class collaborationist leaders of the workers have been, and will continue to be, in political offices as timid before the bosses as they are in the unions. The independent labor party will no doubt elect to political office, among others, many class collaborationists. Their performance in office will help show them up in their true colors before the eyes of the workers. They can thus be compelled to change their policies or be eliminated entirely from leadership in the working class movement in any capacity.
The class conscious working class leaders will fight as militantly in political office for the rights of the workers as they do in the unions. They will give a new meaning to the struggle of the workers for their rights. The workers will find powerful new weapons at their command.
The electing of workers’ representatives to political offices will surely not solve the basic problems of the working class. But when the workers begin to participate in politics as a class, through an independent party of their own, they will have taken a long step forward toward their goal.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 22 May 2020




A new high in confusing the political problems of the working class was reached by John L. Lewis in his recent addresses at Philadelphia. He gave the definite impression of a man who is rapidly losing all sense of political balance.
Lewis has on many occasions brought forth telling indictments of capitalist mismanagement of social production. As the chief representative of the CIO, a mass organization whose members are vitally involved in the major industries, he is well equipped with facts. Unemployment, malnutrition, inadequate housing, industrial diseases have remained as a permanent nightmare to a broad section of the mass production workers of the CIO. A gifted orator, Lewis has done a good job of describing some of the worst sides of these evil conditions.
All of this is an excellent and most necessary service to the workers. But an analysis of the conditions of the working class is only a preliminary step to an effective solution of these problems. In sharp contrast to his good performance in describing the bad conditions of the workers, Lewis has amassed an impressive record of misleadership in action on both the economic and the political front.
 
Lewis Has Remained a Class-Collaborationist
He has adhered consistently to the old-line trade union policy of horse-trading with the employers. But the big corporations, already enjoying a monopoly in their respective fields, have little to expect from a union except higher labor costs and a resultant reduction in their profits. The CIO unions in the basic industries have failed, therefore, to find “friends” among the big employers. Not content to wait for the benevolence of the employers to solve their problems the workers have pressed for militant trade union action – demands for union contracts, wage increases, reduction in hours, seniority, regulation of production speed and improved working conditions – and they have been ready to win these demands. The employers have fought back all along the line.
The officials of the CIO, with Lewis at the head, failing to get a basis for agreements with the bosses without a head-on fight, sought to stem the tide of strike actions by placing their reliance upon government agencies to force the employers into agreements with the union. This necessitated a pressure campaign on the politicians. Acute problems of unemployment relief, poor housing, protection from industrial disease brought demands from the workers for political action by the CIO.
 
Lewis Is Just a Streamlined Green
The choice was between the CIO taking the initiative in the creation of a national labor party or continuing to place reliance in “friendly” politicians of the old-line parties. Lewis and his colleagues chose the latter course, streamlining the old AFL methods by the creation of Labor’s Non-Partisan League which was nothing more than an organization to bring pressure on the Democratic and Republican politicians, although it was palmed off on the workers as an independent working class political organization. It is against this background that the remarks of Lewis at Philadelphia appear in the most significant light.
On June 18, 1940 Lewis told the NAACP at Philadelphia that “Mr. Roosevelt made depression and unemployment a chronic fact in American life.” Chronic depression, unemployment, is a fact. The workers do not have to be convinced of that. It is the making not of Roosevelt alone, but of capitalism as such. Roosevelt has failed to correct these ills because he is committed to a policy of perpetuating them through his role as a protector of their real creator – capitalism. Neither a Roosevelt nor a Willkie nor any other defender of capitalism can give the workers anything but. chronic depression, unemployment, and war.
But in 1936, after the first four years of Roosevelt, John L. Lewis and Labor’s Non-Partisan League considered him the workers’ champion and gave him unconditional support for re-election. And again in the state elections in 1938 Lewis and the LN-PL supported the bulk of the New Deal candidates. This could be excused if Lewis had belatedly made an honest discovery of the real nature of the Roosevelt administration. But he has learned nothing.
 
Turns Away from Roosevelt – to Hoover!
“It was a slogan of the 1932 presidential election,” Lewis told the NAACP, “that Herbert Hoover was responsible for that depression. As a- simple matter of justice let me say here and now that the workers of the United States realize that he had nothing to do with it.”
It isn’t the absent-mindedness of Lewis which is at fault here; it is his belief that the workers have such a poor memory that they will swallow this clap-trap. But it is the best which Lewis has to offer.
Referring again to Hoover and the depression, Lewis adds, “It was laid on his doorstep when he came to the White House.” In other words, Hoover didn’t create the depression; he just didn’t overcome it. Therefore, he is a politician in whom the workers can place their trust and, to quote Lewis again, “It is only the self-seeking politicians that blame Mr. Hoover.”
At this hour of the clock, with the world engulfed in a war which will soon involve the American workers, with Roosevelt already fastening a straight-jacket upon the labor movement, with the Republicans promising the bosses that they will finish the job if their candidate is elected, Lewis can do nothing but fumble around like an octogenarian who has lost his glasses. The best he has to offer is a threat to the Republican resolutions committee, in what the CIO News describes as a “straight-from-the-shoulder talk” that “some day the people will tire of being deceived by the major political parties.”
That is right. Some day the workers will. But it will not be because of anything John L. Lewis has done to help them find their way onto the right political road.
Lewis, Hillman and Dubinksy prevented the workers from taking the road of independent political action when they had an excellent chance under the impetus of the growth and struggles of the rising industrial unions in the basic industries. And so far as they are concerned there will be no such action in 1940.
 
From the Unsung Heroes Will Come Real Leaders
Hillman and Dubinsky are on the Roosevelt band-wagon. Hillman has broken openly with Lewis on the political front. Dubinsky has broken not only politically; he has taken the ILGWU back into the AFL, thus striking a severe blow at the whole CIO movement.
John L. Lewis, who has presumed to be the leader of millions of workers, stands politically bewildered before them in the hour of their greatest crisis. He has neither the courage nor the foresight to lead the workers in independent political struggle through their own party.
On the field of trade union action the real leaders who made the CIO movement what it is today sprang to the front in the periods of struggle against the bosses and then when the fight was over returned into the ranks or remained in minor posts in the unions. They have contributed much more to the building of the CIO than the top leadership which claimed the credit.
These same unsung heroes of the working class will find their way to the front in the political struggles of the days to come. It is in them and not in the John L. Lewises that the workers of the CIO will find the leaders who can guide them to ultimate victory.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 22 May 2020





As the delegates from the unions of the AFL and CIO
gathered in separate national conventions on November 18th, Roosevelt’s
War Deal was rapidly unfolding in all its ugly reality. The aims of
American imperialism in the present world conflict, and Wall Street’s
program for the regimentation of the workers in the war machine had
been made abundantly clear. These circumstances must serve as a point
of departure in analyzing the decisions of the AFL at New Orleans and
the CIO at Atlantic City.
To all practical intents and purposes, the United States is already
in the war. Its alleged neutrality is a pure myth. True, Congress has
not yet declared war, but that formal system of international conflict
has become generally outmoded in 1940. The United States is giving
wholesale aid to Great Britain against Germany and Italy and in an
increasingly open and unconcealed manner. Diplomatic relations with
Japan are constantly strained almost to the breaking point. Thinly
veiled maneuvers are being carried out to assure the dominance of
United States imperialism over the Latin-American countries. All that
remains to make this country’s participation in the war open and
complete is the actual outbreak of hostilities which can occur anytime
in any one of several places. The “peacetime” conscript army is being
mobilized for war and for no other purpose. The same is true of the
gigantic armaments program.
When the huge armament appropriations were cleared through Congress,
the Administration prepared to offer production contracts to the
industrialists. But they found very few capitalists ready to accept
their offers. The corporations, backed up by the big bankers, refused
to accept the contracts until they were given full guarantees of
super-profits from the production of war materials. Congressmen and
Administration officials, alike, were quick to champion the cause of
big business. Only a few isolated voices in the apparatus of government
were raised against the demands of the capitalists. The reaping of huge
profits by the industrialists and the bankers was fervently defended as
the “American way.” Insinuations of “pro-Nazi tendencies” were raised
against those few in the governmental apparatus who half-heartedly
opposed the bosses’ demands. An understanding was reached between the
government and the industrialists on the terms laid down by big
business. Then, and only then, did the corporations agree to accept the
war contracts.

  
Now Comes the Anti-Labor Drive
Now that the bosses are ready to begin production, all
efforts of the workers to fight for the preservation and improvement of
their living standards in the face of the war program are labelled
“sabotage.” The boss-defined “American way” now calls for the
dragooning of the workers into the capitalist-controlled armed forces
and the war industries. Big business has sounded the keynote for the
attitude of the Administration toward labor. C.E. Wilson, who succeeded
Knudsen as president of General Motors, advises the workers that they
must be prepared to sacrifice some material standard of living or some
of their leisure. Knudsen, now heading the “National Defense Advisory
Commission,” acting from inside the Administration apparatus, has
successfully led big business’s fight for its super-profits.
Alfred P. Sloan, chairman of the board of General Motors, has spoken
much more bluntly about the attitude of capitalism toward labor and the
war. He demands the revival of the six-day week and advises against
increases in the workers’ wages, stating that wages must lag behind
prices. If this advice is not followed, says Sloan, there will be
danger of inflation. This clap-trap which is palmed off on the workers
as profound economic theory is coupled with an appeal for the workers
to show their “patriotism” by keeping the war industries in operation. 

The boss-controlled daily press has taken its cue from the Wilsons
and the Sloans. Elaborate editorials appear in almost every issue,
propagandizing the bosses’ line. Headlines in the newspapers smear the
striking workers. Almost every strike action is depicted as against the
armaments program. This hue and cry against trade union action reached
violent proportions upon the outbreak of the Vultee strike in
California.
  
The Government Joins the Drive
The stooges of the bosses in the House of
Representatives were also quick to pick up the cue, using the boss
press as their forum. “Treason, sabotage,” they shouted against the
Vultee strikers, “You are hijacking the government.” They took up the
infamous Roosevelt slogan: “You can’t strike against the government,”

and are attempting to apply it against the striking workers in the war
industries. They demand that such strikes be outlawed. “The strikes are
the program of communism by the CIO,” shouts Representative Ford of
California. Hoffman of Michigan sees in the CIO Ford campaign, “further
subversive activity.” Sumners of Texas, Chairman of the powerful House
Judiciary Committee, has this advice to offer: “Give the strike leaders
a double dose of the kind of violence they understand.”
When the Dies Committee announced that it would investigate the
Vultee strike, Attorney General Jackson rushed into print to inform the
waiting world that the FBI had already investigated and found that
“Communist influence caused and prolonged the strike.” The Dies
Committee charges that the National Labor Relations Board is helping
the “campaign of sabotage” by blocking the bosses from firing suspected
workers. The Committee urges the bosses to use its files to prepare
black-lists against the workers. 

The AFL Convention passed a resolution protesting against the
prosecution of trade unions under the anti-trust laws. Thurman Arnold,
in charge of that division of the Department of Justice, replied that
he was “not influenced by the resolutions of any special group.”
The Gallup Survey reports that 60% of the population wants more
regulation of the trade unions. This announcement was given a big play
in the press. The capitulatory attitude of the trade union officialdom
on the war question has, no doubt, confused the minds of many members
and sympathizers of the trade union movement. This would be reflected
in such a survey. But even under such circumstances the accuracy of
this reported finding is highly dubious. In any event, it is certain
that if the trade union leadership took a clear-cut class position on
the question of the workers and the war the entire working class, with
the exception of an occasional fink, would be solidly lined up behind a
program of independent working class policy and against regimentation
of the trade unions. The Gallup survey undoubtedly raised the question
as a trial balloon on behalf of the forces seeking government
regulation of the unions.
Representatives Hoffman of Michigan and Smith of Virginia have
prepared new bills for rigid control of the unions. They would impose
compulsory arbitration upon the workers and brand picketing or delay of
production as an “oppressive labor practice.” They would revive and
extend the system of individual yellow-dog contracts between the
workers and the bosses. They demand life imprisonment for “sabotage.”
The workers are not saboteurs, and these philistines know it. They
intend this provision as a medium for the preparation of frame-ups
against the workers. And to doubly guarantee the throttling of the
unions they would prohibit the soliciting of union membership in the
war industries.
  
NLRB as an Anti-Labor Weapon
An “informal” statement has emanated from the conference
room of the House Judiciary Committee to the effect that the
enforcement of the National Labor Relations Act in the war industries
is “at variance with the declared policy of Congress.” This Committee,
under the chairmanship of Representative Sumners, who wants to give
strike leaders “a double dose of violence,” is also working on a
measure whereby the workers would automatically lose deferment from
military service if they go on strike. 

The appointment of Dr. Harry A. Millis to the National Labor
Relations Board signalizes a turn to the right for this government
agency. William Green is reported to be “enthusiastic” about the Millis
appointment. So is the Wall Street Journal. And with good reason. The
new policy of the NLRB has been outlined by a Washington correspondent
of the New York Post. “Conciliation” will be
substituted for enforcement of the Wagner Act, which is now to be
construed as an instrument for avoiding labor disputes, rather than a
means to protect the rights of organized labor. The Board will now
attempt to “settle” disputes without issuing complaints against the
bosses, considering that its “first duty” is to “avoid production
delay.” This means that the NLRB, which was originally declared to be
an agency for the enforcement of the workers’ right to organize and
bargain collectively, is now switching over to a policy of outright
strikebreaking. 

Roosevelt, on his part, warns that “labor must make sacrifices.” He
has stated plainly that he “intends to keep the war industries
running.” This threat, not made against the corporations when they were
holding up his war program over their demand for guarantees of huge
profits, is directed at the trade union workers. Roosevelt says that he
has no new plan for labor legislation, “as of today.” He will
first give the class-collaborationist trade union officialdom a chance
to whip the workers into line. If this is not done to his satisfaction,
he will not hesitate to resort to drastic measures in his efforts to
regiment the workers in the war machine.
  
Citrine Peddles the Bosses’ Line
Sir Walter Citrine, Secretary of the British Trade Union
Congress, came to New Orleans to address the AFL Convention and the
American workers over a nation-wide radio hookup. This gladiator,
knighted by the crown for his treachery to the British workers, came to
the United States to do double duty, to serve the interests of the
British bosses and the interests of the American bosses. He did not
come in the interests of the American workers or the British workers.
Sir Walter proudly related how the British trade union leadership had
agreed “without haggling” to submit the British workers to the “war
sacrifices” demanded of them by the British bosses. He told how the
British workers had “voluntarily” given up their right to strike; how
they had “accepted” longer hours of work. “We” insisted, he said, that
these rights were not to be taken away “without labor’s consent.” In
other words, Citrine and his ilk were demanding the democratic right to

give away the workers’ gains. Labor yielded these rights, he
said, on the condition that “the sacrifices would be temporary.” What
guarantees did the Citrines demand? That the British trade union
leaders have “a full voice in all questions of policy.” What policies?
Nothing more nor less than the war policies of British imperialism.
Citrine explained all this to lead up to his main point: “The American
workshops are the first line of defense for world democracy.” This
explains why Sir Walter was sent here. He is trying to shove the
class-collaborationist war program of the British trade union leaders
down the throats of the American working class.
“British society,” said Sir Walter, “is no longer divided into
classes. Look at my own case. I left school at twelve and went to work.
Now I am a member of the Privy Council.” What about the British workers
who are not on the Privy Council and who have not had the dubious
benefits of rubbing shoulders with the flower of knighthood? They are
constantly reminded by their miserable conditions of existence that
there are two classes in British society and that there is a class
struggle. Four million workers in British industry are today pushing
demands for wage increases. Pressure for strike action against the
bosses is becoming quite strong in several sections of the British
trade union movement. The Citrines and the Ernest Bevins are striving
desperately to head off this movement. 

It is only in the light of this background of events – the role of
the United States in the war, the rising tide of reaction against the
trade union movement, the rapid shift in policy by the Administration,
the increasingly violent campaign for the regimentation of labor in the
war machine – that the significance of the convention actions of the
two great sections of the trade union movement can be properly
understood.
  
Green Takes Citrine’s Cue
William Green, comfortably ensconced in the AFL
presidency at a salary of $20,000 per year, was visibly moved by the
oratory of Sir Walter Citrine and the pleadings of the long list of
government and employer representatives who addressed the New Orleans
gathering. He heard only Citrine, and not the voice of the struggling
British workers. Nor did he show the slightest sign of understanding
the vital problems of the more than four million AFL workers whom he is
supposed to represent.
Green informed the workers that to furnish aid to Britain is their primary
responsibility. There will be no production stoppages in American
industry, he said, “for trivial reasons.” And then, as if to give
double assurance to the capitalist overlords, he added, “or for any
reason.” It is Green’s stated opinion that arbitration tribunals
can satisfactorily adjust all of the workers’ grievances. Holding that
the question of longer hours of work can be taken up “when the
situation requires,” Green expressed the opinion that the payment of
time and a half for overtime over 40 hours “will meet the present
needs.” He hastened to add that the cost of such overtime would be “insignificant,”

so that the bosses would understand that he was not making any harsh
demands upon them. The question of the 30 hour week, said Green, can be
taken up after the war is over to serve as a cushion against
unemployment. The essence of this program outlined by Green was
subsequently adopted by the Convention.
This brief examination of the policy of the AFL leadership is
necessary in approaching the question of unity between the AFL and CIO.
Unity on AFL terms would place the mass production workers, who are
most completely involved in the war industries, under the complete
dominance of such a thoroughly capitulationist leadership.
  
The Key Question: Industrial Unionism
And this is only half of the question. What about the
preservation of the industrial form of organization in the mass
production industries? A clear example of the present AFL attitude on
this question is to be found in the action taken against the Federal
locals of the AFL at the New Orleans Convention. The Federal locals,
which are chartered under the direct supervision of the AFL Executive
Council, were used as a stop-gap measure when the fight for industrial
unionism was first breaking into the open inside the AFL. After the
split, out of which the CIO was formed, the AFL Executive Council
continued the use of the Federal locals as an instrument for its
organizational struggle against the CIO. There are today a number of
such local unions in the AFL, having a quasi-industrial jurisdiction.
A resolution was passed at New Orleans which authorizes the craft
international unions to make immediate jurisdictional raids upon the
Federal locals. The delegates from the Federal locals protested
strongly against this resolution. The Electrical Union World,
official organ of Local No.3 of the International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers, AFL, quotes from a protest speech made by a Federal
union delegate from Philadelphia: “Please leave us alone,” said this
delegate, “We are O.K. and better than a whole lot that are regimented
into craft unions.” Green sought to smother the debate by stating that
the recommendation was “not mandatory.” This statement is nothing more
nor less than utter duplicity and Green knows it. The craft
internationals are not forced by the resolution to make jurisdictional
demands upon the Federal locals, but the action makes it mandatory upon
the Federal locals to yield up their members to the craft
internationals on demand. And the demand will be made or the resolution
would not have been introduced and adopted by the craft internationals.
This is the kind of “unity” that the craft union hierarchy on the AFL
Executive Council has in mind for the industrial unions. 

A second example of the AFL’s unchanged attitude on the question of
industrial unionism is contained in its proposition for amendments to
the Wagner Act. It demands that the Act be changed to permit the
recognition of craft units as bargaining agencies in the industrial
plants. These craft units would be carved out of the existing
industrial unions. The AFL wants the Wagner Act changed to provide for
direct court appeals by the unions against the decisions of the NLRB.
The craft unionists want to go to court against the industrial unions.
Guarantees are demanded for the preservation of craft agreements. This
demand arises from the action of the NLRB in outlawing some craft union
contracts in industrial plants. The Board contended, in handing down
its decision, that these contracts had been secured through collusion
between the craft union officialdom and the corporation management.
The craft unionists want to carve up the industrial unions by
whatever means they find at hand. In pressing these demands, the AFL is
blinded by the motivations of petty craft and personal interests. In
their desire to strike at the CIO, the craft unionists would jeopardize
the few remaining beneficial provisions of the Wagner Act, in the face
of the rising tide of reaction and the sharp turn to the right on the
part of the administration which is responsible for the enforcement of
the Act.
  
Industrial Unionism Must Predominate
Unity of the trade union movement is highly desirable in
the interests of the workers. But the CIO cannot unite with the AFL
until it is given full guarantees for the preservation and
extension of the industrial form of organisation. Despite the
wishes of a broad section of the rank and file, the official hierarchy
in the AFL is obviously not prepared to give any such guarantees. Nor
will they be prepared to yield on this fundamental point until the CIO
is much stronger than it is today. Even then, it is not assured in
advance that the craft unionists will yield.
The co-existence of craft unionism and industrial unionism in a
united organization is not at all a 50-50 proposition. It is
conceivable that the craft unions and industrial unions can live side
by side without internecine conflict. But the very nature of the
present-day methods of production makes it mandatory that industrial
unionism must be the dominating factor in the trade union movement.
Craft unionism can play only a secondary role.
The whining
of the deserters, Dubinsky and Zaritsky, who call upon the industrial
unions to “come back to the AFL”; and the shallow arguments of the
Hillmanites, who plead for an exploration of the minds of the craft
union leaders, cannot in any way alter these facts. It is this
fundamental issue in the AFL-CIO conflict which gave Phillip Murray,
the CIO President, the courage to make a “mild protest” to Roosevelt
against any “shotgun unity” with the AFL.

  
The Conflict Will Continue
It is clear that the internal conflict in the trade
union movement will continue and grow sharper. The action of the AFL,
in rescinding the special one cent tax originally imposed for the
declared purpose of fighting the CIO, was a phoney peace gesture,
calculated mainly to save face for Dubinsky. By increasing the regular
per capita tax from one cent to two cents, the AFL retains its special
fund with which to fight the CIO. One of the reasons why the AFL
leaders prostrated themselves so brazenly before the capitalist war
mongers was an attempt to gain a cloak of “respectability” which they
hope will aid them in their fight against the industrial unions.
The CIO is increasing its organization staff and appropriating
special funds for an organization campaign right in the heart of the
war industries – in steel, Ford, aircraft, rubber, aluminum, chemicals
and shipbuilding. The CIO victory in the Vultee strike will give strong
impetus to this drive, Although the Vultee strikers made heavy
compromises from their original demands, it must be recognized that in
the face of the great pressure brought to bear upon the strikers and
upon the class-collaborationist leadership of the CIO, the workers
achieved definite gains. The success of the strike is emphatically
demonstrated by the fact that it has forced “voluntary” wage increases
for the workers in the Douglas, North American, Lockheed and other
aircraft plants. The CIO News now carries the slogan,

“No matter what you do, there is a CIO union for you.” This indicates
an orientation toward war with the AFL on all fronts. However, the main
CIO drive will be concentrated in the basic industries.
  
CIO is More Dynamic
The AFL reports a membership of 4,247,443, which is the
highest in AFL history. The CIO indicates that it has a membership of
about 4,000,000; however, no exact official figures have been given.
The CIO may be somewhat weaker than the AFL in the number of paid
members, but it is much more dynamic than the AFL and that is what is
decisive. The press coverage at the two conventions reflects this
contrast between the two organizations. 105 newsmen covered the CIO
Convention at Atlantic City, and a London correspondent filed 1,000
words a day to his paper on the news of the CIO deliberations. On the
other hand, fewer newsmen were sent to cover the New Orleans convention
and, in general, the second-string men were sent to the AFL gathering,
while the first-string men covered the sessions of the CIO. There was a
continuous parade of stuffed-shirts before the AFL delegates at New
Orleans. But this was not true at Atlantic City where trade unionists
did the speaking. Good, bad or indifferent, they were trade unionists
and that is an important point. The qualitative difference between the
AFL and the CIO was graphically reflected on the Negro question. A.
Phillips Randolph, the president of the Sleeping Car Porters,
introduced a resolution at New Orleans asking for the creation of an
inter-racial committee to end racial discrimination in the AFL. The
Resolutions Committee sidestepped the issue, bringing in a
recommendation that the international unions give “most sincere
consideration” to the problem. Speaking against the report of the
Committee, Randolph made a forty minute plea to the Convention, urging
the delegates to show courage and face the issue. He cited, as an
example, a case in a Tampa, Florida shipyard where, upon the signing of
an AFL closed shop contract, all the Negro workers were fired and
replaced by white workers. He told how, when the Negro workers
attempted to organize a protest, the local AFL leaders aligned
themselves with the Ku Klux Klan in opposition to the Negroes. “The
trade unions,” said Randolph, “have taken over the capitalistic,
imperialistic idea of inferior races.” When Randolph had finished
speaking, Matthew Woll moved the previous question, shutting off debate. 

The New Orleans AFL Central Labor Council was in charge of
Convention arrangements. The various local unions in New Orleans,
including the Negro locals of longshoremen, made contributions toward a
fund for the entertainment of the delegates. The Central Labor Council
gave a check to the Negro locals and suggested that they arrange a
separate program of entertainment for the Negro delegates to the
Convention. This proposition was rejected by the Negro trade unionists.
“We may not participate in the entertainment of the other delegates,”
said Randolph, “but we won’t accept any Jim Crow program.”
  
Negroes Feel at Home in CIO
The reception accorded the Negro delegates in the CIO
Convention stood in sharp contrast to the AFL attitude. There was no
sign of the customary – in the AFL – ripple of laughter when a Negro
delegate rose to speak. It was not considered a light moment in the
meeting, as is so often true in those craft unions which do permit
Negroes in their ranks. The Negro delegates at Atlantic City spoke
without any feeling of constraint. They did not display that attitude
of subservience often seen in an AFL union. They evidenced a belief
that the CIO is really their union, that the convention was their
convention. And, as they spoke, they poured forth the pent-up wrath of
their persecuted race. They were equals among the delegates and their
remarks were seriously received. This bond of solidarity between the
Negro workers and the white workers reflects the great strength of the
industrial union movement.
  

Green Swears by Capitalism
A select group of AFL officials, with Green as their
spokesman, gave a special interview to the press in which they declared
that they “support capitalism as vigorously as they support the trade
unions and the right to organize and bargain collectively.” They
appealed to big business to understand Roosevelt. And on numerous
occasions the AFL officials expressed the opinion that the
class-conscious militants >were opposed to the
industrial unions capitulating to the AFL craft unionists because “the
left wing fears loss of authority in a united movement.” Having
declared their undying allegiance to capitalism, this was the AFL
officials’ way of serving notice that they want no critics of
capitalism in their ranks.
The CIO passed a resolution on political action in which the
executive officers and executive board were instructed to “look towards
the formulation of a program to assure an independent role for labor.”

Ambiguous as this statement is, as little meaning as it will have if
not followed up by a militant program of action, it stands in sharp
contrast to the pronouncement of the AFL hierarchy. Green saw in the
defeat of Willkie after his endorsement by John L. Lewis the
“vindication of the traditional non-partisan policy of the AFL.”
Disregarding the fact that the real meaning of Lewis’s action was a
desertion of the interests of the workers whom he is supposed to
represent, which, of course, Green does not understand, Green read into
the results of Lewis’s performance> a justification
for his own peculiar method of tying the workers to the political
leadership of their class enemy.
  
Stalinists Vote to Condemn Communism
A comparison of the attitude of the two organizations
towards radical tendencies in the trade union movement is evidenced by
their action on the question of the Communist Party. The AFL bans
members of the Communist Party from membership, and it passed a
resolution at New Orleans, requesting the government to outlaw the
Communist Party. The CIO Convention passed a resolution condemning
“communism,” for which the Stalinist delegates voted. The
resolution added, however, that there is “room for all of us” in the
CIO. At least a part of the top strata of the CIO leadership is in full
accord with the AFL attitude toward radicals generally. But they are
not in a position to indulge in any large-scale campaign of
red-baiting. This is partly due to the exigencies of the fight with the
AFL but also, in no small measure, a result of the pressure from the
CIO rank and file which is by and large more class-conscious than the
membership of the AFL. 

Green and the Secretary-Treasurer George Meany got huge raises from
the AFL Convention. This question was not on the agenda at Atlantic
City. The high-salaried CIO officials are paid by their own unions. The
wages of the CIO staff men are generally low by comparison with the AFL
standard. The CIO has in the course of its existence found many willing
workers ready to do everything they could to promote the welfare of the
organization for “coffee and.” This is
always true of a dynamic movement. The top layer of the CIO staff men
dream of better days with higher salaries but a well-knit machine
leadership is necessary before this dream can be translated into
reality.
Such a machine is attempting to form itself in the new CIO unions.
However, machine leadership is well entrenched only in the older unions
of the CIO, such as the United Mine Workers and the Amalgamated
Clothing Workers. The pie-card artists who covet large salaries may
never realize their desires in the CIO. They are preparing a start in
that direction as evidenced by the phoney demonstrations put on for the
leaders at the Atlantic City convention. But these demonstrations were
largely hollow.
  
Why CIO Is More Progressive
The sharp and continuous struggle between the workers
and the big corporations in the mass production industries maintains a
heavy and healthy pressure on the leadership of the CIO. The big
corporations are not willing to hand out even the small crumbs that
class-collaborationist methods can obtain for the more privileged
sections of the craft union organizations. Therefore the CIO leadership
is forced to support policies that are somewhat more progressive than
those of the AFL officialdom. Yet the program of the AFL and the CIO is
basically the same on many fundamental questions. This flows from the
fact that the top officialdom in both organizations has the same
class-collaborationist ideology. Both groups are supporters of the
capitalist system and the war program of American imperialism.
The AFL, as well as the CIO, has raised a demand for the enforcement
of labor legislation in the war industries. But both sets of leaders
also agree on a policy of collaboration with the bosses’ government.
They urge “union-management cooperation” as against trade union action.
Neither group has learned anything from Hillman’s role in the “Defense
Commission.” His feeble efforts to get a crumb for the workers from the
table where the big industrialists were cutting up the fat war profits
was an inglorious failure. He stood unmercifully exposed as a

“representative of labor” sitting in the camp of the workers’ enemy.
But he stays there. Hillman can do this because, as he very bluntly
admits, above all else he is out to promote the “defense
program.” The AFL and CIO leaders completely ignore the significance of
this experience. Instead, they demand more boards, one for each
industry, a board of review above each of these boards and a
super-board at the top on which, as Murray put it, the president might
sit. And they reaffirm their loyalty to capitalism.
As the war crisis sharpens, capitalism will make increasingly heavy
demands upon the officials in the hierarchy of the AFL and CIO. They,
in turn, will yield repeatedly before this pressure. They will serve
the bosses more and more, the workers less and less. The already big
gap between the officialdom and the membership will grow increasingly
wide. The workers will begin to look for new methods of struggle. They
will feel the need for a new leadership, a fighting leadership.
The class-conscious militants must be prepared to step into this
gap, to give the workers a class-struggle program, to lead them in the
fight to preserve their industrial unions, to show them the way onto
the road of independent working class political action, to give them
leadership in the class war to end imperialist war and exploitation
forever, to show them how, as the vanguard class of society, to fight
for the emancipation of the human race. 

F. Dobbs Archive  
|   Trotskyist Writers Index  
|   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 7 May 2006 






Strikes Are “Treason” – But Not Layoffs
About l,800 men have been laid off for over two months at the Boeing aircraft plant in Seattle and are not expected to be reernployed until after January 1st. The reason given is “lack of parts,” but the union (A.F.L.) claims that the company is subcontracting parts to other aircraft outfits because it can make more money that way. Hence there is a virtual stoppage of production in this Seattle plant.
When the Vultee workers went on strike, the bosses’ daily press, and the bosses’ stooges in Congress howled “Treason.” But nothing is said about the present situation al Boeing.
* * *

SWOC Dues Slump; Some Reasons Why
Plans are being made by the Steel Workers Organizing Committee, CIO, to present new demands to U.S. Steel. At a recent conference of the SWOC directors, the following general terms were mentioned: increased wages and abolition of wage. differentials, an improved seniority system and vacation plan, and an improved dues collection system.
The October dues report was the highest in the history of the SWOC. However, there was a noticeable slump in the November dues payments. One reason for that was Lewis’s pro-Willkie speech. But not the only reason.
Iron Age, official publication of the steel, bosses, reports “voluntary” wage increases among some of the smaller companies in the industry. “In other sections of the metal, working industry,” notes Iron Age, “wage controversies have come to the forefront, resulting in strikes in some instances.”
One such instance, which thePittsburgh Pressbemoaned as, “marring a three year record of contractual relations,” occurred last month in the Crucible Steel (Corporation at Midland, Pennsylvania. 4,500 workers walked out of the Crucible plant in protest against company stalling in the settlement of grievances, some of which dated back four months and more. The Workers complained of a speed-up system, “under which, a man hardly, had time for lunch.” Clinton S. Golden, Regional SWOC Director, urged that the “unauthorized” strike be called off. Under pressure from the SWOC officialdom, the workers voted, 52% to 48%, to go back to work without having their grievances settled.
About a week later, Golden spoke before a gathering of bosses at the Hotel Pennsylvania in New York City. The occasion was a dinner in connection with a conference on “management.” In his speech Golden said that “Labor leadership” today has changed its early concept of “fight the management.”
* * *

Boom for the Bosses But Not for Workers
The CIO Economic Outlook has issued a graphic chart of Prosperity and Unemployment based on statistics compiled, by the various governmental bureaus and by the CIO itself. It shows the Federal Reserve Board index of industrial production for October 1940 at an all-time high of 127. This is almost 18% above the 1929 level.
In contrast to this boom for the bosses, we find that while 92% of all workers were employed in 1929, only about 83% of all workers were employed in October 1940. This decline in employment becomes even more significant when it is realized that the total working population has been increasing at the rate of 500,000 to 600,000 a year.
This pronounced decrease in percentage, of all workers employed. reflects the effect which technological change has had on the workers, under capitalist “management” and capitalist “planning.” Fewer workers are producing more goods to further swell the super-profits of the bosses and, at the same time, plunge millions of workers into the dismal swamp of unemployment.
 

Stalinists Vote to Bar Reds as Union Members
The National Convention of the CIO adopted a resolution condemning communism. However, this resolution also contains the statement: “There is room for us all in this great movement,” thus indicating that no wholesale campaign of red-bailing was intended.
Acting on the report of its convention delegate, the CIO Industrial Council in Pittsburgh went a step further and passed a resolution banning from membership those whose ideas are “inimical to the American system.” Anthony A. Federoff, the Council delegate to the CIO convention, called upon the local central body delegates to “exercise their influence in their own unions to the end that these unions shall write into their constitutions regulations barring such persons from membership.”
Just as they voted to condemn communism at the CIO national convention, the Stalinists voted for the red-baiting resolution in the Pittsburgh Council.
 

Dangerous Increase in Length of Working Week
The Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics has released a compilation of average weekly hours worked in some of the basic industries for October 1940. They are as follows: engines, 44.4,; automobiles, 41.3; shipping, 41.7; aluminum, 41.4; blast furnaces, steel works and rolling mills, 38.8; machine tools, 4.4.1; aircraft, 44.3; electrical machinery, 41.3.
With the present trend of weekly hours worked rising above the 40 hour level and with nine to 10 million workers still looking for jobs, the bosses are howling for a further lengthening of the work week. And they have the full backing of the admirals and the generals.
The bosses seek to avoid yielding up any part of their war profits to the workers through increased pay rates for more workers under a shorter work week. Therefore, they brazenly advocate longer hours of work at prevailing, or preferably lower, hourly rates of pay. They also want a permanent army of unemployed to provide a “favorable” labor market, i.e., to pit the workers against one another in the competition for jobs.
The slogans for a 30-hour week, at 40-hours pay in auto, and for a six-hour day at eight-hours pay in steel indicate the course which the trade union workers must take in their fight to raise their standards of living and combat the evils of unemployment.
* * *

AFL Top Leaders Crawl on Their Bellies
Emphasizing that the AFL convention at New Orleans pledged “full and sincere support of the defense program, even if such support entailed strict self-discipline and important sacrifices,” the AFL Weekly News Service makes a big point of the fact that “the two strikes affecting the defense program involved CIO unions and that there has not been a single strike by any American Federation of Labor union which has impeded the government’s preparedness efforts.”
“However, the CIO Vultee strike on the West Coast, which Attorney General Jackson attributed partly to Communist machinations, and other similar developments in the CIO camp,” the statement continues, “have given anti-labor groups an excuse to pounce on all of organized labor with unrestrained attacks.”
No clearer example is needed to illustrate the cowardly type of leadership the AFL workers will get from their top officials in the coming period of rabid anti-union activity on the part of the bosses and their government. Subordinate yourselves completely to the war program; don’t provoke the bosses or they might get tough – that is the advice which the AFL officialdom is giving to the rank and file.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 15 November 2020





Att. Gen. Arnold Shows His Hand
Assistant Attorney General Thurman Arnold, who has been prosecuting the so-called “anti-trust” cases against the trade unions, arguing before the United States Supreme Court, stated that, “labor ... should not be permitted to destroy itself by factional war.” This statement was made in connection with Arnold’s attempt to prosecute the officials of the AFL-Carpenters Union as the result of a jurisdictional strike against the AFL-Machinists in the Anheuser-Busch brewery at St. Louis.
When asked by Justice Frankfurter whether his argument would apply to a similar dispute between the AFL and the CIO. Arnold replied that it would. If the UAW-CIO were to strike Ford and the Ford company-union claimed that the CIO was striking against its “jurisdiction,” which it probably would, then, according to Arnold’s “logic,” this too would be a jurisdictional strike in which he, the great crusader, would step in to save labor from “destroying itself by factional war.”
“The power to suppress competition,” says Arnold, “is far more dangerous than the power to fix prices.” Arnold refers here not to the competition between business establishments, but to the competition among the workers for jobs. When he attacks the “power to suppress competition” in this case, what lie is referring to is the right of the legitimate trade unions to act as the exclusive bargaining agency for the workers.
Having camouflaged his real aim during the early stages of his anti-labor campaign by confining himself mainly to the jurisdictional disputes in the AFL, Arnold is now preparing his second and more brazen line of attack – “anti-trust” prosecution in disputes between the AFL and CIO. The final stage will be a direct assault upon the established principles of union recognition.
Arnold is fighting to maintain the anti-union “open shop” in industry. It is well to remind the workers and the “labor statesmen” that he is a subordinate of a member of Roosevelt’s cabinet.
 

Anti-Labor Bills Secretly Prepared
A Washington correspondent of the New York Post reports that bills giving state and local authorities unprecedented powers in anti-labor activity have been secretly prepared in Washington. They are designed for submission next month to nearly all state legislatures.
One bill provides a ten-year jail sentence and $10,000 fine for anyone who “intentionally ... interferes” with property to “hinder, delay or interfere with national defense.” Another section provides a similar punishment for anyone who “intentionally’’ is responsible for any defect in an article which is “intended to be used in connection with national defense.”
Virtually everything from common pins to cannon can be construed as “used in national defense.” Therefore, this bill could and would in almost every instance be applied against the trade Unions. The word “intentionally” would be used as a convenient pretext in preparing frame-ups against the workers.
A second bill would provide each state with what amounts to an official vigilante organization, the members of which would be free from arrest for almost anything except “treason or felony.” In the business of strike-breaking it is considered neither treason nor a felony to club down the striking workers on a picket line. This becomes a matter of “civic duty.”
These bills will be introduced in the state legislatures behind a smoke-screen of hysterical agitation against “subversive activities,” “sabotage,” and “espionage.”

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 15 November 2020



Proofread: Chris Clayton, 2006.


THE NATIONAL TRADE UNION MOVEMENT has greatly increased in numbers since the split in 1936 over the issue of craft versus industrial unionism. Both the AFL and the CIO have grown during the four years of conflict. At least five million new members have entered the ranks of organized labor since the split, and the membership of all unions combined totals almost one-fourth of the organizable workers in the country. However, there are still more than thirty million unorganized.
Healthy growth has been recorded by the AFL and the CIO where they have functioned as parallel organizations operating independently and in separate sections of industry. On the other hand, the practice of organizational cannibalism in certain fields has resulted in many cases in the complete failure of both unions to make any substantial headway. In other cases the internecine struggle has weakened the contending organizations to a point where a maximum of militancy is required of the workers in their fight against the employers in order to realize a minimum of gain.
 
Disrupters In the Unions
Even when the most principled tactics are followed by the combatants in this civil war, the employers are able to direct their strategy in such a way as to strike heavy blows against the entire trade union movement under the subterfuge of demands for the protection of their “neutrality” toward the contesting unions. The workers draw many incorrect conclusions about trade union principles which they then have to unlearn before they can effectively fight against the employers. The employer on the other hand finds new ideas for the artificial creation of phoney independent unions. In watching one union fight another, the employer learns new methods which he will use in fighting all unions. These are present-day conditions under the best of existing circumstances.
There are individuals and groups participating in the conflict between the unions that are not motivated primarily by trade union principles. They turn an already bad situation into a state of complete chaos. The outstanding example of this unprincipled type is the Communist Party. This clique has drawn a disruptive trail through the auto union, the maritime unions, and every other section of the movement where it could find a way to attach itself to the struggle.
 
Roosevelt’s Kind of Unity
The realization of the harm which comes to the workers through this cleavage in their ranks has led many to work diligently for the unification of the movement since the day the division occurred. There is a rising clamor for unity today among an increasing number of the top officials of both the AFL and CIO. At first glance this seems healthy and entirely commendable, but there is more behind it than meets the naked eye. The main driving force behind this new burst of activity in the interest of unity on the part of the trade union officialdom is pressure from Roosevelt, who has his own special reasons for wanting unity in the labor movement.
Roosevelt wants unity; not for the benefit of the workers, but to serve the interests of the third-term movement and the war machine of American imperialism. To make war it is necessary to have strait-jacketed workers in the factories and patriotic worker-soldiers in the army. The best guarantee for this is to have a peaceful, orderly labor movement, dominated by leaders who believe firmly in the defense of capitalism in imperialist war as well as in its defense against the proletarian revolution. Roosevelt is justifiably confident that a majority of such leaders are at the head of both the AFL and the CIO. All that remains to be done in this phase of the war program is to bring these leaders together in a united labor movement, thus eliminating further possibilities of internal friction. That is why Roosevelt is for unity – his kind of unity.
 
Unity Against War
It does not follow that the workers, hating war, should be against unity. The workers must aim to present a united and militant opposition to war. It is not only the unification of the AFL and the CIO that is necessary; the Railroad Brotherhoods and all other bona fide independent unions must be included. The task does not end with the uniting of all the unions; the employed must unite with the unemployed, the industrial workers with the agricultural laborers; there must be a complete elimination of racial discrimination in all workers’ organizations. The goal must be genuine and complete unity of labor. The workers need leaders who are militant anti-war fighters.
In considering the problem of unity the issues which led to the schism in the trade union movement must be re-examined. It should be remembered that the progressive workers supported the CIO in the split because it was fighting for industrial unionism. The questions naturally arise: What is the present status of the industrial unions? Have they been accepted or rejected by the workers? Are the craft unions which still exist any longer a threat to the mass production workers?
 
Craft Unionism
The rise and decline of craft union organizational methods is graphically reflected in the history of the American Federation of Labor. The story of the AFL is the story of its inability to adjust the organizational structure of the unions to conform with the changing social organization of industry. The organizational policies of the AFL are not the unanimous expression of the opinions of all the leaders, much less of the rank and file. There are many sympathizers of industrial unionism in its ranks, even in high circles. The Executive Council, however, is dominated by a case hardened core of craft unionists, who stand facing the past, stubbornly refusing to recognize the new conditions produced by the grinding wheels of history. They have their main roots in the building trades and the metal trades, supporting themselves on a brittle mass base of one-time privileged workers who also stand with their faces to the past. William Green is not a part of this core. He is their helpless tool. It is one of the ironical pranks of history that a miner had to turn musician to remain at the head of the AFL.
The AFL today reports a membership which represents about ten per cent of the organizable workers. Prior to the NRA it had never more than seven per cent and more often less than five per cent of the organizable workers on its membership rolls. There is one exception; the period from 1919 to 1921. The wave of militancy which swept through the American working class under the impact of the Russian revolution, symbolized by the great strikes in the steel and packing industries, flooded the AFL. The crest of the wave was reached in 1920 when the reported membership exceeded by 72,386 the 4,006,354 represented by the delegates at the 1939 Cincinnati convention. But craft union methods and class collaboration policies had whittled this figure down to 2.9 million by 1923. Ten years later, on the eve of the New Deal; the AFL membership had dropped to 2.1 million, the lowest figure since 1916. Then came the NRA and with it a new crisis for the craft unionists.
Under the impulse of Section 7A, the first wave of workers came into the established unions outside the basic industries. Then the mass production workers began to stir. With ominous forebodings of the future in store for them, the craft union bureaucrats immediately pressed demands for their jurisdictional rights in the big plants they had never tried seriously to organize. True, they had sought to organize the skilled craftsmen in the plants, but they had no place in their unions for the mass of semi-skilled and unskilled workers on the mass production belts. Then, too, as good class collaborationist, they had no desire to enter into serious class struggle conflict with the huge industrial trusts. Their demands for jurisdiction under the new conditions did not represent any change in basic policy. They still had no desire to organize the semi-skilled and unskilled; they just didn’t want anybody else to organize the skilled workers. That they were prepared to fight desperately for their craft interests and policies has been indisputably demonstrated by events.
 
Lewis-Hillman-Dubinsky
Lewis, Hillman and Dubinsky, representing unions already patterned along industrial lines, and therefore finding no serious contradictions for themselves in the problems of organizational structure in the mass production industries, sensed the dynamic character of this new mass pressure for unionism and saw a great future for themselves in taking the early leadership of the movement for industrial unionism. As class collaborationists of long training, as experts in this field of policy, they were confident of their ability to harness the revolutionary spirit of the workers and direct the new industrial unions into the safe channels of employer-employee, government-union cooperation. Lewis had learned this trade well in the miners – how to stem the tide of class struggle and how to twist the principles of union democracy out of shape in order to protect his ruling position. Hillman and Dubinsky had played the same game in the needle trades. Not as skilled as Lewis in strangling democracy in the unions, although they are far from being amateurs at this, both surpassed him in the more refined points because of their practice in giving a class collaborationist twist to the radical political movement. For the tasks at hand Lewis, Hillman and Dubinsky were a good working combination. With Roosevelt – a clever bourgeois politician who knew a good class collaborationist scheme when he saw one – in the White House, they felt that their plans could not fail.
The conflict broke into the open at the 1934 AFL Convention in San Francisco. A compromise was reached through the agreement of the AFL to issue Federal Charters under the control of the Executive Council. For immediate organizational purposes these charters were to have general jurisdiction in the basic industries. The final decision on jurisdiction was to be made later. The craft unionists decided to lay back until the plants were organized and then demand their pound of flesh. The Federal Charters were issued. The workers flocked into the AFL.
 
The Split
On the field of action against the employers the mass production workers found themselves thwarted. The fight in auto was steered into a governmental board. The same thing occurred in rubber, although some gains were made in spite of the leadership as a result of militant strike action. A hard-fought strike in textiles, where the workers went up against police, special deputies and national guardsmen, was steered into a similar cowardly settlement. Decisions on even the vicious speedup and stretch-out systems were referred to governmental boards. The steel workers fared no better. In sharp contrast stood the militant, victorious struggles of Toledo and Minneapolis. And in the midst of it all the craft unionists began to clamor for jurisdictional guarantees. The AFL was through in the basic industries. The workers were tearing up their membership cards.
Lewis-Hillman-Dubinsky had stood on the sidelines and cheered the workers as they fought the craft unionist leaders to a standstill. They now had a clear field before them. The industrial unionists had rolled up an impressive minority vote at the 1936 AFL convention in Atlantic City. The time had come to act.
The Committee for Industrial Organization was formed, under the Lewis-Hillman-Dubinsky leadership, at the end of 1935. Its announced purpose was to work as an organized group within the AFL to promote the cause of industrial unionism. Suspended in advance by the AFL Executive Council, they didn’t get to the 1936 AFL convention at Tampa.
  
Industrial Unionism
The industrial unions correspond to the modern organization of industrial life. The development of modern industry, with its automatic machinery, capable of great precision, has sharply reduced the need for the skilled worker. In his place has appeared a predominant element of semi-skilled and unskilled workers, chained to the production machinery in such a manner that dividing lines cannot be drawn among them as is demanded by the craft unionists. In each industry there must be one union for all the workers in the plant, with all the plants tied together through the democratic organization of the administrative machinery of the industrial union. In like manner the various industrial unions must be linked together. The complete organization of labor must envisage the uniting of all unions in the closest bond of cooperation, with full democratic rank and file control on the job and in the administrative apparatus of the entire union movement.
The organization of the industrial unions has produced a decisive change in the social composition of organized labor and tapped new reservoirs of working class power. The workers in the basic-industries are the most complete proletarians – creators of wealth who share in none of its benefits. They have introduced real militancy into the trade union movement in their first wide-scale struggles. Their full power is yet to be shown. The great sitdown strikes, conducted in spite of the restraints by the class collaborationist leadership of the CIO, are only heat-lightning. The revolutionary courage and determination of the American workers, once it unfolds in full scope, will sweep everything before it.
The relation of forces between the repressive leadership and the aggressive rank and file has been sharply altered in the new industrial unions. The rapid development of the shop steward system, plant committees, grievance committees, industry councils; the immediate appearance of broad strike committees when open conflict breaks out with the employer; the decisive manner in which the workers take matters into their own hands when the union leadership fails to force the employer to abide by the union contract – these are the convincing evidences of a rising pressure for rank and file control in the unions. This pressure from the ranks, upon the class collaborationist leaders reduces their value as an insulation between the workers and the employers. Capitalism feels ever more keenly the heavy hand of the working class.
 
Ferment in the CIO
The CIO, now the Congress of Industrial Organizations, has enjoyed a speedy growth, especially among the unorganized workers in heavy industry. Since its suspension from the AFL in 1936 it has recruited two new members for every one taken in by the AFL. Beginning in 1936 with an organization only two-fifths the size of the just purged AFL, it today claims a membership equal to if not larger than that of the AFL. The actual size of the CIO is a disputed point. Most of this growth and the resultant mass actions have occurred in industries controlled by the most powerful sections of the bourgeoisie.
There is great ferment in the ranks of the industrial unions. Dissatisfaction with official policies of the CIO leadership is widespread. Failure of the officials to enforce the union contracts is leading to frequent strike revolts initiated by the workers in the plants. Important contracts are coming up for renewal. The workers want action. The 30 hour week at 40 hours pay is today demanded by the auto workers, ground down by chronic unemployment. The 30 hour week with no reduction in pay is the slogan of the ladies’ garment workers. Demands for constitutional conventions, democracy in the unions, are heard with increasing frequency in the CIO. Pressure for independent working class political action, an independent Labor Party, takes on new force. These CIO sentiments are telegraphed into the more progressive sections of the AFL. A new wave of working class militancy is on the way.
 
Position of the AFL
The AFL has replaced the one million members lost with the suspension of the CIO and has added an additional half million. Its membership today is slightly over four million. The tonic effect of the CIO campaign immediately gave new life to the AFL. The CIO sitdown victories, the contract with US Steel, gave new courage to all the workers. The AFL registered increased vitality and strike activity. The favoritism of the employers toward the AFL as against the CIO added to its recruiting power among less advanced workers. Outside the basic industries the workers were more inclined to lean toward the AFL as the traditional organization of labor. It had stable unions of long standing. There were partial adoptions by the AFL of the industrial organization form in a few specific cases. In the first stages of the campaign the CIO carried on little activity outside the basic industries. The AFL continued to remain the union of the skilled workers. The absolutely unprecedented activity of the AFL organization staff was also a large contributing factor in its growth.
The main foundation of the AFL is the building trades, the metal trades and the truck drivers. The secondary strata is composed of actors, bakers, barbers and beauticians, brewery workers, building service employes, clerks, firefighters, laundry workers, postal employes, stage hands, teachers, affiliated railway organizations and small miscellaneous groups. The secondary organizations are in fields not seriously disputed by the CIO, but they also are not a decisive factor in the movement. Among them are groups with strong sympathies for the industrial union movement.
The building trades, the metal trades and the truck drivers are both the main strength and the greatest weakness of the AFL. The building trades are now under direct attack from the CIO. At the outset of the struggle they have felt themselves compelled to begin experimenting with new organizational policies. The heat of the battle will force more radical changes. The metal trades have before them the futile task of protecting their hegemony over the skilled workers in heavy industry as the only substantial possibility for growth. Failing to grow they cannot help but retrogress. The powerful and fast growing truck drivers organization, whose aid is especially vital to the building trades in its present fight, is becoming more and more outspoken in its demands for unity. The craft union core is in dire straits.
 
Position of the CIO
Beginning in 1936 with about one million members, the CIO today claims more than four times its original size. Its main base is in aluminum, auto, mining, needle trades, oil, radio, rubber, steel and textiles. The extent of organization varies in these industries, but it does not follow that failure to organize decisive majorities will result in successes by the AFL. It is more often the case that those workers who are not in the CIO are either unorganized or in company unions.
The most serious defection suffered by the CIO was the withdrawal of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, which is headed by Dubinsky, one of the original CIO leaders. The ILGWU, now independent, has just recently negotiated a jurisdictional agreement with the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, CIO, headed by Hillman, also one of the original CIO leaders. There is a possibility that the ILGWU will return to the AFL. If so, there is little likelihood, in view of the pact with the ACW, that a jurisdictional fight would develop in the needle trades as a result. However, reaffiliation to the AFL on the part of the ILGWU would give unwarranted moral and material support to the craft union core.
Among the secondary CIO fields not seriously disputed by the AFL are the distillery workers, certain sections of the transport workers and numerous small organizations. The newspaper editorial workers are generally with the CIO, but there has been quite a battle in this field in Chicago.
 
FBI Attacks
The disruptive AFL attack upon the CIO in auto turned out to be a dud. The auto workers have definitely had their fill of the craft unionists. It will take a great deal more than a Homer Martin, gone haywire, to change their minds. The AFL campaign in mining has been noisy but ineffective.
The main danger to the industrial unions does not come from the attacks of the AFL; it lies in the bold counter-offensives of the corporations and in the governmental preparations for wartime regimentation of the workers. The ignominious and still unretrieved defeat in Little Steel, the failure to organize Ford, the retreat of the union leadership before the onslaughts of the corporations and their government – these are the most serious dangers to the CIO workers. Nor can the industrial unions afford to maintain silence while the FBI attacks the AFL unions. They will be next on the list of victims of the Roosevelt-Arnold-Hoover drive.
 
Fields of AFL-CIO Conflict
Among those most seriously handicapped by the internal struggle in the trade union movement are the maritime workers. Both unions contend for membership in the packing houses, but company unionism remains strongly entrenched in the industry. Even less impressive are the accomplishments of both organizations in the utility field and the tobacco industry. However, the AFL has recently made important gains in one of the larger tobacco companies. There are sporadic AFL-CIO conflicts in the furniture, glass, paper, and shoe industries. Competition is stronger in the struggle for members among the wood workers, government employees and office workers.
The newly developed AFL organization drive in the South is mainly a move against the CIO. The minimum objective is a block of members recruited from every possible field in this poorly organized section of the country. A stronger motive is the desire to make a flank attack on the CIO by attempting to organize the Southern plants of the mass production industries. These plants in the South are steadily increasing in size and number as a result of the attempts of the industrialists to evade the rising militancy of the northern workers.
The overthrow of the late Charles P. Howard, president of the ITU, one-time official secretary of the CIO, was hailed by the AFL as a victory for craft unionism, but this was followed soon by the refusal of the union, through membership referendum, to pay the special assessment levied by the AFL for the fight against the CIO. The AFL has suspended the ITU and it now has an independent status. Although the union clearly does not endorse all the policies of John L. Lewis, it is also plain that the typographical workers, although themselves dominated by a craft psychology, do not give approval to the policies of the AFL in fighting the CIO.
 
Trade Union Unity
The main responsibility for the AFL-CIO split rests upon the AFL as does the main burden of the blame for the continuation of the split. The formation of the CIO was a progressive action. The stand of the CIO leadership on the question of unity with the AFL is progressive only insofar as they defend the industrial organization methods against the onslaughts of the craft unionists. Both leaderships are class collaborationists; both are subservient to the bourgeois government. The basic differences in policy between the top leadership of the AFL and the CIO relate formally to the question of organizational structure. The leadership of the CIO, however, is based on a more dynamic stratum of the proletariat and is more sensitive to their bitter discontent.
This explains why the CIO has followed a somewhat more enlightened policy of social legislation, on the problems of the unemployed, and on the housing question. It has given more concrete expression to the political sentiments of the workers. But its superiority to the AFL in these respects is rather the result of rank and file pressure than of a more enlightened policy on the part of the leadership. This pressure from the ranks will continue with increasing vigor in a united labor movement.
The manipulations of the two leaderships for positions of power in the united movement are of interest to the workers only to the extent that the CIO leaders represent tendencies which are more or less progressive. They have no interest in the aspirations of the leaders to positions of special influence with the bourgeois politicians. Nor are the workers concerned in the ambitions of the officials to enthrone themselves in high positions in the bourgeois political apparatus. On the contrary, the workers need democracy in the unions and their own independent political party. The criminal action of the leadership in utilizing the division in the movement for the achievement of their own personal ambitions is against the wishes and the expressed desires of the trade union workers.
Formal trade union unity at the expense of the industrial form of organization and the gains of the industrial unions would be a catastrophe. But once the preservation of the industrial unions has been assured in the united movement, there can no longer be any justification for a continuation of the split.
 
For a Rank and File Referendum
The test of time has proved to the hilt that craft union organizational methods are outmoded. The success of the industrial unions has demonstrated to the rank and file AFL workers the false position of the craft union core of the AFL Executive Council. The decisive majority of the organized labor movement agrees that the industrial unions have proved to be an indispensable instrument for working class organization in modern industry. The lessons of the recent struggles, gained the hard way, have literally penetrated the trade union movement to the marrow. The only ones who remain unconvinced are the craft union leaders and the small section of skilled workers who support them. They no longer deceive anyone but themselves. They are discredited.
The great majority of the workers want unity and yet it does not come. The usurpation of the right of policy making by the present undemocratic official apparatus of the trade union movement is responsible for this intolerable situation. The trade union workers must insist upon a referendum vote in the AFL, the CIO, the Railroad Brotherhoods and all other bona fide independent unions for the complete unification of the organized labor movement, on the basis of full guarantees for the preservation and extension of the industrial union method of organization.
The launching of a big movement for such a referendum would provide the trade union militants with the best opportunity to fight for full union democracy and rank and file control in the united movement, and an orientation toward class struggle policies on the field of action against the employers. Such agitation, in turn, is the best way to develop an unyielding opposition to the war.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 15 March 2018 by ETOL





In the short period of one month since the adjournment of the Third Convention of the Socialist Workers Party the orientation of the party towards mass work has been carried out with such vigor and enthusiasm that important results have already been reported.
Not dismayed by the desertions from our ranks by the splitters and renegades, the proletarian majority of the S.W.P. is daily discovering new sinews of strength and new sources of proletarian membership.
The manifold problems of the trade-union movement are now more than ever an important part of the problems of the party. Important mass actions arise constantly on an ever-broader front. Unlike literary activity and internal discussion within a party, the mass work presents daily problems which must have an immediate answer. A plan of action which is worked out in the morning is very often tested in practice during the afternoon.
These factors demonstrate the profound need for accurate, up-to-the-minute general information on the trends and developments in the trade union movement.
The party press, the main source of this information, is an indispensable implement for the party members engaged in mass work and for the development of the most advanced trade unionists who are coming towards the party. Special distributions of the party press are being carried out regularly in auto, steel, maritime, among the unorganized factory workers, and in many other fields. Inspiring results have been obtained through this work.
Indispensable as it now is, the party press will be even more valuable when it is published more frequently. The two-a-week Appeal will be a decisive factor in increasing the tempo of party mass work. It will enhance general efficiency by keeping both party and non-party readers more closely informed of day-by-day events and developments as they appear in the light of class struggle perspectives and analysis.
Push the two-a-week Appeal campaign to accelerate the development of party mass work!

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 18 August 2020




Roosevelt addressed a joint session of the United States Congress on May 16, beating the drums for a bigger and better armament program. The last echoes of his speech had hardly faded before the hounds of big business, hot on the scent of greater war profits, were baying loudly in the halls of Congress.
Full of patriotic zeal, the bosses are more than anxious to build planes, guns, tanks and all the other engines of death and sell them to the government. But they want no interference with their profits.
Roosevelt has been quick to oblige. Administration officials and Congressional committees are preparing legislation which will repeal the limitations on profits and, at the same time, void the main provisions of the Walsh-Healey Act and the Wage-Hour Act.
The Walsh-Healey Act forbids the issuance of government contracts to employers unless they pay the prevailing wage. The unions have been able to make use of it in protecting union wage rates in some industries and in establishing the 40-hour week. The Wage-Hour Act calls at present for a minimum wage rate of 30c per hour and a maximum work week of 42 hours.
The “impartial” government is preparing to revise legislation affecting the war industries so that both capital and labor will have a free hand – capital to make unlimited profits and labor to work longer hours at lower pay.
The top officialdom of both the AFL and the CIO have steered a deliberate course away from independent working class action. Instead, they relied upon the “friends of labor” in the government apparatus. They hailed the passage of the Walsh-Healey Act and the Wage-Hour Act, among others, as proof of the wisdom of this policy. This leadership sought to curb militant class struggle action by the trade unions in strike struggles against the employers and denounced all efforts of the workers to establish their own independent political party.
Now the mass production workers in the war industries find that their “friend” Roosevelt and their “friends” in Congress are stepping away from all responsibility to which they previously committed themselves.
The trade union workers, following the false advice of their national leadership, depended upon Roosevelt. He has double-crossed them again. They must now overcome their delusions and prepare for an independent struggle against the bosses.
Roosevelt has already anticipated that this struggle will be made. The demand of Congressman Martin Dies, public stool pigeon number one, that special funds be appropriated to investigate “Fifth Column” activities in the war industries, is the first step in a strikebreaking program. The “Fifth Column” which Roosevelt-Dies really have in mind is none other than the militant workers who will stand up and fight for their rights.
The struggle of the workers will become increasingly difficult. Roosevelt will intervene more and more openly on the side of the bosses. Victory for the workers lies only in militant trade union action, and independent political action of the workers through their own party.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 18 August 2020





The Bosses Are Getting Bolder
Each issue of the daily press brings new evidence of the increasing boldness of the drive against the organized workers. The Chamber of Commerce of the United States at its recent annual convention in Washington, D.C. spoke quite plainly on the subject.
The Chamber demanded government action “to prevent transportation stoppages resulting from violations of maritime labor agreements.” Not a word about preventing the ship owners from violating the agreements, just a demand that the workers be prevented from doing anything effective about it.
Branding the National Labor Relations Act as a “serious deterrent to recovery,” this august body demanded “fundamental and much needed amendments” to the Act. Passing on to the question of the Wage-Hour Act, the Chamber declares that “its humanitarian aspects in dealing with oppressively low wages belongs to the states, each of which can give consideration to the actual conditions that are to be met.”
In other words, the bosses want the National Labor Relations Act emasculated so that it will contain none of the features which are in any way helpful to labor and, in addition, they want the regulation of minimum wages and maximum hours reverted back to the sole jurisdiction of the individual states where even the present minimum wage provisions, although they are now at starvation levels, can be further reduced.
* * *

He Sat in Congress as “Friend of Labor”
Former Senator James A. Reed of Missouri, testifying before the committee investigating the NLRB, inadvertently gave the workers a clear picture of the sham and hypocrisy which surrounds the myth of democratic representation of the workers in the present apparatus of state. Reed for many years past presumed to speak as a “friend of labor” in the United States Congress. His real motivations in voting on various legislative acts are quite sharply clarified in his testimony before the Smith Committee.
His wife owns the Nelly-Donnelly Garment Company of Kansas City Missouri. There has been a long controversy between this Company and the International Ladies Garment Workers Union. Reed called forth all the venom at his command when he began to describe his feelings towards the ILGWU.
He referred to the NLRB as a body “sitting to decide the greatest questions that come before a court, except questions of life and liberty.” In other words, so far as Reed is concerned, the most important consideration in his mind, short of “questions of life and liberty,” is that the Nelly-Donnelly Garment Company in which he has a personal interest be permitted to operate on a non-union basis and at sweat-shop wages.
The case of James A. Reed is only typical of the run of the mill so-called “friends of labor” who are elected to the apparatus of government.
* * *

Bosses Don’t Like Educated Workers
Fearful lest the young people might be kept in school too long for their own good, Henry I. Harriman, a past president of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States, in a recent address to the annual meeting of the American Council on Education, urged the importance of herding the young workers into the industrial plants at a tender age. Said Mr. Harriman: “If youth are left to feel that they have a right to support without work, there is a strong probability that they will become permanent charges upon society.”
This declaration is the preamble to the universal employers’ policy of depriving the workers’ children of anything more than a sketchy education. Whether or not there are jobs available for them it is “un-American” for them to become “charges upon society.” The children of the Harrimans, the Morgans and the Fords receive a full education, but that is different, they say.
* * *
A preview of what to expect when Roosevelt, acting for Wall Street, has succeeded in herding the American workers into the Second World War is now taking place in Australia. Striking coal miners in New South Wales have carried out an effective tie-up. The government is preparing to “compel” coal mine owners to open their mines immediately. In other words, the government is preparing to utilize the military to smash the strike.
* * *

CIO Borrows Boss Methods to Use Against AFL
Under the heading Keeping up with the AFL the May 6 issue of the CIO News seeks to utilize in a most reactionary manner the court actions against George Scalise of the Building Service Employees, Joe Ozanic of the AFL Progressive Miners Union, and Willie Bioff of the Hollywood Stage Hands Union.
There is nothing misrepresented; the reactionary character of the item lies in that which is not said. Scalise is reported to be indicted for “graft, extortion and corruption.” Not a word about the methods followed by Prosecutor Dewey in this case and the real implications of this drive to the labor movement. Ozanic is reported facing government action for collection of $550 in fines levied for “crimes in Illinois several years ago.” Bioff is reported serving a 6 months term in the Cook County jail in Illinois, for an “old sentence of pandering.”
Not a word appears about the meaning of the actions of the bourgeois state in going way back into the record to dig up these issues for criminal prosecution against labor officials. This should be called sharply to the attention of the leaders by the rank and file of the CIO unions. The attacks on the AFL today is nothing more or less than a forerunner to similar attacks on the CIO tomorrow.
* * *
The CIO Council at Quakertown, Pennsylvania, has voted to establish a committee to look after its unemployed members. The Committee is to provide ways and means for the CIO unions to continue to represent the interests of their members even when they are unemployed. It will attempt to find a basis for general cooperation by the CIO with all of the unemployed workers in Quakertown. This progressive action should and must eventually be emulated by all trade unions.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 22 May 2020




ATLANTIC CITY – The recent AFL-proclaimed “spirit of victory” over the CIO has expired in the womb. After a spirited discussion on the second day of the CIO convention, the industrial union workers gave Frey, Hutchinson, Woll and their mouthpiece, Green, a clearcut answer: No capitulation to craft unionism! Forward to a ten-million-membered CIO! Throughout the sessions this theme was echoed by the delegates. The Atlantic City gathering voted to launch a large-scale CIO organization drive, with Ford, Bethlehem and aircraft at the top of the list.
 

Vultee Shows What Is Coming
Meantime, events in the Vultee strike were giving a clear indication of the forces of reaction gathering to oppose the CIO in this drive. Charges of “treason” have been levelled against the Vultee strikers. Congressmen, administration officials and the boss press have launched a many-sided attack on the union. The
Dies Committee has announced that it will investigate the strike. This announcement provoked a public statement by Attorney General Jackson that the FBI has already investigated and found that the Vultee strike was started and prolonged by “communists.”
Headlines in the boss press are beginning to brand all strikes as impediment, if not outright sabotage, of “national defense.” Comment is being introduced in the press through the Gallup poll and by other means to imply that public opinion is in favor of drastically curbing the unions. From various quarters demands are already arising for compulsory arbitration of labor disputes involving “defense” production. The appointment of Doctor Millis signalizes a sharp turn to the right by the NLRB. The increased participation of military officials in the mediation of labor disputes foreshadows an added use of the military boot against striking workers.
 

Green and Hillman’s Judas Role
The AFL leadership will, no doubt, attempt new incursions into CIO territory in the mass production industries. Striving for ultra-respectability, the craft unions will play a miserable role in this effort. As in the past they will frequently furnish a pretext for the corporations and their government stooges, to represent struggles for wages and conditions as jurisdictional fights between unions. They will give some support to certain forms of anti-labor legislation and anti-labor White House policies when directed mainly against the CIO. In their eager desire to weaken the CIO, the craft unionists will forget that, by these actions they are also feeding on their own flesh.
Sidney Hillman, whose speech at Atlantic City reached a new low in grovelling before the powers that be and playing on every chord of reaction among the workers, will prove to be more of a detriment than a benefit to the CIO. Hillman made it clear in his convention address that above everything else he is out to help build the war machine.
 

The Role of Murray and John L. Lewis
Phillip Murray, the new CIO national president, has indicated ability to resist outright capitulation to craft unionism under government pressure. He also appears capable of going a certain distance in an organization drive in the face of the growing pressure from the bosses and their government. However, it is no accident that he placed the strongest emphasis on a demand for more “defense commissions.” one for each industry, in his remarks at the convention. Murray is a “labor statesman.” He is not a class-conscious proletarian fighter. He prefers to seek gains, for the workers at the conference table of “government, industry, labor and the consumer.” He places this method above trade union action, instead of using such forms of pressure as a supplement to it. Murray will not go very far along the road of class struggle, and, as far as he does go, he will step very gingerly.
John L. Lewis is still a powerful factor in the CIO despite his withdrawal from the presidency. What has been said above of Murray applies with equal force to Lewis. The two will collaborate very closely in the coming period. While Lewis may influence Murray to greater militancy against the AFL and towards some increase in tempo in the projected organization drive, they will find no disagreement between themselves on fundamentals. Murray and Lewis see eye to eye on the question of relations with the bosses and the bosses’ government. Their differences on the question of supporting Roosevelt were only a disagreement on tactics.
The Stalinists will find themselves in a less comfortable position in the CIO under Murray. Realizing this, they made a ridiculous spectacle of themselves at the convention trying to keep their “Draft Lewis” movement on its feet. However, the best they could do for themselves was to get Joseph Curran elected as a vice-president. Murray will prune quite a few of the Stalinists out of the CIO apparatus but there will not be an immediate wholesale purge. As a matter of fact, the present position of the CIO indicates that Murray, just as Lewis before him, cannot afford to indulge in any form of outright red-baiting.
 

Inspiring Signs at the CIO Convention
The most encouraging sign of CIO strength lies in the spirit and determination of the membership, as reflected in a somewhat distorted form at the convention. The spirit of class solidarity among the industrial union workers was best illustrated by the attitude of the Negro delegates at the convention. Their role at Atlantic City stood in sharp contrast to the role of the Negro in the lily-white past of the craft unions.
The Negro delegates at the CIO convention spoke without any apparent feeling of restraint or subservience. They felt that the CIO was really their union and that the convention was their convention. Every Negro delegate who took the floor, and there were a number of them, poured out the pent-up wrath of his persecuted race. And of equal importance – the Negro delegates were treated as equals by the white delegates. This factor in itself reflects the real strength of the industrial unions of the mass production workers.
While their delegates were at the convention, the CIO members back home were busy carrying on the struggle against the bosses. The wave of job actions among the industrial union workers continues to rise. They are winning an adjustment of their grievances and improvements in their working conditions. They are throwing the finks out of the plants; they are beginning to go on strike for contracts. The industrial union workers are clearing the decks for action. The class struggle will grow sharper in the period ahead.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 15 November 2020




On November 18, the CIO convention will open at Atlantic City. The AFL gathering will convene on the same date at New Orleans. The main issue before both bodies is the question of the renewal of unity negotiations with strong pressure for unity coming from the White House.
Now that the Third Term election is out of the way, Roosevelt is moving more, swiftly than ever toward war. Therefore, complete regimentation of the trade union movement has become more imperative to him. The main instrument for this job of regimentation is the patriotic trade union officialdom.
However, the conflict between the AFL [and] the CIO creates conditions which are dangerous to Roosevelt’s war program. He must have a maximum of harmony among the class-collaborationist trade union leaders. Hence the strong pressure for the unification of the AFL and the CIO.
 

Cocky Attitude of AFL
The AFL approaches the negotiations with a cocky attitude. The Executive Council feels that the craft unionists are in a very strong position. George Meany reports a current AFL membership of four and one-quarter millions. This is an increase of 50 percent over the membership figure after the CIO was suspended. While the Executive Council, through Green, officially proclaimed “neutrality” in the presidential election, a big majority of the AFL officials supported Roosevelt. This, they feel, gives them an edge over the CIO at the White House because of Lewis’s support of Willkie. They add to these factors the internal conflict now raging within the CIO which cannot help but weaken it in the unity negotiations.
 

CIO in Turmoil
The CIO, on the other hand, is in great turmoil, A realignment is taking place in the leadership, a section of which has come out strong for unity with the apparent intention of deserting the CIO if the impending unity negotiations break down.
It is clear that Lewis lost much of his influence by supporting Willkie. This weakened him in the CIO, not only among the Roosevelt supporters, but also among the many CIO workers who agreed with his criticism of Roosevelt and hoped against hope that he would declare for an independent labor party. Lewis’s threat to resign, however, gave the rabidly pro-Roosevelt Hillmanites just what they needed.
The Hillman forces have been moving rapidly in the direction of labor unity “in the interests of the national defense” and at whatever cost to the industrial union movement. They now demand the elimination of Lewis under a threat to bolt the CIO. What they really mean is that they will bolt unless the CIO makes peace with the AFL regardless of the terms. The attack on Lewis is mainly a cover for this policy. If Lewis does resign and unity does not follow, Hillman ana Company will more than likely leave the CIO anyway and follow Dubinsky into the AFL.
 

Lewis Lost Prestige
The prestige which Lewis has lost in his own union, the miners, creates a new situation in his personal machine. His principal lieutenants did not follow him into the Willkie camp. Instead, they continued in support of Roosevelt. While some emphasized that they were also for Lewis, the fact remains that they did not follow, his political line. It was only second string men who went over to Willkie along with Lewis.
The Stalinist-inspired “draft Lewis” movement has found very little echo among; the Lewis machine men or for that matter in any union not Stalinist dominated. Instead, the Lewis men are quietly making their preparations for the CIO convention with an ear to the ground to see what Lewis is going to do. It is doubtful that there is anyone among them who considers himself strong enough, even under the new conditions, to fight the “chief.” If Lewis decides to fight to hold the CIO presidency, he will probably retain the support of most of his personal followers.
 

Lewis Withdrawal Likely
It is most likely, however, that he will withdraw. If so, Phillip Murray is the most probable successor. Hillman could find Murray acceptable, provided that he negotiates unity with the AFL. Murray, as CIO president, would continue to lean heavily upon Lewis who would, therefore, in a large degree remain the actual “chief.” The Stalinist backing of Lewis is predicated on their hopes to retain the special position in the CIO which Lewis has accorded them and his opposition to Roosevelt’s foreign policy.
 

Roosevelt Pressure
The CIO unions go to Atlantic City fighting with their backs to the wall to preserve their industrial form of organization. The Roosevelt administration is bringing strong pressure to force unity. The AFL, still basically a craft union organization, is very confident of its strength and will attempt to drive a hard bargain. The CIO is weakened by internal conflict. There is grave danger of a capitulation on some of the basic premises of industrial unionism. There is almost the certainty of a split in the CIO if the AFL terms are found inacceptable and refused by a majority of the CIO.
 

Leadership Prevented Unity
The evil fruits of machine domination in the trade unions have fallen upon both the AFL and the CIO workers throughout the entire period of the split. Cowardly leadership, uncontrolled by the workers, has frequently capitulated before the pressure of the bosses, thus depriving the workers of the gains that they could have made through their unions. With the mass of the workers, both AFL and CIO, prepared, to establish unity on a fair and proper basis, this uncontrolled leadersliip has arbitrarily stood in the way of labor peace. Now, under pressure from the War Deal, these same officials place the hard-earned gains of the workers in great jeopardy by putting the industrial unions on the block in a head-long rush towards unity.
These are the evils of the wide gap between the top leadership and the membership in both the AFL arid the CIO. The AFL workers, who do not desire the decimation of the unions of the mass production workers, will have little voice in deciding the AFL terms. The CIO workers on their part are placed in double jeopardy by the crisis in the CIO leadership. Here then is a situation which may provide the impetus for a rank and file uprising to reduce this terrible gap between leaders and members and restore the policy-making powers of the trade unions to the membership where they rightfully belong.
 

Unity with Guarantees
The industrial unions are composed of the most exploited layers of the industrial proletariat, the most militant sections of the trade union movement – the auto workers, miners, steel workers, rubber workers, etc. The mass production workers know what will happen to them if they lose their industrial unions. The AFL workers also realize that if the industrial unions are weakened this will be the signal for an anti-union drive by their employers as well.
The workers want unity, the complete unification of the labor movement – AFL. CIO and the Railroad Brotherhoods. But unity must come only on the basis of full guarantees for the preservation and extension of the industrial union method of organization.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 15 November 2020




The membership of the Steel Workers Organizing Committee, CIO, is increasing at a rapid rate with the present figure the largest since the defeat in Little Steel. This organization presents an imposing structure in an important basic industry, but it is a union of unknown strength which has not been thoroughly tested in struggle.
Its main contracts – U.S.Steel, etc. – have been obtained without a fight. The strike in Little Steel was poorly led and did not put the union to a decisive test of its strength. The main strategy of the strike was dependence on governmental agencies. The official leadership of the SWOC, learning little from this defeat, lias continued to base its key policy on the hope of assistance from the government.
 

Close to 1929 Peak
The rise in membership of the SWOC is due in part to increased production and the resultant pickup in employment. Steel output is now close to the 1929 peak and there is a big back log of orders, knottier important factor which is swelling the ranks of the SWOC is the rise in militancy among the workers.
There have been an increasing number of stoppages involving crews, whole departments and occasionally an entire plant.
A recent job action at the Lackawanna (Bethlehem) plant in Buffalo is a typical example of this new militancy. A furnace crew sent a committee in to see the management on a grievance. The demands of the crew were refused and the committee was given fifteen minutes to get back on the job – or else.
 

Spread Like Wild Fire
When the committee reported back to the crew, the news of the management’s attitude spread like wildfire among the men and before the fifteen minute deadline had elapsed the entire department of more than 600 men had walked out of the plant. The company officials waited a while for the workers to send in a committee. When this was not done, the bosses soon came out on the street to innocently ask what was wrong. They were told in plain language and it took only a few minutes to straighten out the grievance which the management had refused even to discuss a short time before.
 

Symptomatic Action
These militant actions are symptomatic and they are increasing in size and number. But the trend is only just developing; it has not yet reached into all the corners of the industry. Some workers take comfort from the feeling that there is plenty of work. They remember the past periods of heavy unemployment but try to kid themselves into thinking that this boom will last. They ignore the fact that it is based on preparations for war and not of any improvement in the internal economy of the country. They close their eyes to the dangers of the mountain of grievances that is piling up, especially the violations of the 40 hour week. Other workers are much disturbed over the increasing arrogance of the corporations but hesitate to act because of lack of confidence in the SWOC leadership.
 

Tried Curbing Action
Prior to the last few weeks, the SWOC officialdom sought to curb “unauthorized” job actions by the steel workers. They sometimes used quite drastic methods to do this. However, the sweeping changes in the whole situation in steel have forced a partial change in official policy. Today the SWOC staff is to a certain degree Implementing the spontaneous job actions of the steel workers.
Not long ago the U.S. Steel, for example, was often in a position to use the. workers against the SWOC staff. The corporation would admit violations of the contract only to defy the union to do anything about it. They were confident that the employees would not back up the union officials. Today this situation has reversed itself. The workers in U.S. Steel,, as well as in other plants, are becoming more militant. The corporations now often feel constrained to make an appeal to the SWOC staff against the workers. Generally the staff has sided with the workers in recent cases.
 

A Partial Adaptation
However, the new policy of the SWOC leadership is only a partial adaptation to the changing conditions. The main objective of the new militancy in the leadership seems to be an increase in membership not a fight through these methods for fundamental improvement of employment conditions in the steel industry. There is little evidence to indicate that they have turned towards trade union action to get contracts.
Undismayed by the rebuff from the administration in the issuance of war contracts to Bethlehem Steel and other violators of labor legislation, the SWOC general staff still expects to get conditions for the steel workers as a gift from the government.
Further than this, the SWOC still has a representative functioning on the so-called “National Defense Committee” and has thus, continued to lend this committee authority in the eyes of the steel workers.
 

Violate Labor Laws
Certainly the steel corporations will not take such a union leadership very seriously. The corporations violate the labor laws and still they get war contracts. And the leaders of the union of their employees stay on the Committee which awards contracts under such a flagrant anti-labor policy. Since the SWOC was pushed around with such ease in the question of letting war contracts, the government will not take very seriously its demand for union contracts with the steel corporations.
 

Problem of Leadership
A growing section of the SWOC membership is beginning to realize the impossibility of the present official policy. The demand is spreading: “All union officials off the so-called National Defense Committee.”
The first responsibility of the union leadership is to fight for the rights of the membership. All possible pressure should be brought upon the government to enforce labor legislation, but the SWOC cannot rely upon the government to get union contracts from the steel corporations. The first and most reliable weapon in this fight is trade union action.
An ever-larger number of the steel workers are becoming aware of this fact. The main problem today is one of leadership.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 15 November 2020




History is made daily now, if not hourly. Yesterday great battles were fought for a few miles of territory; today a battle is for the conquest of entire countries. Great military powers are reduced in a few days to the role of a pawn. Political regimes beat their breasts in defiance one day only to collapse the next. The rotten structure of capitalistic society stands completely exposed before the eyes of the world working class. And with it the political quackery of the misleaders in the ranks of labor. The “middle way” has gone with the German conquests of Denmark and Norway. The fatal policy of working class support to “democratic” capitalism has brought the French workers new legions of dead and a totalitarian regime.
In the midst of these events the workers of the United States prepare to vote for a president to hold office during the next four years – four years which are pregnant with such events as would surpass the happenings of 400 earlier years. But the political policies of the officialdom of the trade union movement remain unchanged. They have learned nothing.
The AFL has proclaimed neutrality in the election campaign; it takes no official position. The individual officers are free to back whomever they choose. Hillman, Murray, Kennedy, Thomas, and others of the CIO have declared for “friend” Roosevelt, as have the bulk of the AFL leaders. Dubinsky is in the Roosevelt camp but no longer in the CIO. A few “rebels” are for “friend” Willkie. John L. Lewis has attacked Roosevelt, defended Hoover, told the Republican show they could be a “party of the people” and ballyhooed for Wheeler, representative of the copper trust, proposing him as a Democratic candidate and material for a third party leader. Both the AFL and the CIO have solemnly presented proposals for the Republican and Democratic platforms.
The very mention of the idea of an independent labor party frightens the wits out of these pro-Roosevelt Paul Reveres who are dashing madly up and down the countryside, shouting “The Republicans are coming.” John L. Lewis has not as yet indicated whom he will support, nor has he evidenced any thought of independent working class political action (his white hope, Wheeler, went back to Roosevelt at Chicago). Where there is not outright hostility to the proposal to form a labor party, there is widespread inertia on the question. It is sometimes argued that the trade unions have gotten along without a labor party in the past so there can be no practical reasons for getting heated up about it now. But the problem is not as simple as that. It is necessary to examine the conditions of the past and the problems of the present before making a decision.
 
Why No Labor Party Before
Samuel Gompers carved the first unit of the AFL out of the most highly skilled trades. Its growth thereafter was confined, in the main, to these narrow and select fields. The later inclusion of the miners and the needle trades workers as unions embracing almost all workers in a mass production industry were exceptions to the rule. The AFL has never at any time represented more than a small fraction of the industrial workers. There has always existed as the backbone of the AFL a skilled group of workers capable of commanding above-average wages and most generally able to control the labor market in their trade.
The AFL, jealous of its privileged position, has always been quick to resist fiercely any attempt at additional organization by a non-AFL union. This gave the employers an excellent stop-gap against broad mass organization. They could make concessions to this small minority and compensate for the outlay at the expense of the great majority which thus remained unorganized. The final struggle of the Knights of Labor, the activities of the Anarchists, the rise of the IWW, all helped to give the bosses an extra push toward cooperation with the AFL.
American capitalism was able until recently to afford certain concessions to the trade unions without seriously impairing its profits. It was then motivated both by the necessity of self protection and the ability to make small concessions. Then, as now, the politicians of the Democratic and Republican parties voted and acted according to the dictates of the corporations and the banks. It is not difficult to understand how, under these conditions, Gompers was able to outlaw independent working class political action and establish the theory that the trade unions have “friends” among the politicians of the employer-controlled political parties.
Capitalism still is and will continue to be motivated by the necessity of protection against the organized workers. But the AFL can no longer play its former role. It has been partially transformed in itself. And alongside it stands the CIO, just as powerful, if not more powerful, than the AFL. Further, capitalism finds itself less and less capable of making concessions even to skilled minorities. Those trade union leaders who continue to adhere to the Gompers political policy do so because “that’s the way Grandpaw did it.” They do not have a policy based on present day conditions. The majority of the officialdom, both AFL and CIO, falls in this category. They repeat the original sin of subordinating the workers to the political leadership of the bosses without having even the slender pretext of the originators of this policy.
 
What Has Happened Since 1929
A periodic capitalist crisis struck like a thunderbolt in 1929. The business index started on a dizzy descent which took three and a half years to hit bottom. Roosevelt came into office and undertook the job of patching up the cripple. He was forced by the severity of the crisis to make certain concessions to labor. The trade union officialdom hailed him as a Moses come to lead them out of the wilderness. But the workers reacted by flocking into the unions and pressing for direct action against the employers. This pressure from the mass production workers soon broke through the shell of the aristocratic AFL and the industrial unions of the CIO were formed.
Militantly pushing the fight against the corporations, the CIO workers rolled up impressive victories. The CIO enjoyed a phenomenal growth. Capitalism was forced to make concessions, one after another. But the CIO campaign was less than a year old when the business index again hit the skids, dropping back as far in nine months as it had in two and a half years during the previous decline, The four and a half years of “Roosevelt prosperity,” based mainly on a movement of light industry, could no longer sustain itself.
The CIO leadership was frightened by the militancy of the rank and file. The workers had already been led – in “Little Steel” – into a severe defeat in an attempt by the leaders to substitute dependence on “friendly” politicians for trade union action in a strike. The leadership welcomed the new crisis as an opportunity for them to move openly to curb strikes.
The mass production workers brought problems into the CIO which demanded action on the political front. The direct fight against the bosses, necessary as it was, could not alone provide an adequate solution. Sentiment grew for independent working class political action. Labor’s Non-Partisan League was formed by the CIO. It was not permitted, however, to be anything more than a streamlined method of applying the old AFL political policies.
These latest convulsions of capitalism have created the industrial unions. The AFL has also grown. The combined membership of the trade unions is today more than twice any previous figures. Capitalism finds its contradictions permanently sharpened. Yet the leaders of this new union movement are capable of nothing better than to continue to look to the capitalists for political leadership. They cannot visualize the working class doing its own political thinking.
 
Now Labor Faces the War
The present perspective of capitalist strategy is not based on a movement of the light industries; it is based on preparations for war. No matter whether a Roosevelt, a Willkie or any other capitalist politician is in the White House, this will be the program. They all have one plan for the workers – regimentation in industry and combat service in the military machine. The plan is of course sugar-coated so that the gullible among the trade union leaders will swallow it the quicker. Many of these leaders even seize upon the “defense program” as an alibi for a welcome escape from direct struggle against the bosses.
The industrial unions, just as the craft unions, have been unable to solve all the workers’ problems. The need for political action grows sharper. It is true that the business index has been hesitatingly working its way upward, especially since the war started. This has momentarily made the problem of workers’ political action less acute. But this is only momentary. American capitalism is strong, but its contradictions are stronger.
The trade unions are receding more and more into purely defensive activity. Under these circumstances they will lose members and become weaker. The treasuries will grow slimmer. The tasks will be bigger, but the means smaller. The leadership will become even more disoriented; the rank and file more dissatisfied. The situation will be worse for the CIO than for the AFL. The AFL will be more capable of resistance because of its aristocratic base. It will have less opposition than the CIO which, with its broad base among the mass production workers, will meet head-on resistance from the corporations. A much more energetic policy is possible in the direct struggle against the employers, but even with the most militant leadership, trade union action alone is not adequate.
As the trade unions become more and more aware of their inability to cope with all the problems of the workers, they are pushed toward the road of political action which is a generalization of economic action. Political action generalizes the needs of the workers and directs the struggle not against individual bosses or groups of bosses, but against the employers as a whole through their apparatus of state. Despite all the official opposition and inertia on the question, the objective necessity for a working class political party is present. The political channel must be developed if the class struggle is not to be crushed.
 
Why We Want a Labor Party
The Socialist Workers Party presents the program for the fundamental solution of the problems of the working class. It welcomes all workers into its ranks. But it must be stated frankly that the numerical growth of the Socialist Workers Party has not kept abreast of the radicalization of the broad mass of the workers. It does not as yet have sufficient authority in the general labor movement to attract a mass following. This is not unnatural. The program of the SWP is based on a careful analysis of the capitalist system, the international experience of the working class under capitalism, the role of the class in bringing about a socialist society. It is a party of advanced political thought. Many of the trade union militants have found their way into our ranks. The great mass of the workers, however, are learning mainly by actual experience. They have passed through the first stage of their training in the trade unions. It is now necessary for them to enter actively into the political arena.
At present the best medium for this political education is an independent labor party based on the trade unions – a working class political party which will present its own candidates from its own ranks for election. This political channel will enable the workers to generalize their needs and mobilize powerful forces for the struggle to obtain concessions from the bosses. These demands will also treat with the needs of the unemployed and the deep layers of highly oppressed workers who remain unorganized. They will lend their weight to the fight. Small farmers, merchants, professional people and other middle class elements will follow the leadership of the workers in such a political fight against the banks and the corporations.
It must be remembered that a trade union which places reliance upon the political agents of the employer is building a structure on quicksand. A policy of independent working class political action is necessary at all times. We repeat: an independent labor party is not the fundamental solution of the problems of the working class. If its creation is delayed too long it might be an unnecessary, even a backward, step. However, at the present time, the formation of a labor party based on the trade unions is a progressive step. The Socialist Workers Party will help to create it.
* * *
Footnote
1. Published in WIN under the title American Labour and Elections.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 22 May 2020




The stubborn fact remains that 30,000 steel workers have already lost out in the industry and the jobs of thousands more are immediately threatened. Technological change is wreaking havoc among the steel workers. Decisive action by the Steel Workers Organizing Committee is demanded to find a solution.
Last April Phillip Murray, SWOC Chairman, outlined his program before the Monopoly Committee of Congress. He proposed that provisions be made through collective bargaining between the union and the corporations for six month’s advance notice to workers who are to be displaced through technological change. During this period they would receive vocational training for other jobs. He further proposed that job compensation be paid where the new job, if found, is at a reduced rate of pay. A dismissal wage was advocated where a displaced worker is not reabsorbed in another job.
“This practical plan is not offered as the final solution ...”, Murray told- the Monopoly Committee. “... Congressional regulation of the introduction of large technological changes is necessary.” These regulations, he suggested, should make it compulsory for the corporations’ to pay a dismissal wage. The federal government would be required to provide for a vocational training program. Measures would by instituted to have industry immediately absorb the displaced workers.
Six month’s advance notice and a dismissal wage would be a distinct improvement over the present situation. The steel worker today finds himself dismissed or short notice with little or no funds at his disposal. He is soon broke and becomes dependent upon a governmental relief allowance if and when he can get it.
 
Murray’s Program Offers No Solution
The dismissal wage would, however, not be a retirement fund. The corporation would fight to make it a very small sum. When it had been used up the unemployed steel worker would be right where he is now when discharged – broke and fighting to get relief.
Vocational training for other jobs would have little meaning. The trend is towards a reduction in available jobs. Technological change curtails the number of existing jobs far more than it creates any new jobs. The chances for employment outside the steel industry are equally slim. The latest CIO report on unemployment estimates that there are almost 11 million workers now looking for jobs. A few of the displaced steel workers would find employment under this arrangement, but it is no solution for the many.
The sliding scale of wages and hours is the fundamental, approach to the problem of unemployment. The maximum hours of work should be reduced immediately to a point where jobs would be made available for all steel workers presently unemployed. Thereafter, the hours of work should again be reduced to compensate for any further curtailment of jobs because of new technological changes. The hourly rate of pay should be automatically increased whenever the hours of work are reduced so that the workers will suffer no loss in their total wages. The union should fight also for additional pay increases in order to raise the workers’ standard of living.
Murray timidly touches this point, in his statement to the Monopoly Committee that the maximum work week in the basic mass producing industries should be reduced to the level of approximately 30 hours a week at the prevailing earnings or more. However, Murray has resisted all proposals to fight for this objective.
The slogan of the 6 hour day at 8 hour’s pay has been repeatedly discussed in the SWOC. If put into effect it would be along stride towards a solution of the problem of unemployment in this industry. Almost one-third more jobs would be added.
There was a great deal of sentiment for this program among the delegates at the Chicago convention of the SWOC. The union administration side-stepped the issue by declaring it “impractical at the present time.” They proposed instead a national unemployment conference of leaders of government, industry, labor and farm groups. In other words – no action.
It is not hard to understand how officialdom was able, at the SWOC convention, to veto any action. There were about 200 SWOC organizers present. All but a handful of them were there is delegates. Nearly a third of those participating in the convention were, therefore, hired hands of the administration. Experienced parliamentarians can easily maneuver as they choose with such a powerful bloc.
Nevertheless, the administration’s victory over the union militants was a hollow one. The problem of existing unemployment and, the certainty of additional loss of jobs in the steel industry remains very real. The fight for the 6 hour day at 8 hour’s pay is still the first step toward a fundamental solution. The union officialdom has repeatedly told the workers that the industry must be more completely organized before there can be an effective struggle against the bosses. Such talk is idle. Something much more substantial is needed to convince the unorganized steel workers.
 
The Only Way to Win the Unorganized
The SWOC lost the 1937 strike in Little Steel by placing its reliance in treacherous employer-loyal politicians. Since then, the leadership has retreated constantly before the pressure of the steel bosses. The workers have been prevented from making a direct struggle against the corporations through trade union action. Instead, the leaders continue to rely upon the political “friends” and the “impartial” governmental boards.
Apathy and lack of confidence among the workers is only a natural result of this policy. They must be shown a fighting union. They must see that the SWOC means business; that it will energetically and intelligently apply its own strength in the fight with the corporations.
The launching of a serious fight for the 6-hour day at 8 hour’s pay will win over the great majority of the steel workers to the support of the SWOC. Such support will in turn assure victory in the struggle.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 23 May 2020




There is general agreement among the officers and members of the Steel Workers Organizing Committee that a vigorous organization drive is needed. The big question is, how shall it be conducted? Many in the ranks contend that an immediate fight for the 6 hour day at 8 hour’s pay is necessary to show the unorganized steel workers that the SWOC means business. The leaders say, on the other hand, that the union can’t effectively fight for this demand until it is more completely organized.
The leadership understands, nevertheless, that it must show some fight if the union is to make any gains whatever. This is evidenced by the official campaign just launched with considerable fanfare against the Bethlehem Steel Corporation.
The announcement last week by Bethlehem Steel Corporation that it was raising wages to a 62.5 cents hour minimum is an encouraging sign that a vigorous union campaign would soon push this company into line. Undoubtedly the corporation made this announcement to offset the union drive launched just previously.
The announced objectives in this drive are:




Recognition of the right to organize;
The $5 daily minimum wage;
Guarantee of basic hourly rates;
Bonus system reform;
Elimination of staggered work week;
Elimination of the so-called “learner’s rate”;
A written, signed contract.




To win these demands would mean to bring considerable gains to the Bethlehem workers. It should be noted, however, that the program is very vague as to the objectives regarding hours of work. It is, in essence, a move calculated to bring this openly anti-union company up to the approximate level of conditions in those steel concerns where the SWOC has greater strength.
 
Program Doesn’t Solve Workers’ Main Problems
It does not represent a step towards direct trade union action to force a solution of the grave problems of unemployment and threatened loss in earnings which are confronting the steel workers. The union leaders are still hoping against hope that a way can be found to avoid an open fight with the corporation. They look to the government to give them a substitute' for trade union action.
Forty-six local lodges introduced resolutions at the SWOC convention proposing to fight for the 6 hour day at 8 hour’s pay. The officials answered that they were pressing for a broad national program to solve the problem of technological unemployment. They did not mean a broad national trade union program. Their proposal is for a national conference of leaders of government, industry, labor and farm groups.
The workers would be glad to find a solution to their pressing problems without being forced into strike action. Strikes are not a pleasant thing. However, the steel workers will fight if necessary, and fight hard. The question is, what price peace? They are not for peace at any price.
The SWOC leadership has abandoned to all practical intents and purposes any idea of strike struggle since the defeat in Little Steel. Strike action has been used since that time in few cases; then only for very limited purposes and gingerly handled. The National Labor Relations Board has become the white hope of the union. Reliance on the government to the almost complete exclusion of trade union action has been the official policy for the past three years. The results of this program are not very impressive.
The union has contracts with the United States Steel corporation and quite a number of small companies. The national leadership is very cautious about creating strained relations with any of these companies. They are uneasy about the possible outcome. Grievances are pressed by the union membership and the local lodge leaders, but the national officers frequently put on the brakes.
There are no contracts with the Little Steel corporations. Existing governmental legislation, principally the Walsh-Healey Act, is used by the SWOC as the base in these companies for minimum conditions as to wages and hours.
The union does not have direct recognition by these corporations, but relies instead upon the Wagner Act to maintain the best possible semblance of collective bargaining. There are union grievance committees in these plants which are given some de facto recognition by the management. They get what they can by negotiations, and in some cases, if the company agrees, by arbitration. The workers are told by the union leaders that the NLRB is their big stick.
This, in general, is not a very impressive state of affairs. Despite these shortcomings the SWOC has made gains for its members. The union has saved the jobs of many workers and it can be said that the presence of the SWOC in the industry has resulted in some benefits for every steel worker, whether or not he is a member of the union. Nevertheless, the situation of the steel workers is not good.
Technological change continues to take its toll among them. The revolution in production methods in steel is creating an entirely new set of problems for the steel worker. Three years of experience have already shown that neither the National Labor Relations Board nor general unemployment conferences can be relied upon to meet the needs of the day.
The steel workers must depend upon their own organized strength as, the primary weapon in their struggle against the corporations. They must be well organized to win this fight. The SWOC must conduct a campaign to bring the unorganized workers into the union ranks. Abstract arguments won’t do this job. It is necessary to show them a union in action. Three years of dependence upon substitutes for trade union action is enough and more than enough.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 22 May 2020





First Costs to Labor of “National Defense”
The city of Buffalo has suspended five repair men on charge of “non-cooperation in the national defense program.” Municipal employees at Niagara Falls are being “mugged” and finger-printed “to forestall possible sabotage.” The National Association of Manufacturers is pressing harder than ever to emasculate the National Labor Relations Act “in the interests of the defense program.”
Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins told the annual convention of the Massachusetts State Federation of Labor that strikes will not hamper the national defense program as they did in 1917 because “labor now has decent working conditions.” Falling right into line with the Madame, the national AFL representative to the convention told the gathering that negotiations must be the process rather than strikes. “Many a legitimate strike,” he said, “will have to be avoided by the self-discipline of labor unions.”
A CIO union in Jamestown. New York, voted to send two of its members into a struck plant to crate 143 airplane struts for shipment at the request of the War Department. A taste demands a meal. The War Department will next claim that the strike itself is “against the interests of the national defenses.”
Boeing aircraft workers, AFL, have just been shunted away from strike action and into the morass of arbitration. Sidney Hillman did the job for the bosses.
Two regional directors of the UAW-CIO rushed into South Bend, Indiana to investigate reports of a slow-down demonstration at the Bendix Aviation Corporation plant. The company demands that the union rid its ranks of “a group of agitators.” UAW secretary-treasurer, George M. Addes, has said that the International officials “will not tolerate such an interference with production.” FBI agents swarmed through the plant, “investigating reports of sabotage.”
The bosses and their government are moving rapidly in their campaign to curb trade union action and force the workers to submit helplessly to war regimentation. The trade union officialdom is making an inglorious retreat in the face of this attack.
What the bosses and their government really have in mind “in the interests of national defense” is made plain by recent dispatches from abroad. Agreements covering working hours and labor conditions in the metal trades in some industrial districts of New Zealand were suspended by government order on August 3. Six days later, a government decree was issued banning all strikes in Northern Ireland for the duration of the war.
The Philippine National Assembly has voted President Quezon authority to prohibit strikes. This latter action occurs on United States territory. Since the Philippine government is a puppet of Washington, that means that Washington is trying this scheme out there.
*

Gallup Poll Must Have Reached Scissor-bills
The Gallup poll has released statistics showing the results of a survey on the question, “Should the government forbid strikes in industries manufacturing material for our national defense?” 83% of the persons questioned in the upper income group are reported as favoring the prohibition of strikes. If anything, this is an understatement of the prevailing opinion in that group. It is also reported, however, that 73% of the persons questioned in the lower income group favored the strike prohibition. We have no way of knowing who was questioned to get this “sample” of public opinion. But we have every reason to doubt its accuracy.
It seems that the peregrinations of the Gallup inquirers led them to the door of three scissors-bills for every trade unionist that they interviewed. Stand up before any group of trade union workers, whether it be a meeting of a local union or a convention of an international union, and ask them this question. They will give you a quick and decisive answer. They do not favor the prohibition of strikes “in the interests of the national defense,” or for any other reason. And there are about ten million organized workers.
*

Defense Council Deals Blow to CIO
The AFL building trades unions have been granted jurisdiction over all construction work under the gigantic armament program. The decision of the National Defense Council was handed down by its “labor coordinator” Sidney Hillman, a vice-president of the CIO. This action is a vital blow to the hopes of the CIO to organize in the construction industry through its United Construction Workers Organizing Committee.
The CIO has made very little headway in the industry and the methods which it employed in its organization efforts were some times not in the best interests of the construction workers. There has been, however, One positive side to the CIO campaign. It brought direct pressure on the AFL Building Trades Department to take a more reasonable attitude toward the question of labor unity.
The AFL Building Trades unions are in the best position to protect the interests of the construction workers in the rapidly expanding building program which can be anticipated in the next period. But this jurisdictional victory can only tend to stiffen the hard-nosed attitude of the AFL building trades craft unionists towards the industrial unions.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 15 November 2020




The CIO has launched a campaign in the ten mills and shipyards of the Bethlehem Steel Corporation. The plan of action was laid down at a conference of the CIO lodges involved, which was held in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania on August 11. The Steel Workers Organizing Committee and the Industrial Union of Marine and Ship Building Workers of America, both CIO affiliates, will participate jointly in the drive.
The Bethlehem mills are operating at top capacity with 200 million dollars in government contracts already received.
This corporation is one of those which consistently violate the Wagner Labor Act and the Walsh-Healey Act. It refuses to pay the $5.00 a day minimum on work on government contracts.
CIO Vice-President Phillip Murray announced before the conference that it would “lay the ground work to carry the fight to Washington.” The conference itself announced, however, that failure by the company to bargain collectively will “compel the workers to enforce their rights by economic action.”
This campaign, long overdue, can serve as the opening gun in a fight to correct conditions in the entire steel industry. The urgent necessity for the union to rise vigorously to the defense of its membership can no longer be denied.
 
SWOC Under Fire of Bosses and Gov’t
The SWOC is under heavy attack from both the steel bosses and the government. The corporations are creating widespread unemployment and forcing down the earnings of the employed steel workers through technological change. They are violating the union contracts, stalling on the settlement of grievances, and practicing general discrimination against the SWOC membership.
The bosses are undermining the union in every way possible.
The government, on its part, is fronting for the steel corporations “in the interests of national defense.” Agents of the FBI are sent into the plants in an effort to intimidate the workers and try to put down any militancy among them. An undercover drive is being conducted against the alien workers. The finger of suspicion is pointed at militant workers who raise their voice in protest against the policy of the corporations.
The efforts of the AFL to organize the steel workers in opposition to the SWOC are more of an annoyance than a threat to the CIO union. AFL propaganda is in large part based on the claim that it is “more patriotic” than the CIO. The AFL has nothing real to offer the steel workers. Its actions only serve to further disorient them.
 
SWOC Leaders Don’t Fight Back
The national leadership of the SWOC meantime shows an increasing tendency to subordinate the interests of the steel workers to the “interests of the national defense.” Van A. Bittner, SWOC director, Western Region, has been appointed by Hillman to serve in one of the “national defense committees.” The top officials are very jittery about the danger of being called “unpatriotic.” They have gone so far as to warn the field organizers that if they are accused of “un-American activities” they cannot expect the SWOC to defend them, “even though they may be wrongly accused.”
Grievances arising from contract violation and general discrimination against the union membership on the job are permitted to pile up. The complaints are tardily placed before arbitration committees or the NLRB and generally are not militantly pressed, even through these channels. There are very few sallies directly against the bosses. These occur only where pressure from the workers is most heavy.
Some cases of strike action by the steel workers are promptly labelled “outlaw” and a settlement is forced at the first opportunity. The national leadership sometimes follows up the settlement with an attack on the local lodge officials. The usual reason given is per capita tax delinquencies, a violation of the union laws, or some similar charge. Militant lodge leaders are being forced into the background. The most conservative, least class conscious elements are coming forward.
 
Workers Want a Fighting Leadership
Although the fight for a six hour day at eight hour’s pay was sidestepped at the Chicago convention, some sections of the officialdom are now using this slogan. They are motivated largely by the need for some means to halt the decline in dues payment which is becoming a serious problem. There is little indication that they mean business.
The steel workers have a much different attitude. They accept the fact that they are being pushed into the war but they are not enthusiastic about the idea. There is general indifference among them towards the boss-made, artificial war hysteria. They do not as yet understand the real significance of the war preparations and consequently have not gone over to active opposition to the program of the government. The “Fifth Column” agitation is not taken seriously but it harasses and disturbs them to a certain extent. The steel workers are most concerned about the vital question of jobs and wages. Many thousands of them are already unemployed. Those who have jobs face the threat of reduced earnings and wonder who will be thrown out into the streets next.
They want to fight but the defeat in Little Steel and the timidity of their top leaders since then has undermined their confidence in themselves and their union. The rank and file is anxious to overcome the present apathy and inertia. They need and want a fighting leadership.
 
Union’s Salvation Demands Struggle
Every factor in the situation demands that the SWOC leaders abandon their attitude of subservience to the “interests of the national defense” and that they fight for the interests of the steel workers instead. The battle must be carried direct to the steel bosses through militant trade union action. A vigorous organization drive must be launched, on a program of action:




All union officials off the “National Defense Committees.”
 
Enforce the union contracts. Settle the workers’ grievances.
 
Fight for the 6 hour day at 8 hour’s pay.





F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 22 May 2020





Aircraft Unionization Attacked in Advance!
Congressman Martin Dies announces from Los Angeles that he has “uncovered a plot to bring about a general strike in Southern California aircraft factories.” His statement comes on the heels of the decision by the St. Louis convention of the United Auto Workers (CIO) to launch a large-scale organization drive in the aircraft industry.
The aircraft CORPORATIONS have been conducting a general strike against the acceptance of government contracts for airplane construction. They demand tax credits to assure themselves of super-profits from the armament program. Dies isn’t the least bit worried up about this open-fisted grab by the Corporations, but he is always quick to suspicion “subversive activity” among the workers.
He has found seven finks in the plants who describe “the (strike) scheme as having a double objective – crippling the national defense program and hindering American aid to Britain.” The political “friends” of the CIO (Dies is only the first to speak) are thus preparing to give heavy support to the aircraft corporations in their opposition to the union’s campaign.
The UAW leaders will have to muster more guts than they have displayed in the Ford campaign if the organization drive in the aircraft industry is to succeed.
*

FBI Fingerprint Drive Intensified
The FBI already has many acres of finger-print files in Washington. They have long conducted an “educational campaign” to obtain prints wherever and whenever they could. Lately, this campaign has been vigorously intensified and it is beginning to bear more fruit.
WPA employees working in Army and Navy posts and on “other national defense projects” must have their prints taken. Forty WPA workers on a New York City-sponsored project to “prepare for any war emergency that. may confront the city” have also been finger-printed.
The New York City police department has laid down new regulations requiring the finger-printing of night club employees. The unions are fighting this order.
*

How They Recruited National Guardsmen
Representative Massingale of Oklahoma made a slip of the tongue in the House debate on the National Guard bill. He told how the chambers of commerce in Oklahoma had urged enlistment by high school students and that the National Guard in many instances furnished the best social entertainment for youth. He added that the students also wanted a little spending money. Since they had enlisted only to have a good time socially and to get a little pocket money, Massingale felt that it was unfair to send them into military service outside the United States.
The good Congressman failed to inform his constituents that most of these boys did not know when they enlisted that they would be used as scab-herders, as they were recently when the oil workers went on strike. It seems that he doesn’t think it unfair to ask the boys to do a little strikebreaking now and then in return for social entertainment and a bit of spending money.
*

Green’s New Stand on Wagner Act Changes
AFL President Green, appearing before the Senate Labor Committee to testify on the bill to revise the National Labor Relations Act, altered the stand be previously took before the House Committee regarding some of the provisions. The Senate Committee reports Green now says that he acquiesced in the amendments while they were in the House with the idea that those unacceptable to the AFL could be altered in the Senate.
If this is the case, it must be said that Green is guilty of criminal negligence toward his duties as a representative of the AFL workers. The workers get little enough consideration from Congress under the best of circumstances. When all Green’s criticisms of the amendments past and present, are added up, he still hasn’t got much of a position. The AFL has been so anxious to strike a blow at the CIO through amendments to the National Labor Relations Act that they have blinded themselves to the dangers of the situation they are creating. The National Association of Manufacturers is stepping in with the idea of emasculating the Act in such a way that the amendments will prove a boomerang against the AFL as well as an injury to the CIO.
But even taking the AFL program for what it is worth, this action by Green means that he abandoned an important field of battle without firing a shot and thus weakened the fighting power of the AFL on this question by more than 50%.
We aren’t convinced that Green told the whole story when he gave the Senate Committee this reason for his change in attitude. It has the earmarks of part of a horse- trade with Sidney Hillman, CIO vice president, who is rapidly drifting into open conflict with John L. Lewis. A second factor is the report that Hillman as the “labor coordinating expert” on the National Defense Committee, has arranged for the AFL to have jurisdiction over construction work under the armament program. Hillman has denied this report, but the AFL continues to insist that it is a fact.
If the AFL-Hillman horse-trade is a reality it will introduce a series of new factors into the question of AFL-CIO unity.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 22 May 2020




Minneapolis, June 10 – Farrell Dobbs’ speech to the membership meeting of the Drivers Union follows in part:
This is a fight to the death between Local 544 and Dan Tobin. Local 544’s leaders have the guts to fight the employers, which is a lot more than Tobin can say.
Tobin has a grudge against this union. His grudge is that the leaders of Local 544 are not yes-men, whom he can kick around as he pleases.
 
Our Four Crimes
In Daniel J. Tobin’s eyes, this union is guilty of four great crimes.
Our first crime is that we believe in fighting the bosses all the way. Tobin doesn’t believe in this. I hope you all read the little editorial on the inside front cover of the June issue of Tobin’s personal organ, wherein he states:
“Business agents and salaried officers of unions are going to be held mainly responsible by the state and federal governments for the actions of their members as time goes on. In most instances paid representatives of local unions are in a position to stop trouble. In some few instances they are not strong enough to stop the rank and file, but in those instances where they fail or where they are unable to protect the rank and file from themselves, they should notify the International Office of such failure.”
Translated out of Tobin’s language into English, that paragraph is a warning and a threat to every official of every IBT local that Tobin doesn’t want the drivers asking for higher wages, he doesn’t want any trouble, he doesn’t want any strikes, he doesn’t want to pay out any money for strike benefits. And God help any business agent or officer who can’t hold down the drivers and get them to lie down. If they can’t do it, Tobin will have their scalps. That’s what Tobin is saying in his editorial.
Local 544’s second crime in Tobin’s eyes is that the delegates from this union to the last convention of the IBT – Tobin permits a convention once every five years – voted against his proposal that he be given dictatorial powers to force arbitration upon any affiliated local. One of the delegates to take the floor against this reactionary program was Miles
Dunne, who made such an effective speech it took Tobin half an hour to get the convention to order. Brother, Dunne was not the only unionist at the convention to blast Tobin’s program; delegates from the East and West Coasts spoke against it. By agreement with other progressive delegates, Miles Dunne made his talk; together, the convention was able to deal Tobin a stiff defeat, something unheard of at IBT conventions.
Local 544’s third crime, according to Tobin, is that representatives of this union took the lead in organizing the over-the-road drivers and achieving the 11-state area contract. In this drive, about two hundred thousand new members were brought into the IBT. Tobin fought against this successful campaign from the start. He tried to disrupt our drivers’ council that launched the over-the-road campaign. Once the successful fight was over, Tobin immediately clamped down and began to expel or push aside all those whom he couldn’t absolutely control and integrate into his machine.
Our fourth crime is that the Local 544 delegation voted against Tobin’s request to raise his annual salary $10,000 to $30,000 a year. We figured that Tobin ought to be able to skimp along on $20,000 a year – and that if he couldn’t he ought to turn his case over to 544’s Federal Workers Section and ask for supplemental aid from the relief officials.
There stands Tobin with his $30,000 sack of dough over his shoulder, almost tipping him over backward, holding up his hand to the drivers, and howling “Don’t strike, boys. I got mine.”
Those are the four points that are the real issues in this fight. This is a fight over trade union policy, and charges of radicalism have nothing to do with it.
Radicalism? Why, Tobin hired me on May 1, 1939, to be an international organizer. Tobin knew what I was then. He knew my ideas and beliefs. He knew them even better when I resigned as international organizer a year later. At that time, he talked with me several hours, asking me to reconsider my decision. He advised me to keep my paid-up card in the IBT and said I could always return as an international organizer. Well, I have returned. I am back. I am back not to serve Tobin, but to help you fight him.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 2 February 2019






These Workers Picked Their Own Program
The recent strike of 7,000 CIO aluminum workers in New Kensington, Pennsylvania, was settled by the removal of a fink as demanded by the workers, and a two cent raise in pay.
While the strike was on, every peanut politician around the Pittsburgh industrial area took the opportunity to sound off against the “reds” in the union, to demand laws forbidding strikes in the “defense industries,” etc., etc.
Shortly after the strike ended an election was held in this union. Local 2 of the Aluminum Workers of America. One of the slates in the election ran on a “More pay and less, speed-up” platform. The following paragraph appeared in a long, red-baiting article in the Pittsburgh Press which viciously attacked this slate:
“On the heels of a public warning by N.A. Zonarich, international president of the Aluminum Workers, that Communists were backing a slate of candidates in the Local 2 election, Rev. Charles Owen Rice (chaplain of the Pittsburgh Association of Catholic Trade Unionists) predicted a ‘black day6rsquo; for the union if the slate is victorious.” One of the newspaper articles on this election carried this headline: Reds in Unions Attacked As Peril to U.S. Defense.
When the votes were counted the “More pay and less speedup” slate had won by a wide majority. Only one of the candidates endorsed by Father Rice was elected. A similar red-baiting campaign was carried on during the election in the East Pittsburgh Local No. 601 of the UERMW (CIO). Despite the intensive press campaign, none of the candidates endorsed by Father Rice were elected in this local.
If there were members of the Communist Party, on the progressive slates which were elected in these two unions they were in a minority. But this is entirely beside the point. A majority of the workers were obviously in favor of “More pay and less speed-up.” They were not at all impressed by the dire predictions of a “black day” in the union, and the “peril to U.S. defense” if the exponents of this platform were elected.
 

A Boss’ Tears at Christmastide
As the result of strike action, a contract was signed on the Friday before Christmas between the Transformer Corporation of America, a New York City concern, and Local No. 430 of the UERMW (CIO,). The workers won an increase in wages, plus a vacation provision. Just before Christmas a letter of “Christmas greetings” from the president of the company was handed to all manufacturing employees. The following are extracts from the letter:
“Normally, the management would hail an agreement of this type with the same enthusiasm as has been evidenced by the majority of the men ... Unfortunately, these gains place an additional hardship upon the company ... The TCA Management has ... repeatedly called the attention of the Shop Chairman to the lax attitude of a number of employees in the shop ... it is your job to recuperate the losses which TCA has incurred and is sustaining as a result of employee activity ... It will be impossible for us to successfully compete in the open market unless some unusually efficient methods and attitudes are created in the TCA shop ... You can’t squeeze blood out of a turnip ... If TCA is unable to compete ... This will mean only one thing to you ... either loss of employment oi’ greatly curtailed working hours ... It is unfortunate that these sad facts have to be brought forth at what is normally a joyous time of the year ... I sincerely trust that every employee will put his shoulder to the wheel in an effort to earn his job and salary ...”
“Forgetting business for the moment,” the letter concludes, in a two-line paragraph after 447 words of complaint against the workers, “I take this opportunity to wish each and every one of you a very Merry Xmas and a Happy New Year.”
The question is, what turnip is being squeezed? The workers squeezed a few concessions out of this boss and now he is trying, to put a double squeeze on them. Yes, “forgetting business for the moment,” he wishes them a “very Merry Xmas,” indeed.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 15 November 2020

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 15 November 2020




One year ago Comrade Trotsky sat for the last time at the work table in his Coyoacan study. He was a man without a country and at the same time a citizen of the World. Behind him were forty-four years of unceasing struggle in the interests of the world working class. He had never wavered from the decision which he made as a youth of eighteen to devote his life to the proletarian revolution.
He was co-leader with Lenin of the great October revolution which shines as the pole star for the revolutionary navigators of the world working class. It was Comrade Trotsky, our Old Man, who organized and inspired the Red Army which is now standing its ground so heroically before the guns of Hitler. It was Trotsky who led the Red Army to victory against the imperialist plunderers who tried to crush the October Revolution in its first hour of triumph.
Twice before, Comrade Trotsky had been exiled by the Czarist regime. Now, after the triumph of the Russian workers, he was again exiled from his native land, banned from the workers’ state. This time at the hands of Stalin, the betrayer of October, the organizer of working class defeats. Together with his valiant wife, Natalia, Trotsky had borne the horrible grief of seeing his children, one by one, either murdered or driven to suicide by Stalin. His secretaries had fallen, one after another, victims of the mad dogs of Stalin’s GPU. Trotsky had seen his co-workers of October, Lenin’s central committee, the whole generation of old Bolsheviks dragged into the cellars of the Lubianka and put to death. Such were the evil fruits of the infamous Moscow “trials” through which Stalin sought also to slander the name of Trotsky and prepare the ground for his assassination. Trotsky knew all this; he understood it clearer than anyone else.
 
Undaunted By Persecutions
Yet he remained undaunted by these terrible blows. He did not permit it to interfere with his revolutionary work. He kept his eyes turned toward the future, toward the unsolved problems of the workers. He was very impatient with anything which stood in the way of this central task. He continued to analyze world events, to patiently explain to the workers the program necessary for a solution of their problems. He sought constantly for the widest possible forces with which to rebuild the revolutionary movement after the debacle of Stalinism. He was ever alert to ferret out and completely expose any trace of false ideology which might creep into the movement. At every opportunity, through all available mediums he vigorously sounded the clarion call to class struggle. Trotsky’s was the greatest mind, his the stoutest heart of our day, and he was devoted unconditionally to the service of the world working class.
One year ago this great revolutionary sat for the last time at the work table in his Coyoacan study. At his back stood an agent of the GPU. The murderous hand of Stalin had finally reached into the presence of Leon Trotsky. Stalin drove a pick-axe into Trotsky’s brain, seeking to destroy that which he feared more than anything else in the entire world.
Then came the agonizing vigil, the desperate attempts to save his life, the hopes, the fears, the cruel grief of that short span of hours which seemed to pass more slowly than centuries. And finally the last fatal message: our beloved Old Man was no longer among the living.
 
Stalin’s Guilt Has Been Established
The whole world knows today who killed Trotsky. He accused Stalin on his death bed. He had already proven Stalin’s guilt in the events of the May 24 assault. The assassination and the subsequent efforts to protect the assassin have been typical of the widely known GPU methods. Stalin’s motives are abundantly clear. His betrayal of the workers in the Soviet Union, China, Germany, France Spain; the entire working class in the World War II – this endless chain of betrayals has driven Stalin to ever greater violence against the working class. He did not hesitate to murder the whole generation of old Bolsheviks, and he desired the death of Trotsky, whom he feared more than all the others. The hatred of an apostate against those who represent what he once claimed to be accounts in part for the sadistic violence of Stalin’s methods.
Both Stalin and Trotsky will be remembered in the recorded history of mankind. Stalin will receive mention in a brief and shameful paragraph. He will go down in history as the greatest betrayer of all time, a super Cain, Borgia, Judas.
Comrade Trotsky will stand on an historical plane with Marx, Engels and Lenin. He will be loved as a champion of the toiling masses, a gladiator of the working class, a builder of the new society, one of the greatest creators of all time.
The death of Leon Trotsky has been a terrible loss. It came at a very critical juncture in history. The workers are again plunged into the bloodbath of imperialist war. They are again confronted with widespread treachery and betrayal by the leaders of their mass organizations. There is great need for the firm hand and brilliant mind of Trotsky. He could perform even greater deeds than those already recorded during the eventful years of his heroic life.
Stalin killed Trotsky and removed him from the scene of immediate conflict. But he did not, he could not destroy him. The whole of Trotsky is preserved in his writings. He has left behind all the necessary tools: for the proletarian revolutionary fighters. We still have him to help us. It is only necessary to learn how to use these tools and then courageously to apply them.
Comrade Trotsky was a creator of profound ideas. But part of his greatness lay in the fact that he was not entirely a creator. He also could learn from others. He had nothing but contempt for the sniveling pride of the so-called independent thinkers, those little men who are too wrapped up in self-admiration to learn the lessons handed down by their revolutionary forebears. He placed before everything else the need to learn from the great working class leaders. Trotsky built upon the ideas of Marx, Engels and Lenin. He learned to understand their ideas and to master their method. He took this knowledge and applied it in the modern conditions of the daily struggle. The power of Trotsky was above all the power of Marxism.
 
The Struggle Against Stalinism,
After the death of Lenin, the rising Stalinist bureaucracy plunged the workers’ vanguard in the Soviet Union and throughout the world into a horrible swamp of confusion and disorientation. There was widespread; demoralization among the Bolshevik cadres and a rapidly swelling casualty list of the moral victims of Stalinism. It was Trotsky who cut through all this with the sharp knife of Marxist analysis and exposed the reactionary character of Stalin’s policies. It was Trotsky who came forward with a program that shone with the brilliance of the rising sun as it pierces a morning fog. Trotsky, the Marxist, the Leninist, brushed away the confusion, showed the way out and thus saved many of the best militants.
The degeneration of the workers’ state under Stalin has led to a serious alienation of sympathy for the Soviet Union among the world working class. Renegades of all breeds and varieties have helped to increase this isolation of the Soviet workers from their class. Many are the pseudo-Marxists who have tried to prove that Soviet Russia today is very little different from Hitlerite Germany. The crimes of Stalin against the workers of the world have in every instance served as the foundation for these foul theories, for this disorientstion of the working masses.
It was Trotsky who took the lead in the fight against Stalin inside the Russian Communist Party. Then, after the German debacle and the rise of Hitler, he explained the qualitative change which had taken place inside the Russian party: that it had become only a caricature of a communist movement. Therefore, Stalin must be overthrown by revolutionary means. It was necessary immediately to begin the task of reorganizing the revolutionary movement for a world struggle against Stalinism.
However, in sharp contrast to the charlatans who cleave to the false petty-bourgeois concepts of democracy arid morality, who see Stalinism as the natural product of Bolshevism, who renounce Marxism only to turn toward the bourgeois democrats or the half-way house of a mythical Third Camp – in sharp contrast to all these philistines, Trotsky was able to chart a course of struggle against Stalin without turning his back upon the workers’ state, the October revolution, Marxism, and the whole future of the working class. Trotsky taught the vanguard to struggle for the overthrow of the Stalin regime, but at the same time to stand for the unconditional defense of the USSR. True, he explained, under Stalin the Soviet Union has become a degenerated workers state, but that is a matter for the workers themselves to correct. Degenerated though the Soviet Union is, its economy is still based on nationalized property and monopoly of foreign trade. The capitalists have been and remain expropriated. This the workers must defend against all the imperialist bandits.
 
Trotsky’s Last Great Struggle
The last great political battle of Comrade Trotsky’s career was waged against the petty-bourgeois minority of the Socialist Workers Party. They tried to force the party to renounce the defense of the Soviet Union. They tried to turn the organization into the shambles of a social democratic debating society. In this fight Comrade Trotsky wrote a series of documents which must be carefully and thoroughly studied by every serious proletarian fighter. They are a virtual handbook on the most pressing problems of the day.
If Trotsky were in the Soviet Union today, or if the ideas of Trotskyism were being applied to wage revolutionary war against Hitler, the German army would literally melt before the political and military assault of the Red Army. The German workers would return home to settle accounts with their own fascist overlords and a gigantic revolutionary wave would arise to sweep the last remnants of capitalism from the face of the earth.
It was not only on the question of defense of the workers’ state that Trotsky maintained theoretical clarity in the program of the proletarian vanguard. He took the lead in exposing the false and treacherous Stalinist policy of the “Peoples’ Front” and all the other criminal maneuvers of the Kremlin bureaucrats. His brilliant pen poured forth devastating and unanswerable condemnation upon the anarchists and syndicalists for their miserable capitulation before the bourgeois democrats. He pilloried the decrepit social democrats for their bootlicking support of the imperialist war lords. He fought militantly and constantly against every deviation .from Marxist policy in the class struggle.
“No confidence in the bourgeois democrats!” thundered Trotsky. “No support of the democratic war mongers. War is inevitable and fascism a constant danger as long as capitalism exists. There is no course other than revolutionary proletarian struggle against capitalism.” He explained this over and over, in connection with many different events, but he always hammered hardest on these fundamental points.
 
Trotsky and the Trade Unions in War
One of the last of his great contributions was the forging of a proletarian military policy for this bloody epoch of imperialist war: the military training of worker soldiers and worker officers under trade union control. Together with this he left us an uncompleted but nonetheless important document on the whole trade union question. The capitalist class, with the aid of the Tobins, Greens and Hillmans, is seeking to bind the trade unions into the apparatus of state. The ruthless campaign of the dictator, Tobin, who is receiving the full support of the capitalist state in his campaign to smash the CIO union of the Minneapolis motor transport and allied workers is an eloquent example of what is in store for the workers under such an alliance between the government and the top officialdom of the trade union movement.
Pointing to the grave danger of this tendency toward subverting the trade unions into instruments of capitalist repression, Trotsky explains that if the trade unions are to be effective working class instruments they must be kept completely independent from the capitalist state. A second task, flowing from this need, he indicates, is constant vigilance and unceasing struggle to preserve trade union democracy.
Trotsky’s mastery of Marxism, his ability to apply these ideas and methods in modern conditions gave him a superb power of analysis and a crystal clear vehicle of expression. His method was the scientific approach of dialectical analysis. He knew hew to understand each event in the historical chain and how to place each event in proper relation to all other historic phenomena so as clearly to recognize the movement of the contending forces in the class struggle. Every proletarian fighter, no matter from what corner of the world he might come, would find in the course of a discussion with Trotsky a deeper and richer understanding of events in his own country and on the world arena.
There was nothing mystical about this power of Trotsky’s. The fountain of knowledge from which he drew his wisdom is available for all. Even more than that, he has greatly enriched this treasure chest of revolutionary learning by his own contributions. None of us can be Trotskys. He was a giant, even among giants. There will be other and possibly even greater Trotskys. But that is not an indispensable minimum for success. We need only use to the best of our ability the tools which he left for us.
 
Why Roosevelt Attacks The Trotskyists
We have been charged by Comrade Trotsky with the responsibility of carrying out his testament: “I have confidence in the victory of the Fourth International. Go Forward!” Our work of the past year has shown that we have the ability to use his tools and to carry out his last command. Our party has grown. Our press has been greatly expanded. We have sunk our roots deeper and deeper into the ranks of the workers, and they have responded to our call in increasing numbers. The attention we are receiving from the capitalist government is eloquent testimony of our ability to go forward.
We carry on in times of great world crisis. Heavy responsibilities rest upon our shoulders. Roosevelt is striving mightily to plunge the American workers headlong into a shooting war. The war party of American imperialism is finding it very difficult to whip up mass enthusiasm for the war program. They sense in this attitude the dormant seeds of working class revolt. There is no way for them to tell how close to the surface this danger lies. The capitalist class has no confidence in itself nor in its outworn system. This is especially true of its most conscious section. They have a mortal fear of the workers. The Roosevelt administration is thus driven to lash out viciously against the anti-war forces, especially in the ranks of the working class.
We, the Trotskyists, have the high honor of being the first political party attacked through the police powers of the warmongering Roosevelt administration. We are the first to be indicted by the federal government. More than anything else this testifies to the growing power of Trotsky’s ideas. The Stalinists call us fifth-columnists, agents of the fascists, and they urge Roosevelt to go the limit against us. But the bourgeoisie is not confused. They know what we are. They know that we stand in the vanguard of the protetariat. The capitalist state strikes first at the working class party which has the most correct, and therefore to them the most dangerous, program. Roosevelt has struck first at the Trotskyists.
We do not shrink, we do not retreat in the face of this assault. We follow the example of our Old Man. We stand firm. Nor shall we flinch in the fight, whatever the odds.
Comrade Trotsky had unbounded confidence in the working class. He treated with contempt those mental incompetents who seek to fasten upon the workers the responsibility for the crimes of their leaders. Many are the brazen cynics who say that the workers get the kind of leadership they deserve. What monstrosities these pompous little fatheads are Who speak with disdain of the heroic warriors who are the proletarian masses. Our Old Man set an example for us which we must never forget. He never blamed the workers for defeats. He sought always to draw for them the lessons of their experiences, to teach and inspire them, to give them proper leadership.
 
We Are Confident of the Future
This confidence of Trotsky’s in the workers was not based on superficial sentiment. He understood the dynamic power of the proletariat. He had learned well the lessons of the class struggle. At the time of his death he was writing an article on this very subject. He stated that it could be set down as an historic law that the mass radicalization of the workers must precede a fascist struggle for power; that fascism could conquer only if the proletarian vanguard failed to lead the radical masses to the overthrow of capitalism and the establishment of socialism. Such a stage of mass radicalization is high on the agenda of the American workers. We are determined that this historic opportunity shall not be lost. We follow Comrade Trotsky’s example in our preparations and we go forward with his confidence.
We shall defend Marxism against all renegades and revisionists. We have nothing but contempt for bourgeois opinion. We will stamp out every trace of this alien class influence which may seek to penetrate our ranks on the escalator of petty bourgeois confusionism. It is our firm resolve to strive for the fullest assimilation of the ideas and methods of Trotskyism. These we shall develop in modern conditions and then consistently apply them in struggle.
Comrade Trotsky often quoted these words from Hegel: “Nothing great is done in this world without passion.” In this bloody epoch of all-out struggle we stand and shall continue to stand in the front line positions of the class war. We take our places in the vanguard of the proletariat with absolutely no reservations. Nothing is more important to us. We entertain no petty thoughts of personal security in this world which is aflame with the death agony of capitalism. We fight with the burning passion of men and women who are conscious that the future of all mankind depends upon them. We struggle for the emancipation of the human race through the revolutionary working class. We are confident of victory.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 23 March 2019





(Speech of Farrell Dobbs, National Labor Secretary, S.W.P., at the funeral of Grant Dunne, Minneapolis, October 7, 1941)
Grant John Dunne was born June 21, 1893, on a farm east of Little Falls, Minnesota. He went through eighth grade in a one-room schoolhouse in the country. Soon after the turn of the century the Dunne family moved to Minneapolis. Grant went to South High school for one year, and then, like so many sons of the working class, had to forego schooling and go to work. He got his first job as a bill clerk for the Railway Express company. During the next few years he held various jobs in Minneapolis.
On February 6, 1918, he was married to Clara Houck. They had four sons, Claire, John, Richard and Russell. Five months after his marriage Grant was inducted into the 3rd Pioneer Infantry, and one month later he found himself in the frontline trenches in France.
His first great lesson in life he learned from the imperialist war, which broke up his life, took him from his wife who was with their first son, and propelled him, untrained, into the maelstrom of war. Grant served in the front line at the Argonne sector from September 26, 1918, to the Armistice.
On the very eve of the Armistice he was transporting munitions to the front lines when he was caught with other soldiers in a terrific explosion at an ammunition dump. Grant sustained a severe case of shellshock. He was hospitalized in France and brought back to the United States on a stretcher.
On October 21, 1919, Grant was released from Fort Snelling with an honorable discharge. His recovery from his war wounds was slow, and he suffered many relapses, especially in the last year of his life when the existence of another World War brought back to him the sufferings he saw and experienced in the first World War.
In 1920 he obtained employment as an office worker in Minneapolis. He was very conscious of the fact that his lack of formal schooling was a handicap, and he took up the task of self-education. Discovering a talent for figures, he immersed himself in the study of mathematics. Later he entered the construction industry, working his way up to the post of executive secretary of a large construction firm, then serving the firm as branch manager in St. Louis and Washington, D.C. Still later, he was employed as an expert estimator with a plumbing supply company in St. Louis, where his expert knowledge of the industry was frequently consulted by others.
 
A Victim of Capitalism, in Peace and War
Then came the economic crash of 1929. Grant, like millions of other persons, was thrown into the ranks of the unemployed. In 1918 he had been a victim of the first imperialist World War. In 1929 he became an economic victim of that same system that brought about the First and Second World Wars. He searched everywhere for work, but no work was to be found.
In 1931 he brought his family back to Minneapolis. Their savings were gone. The family went on relief.
How did it come about that he and millions of others wanted to work but could find no work to perform? Grant asked himself this question. He again applied himself to study. He found the system of capitalism to be responsible for the great ills of mankind. He found the answer in the working-class movement. He came to understand the need for trade unions and for trade union struggle. He came to see the necessity for working-class political action. Fearlessly he threw himself into the task of building the union movement, of strengthening the workers’ political movement. He devoted the remainder of his years to these tasks. He helped other workers find the solution to their problems.
In 1933 Grant finally landed a job as coal driver. He applied his knowledge. He was one of the pioneers who helped launch the campaign to organize the Minneapolis drivers, who helped build that organization which later came to be known as Local 544.
 
A Fearless Fighter for Labor
There is scarcely a worker in the city of Minneapolis today who can compare his present wages and conditions with those existing in 1933, without realizing that he has bettered himself to some extent, in some way, thanks to the far-reaching results of the work of Local 574 and later Local 544. The great drivers’ strikes of 1934 drove the Citizens Alliance back into the shadows and lifted the workers to their feet. Grant played a big part in the successful organization of the drivers. Seldom in the forefront, so far as the public was concerned, Grant made heavy contributions to his union. He served it as a skillful organizer. He was especially versatile in committee work. He played a brilliant role in presenting testimony on the workers’ movement and the needs of the workers and the unemployed, to various governmental bodies in Washington. For years he served the Federal Workers Section as its assistant from the General Drivers Union.
Grant would always rise to his fullest stature at the time when his organization was facing its greatest crises.
In the summer of 1934, when Governor Olson’s national guards were on the streets of Minneapolis, were turning loose the trucks with military permits, were breaking our strike, raiding our strike headquarters, arresting our leaders and our pickets, Grant more than any other person helped turn the tide of battle. He appeared before the governor and before the colonels, forcing the release of the arrested union leaders, forcing the guardsmen to evacuate the union headquarters.
All during these years Grant suffered periodically from his war wounds. Often it was hard and sometimes impossible for him to function.
Grant did the greatest individual service for me that anyone ever performed. He picked me out from behind a coal pile in 1933, where I was shoveling coal for 35¢ an hour, bewildered and confused by life. Grant set my feet on the high road of the workers’ political movement.
 
Grant Dunne’s Greatest Contribution
Grant has started hundreds of other workers on this same path, the only path that leads to the ultimate solution of all our major problems. Grant has opened the eyes of hundreds to the realities of our economic and political system. Through these men Grant Dunne will continue to serve the workers’ movement until the final victory is won. This is his greatest contribution to humanity.
In recent years, Grant has seen the world again enveloped in another bloody war caused by the forces of imperialism. He has seen the heavy hands of Roosevelt press on the working class, smashing at every element of militancy in the movement, driving the masses into war.
Grant had seen the deep injustices committed against his union by Governor Stassen. He had observed the jackal role played by Tobin, betraying the workers as he always has.
Grant saw all the young men of the present generation being shoved into the maw of the war machine. He saw the Roosevelt administration lashing out against the union that Grant belonged to and against the party, the Socialist Workers Party, that Grant belonged to. He saw himself one of the victims of the vicious witch hunts that always precede and accompany imperialist war. The government and the union bureaucrats were persecuting, in Grant, a man who was himself a victim of the First World War.
As Grant saw the approach of America’s entrance into the bloody struggle for markets and colonies and profits, he looked upon his three sons of military age. He thought of the suffering this war might bring to them, as the earlier war had brought to him. He saw his first-born, Claire, a war baby, now grown and about ready to march off to another war.
These sad burdens aggravated the wounds inflicted upon him in mind and body at the Argonne. All of this was more than he could bear.
We are gathered here to say our last farewell to Grant Dunne. We shall cherish his memory. We shall love him for the good he has done. Grant gave all that he had to give to the cause that meant more to him than life itself. He risked his life many times without giving it a second thought. He was a good fighter.
We shall write his name on the banner of his union and his party. And here at his funeral let us strike up once again the forward march to carry that banner onward – in spite of everything – to the final victory of the workers and the free world of emancipated labor.

F. Dobbs Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 23 March 2019


