


DETROIT, Jan. 21 – The rank and file campaign to revoke the no-strike pledge in the current CIO United Automobile Workers referendum is daily gathering momentum and support despite the terrific flag-waving propaganda of the CIO and UAW leaders, backed by the corporations, government and rabid Stalinists.
A high point in the auto militants’ drive to win a majority vote for rescinding the pledge was the half hour radio program presented last evening over Station WJR, Detroit, by the powerful Briggs Local 212, which has been taking a leading part in the struggle against the no-strike surrender policy. WJR is the largest radio broadcasting station in Michigan.
Thousands of Michigan auto workers heard the hard-hitting appeal from the Local 212 members. From all over the state supporting messages are already beginning to pour in, testifying to the widespread sympathetic response the broadcast has evoked. The addresses of Local 212 President Jesse Ferrazza, John Murphy, Chairman of the Briggs Hamtramck unit; Ruth Bailey, rank and filer from the Briggs Mack Avenue plant; Gordon MacDonald, Local 212 Vice-President; and Leo Ellery, Chairman of the Local 212 Skilled Trades Committee, struck the militant chord that the auto ranks have wanted to hear.
Ferrazza quoted the statement of a delegate to the UAW 1942 convention assailing the fraudulent “equality of sacrifice’’ slogan and the War Labor Board, who declared, “We haven’t had collective bargaining in this union since we gave up the right to strike.”
That complaint voiced over two years ago, declared Ferrazza:
“... has been heard over and over in one form or another by workers employed in plants under United Automobile Workers contract from coast to coast. And herein lies the crux of the no-strike issue. To ask: ‘Shall we or shall we not have legitimate collective bargaining?’ Collective bargaining means that labor can, by its organized strength, resist the downward pressure on its living standards and working conditions by organized capital. But without the right to strike labor’s combined strength means little or nothing.”
Ferrazza pointed out that the employers fear only a threat to their profits, which cease when the workers withhold their labor power. “In the last analysis, manufacturers understand only one language – the language of the pocket book, the language of profits.”
The Local 212 President charged the corporations with unleashing a campaign of provocations against auto workers, but:
“the Union is helpless to stop this war of nerves because it is paralyzed by the no-strike pledge. The union now is like a powerful giant with his hands securely shackled behind his back. And because he is defenseless, others treat him with contempt instead of with the respect his strength should inspire ... Take off his bonds and his adversaries would soon change their tactics and keep a respectful distance.”
John Murphy described the function of Roosevelt’s War Labor Board as an agency for stalling the worker’s demands and grievances. “Experience has convinced us that the WLB is a sorry substitute for the right to strike.”
WLB Runaround
“A mountain of evidence can be submitted,” Murphy asserted, “to prove that the WLB exists not to expedite grievance settlements, but to delay, to stall and to hinder collective bargaining. And this is not all. The WLB’s recent act of refusing to even bend the Little Steel Formula shows that it also functions to hold wages down at a time when corporation profits are zooming.”
Answering the “unfair and dishonest cry from big business executives and editorial writers” about the “boys in the foxholes,” Ruth Bailey asserted:
“Many of those boys helped to form the UAW-CIO back in the organizing days. They walked the picket lines and served on committees and endured the hardships without which the union could never have been built. We don’t want them to come back to low pay, long hours and the vicious speedup once so notorious in mass production industry. We don’t want them to return to company unions.”
Gordon MacDonald charged that the promises of the UAW leaders about “equality of sacrifice” turned out to be “as insubstantial as a dream – or as insubstantial as the Atlantic Charter.” He exposed the fraud of the promises about controlling prices, limiting executives’ salaries, “taking the profits out of war.”
“One has only to read the last issue of the United Automobile Worker to learn how empty that promise was. The front page headline of the paper informs us that WARTIME PROFITS TRIPLED INDUSTRY’S PEACETIME TAKE. The aircraft industry, in which our members work, showed dividends 33 times bigger than in peacetime.”
He asked:
“Were our leaders actually so innocent and so green as to believe all those fine things written in the equality of sacrifice program? Or did they merely sugarcoat a bitter pill in the hope that the men and. women in the shops would swallow it (no-strike pledge) without too much fuss?”
He concluded: “Revoke the No-Strike Pledge and put a stop to industry’s offensive against Labor!”
Leo Ellery described in detail the innumerable corporation provocations and the piling up of grievances since the surrender of the strike weapon.
“From the time our leaders gave up the right to strike it has become increasingly difficult to get grievances settled. Important grievances are shunted from stage to stage until they reach management’s front office. There management all too frequently says: ‘Take it to the War Labor Board!’ This is almost equivalent to saying: ‘Take it to the Cemetery!’”
 
Stalinist Tactics
The UAW top bureaucrats, whose main support comes from the strikebreaking Stalinists, are attempting to counter the offensive of the militants with every dirty trick and flag-waving jingo appeal they can devise. A typical example of their methods was demonstrated this afternoon at the regular monthly membership mass meeting of the Press Steel unit of Ford Local 600, attended by approximately 800 persons.
The Stalinist-dominated leadership took advantage of the meeting, called to honor the parents of a union brother shot down in the South Pacific who survived a 30-day ordeal on a life raft, to try to shove through a resolution supporting the no-strike pledge.
W.G. Grant, Local 600 President and notorious Stalinist frontman, gave a frenzied speech, terming the hundreds of thousands of UAW militants opposed to the no-strike pledge as “enemies of labor.” Following this hysterical tirade, the no-strike resolution was introduced.
A rank and file worker demanded the floor to secure the same courtesy of the chair as Grant to oppose the no-strike pledge. The meeting chairman tried to stall him off, but was hooted by the workers. The worker who took the floor then gave a well-prepared, sharply-pointed talk, which frequently brought cheers from the audience. He was interrupted half-way through by the chairman, a Stalinist vice- president, who ruled his time-limit at an end. This almost created a riot. But, in order to permit the meeting to proceed, the speaker yielded the floor.
A leading Stalinist in the unit was then given the floor. His rantings were accorded a chilly reception. This time the audience halted the speaker when he began to exceed his time. But the Stalinists hauled out a whole stable of speakers, whose reactionary ravings caused the disgusted workers to leave the meeting in droves. It was only when the Stalinists had reduced the meeting to a skeleton that they succeeded by a narrow margin in putting over their no-strike resolution.
An evidence of the real sentiments of the workers at this meeting was their warm reception and favorable comments on The Militant, which was distributed for the first time at the Press Steel meeting. A large number of Pioneer Publisher’s new pamphlet, American Workers Need a Labor Party, written by Joseph Hansen, were also sold.
 








Bulletin
DETROIT, April 24 – The firing of thirteen workers along with seven others by the company after the WLB had ordered their reinstatement caused a renewal of the walkout of 5,500 Kelsey-Hayes employees here today.



* * *
DETROIT, April 21 – After nine-days of militant strike action, 5,000 Kelsey-Hayes workers at three plants here have won a smashing victory. The striking members of Amalgamated Local 174, CIO United Automobile Workers, have forced the Regional War Labor Board to order the reinstatement to their jobs of six fired committeemen and a chief steward. This is the first time the WLB has ever issued such an order while a strike was still in progress.
The strike began on April 9 after the company attempted to transfer a foreman into a leader’s job just vacated by a worker who was drafted. The management insisted on jumping over the union’s list of ten workers, with 5 to 10 years seniority and the proper job qualifications. The company refused to negotiate the issue, and the provoked workers on April 9 escorted the foreman from the department. The company then responded by firing 4 committeemen, and another committeeman and chief steward during the strike.
The strikers refused to submit to demands of the WLB and their own local officials that they return to their jobs while the fired men were still out. Just one hour later after the WLB was finally compelled to make its unprecedented decision, a telegram came from the UAW International Executive Board meeting in Milwaukee threatening drastic penalties against the Local 174 officers and members for non-compliance with the no-strike pledge. This telegram enraged the strikers. As one of the reinstated committeemen said: “If the telegram had been sent a day earlier or an hour earlier, our chances of getting back would have been jeopardized.”
The company, following the deliberate policies being pursued throughout the industry, had been attempting repeated provocations in order to get a pretext for firing union militants. But the determination of the strikers, plus the fear that their action might lead to a tie-up of some 12 Kelsey-Hayes plants and set off a huge strike wave in Detroit, forced the WLB and company to retreat.
 




DETROIT, Jan. 20. – The UAW Rank and File Committee here is steadily stepping up its campaign to win a majority for scrapping the no-strike pledge in the CIO United Automobile Workers’ national referendum.
Discussion over the referendum on the no-strike policy is reaching new heights in this heart of the militant auto workers union. Voting is under way as ballots have been mailed starting January 4, to all UAW members, including some 400,000 in the armed forces.
The climax of the referendum campaign to rescind the pledge will be reached this week-end when the powerful Briggs Local 212 presents a half-hour radio program to urge the auto workers to vote down the no-strike policy. A number of union locals are implementing the campaign of the Rank and File committee with leaflets and other literature issued by the locals themselves.
In addition to its scheduled radio broadcast, officers and members of Local 212 have issued an excellent leaflet entitled, Revoke the No-Strike Pledge, which draws the balance sheet of the blows against labor since the pledge was first made by the top union leaders on the false promises of Roosevelt to institute “equality of sacrifice.” This leaflet has been widely circulated throughout the Detroit east side and has met a heartening response from the auto workers.
The Rank and File Committee has mailed out thousands of copies of its program, described previously in The Militant, to local officers, committeemen and active militants throughout Detroit and Michigan. All reports indicate that this program is making strong headway. The Rank and File Committee is becoming recognized as the only group willing and able to lead the struggle for progressive policies in the UAW.
Confronting the auto militants is a united front of reaction, with the three boss-controlled dailies here shrieking editorially against the rank and file. The corporation daily press published large ads furnished by the Stalinist-led Committee to Retain the No- Strike Pledge, which appears lush with funds that the auto workers themselves certainly have not provided.
The stronghold of this anti-strike committee is the officialdom of the Stalinist-dominated Ford Local 600. However, Rank and File leaders predict that the Local 600 ranks will turn out a huge vote against the no-strike pledge.
 




DETROIT, March 17. – A five-day strike at the Thompson Products plant here this week ended after the company agreed to rehire 20 of 26 fired union leaders and lift the suspensions of 126 other members of CIO United Automobile Workers Local 247, whose victimization provoked the strike.
The company further agreed to arbitrate the cases of the six not rehired, who include the union president, the financial secretary and four leading committeemen and shop stewards. These, however, were the main targets of the company’s union-busting attack. It is obvious that the wholesale firings and suspensions were a deliberate device for securing a “compromise” that would still enable the company to behead the union’s leadership.
The settlement of this strike follows the pattern of that in the Briggs and Chrysler strikes, which occurred just previously. In the Briggs settlement, eight of the 16 leading militants whose firing provoked the strike are still out on the street pending arbitration.
Other than verbally protesting the company’s provocations and declaring the strike a “lockout,” the top UAW leaders took no decisive action to defend the Thompson Products local. Even this gesture was denied by these craven leaders to the Briggs workers.
 
Union Wreckers
The developments at Thompson Products are further evidence of the organized and concerted union-busting campaign of the auto corporations. The bosses are looking ahead to the termination of the war and huge production cutbacks and unemployment. Their strategy is to undermine the local leaderships now, intimidate the membership, and prepare for a final crushing open-shop blow when the unions are sufficiently weakened by preliminary softening up and unemployment.
Following closely on the heels of the Thompson Products strike, the NLRB has come to the aid of the company by announcing a collective bargaining election, although the UAW already has a signed contract with the company. This maneuver was first employed by Montgomery Ward’s Sewell Avery as a pretext for refusing to bargain with the genuine union of the workers.
 




FLINT, Mich., June 19 – A second attempt by the corporate interests to put over an increased property tax on the Flint auto workers and other small-home owners was defeated yesterday when the proposition failed to obtain the necessary two-thirds majority of 25,000 votes cast.
The Socialist Workers Party here led the fight against the tax boost. It was the only organization which publicly opposed and exposed the measure, and its campaign had a great influence on the outcome of the vote.
An attempt was made to silence the SWP. 5,000 leaflets addressed to the General Motors and other workers for early election morning distribution were stolen by corporation stooges from the car of the SWP organizer the night before the vote.
Another leaflet was printed late that same night. Scores of local union leaders responded to an SWP call for aid in exposing the gross violation of the rights of a working class political organization.
 
Denounce Theft
Although not in accord with the views in the SWP leaflet, Everett Francis, president of the CIO United Auto workers Fisher Body local, and Ben Woodward, president of the Buick local, issued a sharp denunciation of those responsible for pilfering the leaflets. As yet, the local press has not seen fit to print the statement.
The big corporate and real estate interests went to such lengths to prevent the SWP from being heard because the highly-financed tax increase campaign was based on the propaganda that there was no opposition to the proposal. That fiction was exploded by the SWP leaflet. The Flint Journal had ignored an SWP press release and the News-Advertiser refused to run an advertisement.
Even CIO Council leaders were taken in by the propaganda of the so-called School Citizens Committee, headed by a General Motors representative. This committee claimed the tax increase was needed to prevent a school finances crisis and to meet the just demands of the school teachers for pay increases. With the elections over, the school board has now discovered that it can borrow the necessary money to cover expenses and meet the school crisis.
During the last depression the banks and real estate interests picked up eighty percent of the houses here for a song. Then they set up a tax limitation. They want to raise it now that many of these houses again are owned by workers and small-property owners. Meanwhile, General Motors property has a scandalously low tax evaluation.
A CIO Council statement gave support to the tax proposition on the grounds of insufficient time to put through a better tax method in view of the immediate needs of the school system. It added: “The next labor vote will be to shift the burden where it belongs.”
 
Let Rich Pay!
The strong working class vote against the measure shows the workers want to put the “burden where it belongs” right now. They are anxious to raise the teachers’ pay, but they want the wealthy corporations and big real estate interests to pay for it.
For the first time in years, a city commission has been elected which appears to be completely dominated by Big Business representatives. But the Flint workers could easily break the corporation stranglehold and solve such problems as local taxation through a labor party.
The major auto and CIO locals here are on record for a labor party. With a real effort, they could build a labor party and sweep all political offices./p>

 




FLINT, Feb. 8 – A back-to-work movement started by two Flint women for the purpose of halting the General Motors strike fizzled out before it could even get under way. The two women announced, a special meeting for Flint women. Some 300 attended, but they were almost unanimous in support of the strike.
After wives of the striking workers explained the purpose of the strike and the necessity of backing it, the two women reversed their position and volunteered for strike and kitchen duty. A collection was taken to send President Truman a telegram asking him to take immediate steps to make General Motors Corporation bargain collectively with the CIO United Auto Workers. The remainder of the collection was turned over to the UAW-CIO strike fund.
A Buick union investigating committee this week discovered foremen working on hourly-rated jobs. Although the corporation is seeking an injunction against the local for so-called illegal picketing, the local decided to keep foremen out of the plant.
All 15 gates were blocked by Buick pickets. Only the personnel office was left open, for office help. As a result of the reinforced picketing an agreement was reached with the company, to be submitted at the membership meeting of the local this Sunday.
 




FLINT, Mich., Dec. 28 – Under threat of
injunctions, the four General Motors union locals of Flint have
permitted office and supervisory employees into the strike-bound GM
plants. This policy was decided upon most reluctantly by the CIO
United Auto Workers officials and members at Buick, Fisher Body, AC
Spark Plug and Chevrolet.
Whereas last week witnessed several picket-line
skirmishes at AC before GM applied for the injunction, this week the
Buick local went through the same process.
At a specially called strike strategy meeting of the
Buick local it was decided to allow salaried help to enter the plants
providing they applied for permits at the union headquarters. After
scores of supervisors were denied admittance because of their refusal
to obtain passes from the union, terrific pressure was brought to
bear on the Buick strike committee by the regional UAW office.
 
Confusing Policy
By a very close vote it was decided to permit entry
to all salaried employees who had passes. However, those who refused
to obtain permits would not be kept out if they insisted on crossing
the picket lines.
At all 15 gates, of the Buick factory, scores of
pickets circled the gates. Numerous cars were turned back when
pickets refused to open their lines.
Some of the union-hating supervision, knowing that
pickets would not stop them, edged their cars through the picket
lines. The confusing policy of the UAW regional officers produced
endless bewilderment among the pickets. More than one picket captain
threw up his hands in disgust when the cars started going through the
lines.
Several cops at the Leith Street gate advised
supervisors to go through the picket lines. “The pickets won’t
stop you,” was the usual comment.
It is interesting to note that two of the locals are
discussing ways and means of organizing the office workers. Union
officials see this as one possible solution to the present problem.
No organizational steps have been taken as yet.
 
Ranks Dissatisfied
Despite a lull in the strike over the holidays there
is noticeable a growing dissatisfaction in the ranks over the policy
of the UAW International leaders. In discussion with this reporter
scores of militants mention time and again the vast difference
between the sit-down strikes and the present strikes. These militants
were the second rank leaders at Chevrolet and Fisher Body during the
heroic 1937 battles.
This undercurrent of criticism has been stirred by
the UAW top leaders’ proposal to provide “company security”
to Ford, a proposal quickly grabbed up by GM. Hundreds of militants
have voiced their opposition to it and have declared openly they
would fight it with the same determination and vigor with which they
fought the no-strike pledge.
The International leaders are quite aware of this
dissatisfaction and intend to leave no stone unturned to ram their
policy down the throats of the GM workers. At the last Chevrolet
membership meeting, the International sent in Victor Reuther and
several local regional representatives to fight a proposal of the
Chevrolet militants who were recommending that the steel workers
advance their strike date from January 14 to January 1.
Despite the high-pressure speeches of the union brass
hats, 40 per cent of the members cast their votes for the proposal of
the progressives of the Chevrolet local.
 







The following statement nailing the corporation-inspired, red-baiting attacks in Flint was issued to the press on January 17 by Sol Dellinger, Flint organizer of the Socialist Workers Party:



* * *
In the January 16 issue of the Flint Journal appears an article in reference to my activities as organizer of the Flint branch, Socialist Workers Party (Trotskyist), and in regard to the program and activity of the Trotskyists in the UAW-CIO.
It is our considered opinion that the statements appearing in the pages of the Flint Journal are corporation-inspired. The time-honored method, but none-the-less disreputable, to split the unity of striking workers is to resort to red-baiting.
At no time during this strike has General Motors Corporation been successful in breaking the magnificent solidarity of the GM workers. One has only to ask himself the question “Who benefits?” The answer is obvious. The only beneficiary of these red-baiting attacks is the power-glutted General Motors Corporation.
The General Motors workers are engaged in a titanic battle with the mightiest, the richest, most arrogant financial colossus in the world. The GM workers have the right to expect the aid of every working class organization, whether it be a political party or another trade union, in their fight to maintain a decent standard of living for the working people of America.
The Socialist Workers Party, all of its members, and I as an official representative of the party, are actively participating, supporting and aiding the striking General Motors workers. We accept our obligation as should every individual worker and organization in the entire country.
We feel that the basic problems of this country—war, inflation, and unemployment—will not be solved until the workers and farmers organize and win a majority of the people over to the idea of taking control of the government, running the government in the interests of the majority of the people, and not as it is today, in the interests of America’s 60 Families, who number less than 1 per cent of the population.
Our party bases its principles and program on the great Russian Revolution of 1917, led by Lenin and Trotsky. There, for the first time, the poor people of Russia proved to the workers of the world that it was possible to take power in the country and wield it in the interests of the people.
In answer to the four misguided individuals of A.C. local, who issued the release to the press about Trotskyists working in the GM-UAW locals of Flint, we would like to make this clear: If there are any people in these locals who accept part or all of our ideas, they can rest assured that they are the most active people on the picket lines, the best supporters of the strike, the most selfless, self-sacrificing and devoted members of the UAW. Where any members of our party are elected to office by the membership of their union, they perform their duties in the best traditions of militant, progressive unionism.
We expect and know that all our members in the UAW are in this fight to the finish, for a 30 per cent wage increase. For this strike will determine whether the American workers will be able to maintain themselves and their children at a decent standard of living or be pushed down as serfs of the corporation.
 




FLINT, Mich., Jan. 5.—The Greater Flint CIO
Council, representing 50,000 organized workers, tonight at Its
meeting unanimously adopted a resolution condemning the “company
security” plan proposed to the Ford Motor Company by the CIO
United Auto Workers negotiators.
The council, which includes UAW locals representing
some 40,000 striking General Motors workers, called on the UAW
International Executive Board to "wash its hands” of any
proposition to permit the firing or fining of union militants for so-
called "unauthorized” strikes.
In addition, the resolution instructed the Flint
Weekly Review, official organ of the Greater Flint Industrial
Union Council, "to prominently and conspicuously in its columns
and editorials begin an educational campaign about the dangers and
harmful effects to the labor movement that can ensue from adoption of
company security clauses in union contracts and agreements.”
Copies of the resolution are to be released to the press and radio
and to be sent to all locals of the Greater Flint CIO to be read to
the memberships.
 
GM Strike Front
On the General Motors strike front, with the office
and supervisory employes being permitted to enter the Flint GM
plants, the four UAW locals involved have started a campaign to
organize the office workers. This is a continuation of the work
started by some of the locals months ago.
Chevrolet local, which has been in the forefront of
this organizing campaign, has appointed a committee to direct the
activity of the local in organizing the clerical help in Chevrolet.
This past week several handbills were distributed explaining the
benefits of union organization.
The other locals, Fisher Body, Buick and AC Spark
Plug, have taken up this issue and are instituting similar campaigns
to remove threat of office workers being used by the corporation
management against the striking workers.
 
“Fact Finding”
As the GM strike enters the seventh week the UAW
members here are watching carefully for the forthcoming announcement
by Truman’s fact-finding committee. After a round of the picket
lines, it is clear that these men do not intend to permit anyone to
sell them short in their demand for a 30 per cent increase in wages.
Their thoughts are best summed up by the comments of
the men at Chevrolet Plant four who are the veterans of the ’37
sitdowns and the battle of “Bulls Run.” The morning after
Truman’s address to the nation, they stated:
“It was a fine speech but we can’t
see where he said anything that you could sink your teeth into, when
all he needed to say was that we rate a 30 per cent wage increase. We
didn’t hear him say anything like that.”
At the Buick Plant Forty gate the pickets commented
on the speech in this way:
“When you boil it all down he is
trying to give us a Full Employment bill which isn’t worth the
paper it is written on and in return we are supposed to accept a
fact-finding committee. We still can’t see where the
fact-finding committees will do us any good.”
 
“Company Security”
That the pickets are anxiously awaiting the report of
the Fact-Finding Committee is apparent by the way the discussion
continually drifts back to what they may possibly suggest for a
settlement. At all gates and almost without exception, the men are
agreed that they will not accept any wage increase that has tied to
it, corporation security clauses or production speedup clauses. The
Plant Ten men of Chevrolet stated emphatically, “We have been
on strike for over six weeks and we may as well stay out until we get
what we want.”
General Motors will have a difficult time trying to
convince these union men to accept corporation security or speedup
clauses. Almost all of them remember the speedup and they would much
rather reject any wage increase than to return to slave-driving
supervisors and speedups in the departments. None of the local union
officials have indicated any support for this proposal. They are
consciously aware that a terrific explosion would take place against
this proposition and against them if they dared to accept it.
The striking militants in their constant discussions
on the picket lines are beginning to realize that the speedup clause
is tied up in every way with corporation security. When the pickets
learned from the columns of The Militant that the Press Steel
Unit of Ford Local 600 had rejected the Leonard proposal to fine and
fire union men, they exclaimed: “Well, it’s about time
they woke up at Ford’s!”
 




FLINT, Mich., Jan. 9 – A red-baiting “anti-Trotskyite”
attack on the Flint auto union militants in the Stalinist Daily
Worker, January 5, has aroused great indignation among the
General Motors strikers here and boomeranged against the Stalinist
slanderers.
Tex Owens, UAW Chevrolet Local president here, who is “quoted”
in the Daily Worker as one source of its “information”
against the “Trotskyites,” has repudiated statements
attributed to him in the Stalinist article, Why Chevrolet Local
Fights The Trotskyites. Owens gave the lie to the article in the
presence of this reporter.
After seven weeks of the GM strike, this article provided the
occasion for the first public appearance of the Communist (Stalinist)
Party in Flint. This issue of the Daily Worker was distributed
to CIO auto workers attending a mass meeting addressed by top UAW
officers on the progress of negotiations with the corporation.
It is obvious that the Stalinists hoped that this article, written
by William Allan, a professional hack writer, would lay the
groundwork for a campaign against the Flint progressives, the
Trotskyists and The Militant, which has gained great
popularity among the GM strikers for its accurate and sympathetic
reporting of their strike.
Allan’s article is based on statements allegedly made by Tom
Kelly, recording secretary of Chevrolet Local, and confirmed by Tex
Owens. Interviewed by Allan, Kelly is reported as saying, “He
would be glad to tell us about the Trotskyites.”
 
Horrendous Tale
Then comes a horrendous tale, attributed to Kelly, about some
“Trotskyites” posing for newspaper pictures before the
Chevrolet gate, with copies of The Militant in their hands.
Kelly stated, according to Allan:
“I checked up later on this quartet and found that
they had sent the workers home. Let me tell you some more about these
people because we are sick of them in Flint and we are going to do a
job on them, right, Tex?”
Tex Owens is then said to have replied, “That’s right,
Tom, tell him about the meeting.” Throughout the article Owens
is quoted as a chorus to Kelly.
The article continues with a harassing account about the
“Trotskyites” allegedly disrupting a Chevrolet Local
meeting. Kelly is then quoted as saying:
“In conclusion we passed a motion in our local that
their lousy sheet, The Militant, shall not be allowed to be
distributed ... They are the fifth column alright and it’s time
we stopped ignoring them throughout the union and take the bull by
the horns like we did in Chevrolet. Our next move is to boot them out
if they continue to disrupt and we know they will.”
Allan then writes:
“We asked Tex Owens, union president, what he
thought of Kelly’s statement. Tex said, ‘Tom speaks my
sentiments about these birds, exactly.’”
 
Answers Stalinists
Immediately after the mass meeting at which the Daily Worker
with this lying account was distributed, I sought out Tex Owens and
found him surrounded by Chevrolet workers.
One executive board member was questioning Owens in regard to the
article. He asked, “Was it true that there was any disruption
at the last meeting of the local?”
Owens replied, “No. There was none.”
He was then shown a copy of the Daily Worker. In answer to
a question from this reporter about the other statements attributed
to him in Allan’s article, Owens said:
“I never confirmed any of these statements in this
paper. I don’t recall Kelly making any such statements to
Allan. You can quote me on that.”
Kelly did not deny giving the report to Allan. However, he
sheepishly dissociated Owens from his own remarks to Allan!
The statement about the Chevrolet Local barring The Militant
by passage of a motion is a pure Stalinist invention. One wonders how
even the brazen Stalinists hoped to palm off such a piece of outright
fiction on the Chevrolet workers.
 
Pure Invention
No ruling against The Militant has ever been passed by the
local. Even Kelly has admitted to this reporter that this is the real
fact of the matter. On the contrary, The Militant is being
distributed, and has been each week, to thousands of Chevrolet
pickets, who receive it eagerly.
As for the truly fantastic charge that Trotskyists, who fought the
no-strike pledge throughout the war and have called for extension of
the CIO strikes to aid the GM workers, sent pickets home – that
is a lie that requires no answer for any thinking person. Only a
Stalinist poison pen artist would have the gall to attempt to peddle
this to the GM strikers here.
The Chevrolet local has the best picket lines in the city of
Flint, perhaps in the state of Michigan. After reading The
Militant for seven consecutive weeks, these workers know that The
Militant wholeheartedly supports the GM strikers in every way
possible. It is for this reason that the paper is accepted in the
most friendly spirit by all workers on the picket lines.
Thus, from beginning to end, the Daily Worker article is
constructed with crass falsehoods. It is an attempt to stir up the
corporation stooges and the conservative elements in the unions to
begin a red-baiting campaign in Flint and elsewhere.
 
Red-Baiting Campaign
For the last few days General Motors Corporation has hinted to
their stooges through paid advertisements that such a disruptive
red-baiting campaign is in order. Walter Reuther, UAW vice-president,
in his speech at the GM strike mass meeting, nailed this attempt
immediately when he pointed out that in the eyes of the corporation
all new demands of the workers are viewed as “revolutionary.”
Several members of the Communist Party of Flint have openly
expressed to this reporter dissatisfaction with the Daily Worker’s
article. As one of the CP leaders at Chevrolet put it, “I don’t
know why Allan had to lie about those points. He sure botched the
job!”
These Stalinist rank and filers know that a red-baiting campaign
in Flint, such as this article attempts to provoke, will be directed
not only against the Trotskyists, but also against members of the
Communist Party. Only the corporation and its stooges can benefit
from it.
This first attempt of the Stalinists to open a smear campaign
against the militant workers here has boomeranged. But this miserable
flop should serve as a warning to all thinking workers and members of
the Communist Party of the lengths to which the cynical and corrupted
Stalinist leaders will go to halt the advance of the militant forces
in the union.
 




FLINT, Mich., Mar. 31 – A large protest meeting held under the auspices of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, heard a rousing talk by Genora Dollinger, representative of the Socialist Workers Party, condemning the recent bloody assault against the Negro people in Columbia, Tennessee. Mrs. Dollinger, a well-known UAW unionist in Flint and Detroit, delivered the main address.
Other speakers who addressed the 150 present were Jesse Governor, president of the Local NAACP branch, Joe Brandt, Organizer of the Flint Communist Party; John Young, Flint attorney, and George Stevens, candidate for State Legislature on the Democratic ticket.
Mrs. Dollinger reviewed the facts behind the recent wave of anti-Negro terror sweeping the country, terming it a part of the boss offensive against the labor movement.
“The powerful unity of the workers in the recent huge strike wave,” she declared, “has shown the capitalist rulers how great, how mighty is the working class united ... The bosses recognize this threat to their imperialistic interests and are beginning to build up their fascist organizations to spread their gospel of hate and poison among us.”
 
Standing Ovation
Advocating an independent labor party, she continued:
“The politicians of the rich in our Congress at one and the same time kill FEPC and draw up legislation to smash labor unions.”
In conclusion she stated:
“The Socialist Workers Party, which I represent, will leave no stone unturned until the Columbia Tennessee victims are freed and vindicated and their murderers placed behind bars. The Socialist Workers Party will leave no stone unturned until this rotten system of discrimination, wars, poverty and misery is replaced by a system of true equality and justice and real liberty for all.”
Her address was greeted by a standing ovation from all present. The audience composed primarily of GM workers and their wives, contributed $165 for the defense of the Columbia Tennessee victims.
 




FLINT, Mich., March 19 – All GM locals here have overwhelmingly accepted the new contract negotiated between the CIO United Automobile Workers and General Motors Corporation.
However, while accepting the national contract by a 40 to 1 margin, the members of Buick local 599 voted 2,767 to 1,510 to continue the strike until local demands were settled. This demonstration of the fighting power and stamina of the GM workers was expressed at the largest mass meeting in the history of the Buick local. Over 9,000 of the 15,000 members attended
Art Case, acting chairman of the Buick Bargaining Committee, informed this reporter that:
“... the membership showed in this meeting that they are solidly behind us. We have a dozen demands that have to be settled. We want the elimination of the reprimand system, reinstatement of workers fired during the war for union activity, elimination of piece-work in the foundry. These are the most important demands.”
At the Buick membership meeting the local leadership came in unitedly with the proposal to continue the strike until agreement had been reached. This has been backed up by the largest picket lines around the 15 gates of the Buick plant since the beginning of the strike.
 
Chevrolet Returns
Chevrolet local 659 voted to return to work despite the fact that some of the leaders of the local had asked the membership to continue the strike on, the basis of the local demands.
Both Chevrolet and Buick Locals here submitted resolutions to the UAW convention in support of the immediate formation of a Labor Party.
The GM workers are returning to work with renewed confidence in their power which was tested time and again during the 118 day strike. Hundreds of new leaders rose up from the ranks and thousands of workers participated in union activities for the first time. This is a good omen for the future.
 




If you want to learn something of the real meaning of British “democracy”, get a job in South Africa. I’ve just returned from there. You won’t frighten the South African natives with threats of Hitler. They’ve got a very special Hell of their own, and all of it the creation of British imperialism.
It took six days before the ship I was on could tie up at the docks in Capetown, South Africa. The port was overcrowded with ships because of the tremendous traffic, now detoured around the Cape, which prior to the war went through the Suez Canal.
In Capetown the native longshoremen came aboard the ship, 20 to a hatch. Although, as I later found out, these are the highest paid native workers, they were clothed in the most miserable rags, burlap sacking, shreds of cloth. They begged the crew members for discarded clothing, ragged dungarees or a scrap of shirt. Shoes, no matter how torn and worn, were a treasure.
The longshoremen ate their food on deck in front of us. It was some indescribable mushy mixture which might turn the stomach of a hog.
It was not in Capetown, however, where I saw the worst conditions. What we saw as we proceeded up the East Coast, at Port Elizabeth, East London, Durban, etc., made conditions in Capetown, vile as they are, appear almost decent by comparison.
In East London, for instance, gangs of native children came around. I learned that these children, between the ages of six to eleven, were working in the holds of our ship.
The ravages of tuberculosis were plainly visible in the faces and bodies of the natives. TB is one of the great scourges which “civilization” has brought the African natives; the hunger and filth which is their lot is a perfect breeding ground for this disease of poverty.
The disease is rampant even among the poor whites, whose standard of living is only a few notches above that of the native colored peoples. I read a number of papers in East London, and the various other South African cities I visited, and one thing in these papers struck me forcibly. Every one contained appeals for funds to fight tuberculosis. These funds, of course, are for the whites. We can imagine what the devastation of TB is like among the natives – for whom there are no appeals for funds.
All the heavy physical labor is done by the natives. They work from dawn to dusk for one meal a day – a bowl of mush. In one American-owned mine there are 200,000 natives employed at a wage of 10 cents a day.
 
Head-Tax System
The means that British imperialism employs to force the natives into these slave jobs is a head-tax. Every native is compelled to pay a tax of a pound a year, about four dollars American.
If a native fails to pay this tax he goes to a hard-labor prison camp. If he is lucky enough to survive this experience, he is unlikely to skip paying the tax again.
In East London, across the river from the docks, I saw one of these slave camps, a quarry, where the prisoners are driven by brutal armed guards at an inhuman pace in the broiling sun. The reports of survivors of these prisons have circulated among the natives, who have thus come to prefer the drawn-out punishment of starvation and “free” toil, to the tortures of the prison camps.
The native peoples are considered and treated as non-humans by the white rulers. There is total segregation and discrimination.
Three Negro mess boys from our ship went ashore at Capetown. They returned in a very bitter mood. They explained to me that the segregation and discrimination are even worse than in any part of our own Bourbon South. They would not go ashore again. The natives of South Africa have never heard of the “four freedoms.”
I attended a showing of the American moving picture Boy’s Town in the lily-white movie theatre in East London. In one scene, a little colored boy was shown sitting with some white boys. When this scene flashed on the screen, there was a loud gasp from the audience. They were horrified at the idea of a colored boy being shown sitting together with whites.
But it remained for the things we witnessed in American and British-owned Portuguese East Africa to show me to what depths of misery and exploitation the African natives are driven by imperialism.
There I saw the natives toiling for six cents a day, living in disease-ridden jungle camps. I saw the native workers laboring on the ore piles in bare feet in Lorenco Marques and Biera, where it is 90 to 100 degrees in the “winter.” The pavements there are so hot they burned through the soles of my shoes.
Starvation is so terrible in this colony that it was not an uncommon sight to see natives arm-deep in the garbage and refuse barrels grubbing for food. I saw more than one native pass out on the street from starvation. I never saw a middle-aged or old native. The work is too gruelling and their conditions of living too appalling. They die like flies in a winter wind.
This was my first trip to Africa, and my first personal glimpse of British imperialism. I saw enough on this one trip to fully understand what the “democracies” are really fighting for. And it’s no different than what Hitler is striving after. It is for the robbery of colonies, and the exploitation of the native peoples.
 

