

Those pickets who dumped two seven-ton loads in front of North Western Yard No. 1 on the first morning of the Strike:
The action that warned the rest of the Companies what to expect.
* * * * *
That 3 hour running fight up West Broadway to keep a load of coal from being delivered to ex-Sheriff Brown’s greenhouse.
* * * * *
That fighting young worker who seized a cop by the throat and made him apologize (before the crowd) for calling him a vile name.
* * * * *
That in this Strike, mass picketing became a reality – not an empty slogan.
* * * * *
The sight of a hall full of sleepy men jumping to their feet, shaking the sleep from their eyes, responding eagerly to the never ending demands – ten pickets here! twenty pickets there!
* * * * *
The steady line of workers flocking up to join the Union – then leaving to swell the picket lines.
* * * * *
The fact that few – very few, farmers tried to scab by selling wood for easy cash although wood is plentiful – and the farmers needed the money.
* * * * *
The cheer that went up from the coal workers when they learned that the Ice Wagon Drivers, in spite of their officials, had decided to go out in sympathy.
* * * * *
The militant young pickets who in the face of pistol fire and five squad cars full of cops – dumped that load of coal.
* * * * *
That the second and the third night of the Strike – found the fuel oil drivers responding to the pickets’ demands for “no fuel deliveries”. Many drivers refused to work.
* * * * *
The fact: That the entire police force backed the bosses, but that all the coal that filtered through the picket lines, could have been delivered by ONE Union DRIVER in two hours.
* * * * *
That the Strike was so effective after the first day – it required a Doctor’s prescription to get coal through the lines – in case of sickness.
* * * * *
That the Union agreement to let Welfare Coal go, the first day – was violated by any number of greedy coal owners – It was banned after that because of this double-crossing.
* * * * *
That the bosses had to swallow their insolent slander that, “the men can’t organize”, “they won’t stick” – they saw UNION organisation – they saw them STICK – More than that, they saw them FIGHT.
 



Minneapolis. – After a whirlwind strike battle which electrified the whole City and tied up every coal yard tight as a drum, the coal drivers won complete recognition of their union in two and a half days.
The Minneapolis Labor Review of February 16 says:
“The workers of the city were thrilled, both organized and unorganized, at the masterly manner in which the struggle was conducted ... Picketing of the coal yards was carried on continuously during the strike and there has never been a better example of enthusiastic efficiency than displayed by the coal driver pickets.
“A week ago Minneapolis was not paying much attention to the coal drivers. Today organized and militant they are a mighty factor in the industrial world.”
The same paper reports “a memorable meeting of the Central Labor Union, that heard Miles Dunne, member of the coal drivers’ strike committee, declare that anyone who doubts that the American workers will fight for their rights is sadly misinformed. He said that all delegates should report to their unions that the coal drivers’ strike had been a very successful one.”
The Strike was conducted by General Drivers’ Union No. 574. The committee representing the strikers before the Regional Labor Board, which negotiate the settlement, consisted of William Brown, Cliff Hall, Miles Dunne and Carl Skoglund. Roy Wier, organizer of the C.L.U. and attorney John Goldie assisted in the negotiations as members of the committee.

Minneapolis. – With united forces and. fighting determination the Coal Yard Workers gave a decisive answer to the coal bosses who had ignored their demands, claiming that the Union did not represent the workers in the yards.
From Wednesday morning until Friday evening, Feb. 7th, 8th, and 9th, the Strike Committee had complete command of the machinery of coal distribution in the City. So effective was the tie-up, that coal orders for Hospitals, Orphans Homes, etc., could move only upon written permission of the Strike Committee, the union furnishing driver and picket guard who were paid Union wages by the delivering company.
The Coal Drivers and Yard Workers organized into General Drivers Local 574 of the Int. T.C.S.H., displayed a well organized, mobile, fighting picket line that stormed over all opposition, closed 65 truck yards, 150 coal offices and swept the streets clear of scabs in the first three hours of the strike, what proved to be decisive factors in the struggle, long foreseen by those active workers who took the lead in the organization of the Coal Yard Drivers and Yardmen, was the careful preparation for action and the militant mass picket line.
The careful work of preparing, the patient day to day organizational campaign in the various yards and sections of the industry, the devotion of a number of militant workers to the idea of the Union – this must be given FIRST place in any consideration of this or any other strike.
Composed in the main of young men learning the lesson of fighting solidarity in their first labor struggle, the Coal Yard workers have in the ranks many older men who brought to the Union and into the fight valuable experience, supplementing enthusiasm with calm judgment, and therefore striking ability. The older and the young workers found their places together in the powerful drive and sweep of the offensive.
 
The “Cruising Picket Squad”
Some of the best proposals and many of the most courageous acts came from those workers who, until a few short weeks ago, knew little about strikes or union membership. One of the outstanding features of the strike was the Cruising Picket Squad. This idea came from the ranks and played a great role in the strike. The general strategy of the Strike Committee was to concentrate the pickets at the largest and most dangerous yards, leaving a more or less skeleton line at the other points, picket captains to make the necessary shifts as occasion demanded.
There were more than 60 yards to cover scattered over an area of ten miles square. To guard the St. Paul line, where more than one hundred greedy coal operators awaited an opportunity to force their workers to scab, was a task of no small proportions. (That few St. Paul drivers tried to run the blockade is a living example of the fine solidarity that exists.) Here the Cruising Picket Squad found its work. From the moment of its inception, when it was taken up eagerly by the Strike Committee as well as the whole membership, in the early hours of the strike, no stray scab had any chance to get through. Car after car volunteered for this work. Manned with five to seven pickets they supplemented the main lines, making them virtually ‘coal’ tight.
 
Inspiration and Example For Union Workers
The methods used and the manner in which the organization work was carried out, stands as a model for the benefit of those who will take up the vast work that lies just ahead. The coal workers section of the transportation industry, has gained its first objective. These workers have tested their organized strength, almost alone, in a sharp and successful engagement with the bosses.
In the course of preparation, and during the fight, many obstacles, hitherto unsuspected by the average rank and file worker, came to light. A careful study of these weak points, with a view to correcting them, will be of extreme importance for the future. The union can be only as strong as an alert and determined membership chose to make it.
First of all: No barrier must be placed in the way of recruiting the membership to full strength. THE FUEL OIL AND GASOLINE DRIVERS AND HELPERS are the next section to be organized, here there must be no delay. This approach connects up the campaign which leads from section to section and gives what assurances can be given in advance that the gains made in the Coal Strike will not be partially sacrificed.
The Open Shop bosses have learned a bitter lesson. That they are far from idle is well known to every wide-awake worker. The example of the whole police force ranged on the side of the bosses in the futile effort to break through the picket lines with scab coal, has only one meaning for the Union and each member of the Union. Be prepared! Be prepared! BE MUCH BETTER PREPARED! for the next test.
Every member of the Union as well as those workers who will be members in the coming period, should be vigilantly watching the Regional Labor Board. What exactly has been its role? It is well to note the fact that in all the efforts made by the Union Committee to present the coal workers demands to the bosses, the Board was only an agency to transmit an insolent reply and a flat refusal of the bosses to deal with the Union. During the most advantageous time of the winter season this Board together with several Labor officials were instrumental in postponing action under one pretext and another, which gravely weakened and endangered the coal workers’ position.
When in spite of these obstructive tactics, the justly angered and aroused workers STRUCK the yards, demonstrating to the bosses and to all who wished to see that the union did actually speak for the coal yard workers and drivers – then the Board, with little delay, came forward with a decision that actually saved the face of the bosses. And not only their faces. A vote in the separate yards was ordered. This played directly into the hands of the coal yard owners who had LOST the Strike.
Here is one of the most important lessons of the strike. It must be discussed again and again in the Union. There must be no misunderstandings. The way to avoid them is through full and free discussion by the membership.
The next phase of the fight for better conditions in the coal industry will open up in the near future. When it is considered that union organization has come to the coal yards for the first time in Minneapolis, the workers in the yards and on the trucks have no reason to take second place in matters of organization and militant action. They have already conducted one of the best struggles that the city has seen in its labor history. The very nature of the work in which they are engaged gives them a responsible and powerful position in the trade union movement.
These workers have demonstrated their power. They have forced recognition of the union while ON STRIKE, a victory of no mean proportions, in the present state of the local Drivers’ Unions. They have, while in struggle, won the loyal support of the rank and file of the Ice Wagon Drivers Union. This and other advantages must be organizationally consolidated, by welding the drivers’ unions into a more solid unit. Those who oppose progress in this direction must take their place with the forces of reaction.
That this can be accomplished at one stroke, no responsible and experienced worker will contend, but any undue delay in advancing along this road will be costly for the whole movement. To follow up the advantage and achieve the greatest good, means for the membership to ready for further devoted work, to stand ready for further developments. Ready at all times to ‘crack down’ if danger threatens the UNION.
 



Three hundred thousand workers and farmers in Minnesota, who have by their support of the Farmer Labor Party in the campaigns of the past few years demonstrated a willingness to move politically against the bosses, face another barren year and new disappointments.
The party to which they have given so much, stumbles towards coalition with the Democratic machine for the state and congressional campaign of 1930. If full coalition is not reached this year it will not be for lack of work and will on the part of a large and influential section of the leadership, but rather because this leadership is unable to come to agreement upon individuals from the different camps to head the ticket.
 
F.L.P. Policy Benefits Officialdom
Even a brief and hurried review of past political campaigns of the F.L.P. will be enough to convince any intelligent workman that the party has been dominated by people who read history backward, in order to justify a policy which, by no stretch of imagination, can be considered beneficial to anyone except that coterie of officials, who use the offices given them by the party for petty bickering and personal advantage.
Shipstead is of course, the outstanding example. But he is by no means alone. During the course of the party’s existence, dozens of men have been sent to the State house, many county and municipal officials have been elected, several U.S. congressmen and two U.S. senators have been sent to Washington. Out of this numerical array, not a SINGLE man has appeared who measures up to the standard of a workers’ representative. Not ONE among them has had either the courage or the vision to propose any measure, which would call into question the existing order and place upon the order of the day a thoroughgoing change from the vicious system of class exploitation.
Not one among them has ever had the courage to use the tribune upon which they strut (like their Republican and Democrat brothers) for the purpose of calling the working masses into action. Rather they have held in check the ferment in the ranks in various ways, especially by truckling in a hundred forms to the prejudices of the most backward. A good example of this, is the action of state Senator Lawson in voting for the Anti-Evolution Bill (to bar the teaching of the theory of evolution in public schools). Lawson is also editor of a[n] F.L. daily paper at Wilmar.
It is true that most of the leaders are in disagreement with Lawson on this and it is just as true that these leaders do nothing to expose and remove him and others who, by actions of a piece with the one cited, live, mentally at least, in the feudal age.
Always the program of the Party has been trimmed to meet the wishes of those elements who look to the countryside for support and approval. Without exception, at every turning point, in all campaigns, before and during each convention or conference, the proposals or demands of advanced sections of the workers have been denied.
 
Farmers Outvote Workers
The workers have been outvoted in every state convention, the most important committees having been governed by a seven to three vote with the farmers always seven and the industrial workers three.
All the proposals by the Communists and Left wing for a closer affiliation of the unions to the Party have been hailed with cries of “split” by the farmers; and the “practical” politicians and labor “leaders” in control of the machinery have never failed to turn thumbs down on these demands. Two instances of this sort of kowtowing to reaction should be cited as typical. In several State conventions the proposal was made by the Left wing to give the local unions affiliated to the Party direct representation to the state conventions. After many attempts had been made to put this into effect, the workers, over the opposition of the farmers and the leadership, were finally able to achieve a half measure of recognition. The unions are now ALLOWED – to send ONE delegate to conventions, who has the standing virtually of a FRATERNAL delegate!!
For a long period the Communists, together with the Left wing, attempted to gain affiliation for a large group of militant workers through their co-operatives and workers clubs. The all too successful plans devised by the leaders to keep these thousands of workers out of active participation, make nothing less than shameful history. It is of extreme importance that workers generally review the history of the Minnesota Farmer Labor Party, that they grow familiar with the path along which so large a number of workers have been led, only to find themselves, after years of struggle and sacrifice, burdened with a party dominated by the ideology of the petty property owner and led by opportunists of the first order.
Of still greater importance, are the reasons for this state of affairs and a clear understanding of the mistakes made years ago which led inevitably to the present situation.
 
“Unity” in a Two Class Party
First of all, the condition of the Minnesota F.L.P. with its list toward merger with the old parties of the capitalists, is not the result of false and incompetent leadership primarily. Any political party composed of two classes, as is the case in this instance, with farmers and workers in the same organization, maintains unity only at the expense of the program put forward by the most exploited and propertyless section. The leadership of such a party can lead only as long as it is able to hold back the thrusts of the workers and satisfy the demands of those elements whose political outlook is bounded by the illusion that it is possible to achieve security under the capitalist order, by acquiring property or enhancing the value of that which they already hold, through reforms, half measures, etc.
The program of a party is the expression of its aims; if the program is wrong fundamentally, those leaders who base themselves upon it have no choice but to follow a path of compromise. Workers in industry always have before them the grim reminder of their position in our present social system. For them there is no question of property; the overwhelming majority have none, the vast mass face the problem daily of making their meager wages stretch out in order to cover the bare necessities of life. Why then do we find this state of affairs in Minnesota? Whence came the idea that together, that is, within the same party, workers and farmers could work towards a solution of their problems?
* * *
It is a matter of history that in 1924 the Communist Party under the leadership of the Right-Centre bloc in the International and the Pepper leadership in America, forced the merger of the Farmer’s Non-partisan League with the Working People’s Non-partisan Political League.
 
Pepper’s Bold Plan
This, to be sure, was the local manifestation of a plan, national in scope which, according to Pepper and his followers, was to make the farmers, if not the spearhead, at least the haft of the weapon that would strike the decisive blow for the workers.
Still within the International in this period, the Leninist-Bolsheviks headed by Trotsky, were able to check for a time, the development of this un-Marxian course: Stalin’s theory of “dual composition” parties finally prevailed through the East at a later date, only to do immeasurable damage to the world revolutionary movement. (For a full realization of the enormous damage done by this reactionary idea, workers should secure and read the pamphlet, The Draft Program of the Communist International, by L.D. Trotsky, published by the Militant.)
It is the purpose of this article to deal with the local and national effect of the false idea of dual composition parties and to bring out clearly, in this connection how wrong tactics proceed from wrong programmatic formulations.
The idea of Farmer Labor Parties, once planted in the favorable soil of the farmer-worker state of Minnesota, grew and blossomed under the guidance of a labor-farmer-compromiser type of leader, whose one burning desire seems to be junction, by any crossover, with some form of “progressive” or “liberal” political movement.
It is not without significance, that the F.L. leaders, almost without exception, look upon the “progressive bloc”, Brookhart, Wheeler, Norris, Frasier, etc., as the real leaders and have an almost childlike faith in them. Naturally, these leaders are knowingly or unknowingly expressing the wishes of the dominant group within the Party – that is the farmers.
The present maneuver towards the Democrats has at least a two fold purpose. First: to capture the Governorship and so to build up a machine within the Party which can be used in the future for bigger and better mergers. Secondly: it is now generally recognized that the Minnesota movement cannot stand alone. The leaders now understand the danger to the movement and are trying in this confused manner to give a new lease of life to the party, hoping against hope that the national “progressives” will come to their aid and lead them into the green fields of a new “liberal” movement on a national scale.
 
Workers Used by Farmers
With this political outlook, the leadership, from the vantage point of the farmers’ wagon, from time to time sees bogholes in the road ahead and is forced to use the workers as pushers of the cart in such bad spots as political campaigns, financial difficulties, etc.
That the workers have nothing to gain from this horse play must be evident to those who give it a little thought. It must be evident also, that the poor farmers, those without land (the banker’s hired men) are being led along a path that will deliver them, bound and helpless, into the hands of the common enemy, for although the farmers belong to a different class than the workers, they can be delivered from their bonds only by supporting the workers politically. The workers, because of their class position, must lead. Only thus can victory be achieved.
Does all of the foregoing preclude the possibility of the workers making an advance politically, through a Labor Party? Not at all; the fact is, that millions of industrial workers still are bound to the political parties of the dominant capitalist groups. A Labor Party based upon workers’ organizations, with a program permeated with the idea of the struggle of the classes, can serve as an instrument in rallying the masses for a march toward the Marxian solution of the great problem.
 



The Communist Party in the Minneapolis-Superior district has just committed the crowning blunder of the long series since the expulsion of the Opposition. Not that it is a district matter alone; far from it. It is merely the scene, because of the location of the cooperative movement in Superior and it makes Karl Reeve, Party district organizer, the official splitter of the movement and places heavy responsibilities upon the comrades of the Communist League here.
As is already known, the Party, because of the Third Period, must secure a stranglehold upon all the auxiliary organizations. The bell has been sounded now for the cooperatives. The Party has therefore mobilized its most reckless crusaders and marched into the North country.
 
The Hi-Jackers at Work
The professional disrupters and faction agents, Minor and Stachel, were sent together with a host of others to demand that the Cooperative Central Exchange not only donate $3,000.00 for the T.U.U.L. convention and $5,000.00 for other Party work, but in addition that a yearly assessment be levied by the Party upon the Exchange to the amount of one percent of the gross sales, which would amount to about $17,000.00 this year. Also, that all the employees of the Exchange and its member stores should be Party functionaries, that is, the salesmen, truck drivers, clerks, etc., must devote the major part of their time to the organizing of the iron miners and Party units, and in spare time, build the cooperatives.
The Party hi-jackers demanded as a first step that George Halonen (“as the outstanding Right winger”) be removed from his post as Educational Director of the Exchange. This suggestion was not well received by the Executive Board. In fact, the Board – of 13, I believe – voted unanimously against it although there are seven Party members on this body. The Board issued a statement for publication in Tyomies, the official organ of the Exchange. At that time the Party had somewhat a better (or worse?) crew in charge of the paper who not only refused to publish the statement but came out with a long and vicious statement against the Board in general and Halonen and Ronn in particular.
As, its next move, the Executive called seven sub-district meetings of the cooperatives which were, of course, attended by hundreds of members, at which their statement was read, discussed and indorsed overwhelmingly.
 
Reckless Party Adventure
One might think that these developments would give the Party pause. Not at all. It seems that they were overjoyed. Had not these cooperative comrades proved that they were agents of the capitalists? Of course. Then more pressure, still more pressure! The cooperatives must be saved or destroyed! Reeve, Pobersky, Bernick, Puro, Heikkinen and a dozen more small fry, together with an unnamed representative from the Party center, and TWO representatives of the Comintern, were wheeled into position. The conferences and meetings which had been going on almost without number were pushed on to new and higher levels – the situation growing more tense and the Party steadily losing ground.
The Executive Board had in the meantime prepared the Pyramid Builder, the monthly organ of the Central Exchange, containing the statement of the Board. The P.B. however, is printed in the Tyomies plant. Now it seems that the Stalin men had not thought of this until it was already being run. I am sure that the natural and orderly processes of publication were somewhat hurried by the workers in the plant who are to a man in sympathy with the Executive Board. At any rate, about 3 out of the 5 thousand copies were carried away by individuals in private cars while the Stalin boys were on the lookout for the Executive’s truck.
When they finally came to and discovered what was going on, Reeve, with a group of Y.C.L. members and a few others, rushed the plant and succeeded in burning some of the remaining copies. A free-for-all started in which Reeve and the others were driven up the street with heavy losses.
Result: Superior is an armed camp. Guards of the Party are posted in the Tyomies and the Hall. The other comrades have complete control of the Cooperative Central Exchange which is also under armed guard. The Party has lost the control and sympathy of the cooperatives, with their 20,000 members. The control of the Tyomies is at best a doubtful one.
The situation is extremely tense and unless the proper steps are taken there can be grievous consequences for the whole labor and revolutionary movement in this section of the country at least. Most of the workers have broken away from the Party essentially because of its wild and devil-may-care policy of arbitrary, mechanical control – or destruction. But the struggle against this policy of the Party is not sufficient or an end in itself. Unless this movement is enriched with a program which sees the roots of the difficulties in a broader field than the cooperative movement, which sees them in the whole present course of the leadership of the Communist International and its American counterpart, it will inevitably lead in the wrong direction.
 
No Turning from the Left!
It is not difficult for this movement to become – under the provocations of the Stalinists and the maneuverings of the Allanes and other outspoken Right wing elements – an anti-Communist movement, which will end in transforming the cooperatives into a plaything of the reactionaries and discrediting its leaders. The entirely factional and reckless policy of the Party for years has led up to this climax. The militants have the hard job of preventing a move in this direction and guiding it instead into healthy working class channels.
 



One of the largest and most rousing Communist meetings in years here was held last night at I.W.W. Hall under the auspices of the Opposition Communists with James P. Cannon speaking on The Truth about Trotsky and the Platform of the Opposition. Over 250 workers packed the hall to the doors and listened with the closest attention to Cannon’s two-hour exposition of the Opposition cause. Thanks to the presence of a strong and well organized Workers’ Guard the meeting was protected from all interference and the gangster tactics which brought the police to Thursday’s meeting and resulted in it being broken up by them were not attempted.
At Wednesday’s meeting held at A.O.U.W. Hall a gang of thirty or more hooligans organized by the Party leadership rushed the hall early in the evening before the crowd arrived. Comrades Skoglund and Coover who were alone, handling tickets at the door, were attacked by the entire gang and badly beaten by black-jacks and brass knuckles. The slugging of these two prominent militants was accomplished by a division of labor between the members of the Lovestone and Foster factions. The latter held the arms of Coover and Skoglund from behind while the former wielded the black-jacks over their heads.
The attempt of the hoodlums to prevent comrade Cannon from speaking resulted in a fight which brought the Police who broke up the meeting, pulling Cannon down from the platform and driving the crowd from the hall. This collaboration of the police and gangsters in the suppression of the workers’ right of free speech aroused violent resentment among the radical workers throughout the city who have seen the Minneapolis Oppositionists in the vanguard of every struggle of the militant workers for years past.
The I.W.W. cancelled a forum program of their own and rented their hall to us for the Saturday meeting “as a demonstration against violation of the workers’ right of free speech.” They also offered to help in protecting the meeting from disruption by the gangsters. The latter however failed to show up. They were brave enough to fight with thirty against two but lacked the courage to show up at the Saturday meeting where a larger group of militants were on hand early and prepared to meet them.
Comrade Cannon’s speech, his array of arguments, suppressed facts and documents, made a profound impression and won many completely over to our side. Thirty-five workers in the audience handed in their names and addresses for notification of other meetings and activities of the Opposition.
On the invitation of the I.W.W., comrade Cannon remained over for Sunday night and gave a lecture at their forum on Free Speech in the Labor Movement to the great satisfaction of another packed hall.
Extensive meetings of the Opposition group were held with the participation of comrade Cannon during his visit which resulted in the clearing up of a number of tactical questions and the unanimous agreement of the entire group on the line of action for the future. The group passed a resolution demanding the weekly publication of The Militant and pledged $25 a week toward its maintenance.
Gangsterism has defeated and discredited itself completely in Minneapolis. The Opposition has won a great moral and political victory over fascist methods. It has won the support of the great majority of the sympathizing workers and has strengthened its own morale and conviction. Our work in the coming period will be animated by a move determined and militant spirit than before.
 



Minneapolis workers have the opportunity, in the 1929 municipal election campaign, to vote for a Communist candidate. The entry of comrade C.R. Hedlund for the post of mayor by the Opposition has a meaning of more than ordinary importance for the revolutionary movement here. It signifies the adherence to the teachings of Lenin of those energetic and trusted fighters who have been expelled from the Party by a small group of apparatus agents of the Lovestone-Foster regime.
 
In Spite of the Split
It is a significant fact that after the split in the Party in the Twin Cities caused by the expulsion of the majority of the leading comrades who constitute the Party’s mass connections in the trade unions, the labor party movement, the Jewish workers’ organizations and the Scandinavian clubs, the “official” Party has made not even a single gesture that would indicate an intention to take advantage of the splendid opportunity offered for Communist work in the present city election.
In spite of the fact that most of the expelled comrade’s were the very ones, because of their experience and ability, to be called upon to carry out the Party program in the political campaign in Minnesota during the national election last fall, as well as in all past campaigns, and did an excellent job by placing Minnesota among the first few states in the whole country in the number of votes for the Communist candidates, these same comrades arc now singled out in the press of the Party as the ones who have no understanding of the tasks of the Party and are, in fact, the ones who deliberately tried to betray the Party to the fakers of the farmer-labor movement.
 
Shady Proposals of Lovestoneites
The expelled comrades of the Opposition formed the only bloc within the Party during the last campaign to put up a determined struggle against the opportunist maneuvers of the majority of the D.E.C. when they tried time after time to go into some backdoor deal with these same fakers. It is unquestionably true that the comrades of the Opposition, together with the whole Party, had a false perspective of the development of the Labor Party, having been taught over a long period by the leaders of the Party and the Comintern, the dangerous and reactionary theory of a political party based upon two classes – the workers aid the farmers. Because of this numerous mistaken were made in the labor party work. But it is just as true that the comrades of the Opposition never made the mistake of advocating the support of Democrats posing as Farmer-Laborites, is was proposed by Tallentire in the 8th Congressional District, and again by Loves-tone, while denouncing Shipstead before the D.E.C. last March and almost in the same breath proposing to put up the reactionary county attorney Olson for Governor (see Lovestone’s speech printed in the April 1928 Communist).
It is also a matter of record that during the election work last November and also after the campaign, the question of the Party’s participation in the Minneapolis municipal election was raised by the comrades now expelled. An outline of the work before the Party in this campaign was made and generally accepted by the thin majority of the D.E.C. Since that time events have demonstrated the correctness of that estimate. The Labor officialdom have gone over more and more to the side of the adventurous political charlatans in the Farmer-Labor Party. This, together with the still more recent collaboration of the trade union officials with the so-called labor representatives in the city council, who are part of the machine of the local gas and street car company, in preventing the development of a real rank and file fight on the big scab building job of the N.W. National Bank, presents an opportunity for revolutionary campaign work which must be utilized.
 
Our Candidate
Our candidate for the post of mayor, C.R. Hedlund, is qualified for the responsibilities of this fight by a life-long record of left wing activity in the railroad unions as well as by years of membership and active life in the Party and finally by his complete acceptance of the platform of the Opposition. His unhesitating stand in defense of the comrades first expelled is in keeping with his whole history in the labor movement. He has carried the banner of the Party in previous campaigns. In this campaign, with the additional handicap of a fight against the Opposition by vicious and unscrupulous Party bureaucrats, we will have need of such a standard bearer. Comrade Hedlund, on a Communist platform, contested the 10th Congressional District in the general election last November and in spite of a full fight by the Republican machine and a bitter fight from the farmer-labor officials received some twenty-four thousand votes.
The platform for the campaign in this election consists of several local and partial proposals based on the needs of the workers in the industries generally, making up in the aggregate the following demands:


The right to organize, to strike and to picket without police interference.
The abolition of all employment agencies and the placing of workers on the job through their unions.
A fund administered by the unions for the relief of unemployment.
The substitution of party designation for the present system of “non-partisan” filings for political office.
The organization of a labor party.
The recognition by the United States of the Soviet Republic and the defense of the Soviet Union against the war danger.
In addition, our agitation in the campaign will emphasize the need for the amalgamation of the craft unions and the strengthening of the fighting power of the workers.
The organization of the unorganized workers.
Rank and file control of the several strikes now going on and the rallying of the unorganized workers to support them.
Against the growing danger of imperialist war.
For the union of all revolutionary workers in on the basis of Leninist teachings in the fight for power in the United States.


Comrade Hedlund has already spoken before several workers’ organizations, and endorsement of the platform will be secured from a number of unions and other working class organizations. The comrades of the Opposition will organize meetings in the different sections of the city and as the weather permits we will hold outdoor gatherings in support of the campaign. Literature will of course be distributed to the extent that available funds permit.
We are out in the name of the Communist Opposition in the present election struggle to make a serious and determined attempt to organize against the Bosses! Against their state machinery! Against the bureaucrats in the labor and revolutionary movement! For registering a big Communist vote for our candidate!

NOTE: Since this article was written, the Stalinites have entered their candidate in the primaries. – Ed.
 



Minneapolis, Minn.
Dear Comrades:
Bill Simons was here last night, gave a most miserable speech to about 60 people and the meeting was closed at 10:30 without discussion. Through questions we forced him to say that any organization of workers fighting: imperialism would be allowed to join the A.A.A.I.L. We will affiliate to the League, although we know what will be tried in spite of Bill’s statement.
We have a new strike in the linseed oil industry – a big industry here – which is taking up a lot of our time. Only a few workers involved at present, but we are trying to weld into shape, out of those striking, a group which can be used for organization work in other plants. Slow work, lots of patience required, raw workers, but real fellows who will, under proper guidance, help to move mountains.
The Party here, with Clem Forsen as political leader, could hardly be more pitiful. This fellow who has never understood where he was going, or in fact why he was in the Party. Forsen – who two years ago came to us and said that he was disillusioned and discouraged and offered as the solution that “he leave the Party”. We spoke with him then as a young comrade, and finally prevailed upon him to stay in the Y.W.L. It is now plain to us that he never stopped upon the downward path. It should be recorded that he was the “Party representative” in the I.L.D. Gastonia conference, who led the attack upon us, made a 50 minute speech against us and then opposed the motion to grant me 5 minutes to state our position. He was chairman at last night’s anti-imperialist meeting – positively shameful. Bill S. avoided us when the meeting was ever; he only pulled down his hat over his eyes and rushed out past us into the night!
The Militant continues to be a joy and inspiration. Tremendous obstacle to the betrayers of Lenin’s Party – their work is tough under the glare of our exposure.



 


VINCENT R. DUNNE



 

ent R. Dunne: Interview (May 1959)



Dunne Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Vincent R. Dunne
Interview with a Twentieth Century Pioneer
conducted by Harry Ring

Interview Conducted: 1959.
Source: The Militant, New York, May 4, 1959.
HTML markup/Editing: David Walters in 2006 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.

Vincent R. Dunne became nationally famous in the bitterly fought teamsters strikes of 1934 35 that transformed Minneapolis from a notorious open-shop fortress into a stronghold of unionism. This was one of the key victories that inspired workers from coast to coast and contributed significantly to the great upsurge that culminated in the organization of the CIO.
In his book American City, a history of the dramatic strike struggles in Minneapolis, Charles R. Walker judged Dunne to be the principal leader. In sketching Dunne’s role, Walker wrote that “his whole life and character prepared him for the position he took in the strike crisis of 1934—”
This has stuck in my mind since I first read it. What was it in Dunne’s life and character that prepared him to lead one of America’s most crucial union organizing struggles?
On April 17 Dunne celebrated his seventieth birthday and fifty five years of continuous activity in the labor and socialist movement. He was in New York that weekend and the editor of the The Militant asked me to interview him. I decided to satisfy my own curiosity about Ray’s early background.
“Did you have any idea as a youngster that you would become a workers. leader?” I asked him by way of an opener.
He seemed a little taken aback. “I had no thought of ever becoming a leader. That was only accidental. I was surprised to observe people looking at me and thinking of me as some kind of leader. It was a strange feeling.”
“But you seem to have handled the responsibility all right—”
“I did the best I could”.
That turned out to be one of the threads in the fascinating pattern of his life. He was loaded with responsibility at an age that nowadays would be considered somewhat tender.
He was born in Kansas City, Kansas, in 1889. His mother was the daughter of a Wisconsin shoemaker. His father, an itinerant worker was an immigrant from County Clare, Ireland. Coming up one day from repairing cables for the cable car company, Ray’s father stepped accidentally into a hole and broke a knee cap.
In those days there was no workmen’s compensation. The family lost the small house they had been struggling to buy. Things looked bleak in Kansas City for the Irish immigrant when he got out of the hospital.
The mother took the three year old Ray and his older brother, Bill, to live with her parents, who had settled on a farm east of Little Falls, Minnesota. When Ray’s father could move about, enough money was scraped together to get him up to the farm and the family moved into an old log house.
Aside from more children, the family continued to be blessed with not much more than hardships. Among other things their log home burned down.
“We lost everything,” Ray recalled.” We had to go to my grandfather’s house a quarter of a mile away in the middle of the night in freezing weather. Bill and I had to carry some of our younger brothers and sisters. I was about six or seven.”
Solidarity was a powerful force among these frontier dwellers and the neighbors organized a building bee to put up a new home for the Dunnes. Things like that stuck in Ray’s mind.
“By that time my father had sufficient strength in his leg and he went back to his former occupation as an itinerant worker, taking what he could find building railroads, felling trees as a sawyer in the lumber woods”.
Such rough circumstances shaped the children. “As we grew up we went out to work on nearby farms, on threshing rigs in the fall, helping with the plowing in the spring. We used to work by the month plow, take care of the horses. We could drive a team by the time we were eight or nine years old. We were useful that way, you see. By the time we were twelve or thirteen, we could take the place of a man at any task around the farm.
“We worked for farmers for $7 or $8 a month. That included board of course. We worked from four o’clock in the morning until it was dark at night. After dark, and before daylight, you cleaned the stable and curried your team and milked a few cows. After a quick breakfast but a hearty one, I assure you the day’s work began”
School was sandwiched into the winter months when work around the farms slacked off. “I went from the first through the seventh reader. They didn’t go by grades then but the McGuffey reader. You could make two or three readers in one term, depending on how fast the teacher pushed and how much you could do. The important thing was to get through as fast as you could. The determining factor in finishing your education was your height and weight. The faster you grew, the less education you got. The average was about six years. I think I had five.”
Then came his first “man’s” job. Ray graduated to this at the age of eleven or twelve. He had the reins on a team pulling a water wagon for the threshing machine at harvest time. Like any boy of those days, Ray was proud of the trust placed in him.
“You took care of your team. That was the special charge. A team was valuable, you know. If you hurt a horse, that was a terrible thing. Besides, you fell in love with the horses.
You wanted to take care of them”.
“I don’t know if I can understand that,” I said to Ray. “Being a pavement kid, I never drove a team of horses. But didn’t you miss school?”
Ray laughed. “You didn’t regret that so much. Sometimes you missed playing with the other children, but on the other hand you felt a little bit superior to them.
“Besides, you knew that you were earning money that you could send home to your mother, and that was an all encompassing responsibility. It was a responsibility you liked. You didn’t feel that you were put upon or abused by it. You were proud to bring home a whole dollar, even two sometimes. It went a long way.”
At fourteen, Ray got his “cork shoes” and struck up an acquaintance with logs in the Minnesota lumber camps. At fifteen, he had ranged far enough to reach the Montana camps. That was a significant year in Ray’s life, for unionism had not reached Minnesota, but in Montana the Western Federation of Miners was already a power.
“When I arrived at the camp, I was met by a man that turned out to be the union steward. He didn’t talk about the union right off. He first introduced me to some of the benefits of unionism. He took me down to the bathhouse. They had a stove going and plenty of hot water. All new men had to scrub themselves and boil their clothes sometimes the steward lent a hand. This was to prevent bedbugs and lice from being brought in.
“Then he took me to the bunk house. I had never seen anything like it. In Minnesota the bunk houses were dark and dirty, the thinks packed with mud. Here they were light and airy with high ceilings and plenty of windows. Everything was spotless and the bunks even had sheets!
“I was amazed at the difference the union made. I had known very little about unions except for some talk I had heard as I made my way to Montana. But after the steward had let my impressions sink in and then casually asked me if I wanted to join up, I didn’t wait.”
That was how the union man was born in Vincent R. Dunne. “The union made all the difference in the world. There was no starting out before dawn and working until dark, and never any Sunday work. They couldn’t fire a man at will the way they did back in Minnesota. And if a foreman eursed out a man, he cursed him right back—”
Ray soon learned that the steward had other responsibilities besides seeing to it that standards of cleanliness were maintained. Among other things, he appeared to be a literature agent with a stock of books for sale. Some of the books might even have been called somewhat radical. As literature agent, the steward took an interest in furthering young Ray’s education and suggested some titles that seemed to fit his age level.
The first of these was The Origin of Species by an Englishman named Charles Darwin. A dictionary went with the order.
“The book made a deep impression on me,” Ray said. “I read it and reread it throughout the entire season. It was a big factor in shaping my thinking—”
The young evolutionist graduated next into a revolutionist. It was in the lumber camp that Ray heard about the Russian Revolution of 1905. Speakers from the IWW, the Industrial Workers of the World, occasionally came through for a friendly visit with the steward and other comrades and they brought ideas that widened the world for the lumberjacks. One of them told about the uprising of the Russian people against the Czar.
“When we heard about this, we regarded it as part of our own struggle, our comrades in Russia fighting the same enemy.” The IWW had done well in inspiring the young lumber worker with the view that the American workers. own struggle wasn’t just for wages and better conditions but for an end to capitalist exploitation as a whole.
Then came 1907 and the “money panic.” Men were laid off in droves. Many were paid in script, and since this wasn’t legal tender, they found themselves stranded in a Montana winter.
Ray and some of his comrades headed toward warmer climate and rumors of jobs in the Pacific Northwest. At eighteen, the young worker enjoyed his first ride on a passenger train on top, that is.”
In Seattle, thousands of jobless were camped, waiting for something to turn up. The IWW campaigned militantly for aid to the unemployed and Ray became one of the “agitators—” He learned how to speak from a soapbox. He felt a policeman’s stick. He was arrested in one of the historic “free speech fights.”
The local capitalist politicians conceded to the pressure organized by the IWW and authorized a state road-building project. But this meant work for only some of the unemployed. Ray headed down to California, using the type of transportation to which he had now become accustomed. It was a dangerous way to travel, for besides the hazards of riding the blinds, the tops, or the rods, railroad dicks were free with their clubs and would not hesitate to shoot.
In Los Angeles, the 18 year old agitator was sentenced to a road gang and he helped briefly in laying out what he later recognized as Sunset Boulevard. After a few days he was made a trustee and the ball and chain was removed so that he could fetch water for the men. A few trips with the bucket brought him to an old Wobbly—at least he seemed old to Ray.
“He told me if I came back once more, he’d beat the daylights out of me.” Ray smiled. “He was pretty big so I took him at his word and headed to places where speakers and organizers were needed.”
From Los Angeles, the IWW trail took Ray into the South. In Louisiana he worked in a sawmill. It was unorganized and conditions were fierce. Ray found himself the center of those who wanted to do something about it. But the effort was defeated and they lost their jobs. It was Vincent R. Dunne’s first attempt to organize a strike.
On an Arkansas road gang, he saw how brutally Negro prisoners are treated, “far worse even than white prisoners—”
In Clifton, Texas, working as second cook in a restaurant, he got another taste of racist prejudice. “I had to stand there and serve whites at the counter and hand plates out the back door to Negroes, who had to pay for whatever was given them. I had to listen to these fellows at the counter plan and organize rapes for Saturday nights, picking out the Negro girls they were going to get. For three solid months I listened. I was pretty hardened from my association with itinerant workers in the lumber camps and harvest fields, but I was sick to my stomach. These were things I had heard about but never seen. It seemed to set my radical thinking so that it never changed.”
Two years after leaving Montana, Ray finally made it back to his family in Minnesota. They had moved to Minneapolis. “I was happy to be in the Twin Cities where the Wobblies had their biggest local. But I was no longer just a Wobbly, a syndicalist, even then. I knew about Debs and socialism. I had heard it discussed in the jungles, on jobs, in the box cars. I had absorbed a lot. And my experiences on the road made my belief in socialism deeply ingrained”.
As a skilled teamster, Ray went to work for various express companies. Attempts to organize under the AFL were frustrated because of the conservatism of the small craft union. Ray kept up with the IWW and plunged deeper into the study of socialism.
In 1914 he married. He and Jenny reared two children of their own and three adopted children. Ray took care of his family obligations, but his main goal in life remained the advancement of socialism.
Activities consisted of recruiting, organizing meetings, advertising speakers, such as Debs, who came to town, selling literature, and reading everything possible about socialism.
In 1917 the Russian Revolution stirred the entire radical movement to its depths. New alignments appeared. Some of the old formations began to wither. Ray, together with some of his closest associates, became members of the Communist Party.
In 1928 Ray was elected to his second term on the Minnesota district committee of the party. It was then that three members of the Central Committee, Cannon, Shachtman and Abern, were expelled for opposing Stalin and supporting the Trotskyist Left Opposition in the Soviet Union.
“This had to be challenged,” said Ray. “We had to protest this expulsion, this bureaucratic disregard of all rights in the party. When we made our protest we were expelled too.”
As a consequence, Ray and some thirty of his Minnesota comrades became founding members of the organization that eventually developed into the Socialist Workers Party.
Throughout the fight, first to reform the Communist Party and then to continue the program of revolutionary socialism, Ray and his comrades continued their union organizing work. They finally succeeded in the Minneapolis coal yards in 1934 and this precipitated the great struggle that ended by bringing the bulk of the city’s truck drivers into the union.
Then came World War II and a conspiracy among Teamsters boss Tobin and state and federal government officials to smash the militant leadership of the Minneapolis teamsters. In 1941, Dunne and seventeen other leaders of the union and of the Socialist Workers Party became the first victims of the Smith “Gag” Act.
The sentence of sixteen months in Sandstone did nothing to change Ray’s mind about the evils of capitalism and the desirability of socialism. He came out as convinced as ever of the correctness of his socialist beliefs, and he turned even more energetically to the work of building the Socialist Workers Party.
Today he is chairman of the Socialist Workers Party in Minnesota, and at seventy he feels that he still has energy to keep going at the task he chose as a youth building for socialism.
“But haven’t you ever thought about a socialist victory in America being postponed more than you expected?” I asked.
“I never was concerned too much about when it would come exactly, although I would sure like to see it soon. For me the main thing was to work for it. That’s a job and a responsibility in itself. You’re working for a cause, for the future. That’s enough—”
“And looking back from the age of seventy, you don’t have any regrets?”
“Of course. I suppose everyone has some regrets. I wish I could have done more.”

  Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 10.8.2012





The American Fund for Political Prisoners and Refugees sponsored by an active committee of militants, places before the American labor movement a task demanding immediate action.
In Europe brave working-class fighters are today facing torture and death at the hands of Fascist agents of reaction. Where yesterday magnificent trade unions and workers’ political movements flourished, and promoted the interests of the working class, today, bloody, totalitarian regimes herd all working-class militants into concentration camps and ruthlessly crush every workers’ organization.
 
Crumbs from Evian Table
Refugees from Fascist terror clamor for help from the “democratic” nations of Europe but receive only the meager crumbs of assistance which the Intergovernmental Refugee Committee feels forced to give them. This Committee, now continuing in London the work begun last month by the Evian Conference, attempts to hide its imperialistic aims behind a mask of humanitarianism and high idealism. However, when the Committee discusses the practical aspects of providing new homes and livings in democratic countries for the thousands of helpless victims of Fascist reaction, it reveals the decadent nationalism of democratic capitalism.
Delegates to the Conference speak of unemployment in their own countries; the necessity for restrictions on immigration, etc., etc. The Prime Minister of Southern Rhodesia objects to the Conference’s proposal to send 500 Jewish families there since “it would appear to cut across the policy of keeping South and Central Africa under British influence.” Democratic capitalism neither can nor desires to offer real assistance to all of the persecuted victims of Fascism. Each democratic country participating in the Conference is itself being driven into a position of extreme nationalism by a dying capitalist order.
If it is decided by the Conference to evacuate 660,900 refugees from Germany and Austria in the next five years (no persons over fifty are to be included, since they cannot be depended upon to earn their own livings in the new country) how many of these will be working-class refugees from Fascism? Myron Taylor, the spokesman for the United States Government at the Conference, formerly spokesman for United States Steel, can be depended upon to guarantee that no revolutionary victims of Fascism become the beneficiaries of “democratic humanitarianism.”
 
“Democracy” Mocks Refugees
The humanitarianism of the democracies is a mockery. In most of the so-called democratic countries the right of asylum is today a meaningless phrase. Workers who have escaped the nets of Fascist police spies in their homelands are now being terrorized by other capitalist police spies in the democratic countries to which they have fled. Even France, the liberal nation, the democratic ally of the U.S.S.R., for whose favor, Stalin sacrifices the welfare of the French workers has passed laws imposing severe penalties upon any French citizen aiding an exile. Its Popular Front Government under Daladier makes it impossible for political refugees to obtain citizenship status and thus earn a living. Nor is France more reactionary than other European democracies.
A thousand examples of persecution of political refugees by all of these democratic countries could be given. Foremost in our minds, however, is the story of that most heroic political exile of our times, Leon Trotsky. Who can forget the cruel persecution of Trotsky by the governmental agents of almost every European democracy during the past ten years? Above all, what excuse can be made for the brutal deportation of Trotsky from the Norwegian democracy in 1936, except that it was dictated more by its tangible capitalist interests, namely its trade with the Soviet Union, than by its abstract democracy.
 
No Safety in Stalinland
Equally opposed to the entrance of revolutionary refugees from Fascism is Stalin’s “Fatherland.” Serge, Ciliga, Tarov, Beal and many others have borne witness to the fact that no revolutionaries are safe in the U.S.S.R. Even the corrupt Comintern bureaucrats from foreign countries, who long ago left the line of revolutionary Marxism are not always safe there.
In fact, the Soviet Union has its own political refugees. They have fewer living refugees probably than do Germany and Italy, since the G.P.U. agents are more expert at ferreting out revolutionists; more successful in staging frame-up trials against them; and more ruthless about delivering them to the firing-squad.
 
G.P.U. Allied With Police
Directly related to this is the program upon which Stalin’s G.P.U. agents in capitalist democracies have now embarked, that is, a program of co-operation with capitalist police spies to persecute and deport to Fascist prisons the revolutionary refugees who have found a temporary shelter in these countries. Democratic capitalism, so-called, now preparing a new war for the re-division of the world among the big capitalist powers, Fascist and Democrat, welcomes the assistance of the G.P.U. in crushing the revolutionary elements in the ranks of the workers. The clearest thinkers in the ranks of American labor, who, themselves, resist being pushed into the inferno of war, owe it to their own movement as well as to the European labor movement to come to the rescue of the hounded political refugees who most consciously oppose the war-makers of Europe.
The fate of the new trade union movement in this country will be tragic indeed if it fails to understand the meaning of this cruel persecution. These brave militants who have seen the great trade union movements of Germany and Austria smashed by Fascism know that there is no safety for workers in a dependence upon “Democracy” for the preservation of their organizations. American trade unionists must learn that independent working-class action alone can preserve and extend the rights to which workers feel entitled.
Voices will be heard within our ranks, “America is not Europe,” “Here we have real democracy,” “Let the European labor movement take care of its own,” etc., etc. These and similar ideas must be combated with all vigor. We must lead the fight on an international scale against the blacklist, the frame-up, the torture and murder methods of “democratic” as well as Fascist reaction. We must support the American Fund for Political Prisoners and Refugees, which brings to the persecuted European working-class fighters immediate badly needed aid and helps to establish for these refugees a real political asylum.
 



A Marxist understanding of the state and of the role of the revolutionary party as the vanguard of the class, without which the class cannot raise itself to power, results in our having a different attitude towards work in the trade unions than that held by any other organization claiming to represent the American workers.
Alone of all parties in the United States, the Socialist Workers Party advocates that only a Workers and Farmers government, basing itself upon nationwide councils of elected representatives of the workers and farmers, can solve the economic and social problems facing the masses. It flows from this concept that our party must extend its influence to all sections of the economic organizations of the workers and farmers – particularly of the workers, because it is the working class that will lead all the oppressed in the onslaught on capitalism and the fight for a socialist America and a socialist world.
 
Our Task
The task of our party consists of gaining influence over the trade unions – more, of winning, through the trade unions, influence over the majority of the working class.
We can only succeeed in this if the methods used by our party in the trade unions help to build the unions, to strengthen them, to increase their influence among the unemployed, the farmers, the oppressed minorities and the small people of the city. That the trade union work of our party, limited in scope as it has been up to now, has been based on a correct policy is verified by the truly remarkable way in which unions in which our members are active and influential have thrived.
Because the Socialist Labor Party and the I.W.W. answered “no” to the question: shall revolutionists work in reactionary trade unions? they doomed themselves to sterility.
Because the Socialist Party and the Lovestone group have degraded socialist politics to the level of trade union politics, their work in the mass movement has not resulted in diverting the labor movement from subservience to the capitalists.
The movement for the Fourth International took shape in America and throughout the world, not only in the fight against the theories of “socialism in one country,” of “social fascism,” etc., but in the struggle against the theory of dual “red” unionism fostered by the Communist International until 1935. Lenin in 1920 had demonstrated theoretically, in his Left Communism, that for communists to turn their backs on reactionary unions and invent new “revolutionary” unions was to render “the greatest service to the bourgeoisie.”
 
The Reactionary Stalinists
But the Communist Parties throughout the world had long since turned their backs on Leninism. When the “Communists” re-entered the trade unions following 1934 they continued to wear the leading strings of the counter-revolutionary Stalinist bureaucracy in Russia. With the drift to the right of Soviet policy,
the trade union work of Brow der’s party has developed to the point where today this group is the most reactionary force in the labor movement. Whereas the fortunes of the Greens and the Hillmans are, after all, bound up with the fortunes of the movements which they head, the fortunes of the Stalinist unionists derive from Stalin and his clique.
Unlike the Communist Party which up until the spring of 1937 favored the A.F.L. over the C.I.O. only to swing overnight to the other extreme, the Socialist Workers Party has no fetishism for either set of initials.
 
Mistakes of the C.I.O.
The C.I.O. has accomplished a great historic task in organizing the heavy industries, a task that the craft unions could never have accomplished. The new C.I.O. unions succeeded, not only because they were industrial in form but because they utilised militant and revolutionary tactics (sit-down strikes etc.) to gain their goal. Had the C.I.O. continued its original policy of organizing the unorganized, of concentrating on the basic industries, of avoiding raids on established A.F.L. unions, there is little doubt but that, despite the blows of the depression, it would today be in a far better position in the American labor movement.
Desperate for organizers, Lewis committed a tragic error in opening wide the doors to the Stalinists in return for their unconditional support.
Weakened by the defeat of “Little Steel” and the hammer-blows of the new depression, the C.I.O. organism could not shake off the Stalinist poison. On the West Coast and elsewhere the Communist-controlled C.I.O. has followed a brutal and callous anti-working class policy of raiding the A.F.L., of violating the picket lines of unions under the control of the progressives. In Minneapolis, the Stalinized section of the C.I.O. has not hesitated to connive with the bosses against the A.F.L., even to appeal to the courts for an injunction against the latter.
On November 14 in Pittsburgh, the C.I.O. will hold its first national convention, at which will be decided the question of who is to control that body: the workers or the Stalinists in a bloc with Lewis or other C.I.O. leaders. It can be said bluntly that only to the extent to which the C.I.O. rids itself of Stalinism can it recover its lost ground and develop.
 
The Strength of the A.F.L.
A phenomenon not sufficiently appreciated by the students of the labor movement – not by Stolberg and not even by certain of our own comrades – is the manner in which the A.F.L. has not only withstood the effects of the depression and the competition of the C.I.O., but has even managed to gain a million new members. The A.F.L., having an experienced organizing staff and great sums of money at its disposal, was better able than the C.I.O. to take advantage of the ground-swell of organization which swept across the country, and to stabilize itself when the newly organized unions faced the ravages of the depression.
Despite the Greens, the Wolls and Tracys and Freys – incurably narrow-minded, selfish, jealous, divorced from the ranks – the A.F.L. finds itself, after three years of the C.I.O., with a membership approaching the all-time peak figures of 1919. To be sure, the A.F.L., in the struggle to maintain itself, has used the organizational forms and even, at times, the militant tactics, which it officially condemned in the C.I.O. This has a special meaning for us.
The A.F.L. convention recently ended in Houston was marked by the fight which Tobin led against the executive council for unification of the A.F.L. and C.I.O. Tobin today finds himself and his International Union in a commanding position in the American labor movement. The Brotherhood of Teamsters is the largest national body in the Federation and has an almost unlimited field for expansion. With the strategic position of the drivers in American industry, the I.B.T. can play an important role in unifying the movement.
 
The Road Ahead
On the road ahead, it is not impossible that a third national union grouping may arise. The history of unionism in other industrial countries indicates that such a formation is not out of the question. Forces that might go to make up such a body are Dubinsky’s I.L.G.W.U.; the Printers; the Teamsters; the Sailors; the Auto Workers and Rubber Workers, etc. Should such a formidable group arise, it would have the power to bring great pressure to bear upon the top leadership of both the A.F.L. and C.I.O.
It is evident that unless labor succeeds in itself unifying its armies, Roosevelt, acting for American capitalism, will intercede to bring about unity from outside and above, in a way that can only have disastrous consequences for the independence of the trade unions.
 
The Unemployed
Of the 35,000,000 workers, almost half are today unemployed. Any trade union policy that does not provide for these unemployed will bring disaster to the working class.
The A.F.L. nationally has disregarded the problem.
The C.I.O. under the pressure of the depression, which hit the mass industries harder than the the skilled trades, has after too much delay tackled the problem in many localities. On the initiative of progressives, many C.I.O. unions have unemployed sections thereby binding the jobless to their working brothers. In areas like Detroit, these unemployed sections have achieved tremendous proportions and have been a major factor in maintaining the union’s hold on the workers.
Both bodies or the new united movement will have to intervene much more vigorously on behalf of the unemployed if the jobless millions are to be saved from fascism.
 
Political Action
No sooner had the C.I.O. organized the great basic industries when the new economic crisis posed problems which the unions could not solve. The C. I. O. was forced to take steps toward independent political action of the working class. These first moves have been timid and bureaucratic. Nevertheless, they represent an advance over the Gompers tradition, and it is the duty of progressives to encourage this process and to give to the growing movement a bold program.
 
Historic Role of S.W.P.
If the Socialist Workers Party, the American section of the Fourth International, is to rise to its historic tasks, it must redouble its work in the union movement. The last year has seen us making great strides forward in both the A.F.L. and C.I.O. But we are progressing much too slowly. Time is short. It is truer than ever that our most important field in the coming period will remain the trade union movement.
No one claims that our party has said the last word on the problem of the relationships between the revolutionary party and the trade unions, or that we have achieved the final pat formulas which will guide us in all the twists and turns of an American union movement that is becoming increasingly complex. But our policies are Bolshevik policies and represent the accumulated experience of decades in the world union movement.
Armed with these policies, our cadres can attract all that is healthy in the movement, can expand into proletarian armies that will lead behind them the American masses in the revolutionary onslaught against the cruel system which is preparing only greater misery, and against the insanities of imperialist war.
 



MINNEAPOLIS, Minn. – The state canvassing board which met November 19 in the state capitol has released the following official figures for the minority parties:



U.S. Senator




Grace Carlson (Trotskyist)


8,761




Carl Winter (C.P. sticker candidate)


   256




President




Aiken-Orange (S.L.P.)


2,553




Thomas-Krueger (S.P.)


5,454




Browder-Ford (C.P.)


2,711




Governor




John Castle (S.L.P.)


3,175




Martin Mackie (C.P. sticker candidate)


   360




Lieutenant-Governor




William Herron (C.P. sticker candidate)


   306




Secretary of State




Clara Jorgenson (C.P. sticker candidate)


   278



Because the candidate of the Socialist Workers Party appeared on the ballot as the Trotskyist Antiwar Party candidate, it is certain that the 8,761 votes for Comrade Carlson represent conscious support of a proletarian revolutionary anti-Stalinist program.
The support for the Trotskyist candidate is thus even greater than earlier figures had Indicated. The candidate not only topped the Tjiomas-Krueger vote but received a vote larger than the combined vote for Thomas and Browder.
Each of the 87 counties in the state furnished votes for our candidate. This would indicate that the ideas of Trotsky have penetrated the American consciousness even deeper than our most optimistic supporters have hitherto estimated. Fittingly the largest number of Trotskyist votes came from the three industrial counties – Hennepin (Minneapolis), 1,755; Ramsey (St. Paul), 1,034; St. Louis (Duluth), 525.
Following this general pattern other counties showing a heavy registration of votes were those outlying counties in which there are industrial workers such as packinghouse workers, miners, timber workers, and where union organization has penetrated.
Although it was impossible because of meager finances to carry our campaign outside the Twin Cities to any extent, the record of the Trotskyists in the union and unemployed movement has obviously made a deep impression upon the workers in the state.
Among the iron miners on the Range, there are a large number of former Communist Party members who have for years supported the Russian revolution. There were many who voted for our candidate, a Trotskyist, and not for the Stalinist candidates.
Counties where the militant Farm-Holiday movement once had great prestige and power also furnished a substantial vote to the Trotskyist Anti-war candidate.
Those counties in which state institutions are located and whose employees belong to the State, County and Municipal Employees Union (in which our candidate, Grace Carlson, was active for a number of years and is a well-known figure) also recorded an impressive total.
With complete precinct votes available from St. Paul and Minneapolis a gratifyingly close correlation is shown between the distribution of Socialist Appeals and the vote for the Trotskyist candidate. Our Socialist Appeal had been distributed in these precincts over a period of months. Excellent use was also made of the special Minnesota election edition of the Appeal, and the leaflets and other literature issued in the campaign.
The total vote, though indicative of oar support, is of course not the chief value of the election campaign. Many people have been brought closer to us by hearing for the first time in this campaign the revolutionary Marxist program.
 



Minneapolis, Minn., Nov. 8, 1928
Dear Comrades:
We were taken completely by surprise as we had no information before your statement came to the different comrades in the mail last week. This was quickly followed by a letter from the “cleansed” minority boasting of their part in the shameful exposé.
Almost all of OUR comrades feel that here at last is the key to the riddle that we have been trying to understand for so many years. That is, we too have come to realise during the time of the Congress that international politics were being played with us while we were still attempting to outsmart these bureaucrats within the confines of our own little Party.
We have EVERY important comrade of the old opposition with us. They have accepted the slogan, “Against the Bureaucrats”, as a slogan of action.
The comrades realize that this is not the ordinary Party fight and that all comrades who take a position now of Opposition will in all probability find themselves confronted with a campaign of the most unjust slander and vilification. Most of us understand that there will be those who cannot understand the pressure and who will desert. We also know that with the correct line we will be able to strengthen our force’s by bringing over to us those elements that are honest and politically alert, those with that old fighting heart.



 


Vincent R. Dunne



 



MINNEAPOLIS, Nov. 8. – As chairman of the mass meeting, Bill Brown introduced V.R. Dunne by saying: “I have saved the best speakers for the last. Next I am going to call on a man who, believe it or not, has succeeded in two years in tearing down a union from 90 to 3,000. Some wrecker he is – even Ripley wouldn’t believe that one. Ray Dunne.”
“We must not,” began Dunne, “forget the more serious and fundamental aspects of this struggle. Meyer Lewis didn’t come into town to take a thrust at the reds because he had a bright idea one fine morning. Meyer Lewis is the personal agent of Bill Green who represents the craft unionist element in the executive council of the A.F. of L. Recently there has been brought about a deep split in the A.F. of L. leadership. But a short time ago – not even six months ago – no one would have been so rash as to predict that eleven thousand votes could be gathered for industrial unionism. No one can understand the present drive against local 574 unless one has an insight into the maneuverings going on inside the A.F. of L. The capitalist crisis has thrown capitalist industry into panic and the workers into the breadlines. American capitalism has been the hardest hit, because it was the farthest advanced. Now the boss class knows that they are caught in a trap, that they cannot keep their place in the sun – that they can’t make any more profits unless they crush the spirit of labor. And this can be done only if the workers are divided into small, weak craft unions. The workers sensing this fact, have entered into the A.F. of L. hoping that it would provide them with the industrial form of organization. They found that the craft structure of the A.F. of L. stood in the way. Ten to fifteen million workers stand ready to be organized – but they want industrial unions so they can strike back effectively at their exploiters.
 
Drive for Industrial Unionism
”Now some union leaders have felt this pressure coming from the workers – John L. Lewis, Dubinsky, etc. These men understand that the workers are determined to drive forward to real industrial unionism. Therefore they have brought the issue into the open because they are interested in maintaining their positions in the unions. This split has tolled off, like a death bell, the fate of Green, Hutcheson, and other arch-reactionary craft-union fakers. They understand that their life in the organized labor movement is limited to months unless they can tear the unions apart, terrorize the workers, and strike fear into all of those who are making the drive for industrial unionism.
“At the last convention they decided that they would have to strike and strike fast. They decided to throw their whole resources into the battle. They decided, also, that they had to make a spectacular start – to begin with a bang. They had to write in letters of fire across the sky that it meant death to any worker who dared raise his head for any progressive idea.
“But why did they choose Minneapolis as the place at which to strike the first blow? For two very good reasons. Minnesota is like an island that is looked upon by the workers of the rest or the country, struggling for their rights. Whatever you may think of the Farmer-Labor Party, you must recognize that it represents a new course – the workers here have struck off upon the path of independent political action through the Farmer-Labor Party. Bill Green, the old Republican wheelhorse, and other craft unionists, closely allied with the two old capitalist parties, resent this political expression of the workers. And so they come here hoping to smash the Farmer-Labor Party. At the same time they intend to strike a blow at the industrial unionists. Tobin and Green understand that if they can make a spectacular and smashing blow at 574, they can smash the industrial union movement a severe blow. It is pure business logic with them. They didn’t come to Minneapolis simply to get after reds, radicals, and communists; they wish to blaze a trial here that will terrorize the workers all over the country.
 
The ‘‘Purge” of 1924
“In 1924, Paul Smith, personal representative of Green, purged the unions here of reds. Between that time and 1934, when 574 came into the picture, not a single strike was won in Minneapolis. The Citizens Alliance succeeded in making Minneapolis an open shop town. Woe to the people who back red drives. They are only the bureaucrats of the labor movement, and the capitalist enemies of the workers.
“All of the newspapers here have taken up the cry of communism ... These are the methods and tools of the capitalists. But this is not simply a flash in the pan – it is going to be a long drawn out, a hitter fight. Lewis can’t move a single step forward – he has fired his best shots. Publicity and newspaper articles do not take over unions. Maybe we’ll see fellows double up, and bend their heads before the onslaughts of the bureaucracy as if their heads were upon hinges. On the other hand, a young, new militant leadership will be thrown up in the process of the struggle.
“But let us be on our guard – watch out. Lewis plans deliberately to perpetrate some outrage. To frame somebody. That is the next card which they intend to play. We offer Meyer Lewis – they say he comes from Iowa – a passport back to where the tall corn grows. Let’s send him back!”
 



MINNEAPOLIS – Those readers of Labor Action who have followed closely the valiant struggle of Local 544-CIO for its existence as perhaps the most outstanding militant and progressive union in the country, will be interested to know whereat stands today. V.R. Dunne, one of its prime leaders, gave me a brief interview which, while by no means giving a complete or detailed picture, indicates the present state of affairs.
Ray Dunne is, without question, one of the outstanding leaders of the American labor movement. His name, as I have had occasion to find out, is practically a household word in Minneapolis. The old guard, reactionary AFL Tobin men and the Stalinists hate and fear him intensely. But they all grudgingly admit his ability. Were it not for his unswerving devotion to the principles of socialism, he would readily be accepted by the official labor leaders as “one of the boys.” As it is, he is primarily responsible, through his patient, skillful work and his militant working class policy, for smashing the open shop in Minneapolis, for building the powerful teamster movement in Minneapolis as well as in the adjoining states.
Dunne began by telling of the background of the case with which most Labor Action readers are familiar: Tobin’s move against No. 544 and his attempt to destroy its democratic rights; the vote of No. 544 to join the CIO; the importation by the AFL of several hundred Tobin goonsters, hopheads and rapists in order to intimidate the men; the outrageous decision handed down by Governor Stassen’s labor conciliator, Blair, which denied the teamsters the rights to an election and awarded exclusive bargaining rights to Tobin; and finally the government indictments.
“What is the present state of affairs?” I asked.
“I think it is difficult for you, without a first-hand acquaintance, to understand what’s going on. There are 5,000 teamsters. The overwhelming majority support us; they voted with us at the meeting where we decided to leave the AFL. Yet due to the fact that Labor Conciliator Blair awarded bargaining rights to Tobin, the men are forced to belong to the AFL union, for the most part, if they want to continue working. We’ve appealed the case and it comes up for review in Ramsay County on November 29.”
“What happens afterward if the legal appeals open to you are denied?”
“That question can’t be answered since it is so indefinite. It depends on what happens at the CIO convention, to what degree the various pro-war and anti-militant forces in the CIO can carry the day; it depends on what happens to the movement to unify the CIO and AFL; it depends on what happens to the war drive.”
“Are you getting support from the CIO and from the United Construction Workers Organizing Committee?”
“As much as they can give us. You probably know that A.D. Lewis is tied up in a lot of other situations, like the Currier case in Detroit, and a whole series of other fights, and the UCWOC is not as liberally supported as some of the other new unions were. But we are getting national support from them, as well as from numerous individual teamsters in Tobin’s union. The Stalinists, who control the local CIO council, are of course fighting us tooth and nail – a beautiful sabotage job on their part – and in the Teamsters Union they’ve come out for support of Tobin, critical support to be sure.”
“What is the work of Local 544-CIO at present?”
“First, appealing the reactionary Blair decision. If we can only get a democratic election among the teamsters, we’re on our way. In the meantime, the AFL has the contracts. We’re carrying patient organizational and propaganda work through our staff and press, for which we’re putting on a special drive.”
“In other words, the Blair decision gives the Tobin crowd control of all the union members?”
“Yes. But the men vote with their feet. Not more than 125 attend union meetings. We are in very close contact with the drivers who still consider us the legitimate union.”
“The AFL has claimed that you could get only 170 witnesses to the state labor hearing and that most of them have since joined the AFL. They say that these men came from only a few shops.”
“They came from the biggest and most representative shops. It was the most impressive labor hearing I’ve ever heard. But the AFL didn’t put up one rank and file member as their witness, only the leaders. Of course, many of the witnesses have since joined the AFL. When a squad of Tobin goons come abound and say: Sign, and when their blackjacks are backed up by the fact that they have bargaining rights and therefore control the jobs, there’s little else the men can do except sign. But we are absolutely certain the men support us.”
“The AFL is raising a big rumpus about how you fellows can’t pay wages to your staff as proof of your lack of support.”
“Well,” smiled Dunne, “the only kind of a union those fellows can imagine is one where the leaders get paid. That’s its main purpose, in their eyes. It’s true that our organizers are not getting paid. When you have a union which needs organizers and business agents to check up on every detail and fight with the boss on the contract and similar things, then you need a large, paid staff. But now we don’t. As a matter of fact, 544 was built on the basis of an unpaid staff of volunteer, full-time organizers and afterward, when the union consolidated and established itself it put on some full-time organizers. But the Tobin boys can’t understand that – it’s too radical for them.”
“Some people here with whom I’ve spoken, who say they’re friends of 544, believe it would have been wiser to have knuckled under to Tobin in order to avoid this situation,”
“That’s the typical attitude of an opportunist,” answered Dunne. “There are, of course, certain compromises which are necessary in the trade union movement, but to compromise here would have meant to surrender, to give up the democratic rights of the local and to betray the members. We don’t intend to do that.”
“Suppose the defendants are convicted, how will that affect the union?”
“It will be a severe blow, of course, since they’ve indicted almost the entire union staff. But I think that we’ve got a pretty good chance to win our case since, first, we’re innocent of the charges and, second, the tide of public opinion seems to be turning toward us. In my case, I’m absolutely convinced that 544-CIO can go on.”
 

