astman-censorship and



The Masses  
Max Eastman
Two articles related to the The Masses and Censorship




Published: The Masses, September 1916, October 1916 and November 1916
Transcribed:Sally Ryan for marxists.org in 2000



Are We Indecent?


The opportunity to present the Ward & Gow censorship of THE MASSES before the Thompson Legislative Committee came to us rather as a surprise. August Belmont, director and former president of the subway company, had been questioned by the committee on the terms of subway's contract with Ward & Gow, as a matter of public importance.
It seemed to us that the way Ward & Gow made use of their privilege was no less a matter of public interest; and we were glad to find that the chairman of the committee, Senator Thompson, agreed with us. A hearing was held on June 28.
August Belmont was the first witness, and was given an interesting ten minutes. Max Eastman asked if he could put some questions to Mr. Belmont. The first questions dealt with the terms of the Ward & Gow contract.
"Is there anything in the terms of that contract," asked Mr. Eastman, "which allows Ward & Gow to exercise a censorship as to what magazines they will sell on the subway?"
A. "I don't recall."
Q. "Would you mind giving me your personal opinion as to whether you think they have a right to exclude magazines from the subway stands because they don't like them?"
A. "I wouldn't express an opinion as to that, a personal opinion."
Q. "Mr. Belmont, is Ward & Cow's function there a public service, in your opinion?"
A. "They conduct newsstands under the same privileges as any newsstand, I presume."
Q. "Well, is the function of any newsstand public service?"
A. "I don't quite understand the purport of it. A public service--they are newsstands, they conduct a newsstand like any other newsstand. I don't know what you mean. Do you mean that they have a moral obligation to the public? Is that what you mean? I am more interested in their legal obligations than I am in their moral obligations. I believe if they are of public service, they have some legal obligations that they have not if they are not of public service. I can't help you on that."
Q. "Mr. Belmont, the Interborough Company is of public service, is it not?"
A. "Oh,yes."
Q. "Well, does not the relation between the Interborough Company and Ward & Cow entail the conclusion that they also are a public service?"
A. "I could not express anything but an opinion on that subject."
Q. "That is exactly what I want you to express. It would help a lot if you would express an opinion."
A. "Why?"
Q. "Because your opinion is very important."
A. "I don't see that it is. My private opinion does not seem to be pertinent here on a question of that kind. You are asking me about the actual relations between the two, and so far as Ward & Cow is involved as a public servant, I think it is. As to its contract with the Interborough, I can't give you an opinion."
Q. "May I ask you if you have an opinion about it?"
A. "As to whether an objectionable publication should be sold there or not?"
Q. "Yes."
A. "Yes, I think if there was any legal method of preventing an objectionable publication from being sold on a stand it ought to be done."
Q. "Will you tell me whether you have an opinion as to whether Ward & Cow is a public service?"
A. "I can't give you that either, it would be worthless."
Mr. Eastman: "Don't you think, Senator Thompson, that Mr. Belmont's opinion would be pertinent to the question of whether a law on this subject would be proper or not?"
Senator Thompson: "I should think so, very much so."
Mr. Eastman: "Won't you give us your opinion, Mr. Belmont?"
Mr. Belmont: "I don't think you want my opinion on a subject like that. You would have to make that very specific."
Mr. Eastman: "Senator Thompson, will you please make my question specific? I don't seem to know how."
Senator Thompson: "... He wants to know if in your opinion the sale of these magazines on the newsstands of the Interborough is a public service, that is, a service that they are bound to give to the public; it is in the nature of a monopoly, and he also wants an opinion as to whether, if it is not now under the jurisdiction of the public service, it should be?"
Mr. Belmont: "Yes, it is."
The witness was excused, and Mr. Eastman proceeded to lay a complaint against the firm of Ward & Cow for excluding THE MASSES from the subway newsstands. His statement is printed on page five of this issue. The grounds of exclusion having been the "blasphemous and indecent" character of THE MASSES, he asked a number of representative citizens to testify as to their opinion of the magazine. The first of these witnesses was Professor John Dewey, of Columbia University. Mr. Dewey said:
"I have been a fairly regular reader of THE MASSES, and I have never seen anything which I regarded as either indecent or blasphemous."
Q. "Do you think that Ward & Gow have a moral right to exclude THE MASSES from the subway stands?"
A. "It is my personal opinion that it is very unfortunate that any private business corporation should have it in its power to determine in any way the trend and set of thought and ideas that should percolate to the community. That is to my mind the most serious feature of the present case --the exercise of a censorship by a business organization."
Senator Thompson: "Is it a power that ought to reside anywhere except in the Legislature?"
A. "My own judgment is that it should reside simply in the Legislature and in the decisions of the courts pursuant to the acts of Legislature. I think otherwise we might find that certain business interests might object to any propaganda and exercise their power to cut it off."
Lincoln Steffens was then called to the stand. He told how he had gone, at the request of THE MASSES, to see an official of the Ward & Gow Company, to see if it were not possible to persuade Ward & Gow not to exercise censorship over THE MASSES, and to put it back on their stands. "The purpose of that move from my point of view," he said, "was to see if we could not get them to see the point about free speech and free press, without making a fight."
"Some of the men on THE MASSES wanted to make a fight and I am against fighting except when it is necessary. However, I went down to see Mr. Atkinson and he received me and asked me curtly what my business was and I said it was to ask him to raise the embargo upon THE MASSES, and he said,'That cannot be done.' I asked him if he would give me a hearing and he said,'Yes.' So I went inside and sat down at his desk with him and I said,'Mr. Atkinson, I used to be what they call a muckraker, had access to magazines which gave me a certain power and I abused it. I used that power to blame men, to express more or less my feelings against men, individuals, and I know now that men are not at fault, and I said,'Now, here comes THE MASSES, a lot of young men. They have talent and their publication amounts to power.' I said,'They abuse their power as they are bound to do, as all men in power abuse power.' I said, 'Then come Ward & Gow and they have a privilege from a privileged concern, which gives them the power to say what publications shall be presented in a certain way to the public and which shall not, so of course Ward & Gow abuse their power. This usually means fighting. Men can't express themselves, can't get together and can't have any understanding among themselves, and so they go to War as they do in Europe.' He said, 'Well, why not make THE MASSES stop publishing what they are publishing all the time!' I said, 'That is not the way to begin. They are young men and they think these things and feel these things, let them express themselves. We don't want them repressed.'...
"Well, the result of the interview was that Mr. Atkinson said that it was a new point of view to him and he said he would take it up with Mr. Ward and would try to persuade Mr. Ward. So he went to see Mr. Ward and he told me a week later that they could not move Mr. Ward. Then I got his permission to make my appeal to Mr. Ward and I went and saw him, and Mr. Ward was hard. He was very explicit. He said that he had excluded THE MASSES from the stands because it had offended his religious sense. 'Now,' he said, 'I have a right on any grounds to exclude anything. I have two hundred applications for publications for space on my stands and I can't receive them all, so I have to exclude some, and I exclude some because there is not space, but in the case of THE MASSES I exclude it because it offends my religious sense.' Then I said, 'Mr. Ward, you are acting as a censor and you are deliberately taking over the responsibility for everything that is on your stands.' He said,'I am willing to do that; THE MASSES shall not go back on my stand. It is mine, it is my private property, I rent and control it, it is mine. Now,' he said,'I won't say it never will go back on the stand, because if they become decent and produce a publication like the Atlantic, then I will let it back upon the stand.'
"The whole point was that he was acting as a censor and that is very clear.
"It seems to me," Mr. Steffens said, "that it is one more entering wedge by which not only Ward & Gow, but all of what we now call the interests, are closing in on the press and all of us who write for the press, to keep us from saying the things that will improve conditions in the United States."
The Rev. Percy Stickney Grant, pastor of the Church of the Ascension, took the stand, and said:
"I do not think THE MASSES should be excluded from the subway stands. I do not think it is indecent or blasphemous." He had felt that the publication of the "Ballad," which was the cause of its exclusion, was a matter of bad taste or of editorial inattention, "or it might have been carrying out the theory of THE MASSES, which after all is the theory of giving to the proletariat the widest expression of their beliefs, carrying that expression to an extreme. And yet," he said, "I think that theory cannot be carried to such an extreme as to make it wise to put that publication under the ban on any stand.... I am too accustomed," he said, "to free expression by workingmen and their sympathizers on religious subjects, to be personally disturbed."
Asked if he read THE MASSES regularly, he replied :
"It is one of the papers that I look forward to with great pleasure. I feel that the sympathy and intelligence of the writers of THE MASSES, and their expert knowledge of social and industrial conditions, make a reader confident of the reality of what he gets in THE MASSES. That is a great relief today, to a reader of periodicals."
Abraham Cahan, editor of the Jewish Daily Forward, being put on the stand, said that he had been brought up in Russia, and was used to the idea of magazines being suppressed because they were good, because they told the truth. "To me," he said, "it is a Russian affair all the way through. It almost makes me homesick."
Rose Pastor Stokes testified that she had been familiar with the story of Jesus as related in the "Ballad" printed in THE MASSES. It was an old Jewish legend, which she had never regarded as irreverent.
The Rev. Edward A. Saunderson, formerly pastor of the Church of the Pilgrims in Brooklyn, and now connected with the Good Will industries in the same city, testified that he did not regard THE MASSES as blasphemous. "I am too familiar," he said, "with the Bible itself, to feel at all shocked by any of the conceptions either of God or Christ that have been published there. I feel that as far as blasphemy is concerned, conceptions of God which you can take out of the Old and New Testaments are far more of a calumny against God than anything I have ever seen in THE MASSES."
Amos Pinchot testified to his belief that the exclusion of THE MASSES was an infringement of the right of free expression. He said: "History has shown pretty plainly that all of these movements to guard people from ideas are unsound; and that the only safe, conservative thing to do is to let the ideas loose in the community. If they are bad ideas, they will be destroyed by the good ideas that are in the world; if they are sound ideas, they will maintain their position in the world, and grow in strength.
"Now," he Said, "I have seen THE MASSES on tables of girls' boarding schools. It is on my table. I never miss a copy; my children read it. I give it to my little girl, because the art features of it are very, very fine, I think. I like to have them read it; I like to have them get away from the idea of prudery and secret things, and come right out in the open. I like to have my children talk to me; I hope they always will, as frankly as THE MASSES talks to the public, and I regard it as a very, very valuable publication.
"I agree with Senator Thompson and Mr. Moss, that the great danger to this country is in the control of ideas, for ideas are the source of everything. Any man that controls ideas, controls the world, and if there is one single principle that is absolutely vital to society, more vital than any kind of physical freedom, it is mental freedom, for that is the basis of all freedom."
Senator Thompson: "The question of what is decent and what is indecent is one that is very hard to pass upon."
A. "Personally, I have never seen anything that I considered indecent in THE MASSES."
 
Some Recent Workings of the Censorship


In the past six months six radical periodicals have been suppressed by the Post Office Department without the formality of a trial and without possibility of redress: Revolt, of New York; Alarm, of Chicago; The Blast, of San Francisco; Voluntad (Spanish); Volni Listy (Bohemian); and Regeneracion (English-Spanish). All of these papers, except the last one, were denied the privileges of the mails on the grounds that the Post Office Department "did not like the tone of the paper." Regeneracion, as will be remembered, was handled more crudely: the Federal Department of Justice confiscated its presses on the ground that an article which it published, advising the Mexican people not to trust the Carranza government, was "treason." And at the same time two of its editors, the Magon brothers, were beaten into insensibility by detectives, and the entire editorial board was indicted.
The Post Office examination and censorship of mail is strictly illegal. Several times the Post Office has asked Congress to grant it definite rights in this matter, and Congress has refused. Cases which have been carried up to the United States Supreme Court have been decided on the legal merits of the particular case--the Supreme Court has refused to pass on the principle of the Post Office censorship.
This method of suppressing publications without trial was begun during the administration of Theodore Roosevelt, when La Questione Soziale, of Paterson, N. J., was so forbidden to publish or circulate.
We bring these instances of lawless tyranny to the attention of our readers, to further prove that the governing class of the United States has not the slightest respect for that "law and order" which it professes to uphold against "dangerous revolutionists" like us.
Passing from philosophy and economics to art and literature, we catch a glimpse of the reason why America is so hopelessly inferior in artistic and philosophical expression to the rest of the world.
We find in the literary section of the Boston Transcript a notice to the effect that "the Committee on Suppression of Cincinnati and New York" has instituted proceedings to suppress Theodore Dreiser's great novel, "The Genius," on the grounds of "immorality."
We also happen to know that "The Rainbow," by D. H. Lawrence, one of the finest novels ever written in the English language, has been barred from publication here--after appearing in England--by the threat of the Society for the Suppression of Vice--on the grounds of "obscenity."
Then there are "Hagar Revelly" and "Home Sapiens" and an infinite number of other books. Likewise the publishers of translations of Russian literature have been warned against introducing here some of the greatest books of all time--which are freely available to the public of every other country of the world, including China.
In the theatre we have a recent example in the outrageous censorship of the Russian Ballet in New York, and the stupid suppression of serious plays in Boston, Philadelphia and Chicago; while undisturbed, the silly and lascivious burlesque show, musical comedy and vaudeville act go on. The moral is, of course: "As long as you are vulgar you are safe."
And we have with us always what the Little Review calls "the most perfect system of Birth Control for genius and art ever devised--The National Board of Censorship."
But the latest activity of our national pruriency is in the realm of painting. Jerome Blum, a painter of reputation, returned from China this spring, bringing with him a little collection of Chinese and Japanese paintings. Among them was a book containing eight original paintings on silk by one of the ancient Chinese masters, and a Japanese scroll of exquisite workmanship.
The Customs Appraiser of the Port of Chicago declared these two works obscene, saying "they would arouse the passions of an ordinary man."
Upon this evidence the Collector of the Port ordered them to be destroyed, informing Mr. Blum that he had laid himself open to thousands of dollars in fines and five years imprisonment. Mr. Blum offered to paint out the objectionable parts, to return them to China, or to present them to some museum. But the Customs official's decree was: "Art or no Art, all paintings of the kind are to be burned." So the two paintings were destroyed!
No one of the slightest education need be told that all Art--and all religion--arose from the desire of humanity to recreate for the hearts of men the mystery of the creation and reproduction of life. The Art of the Orient is almost solely concerned with these subjects. And not only that; the steeple of every village church in the United States, the form of the cross on its altar, the shape of a bishop's hat--are all "obscene" phallic symbols.
We wonder how the Customs officials of the Port of Chicago can bear to go around carrying the shameful male organs of generation. But perhaps, after all, they haven't any.
 
Sumner vs. Forel


You may have heard that John S. Sumner, the successor of Anthony Comstock, paid a visit to our office recently, confiscated all the September numbers of THE MASSES on hand, and arrested our circulation manager, Merrill Rogers. The reason was that we had advertised and sold "The Sexual Question," by August Forel--a book recognized as one of the great authoritative works on the subject of sex. The case will be fought to a finish in the courts. In the meantime it is interesting to have a personal statement from John S. Sumner, made to one of our editors, explaining his animus against the Forelbook. He says: "It advocates sodomy"! Our readers have our word for it that it does, of course, nothing of the sort. If our recommendations had any weight with the authorities, we should suggest that some of our prominent vice experts be detained for observation in Bellevue; their minds really do not seem to us to be normal. For the time being, however, they dictate what you shall buy and read.





Eastman Archive | Marxists Internet Archive



astman-A Passionate Magazine-



The Masses  
Max Eastman
A Passionate Magazine






Published: The Masses, April 1917
Transcribed:Sally Ryan for marxists.org in 2000



The editors of The New Republic seem to have been seized with a highly intellectualized lust for bloody combat. I was shocked by their mobilization order. They had the submarines out and the guns firing before the subscribers had time to realize the magazine had $one to war. I had often predicted they would go to war, these liberal intellects, in the front rank--ahead, in fact, of the republic. But I was really shocked at the joyful unction with which they did it.
Those bold letters on the front cover:
WITHOUT DELAY DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS MUST BE BROKEN. THE NAVY SHOULD BE MOBILIZED. STEPS SHOULD BE TAKEN TO ARM ALL MERCHANT SHIPS. THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF OUR ENTRANCE INTO THE WAR SHOULD BE DISCUSSED AND ANNOUNCED.
Where now is the suave and judicial externalism of the "journal of opinion"?
The New Republic has given expression to a great many radical ideas--birth control education, freedom of speech, the right to strike, government ownership of railroads. Its editors have a great liberality of view, and we have to thank them for many deliberative and careful pronouncements in favor of radical progress. But they never put their heart in their pens before. It was never:
WITHOUT DELAY THIS KNOWLEDGE THAT IS VITAL TO LIFE MUST BE MADE ACCESSIBLE TO THE PEOPLE. SPEECH MUST BE FREE. STEPS SHOULD BE TAKEN TO GUARANTEE TO THESE WORKMEN THE RIGHT TO STRIKE. THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF TRANSFER OF THE RAILROADS TO THE REPUBLIC MUST BE DISCUSSED AND ANNOUNCED.
No--they always managed to hold in on those topics, these young men, maintaining that infinite equilibrium and freedom from the propaganda note which bespeaks a finished intellectuality. But now the miracle is broken. An emotion is acknowledged. The New Republic has a mission. And its mission, as well as I can gather from the first two numbers, is War on Germany and Anglo-American Imperialism--Victory without Peace. 






Eastman Archive | Marxists Internet Archive



astman- The Nice People of Trinidad



Max Eastman
The Nice People of Trinidad




Published: The Masses, July 1914
Transcribed:Sally Ryan for marxists.org in 2000



Pearl Jolly says that after she escaped from the blazing tents at
Ludlow, she spent the night with a crowd of children, out of
bullet-shot, in the cellar of Baye’s ranch, a mile away. The next
morning she crept up to the telephone to listen for news. And this is
what she heard:
Mrs. Curry, the wife of the company’s physician at the Hastings
mine, was talking with Mrs. Cameron, the wife of the mine
superintendent.
“Well, what do you think of yesterday’s work?” she said.
“Wasn’t that fine!”
“They got Fyler and Tikas.”
“Wasn’t that fine!”
“The dirty old tent-colony is burnt down, and we know of
twenty-eight of the dirty brutes we’ve roasted alive down there.”
Later she heard two men discussing the same subject.
“We have all the important ones we wanted now,” they agreed, “except
John Lawson and the Weinburg boys.”
Pearl Jolly is a cool, clever and happy-hearted American girl, the
wife of a miner. She stood in her tent making egg sandwiches for the
people in the holes, while bullets clattered the glassware to the floor
on all sides of her.
“Tikas asked me if I was afraid to stay,” she said. “I was, but I
stayed.”
When Pearl Jolly tells you exactly what she heard over the
telephone, correcting you if you misplace a monosyllable, it is
difficult to retain the incredulity proper to an impartial
investigator. But still it is possible, for the thing she heard is a
shade too barbarous to believe. The quality of cruelty is a little
strained. And so I shook hands with Pearl Jolly and hastened away from
her honest face, in order to do my duty of disbelieving.
Subsequently I heard with my own ears, not from professional gunmen
or plug-uglies, but from the nicest ladies of Trinidad, sentiments
quite equal in Christian delicacy to those she plucked out of the
telephone. And I quote these sentiments verbatim here because they
prove, as no legal narrative ever can prove, where lay the cause of the
massacre of Ludlow, in whose hearts the deliberate plan of that Indian
orgy was hatched.
A visit to the general manager of the Victor American Company, an
introduction from him to his superintendents, Snodgrass at Delagua and
Cameron at Hastings, a charming and judicial lecture from these
gentlemen, had netted us nothing more than a smile at the smoothness
with which a murder business can be conducted. Not an armed man was in
sight as we drove into the camp, not a question asked at the gate,
everything wide open and free as the prairie. Did we wish to see the
superintendent? Oh, yes—his name was Snodgrass. We had mislaid our
letter of introduction? Well, it would hardly matter at all, because in
fact the general manager happened to be telephoning this morning and he
mentioned our coming.
So began a most genial conversation as to the humane efforts of the
companies to conduct the strike fairly and without aggression upon
their side, whatever indiscretions might be committed by the miners. I
had just come up from the black acre at Ludlow, where I had counted
twenty-one bullet holes in one wash-tub, and yet when that Snodgrass
assured me that there had been no firing on the tent-colony at all I
was within a breath of believing him. There are such men in the world,
mixing cruelty and lies with a magnetic smile, and most of them out of
politics are superintendents of labor camps.
So we learned nothing to corroborate Mrs. Jolly from the company’s
men—except, perhaps, an accidental remark of Mr. Cameron’s “town
marshal,” A. W. Brown, that the strikers got so obstreperous last fall
that he “really had to plant a few of ’em"—a remark we may set down to
the vanity of one grown old as a gunman in the company’s service.
Excepting that, the men behaved as men of the world have learned to
behave under the eyes of the press.
And for this reason we turned to the women.
We secured from the librarian at Trinidad a sort of social register
of the town’s elite. We selected—and “we” at this point means Elsa
Euland, who was representing the Independent—selected and
invited to a cup of afternoon coffee at the Hotel Corinado a dozen of
the most representative ladies of the elegance of the town. And as the
town’s elegance rests exclusively upon a foundation of mining stock,
these ladies were also representative of the sentiment of the
mine-owners in general.
There was Mrs. McLoughlin, who is Governor Ammon’s sister and the
wife of an independent mine-owner—an active worker also in the uplift
or moral betterment of the miners’ wives.
There was Mrs. Howell, whose husband is manager of the Colorado
Supply Company, operating the “Company Stores,” of which we have heard
so much.
Mrs. Stratton, whose husband heads a commercial college in Trinidad.
Mrs. Rose, whose husband is superintendent of the coal railroad that
runs up from Ludlow field into the Hastings mine.
Mrs. Chandler, the Presbyterian minister’s wife.
Mrs. Northcutt, the wife of the chief attorney for the coal
companies, the owner also of the bitterest anti-labor newspaper of
those counties, the Chronicle-News.
One or two others were there, but these furnished the evidence. And
they furnished it with such happy volubility to our sympathetic ears,
and note-books, that I feel no hesitation in reproducing their words
exactly as I copied them there.
“You have been having a regular civil war here, haven’t you?” we
asked.
“It was no war at all,” said Mrs. McLoughlin. “It was as if I had my
home and my children, and somebody came in from the outside and said,
’Here, you have no right to your children—we intend to get them out of
your control’—And I tell you I’d take a gun, if I could get one, and
I’d fight to defend my children!”
A mild statement, by what was to follow, but to my thinking a
significant one. For what exists in those mining camps—incorporated
towns of Colorado, with a United States postoffice and a public
highway, all located within a gate called “Private Property"—what
exists there, is a state of feudal serfdom. The miners belong
to the mine-owners in the first place, and what follows from that.
“Then you attribute the fighting,” I said, “solely to these
agitators who come in here where they don’t belong and start trouble?”
“Just these men who came in here and raised a row. There was nothing
the matter. We had a pretty good brotherly feeling in the mines before
they came.”
“Yes,” Said Mrs. Northcutt, “I’ve had a hired girl from the mining
camps tell me how much money the miners get—but they never save a
cent. ’I tell you we live high,’ she would say, ’we buy the very
best canned goods we can get.’”
“Yes—the men who are willing to work make five and six
dollars a day. Of course the lazy ones don’t. But the majority of them
in the Delagua camp just simply cried when the strike was
called! They didn’t want to go out.”
“Isn’t that strange,” I said."How do you account for 80 or 90 per
cent of them going out when they didn’t want to?”
“Well, the union compelled them—that’s all. You know all the  good miners have
left here now. That is always the way in a strike. The better class go
on to other fields.”
“Then you feel that the low character of the strikers themselves is
what made it possible for these trouble-makers to succeed here?”
“That’s it exactly—they are ignorant and lawless foreigners, every
one of them that caused the trouble. I’ve thought if only we could have
a tag, and tag all the foreigners so you could recognize them at a
glance—I believe if Roosevelt were here he’d deport them.”
This subject of the native iniquity of every person not born on
American soil was then tossed from chair to chair for the space of
about an hour. It is the common opinion in Trinidad society. We even
heard it voiced by a Swedish lady of wealth, who had herself been less
than ten years in America.
“Americans, you know, won’t work in the mines at all.”
“I wonder why that is.”
“Well, I don’t know. They don’t want to go under ground, I suppose,"
was one answer. Another was:
“These people are ignorant, you see, and that’s why they will do the
menial work.”
“I see,” I said.
“And you must understand that our town was absolutely turned over to
these people for a week. They were armed with guns and singing their
war songs in the streets. The policemen knew they could do nothing and
stayed home. I kept my children in the basement.”
“Was the larger part of the town sympathetic to the strikers?”
“Well, those of us who weren’t sympathetic thought best either to
keep still or pretend we were!”
“I understand. And what did they do?”
“Had control of the town, that’s all! And don’t hesitate to say that
we didn’t have any mayor.”
“What became of your mayor?”
“The mayor received some letters and he was called suddenly away,
that’s what became of him! And the sheriff—they say he went to
Albuquerque for his wife’s health—but his wife stayed at home.”
“You know our church is right next door to the union headquarters,
and on Sunday morning there was such a crowd of these people around
there that we couldn’t get to church. I wasn’t going to pick my way
through these people to get to church” —this is the minister’s wife
speaking—"so I called up the chief of police and asked him to clear the
street. He said he had no authority, it was a county matter. So I
called up the sheriff’s office, and they said they couldn’t do it.
Finally we had to call up the labor union secretary himself!”
“Has the church done anything to try to help these people, or bring
about peace?” we asked.
“I think it’s the most useless thing in the world to attempt it,"
she answered. And there followed the story, which I had also from a
priest himself, of how a Catholic father was reported as a scab and
compelled to stop preaching because he taught that “idleness is the
root of evil,” and tried to advise the men to return to work.
“Christianity could prevail, of course,” was her conclusion, “but we
haven’t enough of it.”
“You haven’t a spiritual leader in the community, have you?” said
the least tactful of us.
“We haven’t a spiritual community!” said the minister’s
wife.
“And how do you feel about the disaster at Ludlow?” we asked. It was
Mrs. Northcutt who answered.
“I think there has been a lot of maudlin sentiment in the newspapers
about those women and children. There were only two women, and they
make such a fuss about those two! It was their own fault, anyway.”
“You mean that the papers are to blame for all the trouble they have
caused?”
“The sensational papers,” she added. “They’re looking for something
to sell their papers, that’s all.”
“I guess that’s true,” I said, and thanked God they were.
“The worst that has come out of this strike,” Mrs. Northcutt
continued, “is the way those poor militia boys have been treated.
They’ve just had abuse heaped upon them. Yes, my heart has felt very
sore for those boys who came down here full of patriotic feelings!”
“And General Chase certainly was a fine man,” said another, “one of
the Lord’s own! Do you know that at the time they broke up the Mother
Jones parade a woman stuck her hatpin in the general’s horse, and the
horse threw him off?”
“That was just it—the low things they would do!” came the refrain.
"And he hasn’t a bit of cowardice in him. He rode around all day just
the same! I tell you the soldiers behaved themselves nobly down here.”
“And yet people object,” said Mrs. Stratton, “because they
occasionally got drunk—didn’t General Grant get drunk? Did they expect
a lot of angels to come down here and fight a lot of cattle?"
Mrs. Stratton had touched the key-word—cattle—and from that
word ensued a conversational debauch of murder-wishing class-hatred of
which I can only give a suggestion.
“That’s it,” said Mrs. Rose, “they’re nothing but cattle, and the
only way is to kill them off.”
I think one of us winced a little at this, and the speaker rested a
sympathetic hand on her shoulder. “Nothing but cattle, honey!” she said.
“They ought to have shot Tikas to start with," added the
minister’s wife, a woman of more definite mind than the others. “That’s
the whole trouble. It’s a pity they didn’t get him first instead of
last.”
“You know, there’s a general belief around here,” she continued,
"that those women and children were put in that hole and sealed up on
purpose because they mere a drain on the union.”
“Yes, those low people, they’ll stoop to anything,” agreed Mrs.
Northcutt.
“They’re brutal, you know,” continued the minister’s wife. “They
simply don’t regard human life. And they’re ignorant. They can’t read
or write. They don’t know anything. They don’t even know the Christmas
story!”
“Is that possible!” I gasped.
“Yes, sir; there was a little girl, one of the daughters of a miner,
and she was asked on Christmas day what day it was, and she said,
’Well, it’s somebody’s birthday, but I’ve forgotten whose!’”
“All you ladies, I suppose, are members of the church?” we asked in
conclusion.
“Oh, yes; all of us.”
“Well—we are glad to have met you all and found out the true cause
of the trouble,” we said.
And here I turned to Mrs. Rose—whose word comes, remember, straight
from the mine above Ludlow. “What do you seriously think,” I said, “is
the final solution of this problem?”
“Kill ’em off—that’s all,” she answered with equal seriousness.
So that is how I returned to my original faith in Pearl Jolly’s
story of what she heard over the telephone. And when she tells me that
while she was assisting in lifting twelve corpses out of that black
pit, the soldiers of the National Guard stood by insulting her in a
manner that she will not repeat, and one of them said, “Sorry we didn’t
have more in there for you to take out,” I believe that, too.
When a train despatcher at Ludlow and his assistant both assure me
that at 9:20 A. M. on Monday, the 23d of April, from their office,
square in front of the two military camps, they saw and heard the
militia fire the first shot, and that the machine guns were trained
directly on the tent-colony from the start, although never a shot was
fired from the colony all day, I believe that.
This “Battle of Ludlow” has been portrayed in the best of the press
as a “shooting-up” of the tent-colony by soldiers from a distance,
while armed miners “shot-up” the soldiers to some extent, also, from
another distance.
The final burning and murder of women and children has been
described as a semi-accidental consequence, due perhaps to
irresponsible individuals.
I want to record my opinion, and that of my companions in the
investigation, that this battle was from the first a deliberate effort
of the soldiers to assault the tent-colony, with purpose to burn,
pillage and kill, and that the fire of the miners with their forty
rises from a railroad cut and an arroyo on two sides of the colony was
the one and only thing that held off that assault and massacre until
after dark. It was those forty rises that enabled as many of the women
and children to escape as did escape.
Every person in and in the vicinity of the colony reports the
training of machine guns on women and children as targets in the open
field. Mrs. Low, whose husband kept a pump-house for the railroad near
the tent-colony, tells me that she had gone to Trinidad the day of the
massacre. She came back at 12:45 alighted at a station a mile away, and
started running across the prairie to save her little girl whom she had
left alone in a tiny white house exactly in the line of fire. They
trained a machine gun on her as she ran there.
“I had bought six new handkerchiefs in Trinidad,” she said, “and I
held them up and waved them for truce flags, but the bullets kep’
coming. They come so thick my mind wasn’t even on the bullets, hut I
remember they struck the dust and sent it up in my face. Finally some
of the strikers saw I was going right on into the bullets—I was bound
to save my little girl—and they risked their lives to run out from the
arroyo and drag me down after them. I didn’t know where my baby was, or
whether she was alive, till four-thirty that afternoon.”
Her baby, as I learned, had run to her father in the pump-house at
the first fire, and had been followed in there by a rain of .48-calibre
bullets, one of which knocked a pipe out of her father’s hand while she
was trying to persuade him to be alarmed. He carried her down into the
well and they stayed there until nightfall, when a freight train
stopped in the line of fire and gave them a chance to run up the arroyo
where the mother was hiding.
This has all grown very easy for me to believe since that bloody
conversation over the coffee cups. And when citizens of Trinidad
testify that they saw troops of armed soldiers marching through on
their way to Ludlow at midnight of the night before the massacre, that
too, and all that it implies, is easy to believe. It prepares one’s
mind for the testimony of Mrs. Toner, a French woman with five
children, who lay all day in a pit under her tent, until the tent was
"just like lace from the bullets.” At dark she heard a noise “something
like paper was blowing around.”
“I looked out then, and the whole back of my tent was blazing, with
me under it, and my children. I run to a Mexican tent next door,
screaming like a woman that had gone insane. I was fainting, and Tikas
caught me and threw water in my face. I was so thrubled up, I says,’My
God, I forgot one, I forgot one!’ and I was going back. And Mrs. Jolly
told me, ’It’s all right. They’re all here.’ And I heard the children
crying in that other hole, the ones that died, and Mrs. Costa crying,
’Santa Maria, have mercy!’ and I heard the soldier say, ’We’ve got
orders to kill you and we’re going to do it!”
“’We’ve got plenty of ammunition, just turn her loose, boys’ they
said.
“Oh, I tell you, that was one of the saddest things was ever went
through! When I was lying in my tent there, Mr. Snyder come running in
to me with his two hands out just like this. ’Oh, my God, Mis’ Toner,’
he said, ’my boy’s head’s blown off. My God, if your children won’t lay
down, just knock’em down rather’n see ’em die.’ He was just like wild.
“I didn’t like to say it before the children—but I was going to have
this baby in a day or two, and when I got to that tent I was having
awful pains and everything. And there I had to run a mile across the
prairie with my five children in that condition. You talk about the
Virgin Mary, she had a time to save her baby from all the trouble, and
I thought to myself I was havin’ a time, too.
“He was born in a stable, I says, but mine come pretty near bein’
born in a prairie. Look at him—I had everything nice for him, and here
he’s come, and he didn’t have hardly a shirt to his name.”
Mrs. Toner sat up languidly from a dark and aching bed in a tiny
rented room in Trinidad.
“I lost everything,” she said. “All my jewelry. A $35 watch and $8
chain my father gave me when he died. A $3 charm I’d bought for my
husband. My fountain pen, spectacles, two hats that cost $10 and $7, my
furs, a brown suit, a black one, a blue shirt-waist, a white one—well,
just everything we had left. I don’t believe the Turks would have been
half so mean to us.”
“Whom do you blame for it?”
“Do you know who I blame? Linderfelt, Chase and Governor Ammons—I
think one of ’em as bad as the other. If Linderfelt had got any of my
children I bet I’d have got him by and by. But then it’s the coal
companies, too, for that matter—if they wouldn’t hire such people.
“They searched my tent eight different times, tore up the floor,
went through all my trunks, and drawers. One of the dirty men asked me
for a kiss. I picked up my iron handle, and I says, ’If you ask me that
again I’ll hit you between the teeth.
“If they hadn’t brought those bloodhounds in here there’d have been
no trouble. They started it on us every time. They’d often threatened
to burn it up, you know, but we said, ’Oh, that’s just talk.’
“Look at him! I tell you it’s a wonder he was born at all!
“Just the same I’d go through the same performance again before I’d
scab. I’d see the rope first. I was the first woman in that colony and
I was the last one out—alive. They took my husband up to the mine, and
offered him $300 a month to run a machine. He’d been getting $2.95 a
day before, and they offered to pay up his back debts at the store, too.
“’You’ll need a wash-tub to come after your pay,’ they said.
“’Yes,’ he said, ’why didn’t you offer me that before the strike?’
“Oh, we ain’t bluffed out at all—only I’ll never go back and live in
a tent. I brought my children out alive and I’m going to keep ’em alive.
“You know the children run cryin’ when they see a yellow suit—even
the Federals. All yellow suits look alike to them!”
I have trusted Mrs. Toner’s own words to convey, better than I
could, the spirit of the women on strike. But I wish I could add to
that a portrait of the young Italian mother, Mrs. Petrucci, who
survived her babies in that death-hole at Ludlow—sweet, strong,
slender-fingered, exquisite Italian Mother-of-God! If there is more
fineness or more tenderness in the world than dwells in those now
pitifully vague and wandering eyes, I have lived without finding it.
It would be both futile and foolish, I suppose, to pretend that
there is hatred, ignorant hatred of dwarfed and silly minds, only upon
the “capital” side of this struggle. Yet I must record my true
conviction, that the purpose to shoot, slaughter, and burn at Ludlow
was absolutely deliberate and avowed in the mines and the camps of the
militia; that it was an inevitable outcome of the temper of
contemptuous race and class-hatred, the righteous indignation of the
slave-driver, with which these mine-owners met the struggle of their
men for freedom; and that upon the strikers’ side is to be found both
more of the gentleness and more of the understanding that are supposed
to be fruits of civilization, than upon the mine-owners’. It will be
granted, perhaps, even by those who love it, that our system of
business competition tends to select for success characters with a fair
admixture of cruel complaisance, and that those excessively weighted
with human love or humility gravitate toward the bottom? At least, if
this is granted to begin with, it will be heartily confirmed
by the facts for anyone who visits the people of Las Animas County.
“Revenge?” said Mrs. Fyler to me—and Mrs. Fyler’s husband was caught
that night in the tent-colony unarmed, led to the track and murdered in
cold blood by the soldiers—"Revenge? We might go out there and stay
five years to get revenge, but it would never get us back what we lost.
It would only be that much on our own heads.”




Eastman Archive | ETOL main page



astman-the Associated Press libel suit against



The Masses  
Max Eastman
Two articles related to the Associated Press libel suit against The Masses




Published: The Masses, January 1914, April 1914
Transcribed:Sally Ryan for marxists.org in 2000



 
Indicted for Criminal Libel


Our readers will wish to know these facts:
Last summer, after a number of publications, including Collier’s
Weekly and The Independent, had delicately intimated
that the Associated Press gave the country no fair amount of the
struggle between labor and capital in West Virginia, THE MASSES
decided to look into the case. It decided that if this thing were true,
it ought to be stated without delicacy.
The result was a paragraph explicitly and warmly charging the
Associated Press with having suppressed and colored the news of that
strike in favor of the employers. Accompanying the paragraph was a
cartoon presenting the same charge in a graphic form.
Upon the basis of this cartoon and paragraph, William Rand, an
attorney for the Associated Press, brought John Doe proceedings against
THE MASSES in the Municipal Court of New York. Justice Breen
dismissed the case.
Rand then went to the District Attorney. And the District Attorney
considered the case serious enough to receive the attention of the
Grand Jury. He secured an indictment of two editors of THE MASSES
for criminal libel. Max Eastman and Arthur Young were arraigned on
December 13, pleaded not guilty, and were each released on $1,000 bail.
The date for the trial is not set. The penalty for criminal libel may
be one year in prison, $5,000 fine, or both.
We do not invite your solicitude over the fate of these two editors
of THE MASSES. But we do invite you to arouse yourselves against any
attempt to put down by force of legal procedure the few free and
independent critics of the Associated Press. The hope of democratic
civilization lies in the dissemination of true knowledge, and every man
must be free to keep vigilance over the sources of knowledge. The
Associated Press boasts of supplying news to one-half the population of
this country. And if that boast is true, or if it remotely approximates
the truth, then a criticism of the Associated Press is a criticism of
the very heart of the hope of progress for mankind in America. And if
the Associated Press proves powerful enough—as it may, for it is the
biggest political force we have—to silence such criticism, we may as
well forget all about the New Haven Railroad, and the Telephone Trust,
and the Standard Oil Trust, and the Steel Trust, and the Money Trust,
and every other problem of combination that confronts us, for they are
little or nothing by comparison with a sovereign control of true
knowledge.
In our effort to secure a just decision of this case and the
principles involved in it, we expect the support of every man and woman
who believes in democratic civilization and the freedom of the press.
If you control or influence any avenue of publicity in the country,
go out and help us get the case before the public. And if you know any
other way to contribute to a legal struggle, do not pause or postpone
it. The issue is not ours, it is yours.
The defense is in the hands of Gilbert E. Roe, 55 Liberty street,
New York, a former law partner of Senator La Follette and a
distinguished fighter against Privilege.
FLOYD DELL
—January 1914
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS


We print below a defense of the Associated Press which appeared in
the New York Times of March 7, and a reply to that editorial
by Mr. Amos Pinchot. This reply was sent to the Times, but
was not printed there. It appeared later in the columns of the New
York Sun. We offer our readers the choice between the two views of
the Associated Press and its activities.
 
The Times Editorial


The men who centuries ago fought and won the great fight for freedom
of speech and of the press were stout and worthy champions of the
liberties of the people. Nowadays those who bawl loudest for freedom of
speech are persons who make or wish to make the unworthiest use of the
privilege. When men or women inciting mobs to riot and pillage come
into collision with the police we always hear much prating about
freedom of speech.
The freedom of speech and of the press found defenders of the “free
press protest meeting” held in Cooper Union Thursday evening, under the
management of the Liberal Club. Mr. Lincoln Steffens was there and
spoke. There were feminists and suffragists. But Mr. Amos E. Pinchot
was the star of the evening. The meeting was called as a measure of
protest against the Federal indictment for criminal libel that has been
found against Max Eastman and Art Young, the editor and the cartoonist
of a Socialist publication, THE MASSES. These men published
in their paper a cartoon representing Mr. Frank B. Noyes, President of
The Associated Press, as poisoning the waters of public opinion by
causing to be sent out false and distorted news to the newspapers
served by that organization. This cartoon was examined by a Federal
Grand Jury, adjudged to be libelous, and an indictment for criminal
libel was brought. Mr. Amos E. Pinchot insisted that a protest should
be made against the use of the Federal District Attorney’s office for
the muzzling of those who criticised The Associated Press monopoly. In
a matter of criminal libel the office of the public prosecutor can be
"used” only when the prosecutor finds a case for submission to the
Grand Jury, and the Grand Jury in its finding represents not the
prosecutor but the people. Mr. Pinchot should understand that this is
not an Associated Press suit; it is a Government suit, an action
brought by the people to punish the lawless.
The speakers at the Cooper Union meeting, and others besides, insist
that there should be an investigation of The Associated Press. The
indictment of Eastman and Young makes certain that an investigation
will be had, a thorough, searching, and perfectly impartial
investigation. The Socialists who perpetrated the libel will have every
opportunity in the world to show that Mr. Noyes does in fact poison the
news, mislead the public, and pervert its notions of current affairs.
If The Associated Press has guilty secrets they will get full
publicity. What more can be asked by the volunteer defenders of the
press against an odious monopoly? The surface appearance of the
transaction is that The Associated Press has courted an investigation
of the most far-reaching kind.
Mr. Pinchot is a careless man. He made this statement:
“I have had a long acquaintance with The Associated Press. I am
perfectly willing to stand behind the charge made by Eastman and Young
that The Associated Press does color and distort the news, that it is
not impartial, and that it is a monopolistic corporation, not only in
constraint of news but in constraint of truth.”
It is not necessary to say that Mr. Pinchot does not know what he is
talking about and to apply unpleasant epithets to him and to his
utterance. He is confuted and made ridiculous by the facts of the case.
The condition he describes is impossible, it could not arise and
continue in The Associated Press. This is made clear by an admirable
statement of the matter which we take from the editorial columns of The
Springfield Republican. Referring to the charge that The Associated
Press has power to color the news, and so determine “in what form and
to what extent the news of the world shall be given from day to day to
the average citizen,” The Republican says:
“But The Republican knows from actual experience and from many
years’ study of the daily press of the United States that the worst
abuses of news publication are perpetrated by the reporters of
individual newspapers in their local field or by the special
correspondents directly serving them at a distance. The more papers a
reporter or a correspondent serves—papers with interests and
sympathies far from uniform—the closer he approximates usually to
impartial presentation of facts. And that is precisely the position of
the news-gathering representatives of The Associated Press.”
Anybody but a Socialist champion of freedom of the press would find
this statement convincing. All sorts of newspapers are served by The
Associated Press—Republican, Democratic, Bull Moose, Independent,
pro-Bryan, anti-Bryan, some that insist that the corporations are too
much abused, and others insisting that they are not abused enough—in
short, newspapers representing every shade of opinion. Now, if Mr.
Noyes should attempt to use his dyestuffs on the news served to all
these papers there would be a deafening uproar and tumult all over the
country. The Associated Press would be split into fragments and the
views openly expressed of its management would make the cartoon of THE
MASSES look like an expression of confidence and esteem. If there
were a church press association and the management should serve purely
Methodist news or Dutch Reformed news to the subscribers, the case
would be an exact parallel to that alleged by THE MASSES and
declared by Mr. Pinchot on knowledge to exist. Mr. Pinchot has no such
knowledge. He bears false witness and foolishly butts his head against
a rough stone wall. If the assailants of The Associated Press would now
and then find something true to say about it, if they would base their
arguments on some other structure than one built up of glaring
falsehoods and owlish stupidities, their antics would be more
interesting.
 
MR. PINCHOT’S REPLY


To the Editor of the Sun—Sir: The subjoined letter in reply to an
editorial article in defense of the Associated Press and in
condemnation of its critics was sent to the New York Times on
March 7, but has not been made public by that newspaper:

To-day’s Times publishes an editorial over a column long
defending the Associated Press as to the indictments against the
editors of THE MASSES and attacking myself and others who “insist that
there should be an investigation of the Associated Press.”
The Times says that the Associated Press could not
possibly color the news, because it serves all kinds of
newspapers—"Republican, Democratic, Bull Moose, Independent, etc."—so
that if it was not impartial “there would be a deafening uproar and
tumult all over the country.” I do not think that this is either an
impressive argument or a fair statement of the case.
As a matter of fact there has been a tumult of protest against
Associated Press news coloring throughout the country. And with this
protest newspaper owners who are members of the Associated Press and
dependent upon it for their information are in many instances heartily
sympathetic. Within the last month I have talked with a number of
editors of newspapers that are members of the Associated Press. They
assured me that the charges of suppression and misrepresentation made
by THE MASSES are well within the truth. They, each of them,
expressed the sincere hope that there would be a searching
investigation which would result in a change of policy.
These gentlemen, however, are not free to state their opinion of the
Associated Press openly, either in their papers or otherwise. For,
under the bylaws of the Associated Press, they would at once be subject
to fines or other discipline. Moreover, Section I of Article II
provides that the corporation shall have the right to expel a member
"for any conduct on his part, or on the part of any one in his employ
or connected with his newspaper, which in its absolute discretion it
shall deem of such a character as to be prejudicial to the interest and
welfare of the corporation and its members, or to justify such
expulsion. The action of the members of the corporation in such regard
shall be final and there shall be no right of appeal or review of such
action.”
The Sun to-day reprints an editorial from the Peoria Star,
which describes how membership in the Associated Press is restricted.
It says: “Membership is restricted in each city, and no new member can
be taken in except by consent of every member in the city belonging to
the trust. In some places membership is held at an exorbitant figure
running up into hundreds of thousands of dollars. * * * It can readily
be seen that this is the worst possible monopoly, because the
newspapers belonging to it are obliged to print what the management
desires, and they are prohibited from criticising any of its acts.”
When, in addition to this, we note that the ultimate control of the
Associated Press does not lie in the vote of the newspapers belonging
to it but in its bond ownership we realize that partiality and news
coloring can be indulged in by the Associated Press, even though, as
the Times says, all sorts of newspapers are served by it.
No newspaper can itself gather all its news. It must depend on some
news agency for its information. The Associated Press is the only great
news-providing agency that serves morning newspapers. To the morning
newspapers it is more important than the railroads are to industrial
organizations. For, while railroads merely transport the product of
industry, the Associated Press both gathers and transports the material
of which newspapers are made.
The Associated Press is certainly a monopoly. It is a monopoly
controlling the distribution of a vital necessity of civilization,
controlling the price at which this necessity shall be sold; and it
goes still further than other trusts in monopolistic power, for it
exercises an absolute discrimination as to whom its products shall be
sold to.
The Times editorial, in denouncing those who hold that the
District Attorney’s office shall not be used by the Associated Press,
seems to me to be inclined to cover up the real issue. It does not
mention that two criminal indictments were brought against Eastman and
Young for publishing the same editorial and cartoon.
In the first indictment the figure depicted as poisoning the
reservoir of public news and labelled “The Associated Press” is alleged
to refer, as in fact it was meant to refer, to the Associated Press, a
corporation. In a trial under such an indictment there would naturally
be admitted the broadest evidence upon the questions whether the
Associated Press colors news and exercises a monopolistic control over
the distribution of information to the public. In a trial upon such an
indictment a searching investigation into the policy and organization
of the Associated Press, its attitude toward labor and capital, its
control by bond ownership, etc., would be inevitable.
But it seems that the Associated Press is unwilling to appear in
court as a complainant in such a trial. For, just thirty-three days
after Eastman and Young were indicted and admitted to $1,000 bail each,
Mr. Noyes again complained to the District Attorney, and they were
again indicted. This time, however, the figure in the cartoon  labeled “The
Associated Press” is alleged to be a picture of Mr. Noyes, and the
charge in this indictment is not that the Associated Press is libelled,
but that Mr. Noyes personally is libelled. The Assistant District
Attorney in charge of the case now expresses his intention of
dismissing the first indictment, and only trying Eastman and Young on
the second. He contends that upon the trial of the second indictment
evidence in regard to suppression and coloring of news by the
Associated Press shall be inadmissible, and the trial shall be limited
to the narrow question as to whether Mr. Noyes and the dignity of the
people the of the County of New York were injured by the publication of
this cartoon.
It would seem as if this was an unfortunate change of ground,
because it is much more important for the public to discover whether
the Associated Press is guilty of news coloring and monopolistic
practices than whether Mr. Noyes and the public have been harmed by the
publication of Art Young’s picture.
I sincerely hope that all this agitation, the indictments of Eastman
and Young, the mass meeting of protest, the discussions and
recriminations in the papers and, finally, the approaching trial in the
criminal courts, will have some beneficial and constructive outcome. It
is perfectly clear to those who have thought of the question calmly
that this outcome must inevitably be along legislative lines. The
nature of the Associated Press, its control over the distribution of
news and the size and scope of its operations demand that it shall be
considered a common carrier in the sense that rail roads are common
carriers. Its service must be open to all those who can pay for it, its
control known and all of its operations conducted with the fullest
publicity.
The initial and necessary step in this programme is an investigation
which will go deeply into very important questions involved. Many
people have hoped that in the trial of Eastman and Young such an
investigation could be secured.
I hope that in spite of the by-laws of the Associated Press, which I
realize would, under ordinary circumstances, prohibit your publishing
what I have written, you may decide that the present situation would
justify you in doing so.
AMOS PINCHOT.
New York, March 9.




Eastman Archive | Marxists Internet Archive



astman-Confession of a Suffrage Orator



Max Eastman
Confession of a Suffrage Orator




Published: The Masses, November 1915
Transcribed:Sally Ryan for marxists.org in 2000



It was never a question of making people believe in the benefits of
women’s freedom, it was a question of making them like the idea.
And all the abstract arguments in the world furnished merely a sort of
auction ground upon which the kindly beauties of the thing could be
exhibited. Aristotle, in his hopeful way, defined man as a “reasonable
animal,” and the schools have been laboring under that delusion ever
since. But man is a voluntary animal, and he knows what he likes and
what he dislikes, and that is the greater part of his knowledge.
Especially is this true of his opinion upon questions involving sex,
because in these matters his native taste is so strong. He will have a
multitude of theories and abstract reasons surrounding it, but these
are merely put on for the sake of gentility, the way clothes are. Most
cultivated people think there is something indecent about a naked
preference. I believe, however, that propagandists would fare better,
if they were boldly aware that they are always moulding wishes rather
than opinions.
There is something almost ludicrous about the attitude of a
professional propagandist to his kit of arguments—and in the suffrage
movement especially, because the arguments are so many and so old, and
so classed and codified, and many of them so false and foolish too. I
remember that during the palmiest days of the abstract argument (before
California came in and spoiled everything with a big concrete example)
I was engaged in teaching, or endeavoring to teach, Logic to a division
of Sophomores at Columbia. And there was brought to my attention at
that time a book published for use in classes like mine, which
contained a codification in logical categories of all the suffrage
arguments, both pro and con, and a priori and a
posteriori, and per accidens and per definitionem,

that had ever been advanced since Socrates first advocated the
strong-minded woman as a form of moral discipline for her husband. I
never found in all my platform wanderings but one suffrage argument
that was not in this book, and that I discovered on the lips of an
historical native of Troy, New York. It was a woman, she said, who
first invented the detachable linen collar, that well-known device for
saving a man the trouble of changing his shirt, and though that
particular woman is probably dead, her sex remains with its pristine
enthusiasm for culture and progress.
But the day of the captious logician, like the day of the roaring
orator, is past. What our times respond to is the propagandist who
knows how to respect the wishes of other people, and yet show them in a
sympathetic way that there is more fun for them, as well as for
humanity in general, in the new direction. Give them an hour’s
exercise in liking something else—that is worth all the proofs
and refutations in the world. Take that famous proposition that “womans
sphere is the home.” A canvass was made at a women’s college a while
ago to learn the reasons for opposing woman suffrage, and no new ones
were found, but among them all this dear old saying had such an
overwhelming majority that it amounted to a discovery. It is the
eternal type. And how easy to answer, if you grab it crudely with your
intellect, imagining it to be an opinion.
“Woman’s sphere is the home!” you cry. “Do you know that according
to the census of 1910 more than one woman in every five in this country
is engaged in gainful employment?
“Woman’s sphere is the home! Do you know where your soap
comes from?
“Woman’s sphere is the home!—do you know that in fifty years all
the work that women used to do within the four walls of her house has
moved out into  the —
“Woman’s sphere is the home! Do you know that, as a simple matter of
fact, the sphere of those women who most need the protection of the
government and the laws is not home but the factory and the
market!
“Why, to say that woman’s sphere is the home after the census says
it isn’t, is like saying the earth is flat after a hundred thousand
people have sailed round it!”
Well—such an assault and battery of the intellect will probably
silence the gentle idealist for a time, but it will not alter the
direction of her will. She never intended to express a statistical
opinion, and the next time you see her she will be telling somebody
else—for she will not talk to you any more—that “woman’s proper
sphere is the home.” In other words, and this is what she said the
first time, if you only had the gift of understanding, “I like women
whose sphere is the home. My husband likes them, too. And we should
both be very unhappy if I had to go to work outside. It doesn’t seem
charming or beautiful to us.”
Now there is a better way to win over a person with such a gift of
strong volition and delicate feeling, than to jump down her throat with
a satchel full of statistics. I think a propagandist who realized that
here was an expression primarily of a human wish, and that these
wishes, spontaneous, arbitrary, unreasoned, because reason itself is
only their servant, are the divine and unanswerable thing in us all,
would respond to her assertion more effectively, as well as more
pleasantly.
The truth is that any reform which associates itself with the name
of liberty, or democracy, is peculiarly adapted to this more persuasive
kind of propaganda. For liberty does not demand that any given person’s
tastes or likings as to a way of life be reformed. It merely demands
that these should not be erected into a dogma, and inflicted as
morality or law upon everybody else. It demands that all persons should
be made free in the pursuit of their own tastes or likings.
Thus the most ardent suffragist might begin by answering our
domestic idealist—"Well, I suppose it is a charming and beautiful
thing for you to stay in your home, since you are happy there. I myself
have a couple of neighbors who have solved their problem of life that
way too, and I never have an argument with them. Why? Because they
recognize that all people’s problems are not to be solved in the same
way. They recognize the varieties of human nature. They recognize that
each one of us has a unique problem of life to solve, and he or she
must be made free to solve it in her own unique way. That is democracy.
That is the liberty of man. That is what universal suffrage means, and
would accomplish, so far as political changes can accomplish it.
“Let us agree that woman’s proper sphere is the home, whenever it
is. But there are many women who, on account of their natural
disposition perhaps, or perhaps on account of their social or financial
situation, cannot function happily in that sphere; and they are only
hindered in the wholesome and fruitful solution of their lives by the
dogma which you and your society hold over them, and which is
crystallized and entrenched as political inequality by the fundamental
law.”
Thus our agitation of the woman question would appear to arise, not
out of our own personal taste in feminine types, but out of our very
recognition of the fact that tastes differ. We would propagandize, not
because we are cranks and have a fixed idea about what everybody else
ought to become, and what must be done about it at once, but because we
are trying to accept variety and the natural inclinations of all sorts
of people as, by presumption at least, self-justified and divine. We
want them all to be free.
Such is the peculiar advantage that the propaganda of liberty has
over all the evangelical enthusiasms. It does not at the first gasp ask
a man to mortify his nature. It merely asks him to cease announcing his
own spontaneous inclinations as the type and exemplar of angelic
virtue, and demanding that everybody else be like him. It tries to
remove another old negative dogmatic incubus from the shoulders of
life, aspiring toward variety and realization. That is what the
suffrage propaganda is doing.
It would be folly to pretend, however, that the principle of equal
liberty is the only motive behind the suffrage movement. I have said
that it is the primary one. It is at least the broadest, the surest,
the one upon which the conversion of a person whose taste opposes yours
can be most graciously introduced.
But there is yet another way of changing a person’s wish, and that
is to show him that he himself has deeper wishes which conflict with
it. And there is one deep wish in particular that almost all women, and
most men possess, and that is a wish for the welfare and advancement of
their children. And just as “Woman’s sphere is the home” typifies the
voluntary force opposing woman suffrage, so “Women owe it to their
children to develop their own powers,” typifies the force that favors
it.
Universal citizenship has meant in human history universal
education. That has been, next to a certain precious rudiment of
liberty, its chief value. That will be its chief value to women for a
long time to come. And by education I do not mean merely political
education. I do not mean that it will awaken in women what we call a
"civic consciousness,” though it will, I suppose, and that is a good
thing.  Then that by giving to women a higher place in our social esteem, it will
promote their universal development.
We are not educated very much by anything we study in school or see
written on the blackboard. That does not determine what we grow up to
be. The thing that determines what we grow up to be is the natural
expectations of those around us. If society expects a girl to become a
fully developed, active and intelligent individual, she will probably
do it. If society expects her to remain a doll-baby all her life, she
will make a noble effort to do that. In either case she will not
altogether succeed, for there are hereditary limitations, but the
responsibility for the main trend of the result is with the social
conscience.

"Sugar and spice and everything nice,
That is what little girls are made of;

Snips and snails and puppy-dogs’ tails,
That is what little boys are made of."

There is an example of what has been educating us. That kind of
baby-talk has done more harm than all the dynamite that was ever let
off in the history of the world. You might as well put poison in the
milk.
All that is to be ended. And this is the chief thing we expect of
women’s citizenship. It will formulate in the public mind the higher
ideal that shall develop the young girls of the future. They will no
longer grow up to be, outside the years of motherhood, mere drudges or
parlor ornaments. They will no longer try to satisfy their ambitions by
seeing who can parade the most extreme buffooneries of contemporary
fashion on the public highway. They will grow up to be interested and
living individuals, and satisfy their ambitions only with the highest
prizes of adventure and achievement that life offers.
And the benefit of that will fall upon us all—but chiefly upon the
children of these women when they are mothers. For if we are going
anywhere that a sane idealism would have us go, we must first stop
corrupting the young. Only a developed and fully constituted individual
is fit to be the mother of a child. Only one who has herself made the
most of the present, is fit to hold in her arms the hope of the future.
We hear a good deal about “child-welfare” in these days, and we hear
the business of child-welfare advanced as one of the arguments for
woman suffrage. To me it is almost the heart of the arguments, but it
works in my mind a little differently from what it does in the minds of
the people who write the child-welfare pamphlets. I do not want women
to have, for the sake of their children, the control of the milk-supply
and the food laws, half so much as I want them to have, for the sake of
their children, all the knowledge-by-experience that they can possibly
get. That is the vital connection between child-welfare and woman
suffrage—that is the deeper ideal. No woman is fit to bring children
into this world until she knows to the full the rough actual character
of the world into which she is bringing them. And she will never know
that until we lift from her—in her own growing years—the repressive
prejudice that expresses itself and maintains itself in refusing to
make her a citizen.
A man who trains horses up in western New York put this to me very
strongly. “If you’re going to breed race-horses,” he said, “you don’t
pick out your stallions on a basis of speed and endurance, and your
mares according to whether they have sleek hides and look pretty when
they hang their heads over the pasture fence. And if you’re going to
raise intelligent citizens you’ll have to give them intelligent
citizens for mothers.” I do not know whether he was aware that an
actual tendency to select the more intelligent, rather than a
mere training of the intelligence of all, is the main force in racial
evolution. But that is what he said. And, either way, it is a piece of
cold scientific fact. The babies of this world suffer a good deal more
from silly mothers than they do from sour milk. And any change in
political forms, however superificial from the standpoint of economic
justice, that will increase the breadth of experience, the sagacity,
the humor, the energetic and active life-interest of mothers, can only
be regarded as a profound historic revolution.
In these broad effects upon the progress of liberty and life, not in
any political result of equal suffrage, are to be found an object of
desire which can rival and replace the ideal that opposes it. They are
the material for the propaganda of the will. And while we noisy orators
are filling the air with syllogisms of justice, and prophecies of the
purification of politics, and the end of child labor, and what women
will do to wars, and the police department, and the sweat-shops, and
the street-cleaning department, and the milk-wagons, and the dairy
farms, and how they will reform the cows when they come into their
rights, we ought to remember in our sober hearts that those large warm
human values, which have nothing to do with logic or politics or
reform, are what will gradually bend the wishes of men toward a new age.




Eastman Archive | ETOL main page



astman-The Religion of Patriotism-



The Masses  
Max Eastman
The Religion of Patriotism






Published: The Masses, July 1917
Transcribed:Sally Ryan for marxists.org in 2000



Nothing could be more calamitous than for patriotism to become the
established religion of this country. I do not know exactly what
religion is. Every psychologist has a different theory of its origin
and nature. Some say it originates in fear, others in wonder, others in
the filial affection, others in gregarious instinct—a desire for
infinite companionship. But I doubt if the religious emotion is any of
these single things, the same in different cases. I think that any
object or any idea which appeals to a considerable number of
our instincts, and offers them a combined satisfaction, may
become the focus of an attachment so controlling, and so fixé,

as to gain that uncanny and unreasonable priority among our feelings
which we call religious. The religious object binds us (as the Latin
original of the word implies), not by a single tie, but by gathering
into itself so many threads of our impulsive nature that no one motive
whatever can break its hold. God is indeed a refuge to our fear, a
temple to our wonder, a parent for the little child that lives in our
heart. He is an infinite companion. He satisfies so many of those
native cravings which the terms of life leave thwarted, that His hold
upon us becomes supernormal and sovereign, and our whole being is
transfixed by His name as though we were maniacs and He our obsession.
In order for this to happen, however, it is necessary that we have
the gift of making God seem real. In past ages, with a Christ or a
Virgin Mary giving the warmth of flesh to the picture, and a general
consensus of mankind supporting the opinion that God is real,
it was not difficult to acquire this gift. Perhaps almost a majority of
mankind possessed it, and the religion of God was one of the
determining forces in history. In this day, however, for many reasons,
it is growing difficult to make God seem real. The money and machine
character of our civilization leaves little room for miracles. A belief
in supernatural causes is dangerous in a factory and impractical in a
bank. And, moreover, Jesus Christ expressed so many principles of
conduct wholly out of accord with our industrial life, that the
ministers of his gospel are forced to deny him and betray his ideals
continually while asserting his godhead, and this makes them seem weak
and queer, and his godhead dubious. Deity is identified with the
church, and the church is hypocritical and alien to everyday life, and
so deity grows slippery and unpleasant to our minds. God is a long way
off. There is no sovereign motive in our lives.
That is good—It allows us to be intelligent and agile in various
kinds of enjoyment and enterprise. It lets us love truth more
whole-heartedly, and become acquainted with liberty. It is so lofty a
state, in fact, that most people have not the strength of stem to
endure it; they think they must find something to lean on and bind
themselves around. And so our godless age has been characterized by a
wistful hunger and search after religions. It is the age of “isms.” And
some of these isms have been able to bind together a number of native
impulses, and hold men almost as strongly as God did. Socialism with
its doctrine of Universal Brotherhood to be attained by the method of
Class War, offers almost infinite indulgence of two otherwise
unreconciled impulses—pugnacity and social love. With its system of
revealed economics, it offers, too, an Absolute in which mental
curiosity ran rest. It has its gospel according to Marx. Socialism is
no mean religion. But it is not a religion that binds or blesses the
rich and powerful, and so it could hardly become established in a
country like ours. For an established religion we needed something a
little more like God—a little vaguer and more elegant and better
adapted to bind in among other motives the economic self-interest of
those who rule. We needed something that would give us the same
emotional crystallization without greatly disturbing the profits on
capital.
Quite consciously a great many good people were searching for a
thing of this kind, for a new and vigorous religion. And now, through
the lucky accidents of history, they have found it. For there is
nothing more copiously able to bind into its bosom the multiple threads
of human impulse, and establish that fixed and absolute glorious
tyranny among our purposes, than military patriotism. You will see how
everything that was erect in this country bows down to that sentiment.
The love of liberty, the assertion of the rights of man, what little of
the ethics of Jesus we had—these things must obviously yield. And not
only these, either, but the common principles of morality and truth. We
shall see men devoting their utmost energy to an endeavor which they
declare to be evil.
“Gladly would I have given my life to save my country from war,"
says William J. Bryan, “but now that my country has gone to war, gladly
will I give my life to aid it.” This Christian gentleman, whose
morality was perhaps the most rigid thing we had in the country, thus
boasts that he will devote his declining years to a cause which he
considers wicked. Like Abraham who would slaughter his son at the
bidding of God, Bryan is ready to do murder—he has called it
murder—for the sake of his country. And this seems entirely right and
noble to his countrymen. To me it seems utterly ignoble.
Not only morality, either, but the ideal of intelligence itself, of
truthful seeing, will be abandoned. Men will glory in the ignorance and
celebrate the stupidity of what they are doing. “I shall vote,” said
Senator Stone, against “the greatest national blunder of history,” but
after that “my eyes will be blind to everything but the flag of my
country.”
When ordinary alert perception has been renounced, it is needless to
say that the extreme ethical visions of Jesus must go, and that
God—long suffering God—will be denounced from the pulpits that were
his last refuge. I suppose the pew-holders of Henry Ward Beecher’s
church are satisfied with Newell Dwight Hillis, for they have stood a
good deal from him besides his preaching, and here is his creed of
patriotism:
"All God’s teachings about forgiveness should be
rescinded for Germany. I am willing to forgive the Germans for their
atrocities just as soon as they are all shot. If you would give me
happiness, just give me the sight of the Kaiser, von Hindenburg and von
Tirpitz hanging by the rope. If we forgive Germany after the war, I
shall think the whole universe has gone wrong.”
When God is thus enthusiastically ejected from the rostrum of the
most famous church in the country, to make way for the patriotic
emotion, I think we are justified in the fear that patriotism may
become our religion.
Patriotism indulges that craving for a sense of union with a
solitary herd, which is an inheritance of all gregarious animals. It is
a craving which our modern sophisticated, citified, and diverse
civilization leaves unfed in normal times. There is a great swing
towards war on this account even among the most pacific people. They
are flocking for a drink of this emotion. Men are willing to be dead,
if they can only be dead in a pile.
This quite organic and almost animal craving is what makes us talk
so much about the “great spiritual blessing” that war will bring to our
unregenerate characters. When a desire springs so deeply from our
ancient inheritance as this gregarious hunger does, we always feel it
as mystic and inscrutable, we attribute a divine beneficence to the
satisfaction of it. As a matter of fact, it would be better for the
progress of society, in science and art and morality and happiness, if
this terrible solidarity could be mitigated instead of enlarged. For it
inhibits individual experiment, and it falsifies the facts of life,
always pretending the nation is more socially and brotherly organized
than it is. The “great spiritual blessing” is in fact a distraction of
men’s minds from the pursuit of truth and from realistic progress. It
is the temporary indulgence of a facile emotion.
“I pray God,” said President Wilson at the dedication of a Red Cross
Memorial, “that the outcome of this struggle may be that every element
of difference amongst us will be obliterated....The spirit of this
people is already united and when effort and suffering and sacrifice
have completed this union, men will no longer speak of any lines either
of race or association cutting athwart the great body of this nation.”
To the instinctive man, the altogether righteousness of this
aspiration, and the entire beneficence of the condition outlined, is as
much taken for granted as the goodness of virtue. And yet, if seriously
considered, such a state of affairs would be aesthetically monotonous
and morally stagnant. Aside from the mere satisfaction of the old
instinct for herd-union itself, there would be no health, no beauty, no
life in it.
“Liberty and Union, One and Inseparable, Now and Forever,” is the
watchword that adorns the statue of Daniel Webster in Central Park. And
that too seems obvious—it has become a proverb. And yet if it has any
meaning whatever, the meaning is false. It has become proverbial merely
because it celebrates, with some show of regard for individual freedom,
this gregarious instinct of mankind which is the central armature of
the religion of patriotism.
According to my idea, however, the satisfaction of a single
instinct, even though so arbitrary and ancient-rooted as this, cannot
acquire that peculiar hypnotizing force upon us which makes us name it
religious. We might love union and the monotony of the herd very much,
and still continue to act morally, and exercise intelligent judgment,
and perhaps love God and walk humbly with our neighbor. But it happens
that the moment we declare for the herd, and let loose our enthusiasm
into that vent, especially at war time, a half dozen other starved
monsters of passionate desire that our lawful and cultivated life has
caged and thwarted rush to this outlet and find satisfaction.
One of them is angry hate. Men are full of it, and they get small
chance to exercise it in these days of legality and respectable
convention. The war liberates them. They can rage and revile and spit
upon the enemy with the sanction of all contiguous society, and without
immediate personal danger. I think this is what makes a declaration of
war especially palatable to ministers of Christ. They have repressed so
much more personal spleen, as a matter of professional necessity, than
the rest of us, that they let go all the more violently into the
national spout. Nobody will demand that they apply the ethics of Jesus
to the relations between nations; they can go on preaching forgiveness
as a personal matter, while enjoying in this national festival the
emotions of implacable hate.
Here is a conversation overheard in a restaurant conducted by two
innocent and colorless Germans, man and wife. The talkers are American
patriots.
“Did you read what Ambassador Gerard said about the German boys
torturing foreigners in Germany?”
“Yes, and it’s true too. They’re cruel. They’re savages, the
Germans. They wouldn’t stop at anything.”
“You bet, look at these people. I bet they’re spies. We’ll be over
there and string them up one of these days.”
The sudden and copious flow of malice which follows a declaration of
war suggests that a really dire condition of the natural organs has
been relieved just in the nick of time. Another and even more bursting
reservoir that ordinary moral conduct never half relieves is rivalrous
egotism. Society suppresses the braggart, for the reason that if
bragging is to be done, each member of society feels fully entitled to
do it, and there is no other solution short of bedlam. In consequence
every individual is full as a bladder with inexpressible self-esteem.
And by a quickly articulated emotional device, this passion too is
sluiced into the channel of patriotism. A man identifies himself with
his country, and then he brags about his country to his heart’s desire,
and nobody observes that he is bragging about himself. Only sensitive
people know that patriotic loyalty is so much less flame-like and
beautiful than loyalty to a friend or an idea—they feel this cold vein
of complacence in it.
The patriotic religion has a hold here that God never had. God
wanted people to be humble. A religion that lets us brag without
knowing that is what we are doing is far more gratefully adjusted to
our constitutions. We can love our country and make sacrifices for it,
we can have all those altruistic satisfactions, and yet not suffer the
self-abasement that is inevitable in loving a Supreme Being. It is our
country; it is not simply Country, abstract and awful.
Our country comforts us too, even as God’s fatherhood did. Our
filial affection is gathered up into the bosom of the fatherland. We
were conceived and born in its bosom; it is our native place, the place
that sheltered us long ago when we were happy; it will still care for
us (especially while we are fighting for it), and give us that sense of
the Everlasting Arms without which perhaps no religion would retain its
extreme dominion among our feelings.
Yes, patriotism binds us by as many ties as God. We need not be
surprised at those Methodist conventioners, who denounced for treason
the lowly delegate who wished to put God before his country. In the
very nature of the case, if our theory of religion is true, there can
be no two religions. If God will not fall in step with the United
States army, God must go. That has been made plain in every pulpit in
this vicinity, with the noble exception of the Church of the Messiah,
where John Haynes Holmes spoke not only for the sovereignty of God, but
even for the ethics of Jesus, on the eve of War.
Patriotism has, like other religions whose object of worship is a
little open to question, its extreme sensitiveness, its fanatical
intolerance. The ceremonial observances are enforced with zealotry, and
those who blaspheme with unassenting presence are likely to be thrown
out bodily or confined in jail. At one of the meeting-places of
patriots on Broadway, known as Rector’s, one night at two A. M. the
ceremonial of the national anthem was being enacted, and while all the
devotees were rising or being assisted to their feet, Mr. Fred Boyd and
two companions—heretics of this religion—endeavored quietly to remain
in their seats. Chairs, tables and salad bowls were employed by the
orthodox to enforce the tenets of their creed, and these failing, a
policeman was summoned in the name of the fatherland, and Mr. Boyd and
his companions arrived at the night court. Here they were severely
reprimanded by a judge, who acknowledged, however, that they had
disobeyed no law, not even the law of God, which is usually invoked
upon such unfortunates as wish to act upon their own judgment in public.
To me patriotism, in practically all of its forms, is distasteful.
And I confess to a feeling of strange solitude in these days of its
divinity that no other revolutionary opinions have brought me. Much of
the time I wonder what it is that separates a handful of us from the
concourse of mankind. We are so motley a handful: Christians, Atheists,
Quakers, Anarchists, Artists, Socialists, and a few who just have a
fervent pleasure in using their brains about truth. You could bring us
together, and we would not agree upon anything else under the sun—but
we agree in disliking the religion of patriotism. We can not stand up
when the national anthem is played, not because we have any theory
about it, but because the quality of the emotion expressed is alien and
false to us. We cannot partake of the communion and be true to
ourselves. And so many of us do not go to these meeting-places at all,
or we come in late, or otherwise we try to avoid the acute discomfort
of sitting quiescent under the scowling malice and ignorant suspicion
of a mob indulging its fixed and habitual emotion.
As I count over the little group that I know who feel this way about
committing themselves to the new religion, I find two or three traits
that seem somewhat to explain it. Some of the group are platonic in
their temperament—given, that is, to falling in love with ideas. And
so many beautiful ideas, like justice and proportion and mercy and
truth, have to be renounced and reviled in abandoning oneself to this
religion, that they find it absolutely impossible. They can not tear
themselves away from their loves.
Others are temperamentally solitary. They are actually lacking in
gregarious impulse, or have an opposite impulse to kick out and desert
whenever the herd agrees upon something. They cannot even understand
patriotism, and these modern days make them not only sad, but bitter
and contemptuous of men.
Others are rationalistic, and have a theory about patriotism, and
their emotions are controlled by a theory. But there are not many whose
emotions are controlled by a theory.
The character that is most common to those who cannot commit
themselves to this religion, is the character of having already really
committed themselves to something else. And this too is rare enough.
Most of the people in our days of nervous modernity—busy with labor,
or busy with entertainment-never heartily abandon themselves to
anything. Such people welcome the orgy of nation-worship merely as a
chance to feel.
I think of Mayor Mitchel, for example, as a little fox-like
political man, who has stepped very carefully here and there, taking a
bit, giving a bit, to this and to that—church, politics, business,
society, dress. He shows very plainly that he never abandoned his soul
to any purpose or any experience. But now he has—and it is doing him
good. One cannot but smile in sympathy with the Mayor’s boyish
extravagance in this the first experience of his life. One cannot but
wish him the good luck of other experiences before he dies. And he is
typical of the average man and man-of-affairs. They go in for this
facile religion of the fatherland, or at least they show no resistance
against it, because they not only are not committed to anything else,
but they never have been committed to anything. Other religions always
seemed to require courage, or faith, or loneliness, or
energy-of-intent; this requires only the most social and joyful
abandonment of intelligent judgment and moral restraint. It is the
easiest religion under the sun to feel and feel deeply, for it gives
the highest quantity of satisfactions, requires no imaginative faith,
and demands only at the most that physical crowd-courage which is our
common heritage.
I do not believe many people will ever be led to feel unpatriotic.
To argue against these tribal and egoistic instincts is like arguing
against gravitation. But I do hope that a fair proportion of the
intelligent may be persuaded to resist the establishment, in their own
minds or in American society, of patriotism as a religion. Let them
understand that to indulge and satisfy some one or two of the emotions
that enter into this compound, is a very different thing from binding
all these satisfactions into a fixed and rigid and monumental sentiment
which will exercise absolute dictatorship in their minds. Strong minds
do not need any religion. They are able to bear the responsibility and
the labor of thinking and choosing among the values of life anew every
morning. But even for those who must have a religion, an exposure of
the extreme easiness of patriotic enthusiasm, its quality of general
indulgence, might make them wish to bind themselves, if they must be
bound, to some god that is more arduous and demanding of personal
character.




Eastman Archive | Marxists Internet Archive



Trotsky-ch09



Leon Trotsky:
The Portrait of a Youth

Chapter IX:
 Lenin and Trotsky


AFTER two happy months in Paris Trotsky went on with his pilgrimage to Lenin. He has himself described, in a little book about "Lenin and the Early 'Iskra,' " how they first met. I will quote from that book, as it is the most authentic account of this period of Trotsky's life.
But to make the picture that it gives complete the reader must know that Lenin loved Trotsky. He took him wholly into his heart with that union of revolutionary admiration and personal affection which was the romantic motive in his life. He recognized Trotsky's magnificent powers instantly, and with such confidence that he was only prevented by Plechanov from making him one of the editors of "Iskra."

 I arrived in London [Trotsky writes] in the autumn of 1902—it must have been October—-early in the morning. A cab, engaged by the method of gesticulation, delivered me at an address written on a slip of paper, my ultimate destination. That was the apartment of Vladimir Ilych. I had already learned—it must have been in Zurich—to knock the proper number of times at the door.
The door was opened, as I remember, by Nadiezhda Konstantinovna, whom I suppose I had roused out of bed with my knocking. The hour was early, and any experienced person, anyone accustomed, as you might say, to civilized social life, would have sat still at the station for a couple of hours instead of knocking before dawn at a strange door. But I was still loaded full of my successful escape from Verkholensk. In practically the same way I had routed up the household of Axelrod in Zurich, only not at dawn, but in the middle of the night.
Vladimir Ilych was still in bed, and the welcome in his face was mingled with a legitimate perplexity. In those circumstances occurred our first meeting and our first conversation. Both Vladimir Ilych and Nadiezhda Konstantinovna knew about me already from the letter of Krizhanovsky, who had officially enrolled me in the organization of "Iskra" under the nickname of "Piero." So I was met this way:
"Well, Piero has come."
... They poured me some tea in the kitchen-dining-room. And meanwhile Vladimir Ilych dressed himself. I told about my escape and complained of the bad condition of the "Iskra" frontier; it was in the hands of a high-school student, a Social-Revolutionary who looked upon the Iskrovtsi, thanks to the cruel polemic blazing up between them, with small sympathy; moreover the smugglers held me up cruelly, raising all tariffs and established standards. To Nadiezhda Konstantinovna I gave my modest baggage of names and addresses, exact information as to the necessity of abandoning certain useless addresses.
I don't remember whether it was the same day or the next morning that Vladimir Ilych and I took along walk through London. He showed me Westminster Abbey (from the outside) and certain other eminent buildings. I don't remember what he said, but the shading of it was:
"That's a fine Westminster of theirs."
Of theirs meant, of course, not of the English, but of the enemy. That shading, not in the least emphasized, deeply organic, expressed mostly in the timbre of his voice, was always noticeable in Vladimir Ilych when he spoke of some treasures of culture or some new achievement—of the structure of the British Museum, of the wealth of information in the "Times"—or many years after, of the German artillery or French aviation; they can or they ken, they have made or achieved—but what enemies! The invisible shadow of the exploiting class rested in his eyes upon all human culture, and he perceived that shadow always, and with the same indubitability as the light of day.
As far as I remember, I bestowed at that time upon London architecture a minimum of attention. Tossed all at once from Verkholensk beyond the border, where I was arriving for the first time, I took in Vienna, Paris, London, only in the most summary fashion. I had no time for "details" such as the Westminster Cathedral. Yes, and it was not for this that Vladimir Ilych had invited me on that long walk. His object was to get acquainted, to give me an examination. And the examination was indeed "on the whole course...."
As to my further work the conversation was at that time of course very general. I wanted first of all to get acquainted with the literature which had already appeared, and afterward I assumed that I would return illegally into Russia. It was decided that I ought in the first place to "look around a bit."
For lodging Nadiezhda Konstantinovna led me several blocks away to a house where lived Zassulitch and Martov and Blumenfield, who managed the typographical side of "Iskra." There was a free room there for me. That apartment was arranged, according to the customary English style, not horizontally but vertically. In the lowest room lived the landlady and then, one above the other, the tenants. There was one free sitting room which Plechanov christened the "den." In that room, thanks largely to Vera Ivanovna Zassulitch, but not without the cooperation of Martov, there reigned an enormous disorder. Here we drank coffee, smoked, came together for conversation.
Here began the short London period of my life. I devoured greedily the numbers of "Iskra" which had already appeared, and the little magazine "Zaria." At that time I began my contributions to "Iskra." For the two hundredth anniversary of the Schlusselburg Fortress I wrote a small article, my first work, it seems, for "Iskra." My article ended with Homer's words, or rather the words of Homer's translator Gniedich, referring to the "hands unvanquished" which the revolution will lay on czarism. (I had been reading the Iliad in the train on my way from Siberia.) Lenin liked my article, but as to the "hands unvanquished" he felt a legitimate doubt and expressed it to me with a good- natured smile.
"Yes, that is a line from Homer," I justified myself.
But I willingly agreed that a classic quotation was not obligatory. You can find my small article in "Iskra," but without the "hands unvanquished."
At that time also I made my first speech in White-chapel, where I came into conflict with the "old man" Chaikovsky—he was even then an old man—and with the anarchist Cherekiesov, also not young. I was sincerely astonished that eminent, gray-bearded emigrants could talk such obvious nonsense. ...
During my stay in London Plechanov came for a short visit, and I went to see him the first evening. In the little room, besides Plechanov, sat a fairly well-known German writer, a Social-Democrat, Baer, and the Englishman Askew. Not knowing where to put me, since there were no more chairs, Plechanov—not without hesitation—proposed that I should sit on the bed. I considered this to be in the usual order of things, not guessing that Plechanov—a European to his finger-tips—could only in the most extreme circumstances decide upon such an extraordinary measure. The conversation was conducted in the German language, with which Plechanov was insufficiently acquainted, and therefore it was limited to monosyllabic remarks.
Baer and Askew soon departed. George Valentinovitch, with ample justification, expected that I would depart with them, since the hour was late and we ought not to disturb the landlady with conversation. I, on the contrary, considered that the real thing was only just beginning.
"Baer said some interesting things," I remarked.
"Yes, as to English politics interesting, but as to philosophy nonsense," answered Plechanov.
Seeing that I did not intend to withdraw, he offered me a neighborly glass of beer. He put me a few idle questions, was agreeable enough; but in his agreeableness there was a shade of hidden impatience. I felt that his attention wandered. It is possible that he was merely tired after the day. But feeling of dissatisfaction and hurt....
One Sunday Vladimir Ilych and Nadiezhda Konstantinovna and I went to a Socialistic church in London, where a Social-Democratic meeting alternated with the singing of revolutionary-pious psalms. The orator was a typesetter who had returned to his native land, it seems, from Australia. Vladimir Ilych translated his speech to us in a whisper, and it seemed revolutionary enough, at least for those times. Afterward everybody stood up and sang: "Almighty God, do something so there will not be any more kings and rich people!" or something of that kind.
It is needless to say that Vladimir Ilych lived more than modestly with Nadiezhda Konstantinovna and her mother. Returning from the Social-Democratic church, we dined in the little kitchen-dining-room of their two-room apartment. I remember, as though it were now, the slices of fried meat served in a frying-pan. We drank tea and joked as always about the question whether I would be able to find my way home alone....
After my "trial speech," as you might call it, at Whitechapel, they sent me for a tour on the Continent—to Brussels, Liege, Paris. My speech was on the subject: "What Is Historic Materialism, and How Do the Social-Revolutionaries Understand It?" Vladimir Ilych was much interested in the theme. I gave him a detailed outline to look over, with citations and so forth. He advised me to work up the speech in the form of an article for the coming number of "Zaria," but I lacked the courage.
From Paris they summoned me quickly back to London by telegram. It was a question of sending me illegally into Russia—Vladimir Ilych's idea. There were complaints from Russia about arrests, a lack of workers, and it seems Krizhanovsky had asked for my return. But before I had time to reach London the plan was changed. A. G. Deich, who was living then in London, and was very kindly disposed to me, told me subsequently how he "interceded" for me, arguing that "the youth" (he never spoke of me otherwise) needed to live a little abroad and educate himself, and how Lenin after a certain amount of opposition had agreed to this. I was allured by the idea of working in the Russian organization of "Iskra," but I nevertheless willingly stayed for a certain time abroad.
In the London period, as also later in Geneva, I was with Zassulitch and Martov far oftener than with Lenin. Living in London in the same apartment, and in Geneva lunching and dining in the same restaurants, Martov and Zassulitch and I met several times a day, whereas with Lenin, who took his meals at home, each meeting outside the official conferences was already something of a little event....

 Before the great convention of the party, which was held in London in the summer of 1903, the office of "Iskra" was transferred to Geneva, and all the preparations for the convention, and the preliminary conferences of the delegates, were conducted there. Trotsky was "sent to Paris" on his way to Geneva—he succeeded in being sent to Paris, it seems, every once in a while—and he and Natalia Ivanovna went to Geneva together. Of the days in Geneva he relates some further things that belong as much to his own biography as to Lenin's:

The sharpest question for Lenin [he says] was how to organize for the future the central organ of the party, which was going to be practically also the Central Committee. Lenin considered it impossible to preserve the old group of six. Zassulitch and Axelrod upon a disputed question almost invariably took the side of Plechanov, and thus at the best you had a deadlock of three against three. Neither group would agree to remove someone from the Collegium. There remained the opposite course, to enlarge the Collegium. Lenin wanted to introduce me as a seventh member, with the idea that from the seven as a broad editorial board he would separate out a narrower editorial group consisting of Lenin, Plechanov and Martov. Lenin made me acquainted with this plan gradually and without saying a word of the fact that it was I he had proposed as a seventh member of the editorial board and that this proposition had been accepted by all except Plechanov, in whose person the whole plan encountered a decisive resistance. The very inclusion of a seventh member meant in the eyes of Plechanov a retirement of his group; it meant four "young ones" against three "old."
I think that this plan was the most important cause of George Valentinovitch's very unfavorable attitude to me. But to increase it there were other little open conflicts of ours before the delegates. These began, it seems, upon the question of a popular journal. Certain delegates insisted on the necessity of establishing alongside of "Iskra" a popular organ—so far as such a thing was possible in Russia....
Lenin was decidedly opposed to this plan. His reasons were various, but the principal one was the danger of a special grouping which might form itself upon the basis of a popular simplification of the ideas of the social democracy before the fundamental nucleus of the party had become sufficiently strong. Plechanov spoke decisively for the formation of the popular organ, opposing Lenin and clearly seeking support among the delegates. I supported Lenin. In one of the conferences I developed the idea—rightly or wrongly, it does not matter now—that what we needed was not a popular organ, but a series of propaganda brochures and leaflets which would help the advanced workers to raise themselves to the level of "Iskra"; that a popular journal would supplant "Iskra" and blur the political physiognomy of the party, reducing it to Economism, etc. Plechanov objected.
"Why blur it?" he said. "Obviously in a popular organ we cannot say everything. We will advance demands there, slogans, and not occupy ourselves with questions of tactics. We will say to the workers that it is necessary to struggle with capitalism, but we will not, of course, theorize as to how to struggle with capitalism."
I seized upon that argument.
"But the Economists and Social-Revolutionaries say that it is necessary to struggle with capitalism! The difference between us begins exactly there—how to struggle. If in a popular organ we do not answer that question we ipso facto blur the distinction between us and the Social-Revolutionaries !"
My answer had a very triumphant look. Plechanov found nothing to say. Obviously this episode did not improve his attitude to me....

 Trotsky describes another of these conflicts in which Lenin supported him against Plechanov, and he continues:

 In both these instances the sympathy of Vladimir Ilych was, as we see, upon my side. But at the same time he observed with alarm how my relations with Plechanov were becoming spoiled—a thing which threatened final destruction to his plan for reorganizing the editorship. In one of the next conferences with newly arrived delegates Lenin, leading me aside, said to me:
"On the question about a popular organ, better let Martov answer Plechanov. Martov will lubricate the thing, but you will start chopping. Better let him lubricate !"
Those expressions chop and lubricate I clearly remember.

 Trotsky may well remember those expressions, for they point to the one thing which prevents him from being a great political leader. Lenin called it "excessive self-confidence," but Trotsky's self-confidence is not greater than that of Lenin. What Trotsky lacks is a sense of the feelings of the other man—an immediate sense that is not a matter of reflection and that would guide him unconsciously to those words and gestures which center the attention upon objective issues and not upon personal relations. When Trotsky triumphs, it always has a "triumphant look." When Lenin triumphs, it is just the truth, and nobody is disturbed. Trotsky is too full of himself—not in a vain way, although many people mistakenly think so—but he is too full of his own will and his own passion to orient himself tactfully in a group. For that reason, while he is great as a commander and inspirer—and also as a thinker—he is not great as a leader of men.

Read next chapter | Eastman Internet Archive



Trotsky-ch06



Leon Trotsky:
The Portrait of a Youth

Chapter VI:
 Solitary Confinement


Trotsky did not take with him his mimeograph machine nor the paper and ink, but arranged to have them brought by a worker whom he promised to meet at the railroad station the next day. He went to the station the next day, and several days after, but the worker did not appear. Trotsky had the material all composed for his journal and was eager as a child with a scrapbook to get to work. Moreover, he was in complete darkness as to what had happened in Nikolaev, and the doubt made him restive.
His father could not help noticing his nervousness, but he said nothing about it. He had been in Nikolaev himself the day after Trotsky left, and they had given him the package, thinking to expedite matters; and he, suspecting its contents, had stowed it under his own bed where it was dark. He watched Trotsky fret with a mixture of distress and satisfaction, until one morning he saw him getting ready to go back to Nikolaev, and then he said:
"What's your hurry? I've got your stuff here. They gave it to me.
Trotsky took it, locked himself up in his room and went to work. He worked all day long and practically all night too. He would come out for a meal once in a while, as grudgingly as a woodchuck in winter, and answer evasively when his parents asked him what he was doing.
It was their turn to be nervous, and they were. They became indeed so deeply distressed that he finally decided to take his machine and his papers and ink and go away. It was the morning of January twenty-seventh, and he saw his father's house then for the last time. They were already building the big, respectable stone mansion, and it stood there in the field without any roof on it.
Trotsky had not been long out of the house when a small army of the czar's police descended upon it and performed what is officially described as a "search." It left the house standing, but the inmost nooks of its walls and ceilings were ransacked, the furniture was thrown about and turned upside down, the upholstery ripped off the chairs, the bedding slashed open, the cupboards were emptied on the floor and the unhappy father and mother left standing amid the ruins, convinced that they had given life to the most dangerous criminal in Russia, and that he would be hanged without judgment if caught. Further than that it accomplished nothing, for Trotsky had all the incriminating material with him under his arm, and he was half a day's journey away. He had gone to Svigofsky's new home, which had been agreed upon by the conspirators as a rendezvous and source of mutual information.
Poor Svigofsky! He never meant to be a revolutionary. He only wanted to be an intelligent man and a carrier of culture to the people. But how could you be intelligent in Russia without getting into trouble? His house stood a little apart from the general farm buildings; it was an ideal place for other people to conspire in. And, besides, the conspirators were his best loved friends. He could hardly have been sorry when he saw Trotsky come trudging through the snow with his big bundle of crime, laughing and full of the plans for his next number. They soon, had it untied and all spread out on the tables and chairs and all over the floor, and were working away together, like well-entertained children when Alexandra Lvovna's younger sister, Maria, arrived with the news that her brother had just been arrested in Nikolaev and that she had been followed all the way down there by a spy.
"He will be here any minute," she urged, "and you must gather up all these papers and hide them quick."
Trotsky would not take it seriously, and even the prudent Svigofsky insisted on arguing the question before, instead of after, the papers were concealed. Maria Lvovna insisted that she had been followed. She described all the expressive actions with which detectives usually make it a point to reveal their identity, and finally through sheer force of distress prevailed upon them to conceal the papers. They took them out in the cabbage patch and buried them in a deep pit with the cabbages.
Then they came back and continued the discussion. It turned into a discussion as to whether they ought, in view of these arrests, to leave Nikolaev and go and take up their work in some other town where they were not known, or whether that would not merely result in the arrest of the workers they had led, and give color to the propaganda against them as "irresponsible students," "Jews," "outside agitators."
The whole field of revolutionary theory had to be canvassed in considering this question. Every Russian argument lasts all night. And they were still talking when the lamp grew pale, and Svigofsky remembered that it was time for him to go to his morning chores.
It seemed evident that Maria Lvovna had been mistaken about the detective, and so before going to work Svigofsky dug up Trotsky's portfolio again, and brought it in and set it on the top of a barrel that stood full of water in the entry. He turned around to go out again and met the detective coming in. The man had "planted" them there early in the evening, and then summoned enough help from Nikolaev to surround the house and make sure of their arrest.
He started back with a shock of surprise when he saw Trotsky.
"Oh, that's you!" he said, grinning.
His satisfaction was so great that he went rather hastily through the rest of the job, and his "thorough search of the premises" failed to reveal the incriminating portfolio, which sat there all the while in plain sight on the water barrel. Svigofsky, moreover, found an opportunity to whisper to his good-natured housekeeper to be sure to destroy it after they were gone. They rode away in two wagons, Trotsky on a back seat with an enormous gendarme beside him, Svigofsky in front with two gendarmes and Maria Lvovna in the other wagon with the detective.
The old lady was faithful to her charge, but her idea of destruction was a mild one. She took the portfolio out and gently buried it in the snow!
The jail at Nikolaev was not adapted to receive political prisoners, and Trotsky got no better comfort there than if he had been an ordinary criminal—or if he had been a political prisoner in America. For in America we do not recognize a distinction, which seemed obvious to the despots of Russia, between idealistic agitators and common thieves. After fulfilling the formalities at the desk, he was led away through a door of steel bars into a corridor and thence into the nearest room. It was a very big room with one window under the ceiling and no furniture—no bed, table, chair; only a white-brick stove in the wall.
A man was crouched on the floor by the stove in a big overcoat and hat. Trotsky thought at first that this man was a non-political criminal, and for a long time they were both too cautious to speak. Only by way of a long series of intimations did they arrive at an acquaintance. The man was a young revolutionist unknown to Trotsky, a hook-binder named Misha Iavitch—"a very dear comrade" as it turned out.
They lived three weeks together in that naked room. They were always cold. The stove was half-heated, and there was a six-inch grating in the door, where the frost blew in from a corridor separated only by an iron lattice from the open air. Not once all day did they take off their rubbers or their overcoats or hats. At night straw mattresses were brought in, and they lay down on them, close to the stove and close to each other, covered with everything they had.
At six o'clock in the morning they were roused by the guards, and as they had no will to move the mattresses were yanked from under them. They dressed hastily and then drowsed again for two hours, sitting on the floor with their backs to the stove. Hot water and prison food were brought to them by "trusties," and through these they managed to establish a communication with the other rooms.
They had no pencils, but would write by pricking holes with a pin under the letters in old scraps of newspaper. In this way Trotsky learned of the arrest of all the leading members of his organization, twenty-eight of them, including Alexandra Lvovna.
The news of Trotsky's arrest had reached Alesandra Lvovna in Ekaterinoslav, where she had withdrawn when the organization dispersed. She learned also of the failure of the detective to find the incriminating evidence; and, thinking that they might all be examined and released more quickly if she were present, she came back purposely into the zone of danger. It was a naive calculation, and characteristic of this most youthful and imprudent conspiracy. She was arrested in the railroad station upon her arrival.
They were in jail ten months before there was any hint of an examination. And during those ten months the snow had time to melt around that eloquent portfolio, and the summer grass to grow up and conceal it; the grass had time to grow too high and be cut down by Svigofsky's diligent successor; and the children of the landlord, playing there, found the portfolio and carried it to their father. He, being loyal to the czar, or—what is the same thing—prudent of his own skin, turned it over in due course to the police. That sealed the fate of the South Russian Workers' Union.
There were six "intellectuals" properly so-called among those arrested. The remaining twenty-two were manual worker steam-fitters, cutters, joiners, boiler-makers, blacksmiths, bookbinders, a seamstress and a soldier. In this small city which had never heard of a labor union, Leon Trotsky, only eighteen years old, had organized in nine months over two hundred of the workers of these essential industries in a criminal conspiracy on a programme calling for the overthrow of the existing government and the expropriation of the capitalist class. You can imagine the confidence that he inspires, the restless and compelling force of his character. You can understand how the Red Army rose up out of the wreckage of a nation and fought off the world.
It would have been a good idea to keep this young man warming his back against a cold stove all the rest of his life. And you wonder why it was not done. Why do government officials who have no fundamental regard for their own laws, have any regard for them at all?
After three cold weeks with his young comrade in the jail st Nikolaev, Trotsky was led out alone one day, placed in a mail-wagon with two gendarmes and driven thirty-five miles through the country. He found himself at nightfall in the city of Kherson, where the jail was not so crowded perhaps—or where his friends would not be able to guess his whereabouts and communicate with him.
Trotsky lived in absolute solitary confinement in a small cell in this jail for about two months and a half. It was warmer here, but the warmth was due only to the absence of openings, and the air was correspondingly foul. Trotsky had no clean linen and no hope of receiving any; and there was no soap, and he found himself covered with lice. He had no book, no paper, ink, pencil. The fight with lice occupied a considerable part of his time, and he would keep walking from one corner of his cell to the other, counting his steps or making up verses and committing them to memory. The loneliness, the inactivity, the loss of his friends, the inability to look forward to anything, and worst of all perhaps the nervousness caused in him by the filth of his body, would bring waves of anguish through his thoughts.
But his will was strung tight. There was no relaxation of its mettle. "For our sacred cause we are ready to lay down our lives."
A wonderful generation of men and women was born to fulfill this revolution in Russia. You may be traveling in any remote part of that country, and you will see some quiet, strong, eliquisite face in your omnibus or your railroad car—a middle-aged man with white, philosophic forehead and soft brown beard, or an elderly woman with sharply arching eyebrows and a stern motherliness about her mouth, or perhaps a middle-aged man, or a younger woman who is still sensuously beautiful, but carries herself as though she had walked up to a cannon—you will inquire, and you will find out that they are the "old party workers." Reared in the tradition of the Terrorist movement, a stern and sublime heritage of martyr-faith, taught in infancy to love mankind, and to think without sentimentality, and to be masters of themselves, and to admit death into their company, they learned in youth a new thing—to think practically; and they were tempered in the fires of jail and exile. They became almost a noble order, a selected stock of men and women who could be relied upon to be heroic, like a Knight of the Round Table or the Samurai, but with the patents of their nobility in the future, not the past.
Trotsky belonged to this noble order, and his years in jail were but a part of the appropriate experience. They made him a member of the oppressed classes whose cause he had championed. He would not be an "outside agitator" any longer. There would not be an excess of sympathy in his mood of revolt. He could hate the tyrant on his own account, and fight for his own right of liberty.
The verses which Trotsky made up show how revolutionary his mind was in this torture of solitude, and how unpoetic. He made up verses that he thought might help to overthrow the czar. If he had been a poet he would have overthrown the czar in verses. Only two of these verses survive. One of them is a soap-box ballad-lecture, written to the music of the "Komarinskaia." The other is called "My Little Machine" and may be described as the revised, or Marxian, version of a revolutionary folk-song belonging to the boatman of the Volga. In that song the Russian peasant tells the virtues of his "little oak club." He turns to it in all the major crises of life, and finally brings it down on the head of the czar:
Oh, Dubinushka, heave-ho!
 Oh, the little green one
Lifts of itself.
Give her a twitch and—ho!
That is a free translation of the chorus, and Trotsky's revised version sings:
Oh, Machinushka, lightly!
Oh, the little steel one
 Runs of itself.
Oil her, and let her go !
"My verses are very bad," Trotsky says. And his critical judgment, I will add, is very good. His poem is printed in the Bolshevik song books —but this for pedagogical, I imagine, rather than lyrical purposes. "You may sing about the peasant and his little oak club," says the Executive Committee; "but when you get through singing, read this, and don't forget that we are Marxian and by no means Socialist-Revolutionaries."
One morning toward the end of his three months in Kherson Trotsky's guard arrived, carrying a pillow and a blanket, tea, sugar and some good things to eat, and wearing an expression of Christian benevolence with a market value of ten gold rubles. These had been paid outside the prison walls by Trotsky's mother. With those elementary properties he was able to institute one or two little infinitesimal habits of life that gave some relief to the bare sitting and standing. And this kind of relief continued throughout the two years of his imprisonment.
About the first of May, three months after his arrest, Trotsky was again led forth between two policemen and loaded into a patrol wagon. And this time he found himself, upon dismounting, in his familiar sleeping-quarters on the deck of the night boat to Odessa. He was taken to the big modern prison in that city, and there he spent two very important years of his life.
I asked him in a letter to amplify some of the things that he told me about those years, and his answer, hastily dictated, is better than my story:

 You ask me about the Odessa prison. It was radically different from the prisons of Nikolaev and Kherson. Those were old provincial prisons adapted chiefly for non-political criminals. The Odessa prison represented, as you might say, the last word in American technique. It is a solitary-confinement prison with four wings, containing several hundreds of single cells. Each wing has four stories, and along each story runs a metal gallery, and those galleries are joined together by a system of metal stairways. Brick and metal, metal and brick.
Steps, blows, movements clearly resound throughout the whole building. The beds attached to the walls fold up in the daytime, and are let down at night. You can hear distinctly when your neighbor closes up or lets down his bed. The prison guards signal to each other by striking with metal keys on the metal rails of the galleries. That sound you hear almost continually throughout the day. Steps on the metal galleries you hear also distinctly, as well as steps next door to you, and under you, and over you. You are surrounded by an uninterrupted noise and clangor of brick, cement and metal. And all the time you are absolutely isolated.
In spring the windows were opened, and the convicts, standing on their tables, would call across to each other. That was of course strictly forbidden, and at times the administration actually achieved "order." But there were periods of weakening, when conversations went at full swing.
I was brought to the Odessa prison in May, and when I first showed my head at the window they named me "May." (We each had our conventional prison designation, so that the guards, listening in on our conversations from the court, could not guess who was speaking with whom.) I, however, participated little in the conversations, since these shouts through a window give little and at the same time make you very nervous.
The politicals occupied one of the wings and were supervised not by a guard but a member of the police force. An old non-commissioned police officer, Usov, was our almost unlimited ruler. He was an intelligent and crafty man, poised, not lacking in good-will, and inclined to a bribe. His assistant was Miklin—a neurotic with a woman's face, eternally singing sacred hymns through his nose, pious to hysteria.
Usov brought me books from the prison library. Sometimes they would be works of polite literature, oftener historical journals—the "Historic Messenger," and especially in great quantities the "Orthodox Review" and the "Pilgrim." After three months without a single printed line I threw myself ferociously upon books. Theological journals I read weekly with the same ardor as the "Historic Messenger" or the works of Korolenko. The polemics of the learned orthodox writers against Voltaire, Kant and Darwin led me into a world of theological thoughts, which I had never touched before, and I had never even distantly imagined in what fantastic, pedantic, droll forms these thoughts pour out.
Those books contained an odd history of the prison, for the convicts have a habit of relating there, by means of little dots under the letters, the facts about themselves—who they are, when arrested, and for what cause. A considerable time must have passed before I began to receive books from the outside. At any rate I managed to read the files of the "Orthodox Review" for a long series of years.
I had known the prison tapping alphabet before my arrest, but none of my neighbors knew it. I was not especially sorry, for books swallowed me completely. After some weeks of my stay in the Odessa prison my neighbor on the right began insistently tapping to me. The tap was not in the prison alphabet, but monotone, even unintelligible and tiresome. I judged that some illiterate convict was tapping on the wall from sadness, and did not answer. On the next day and the day after it continued. Then it came into my head that my neighbor did not know the prison alphabet, and was tapping each letter according to its place in the alphabet. As an experiment I cried out. My neighbor tapped with redoubled energy. The first letter was S—nineteen blows on the wall. I thought to myself, half-joking:
"What if it should be Sokolofsky!"
The second was 0, the third K, and so on. It was Sokolofsky ! I soon taught him a better method of tapping, and he told me that he had been about two months in Kherson, whence he had been transferred like me to Odessa.
After about two weeks or more we found out that there was a secret communication between our rooms. The prison toilet had a drain which entered the wall from two sides—that is, from the two neighboring rooms it went into the same wall, and more than that into the same ventilator shaft. The lower part of that ventilator shaft was walled with only one brick. The convicts in almost all the cells had knocked out that brick and established a connection with one of the neighboring rooms.
Sokolofsky and I could even see each other, could pass notes, shake hands and exchange unbound books; for this it was only necessary to remove the table and toilet from the wall.
Usov noticed our illegal communication, but shut his eyes to it. After a month or two some new police officer took charge of us, and then I was moved to another cell.
By that time I was already receiving books from the outside. I had the New Testament in five languages (Russian, German, English, French, Italian) for the study of foreign languages. I studied the Italian language with special diligence at that period, learning Italian poetry by heart. The New Testament I learned admirably, could recite accurately the separate chapters and separate verses in them.
During my promenade I used to tease the pious officer Miklin, demonstrating to him that he played the same role toward us as the Roman soldiers toward the Christian saints. In answer he informed me that the heretic, Arius, had exploded alive because he called the Mother of God simply the Mother of Christ—and Miklin left me to conclude what fate awaited me in view of my arbitrary operations upon the text of the Holy Scripture.
The inquiry into the Nikolaev affair took place in the prison ten or eleven months after I was arrested. The Nikolaev police lieutenant, Dremliuga, put the questions. He had in his hands at that time all the material which I left in the country at Svigofsky's... and it was amply sufficient to convict us. I presented a written explanation with the purpose of proving that Svigofsky had no connection with the affair. At that period it war not yet accepted as a general rule in the ranks of the revolution to abstain from all testimony. Dremliuga questioned me not more than twice.
After my removal to the new ceil I found myself next door to Zif. He too was a welcome neighbor, although less interesting than Sokolofsky, with whom I was bound by common literary interests.
I read in prison: Darwin, a complete collection of the works of Michaelovsky, Plechanov—"Toward the Development of the Monistic View of History"; Antonio Labriola on Historic Materialism, and many books on the history of freemasonry, and in connection with these upon the history of guilds in the Middle Ages and social conditions in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
From the first day that I received paper and ink I began to formulate for myself the theory of historic materialism upon the foundation of what materials I had at my disposal.
When it seemed to me that I had made the matter clear to myself in the abstract, I decided to make an experiment in the application of the method to some more or less complicated ideological question. The choice, rather accidentally, fell upon freemasonry; I hit upon that subject while reading a historical work by Pipin—-the title of the book I have forgotten. Since it was necessary to return the books in order to have the right to receive new ones, I made enormous summaries in my note-book, sometimes running to ten pages in the most minute handwriting. By the end of my stay in the Odessa prison I had filled with these summaries a fat note-book of several hundred pages. This note-book, along with all my work on freemasonry, got lost later in Switzerland.
I remember telling you that in the first days of my confinement in prison I acknowledged to myself that had become a Marxist. Darwin destroyed the last of my ideological prejudices. Marx himself I could not secure in the prison. Beltov and Labriola I received later. In the essence of the matter I was already a Marxist outside, but through obstinacy I still defended, against the Marxian epidemic that was spreading among the intelligentsia, my "individuality," a sufficiently ignorant one.
I communicated the news of my conversion to Svigofsky, being confident that he had gone through a similar process. To my enormous surprise he received my announcement very coldly, and had not the slightest inclination toward Marxism. After that Sokolofsky declared himself a Marxist, as I had. Zif already counted himself a Marxist before the imprisonment.
In the Odessa prison I felt something like hard scientific ground under my feet. Facts began to establish themselves in a certain system. The idea of evolution and determinism—that is, the idea of a gradual development conditioned by the character of the material world—took possession of me completely.
Darwin stood for me like a mighty doorkeeper at the entrance to the temple of the universe. I was intoxicated with his minute, precise, conscientious, and at the same time powerful, thought. I was the more astonished when I read in one of the books of Darwin, his autobiography, I think, that he had preserved his belief in God. I absolutely declined to understand how a theory of the origin of species by way of natural and sexual selection, and a belief in God, could find room in one and the same head.
There, that is the most that I can tell you about my stay in the Odessa prison.

 Trotsky's crime was sufficient, if he were formally tried and condemned in court, to earn him twenty gears at hard labor in the mines. But the publicity of formal trials was not always convenient to the czar's government. In wholesale quantities political rebels were simply shipped off to the northern villages of Siberia by administrative order, and there set at liberty under police surveillance. As there was but one way out of these villages, along the river valley, they had the character of stockades or big prison-yards. Trotsky and his principal co-workers were sentenced to four years in one of these stockades.
It was a late autumn of 1899, almost two years after his arrest, when Trotsky was finally led out of his solitary cell and down into the office of the prison, where he joined his old friends of the garden. Alexandra Lvovna was there, and her sister and brothers, and Svigofsky, and Zif, and Mukhin—all the best friends that he had in the world—and they were shipped away together in a comparatively jolly company.
They spent the winter in the "transfer prison" in Moscow, and there Trotsky and Alexandra Lvovna were married. That marriage had been planned long before in the prison in Odessa, but Trotsky's father had stopped it by means of a telegram to the Minister of Justice at Petrograd. He put all the blame now upon Alexandra Lvovna, and believed that by stopping this marriage he might still rescue his son and get him to build sugar-mills on the Bronstein estate. I doubt if he ever fully relinquished that purpose until a detachment of his son's army marched in and took the estate away from him. But here in Moscow they were beyond his observation, and their union was legally sealed and sanctified by a rabbi-chaplain with an old ring borrowed from one of the prison guards. This was not because Trotsky and Alexandra Lvovna needed the blessings of a church or of the laws upon their love. It was in order that, as man and wife, they might be exiled to the same village. That was the "marriage problem" for Russian revolutionists. They were often married when they were not lovers, as well as when they were.
Trotsky and I visited together the prison in Moscow where he was confined so many years ago. He showed me the dim semi-circular cement room in the Pugatchevsky Tower where he and his friends slept on board blinks radiating from the curved wall. He showed me the little courtyard where they played lapta, a kind of Russian cricket, and where one day Trotsky got thrown on his back and dragged out to the lock-up by the prison guards. The superintendent in those days was a big German-Russian bureaucrat, a pompous and brass-buttoned official, who gave orders that when he appeared in the court the prisoners should remove their hats. He appeared in the middle of a game and Trotsky who was standing nearest to the gate he came through, paid no attention to him at all. He advanced with a loud roar, commanding Trotsky to take off his hat.
"Don't yell at me—I'm not your soldier!" Trotsky said.
The man called for the alarm whistle, and amid that appalling din ten or twelve guards rushed in, leaped upon Trotsky and dragged him off to another tower to live on bread and water for his sins. But Trotsky's sins are always organized. Every one of the political prisoners followed his example—they all had to be dragged off in the same way—and the job of punishment was too heavy. It resolved itself into a general change of residence, which was not unwelcome to them; for the new cells, although smaller, were not so crowded, and the question of saluting their pompous ruler was allowed to lapse.
Trotsky's home-coming to this prison after twenty-two years was a simple one. The power has changed hands, but the pomp has disappeared. There are no brass buttons in Russia. As the terrible gates swing open at the approach of Trotsky's car a good-natured, fat-faced, teacher-like character in a workman's coat runs forward, jumps on the running-board and shakes hands as we drive in. He is excited by Trotsky's visit to his prison—as excited as though Trotsky were the Czar of Russia—but his excitement shows itself in an amiable, comradely eagerness rather than in any access of dignity. Bolshevik prisons are informal and easy-going in comparison with American prisons. They are a little bit more like schools, and it is easier to graduate from them. They make you feel glad that the power has changed hands.
It was spring again before Trotsky an companions started eastward from Moscow, and they were on the road all summer, stopping for long months in the prisons of Irkutsk and Alexandrovsk. At the end of August, 1900, he and Alexandra Lvovna were placed on a big river barge with a crowd of criminal prisoners and shaptzi—a sect of fanatic men and women who castrate themselves in order to become altogether hideous and egotistical for the glory of God—and with this company they floated down the river Lena toward their home under the Arctic Circle.

Read next chapter | Eastman Internet Archive



Trotsky-ch01



Leon Trotsky:
The Portrait of a Youth

Chapter I:
 An Imperious Secretary


Trotsky never lived in the big stone house that testifies to the wealth of his parents. He was born and grew up to the age of ten in a little old-fashioned peasant's hut, with a fat brown roof of straw and five tiny rooms with low ceilings. The sitting-room and dining-room had wooden floors, and the floor in the sitting-room was painted; and here there were comfortable chairs, a table, an immense square stove, and on top of the stove a great big sleepy-eyed cat.
In the winter time, when it is impossible to work all day long and all the evening too, his mother sits reading with quiet concentration the words in a book. The process interests him because she whispers the words as she reads. He is cutting out the letters of the alphabet and sticking them fast in the frost on the window, one in each pane, and each little window has six panes. He is sticking them accurately in the middle, you may be sure. It is all snowy white outside, and the drifts curve half way up the low windows, and it is all warm inside, and tender and friendly and unworried.
The elder brother and sister will explain to him about the letters and give him his first colored books to read. And then when they are gone away to school he will be taken over to an aunt's house in the village, and he will stay there studying with her children. Nominally he will stay all winter, but as a matter of fact he will be at home most of the time, because he is so sweet-tempered and has such merry dimples that his parents cannot get along without him. In the summers an uncle from Odessa will come to visit them, and he too will give lessons to this gifted child with the beautiful manners and the blue light shining out of his eyes. Everybody who sees him will help him, and he will have every opportunity to rise to a place of respectability and comparative honor in Russian society.
And he will avail himself of these opportunities with a speed the memory of which makes people breathless. By the time that you might have learned to make letters with a pen, Trotsky had lost interest in the letters and was making a pen. At the age of eight he was printing with his pen a little magazine—although this with the help of a cousin two years older, a great artist, who made the cover designs. Trotsky's first ambition was to be a great artist like his cousin. And his first job was to be, at the age of seven, his father's secretary and account-keeper, a job which he fulfilled with an accuracy and perfection of penmanship entirely beyond the reach of his elder brother and sister.
Trotsky never played very much out of doors. He never learned to skate, and he can swim only a little. His early friends describe him as a "mischievous" child, but they do not mean that he went around with bow and arrows and a sling-shot, spit-balls and cigarette-butts, sticking burrs in the lambs' tails and riding the cows bareback. They refer to what he said rather than to what he did. His friendship was full of laughter; he liked personal jokes, and had ironical-affectionate ways of appreciating people. The nearest he came to playing, in our sense, was to "hang around" his father's machine-shop and blow the bellows or turn the wheels for his best friend, Grebin, the farm mechanic, with whom his conversations were endlessly lively and adventurous. He remembers, when he was seven years old, talking of the improbability of people's going up in the sky somewhere after they die. But that too was a playful conversation. He can not remember caring much whether they went up there or not. He can not remember ever having a serious emotion in regard to the religion about which his parents tried to tell him a little. His seriousness was bent from the beginning in a different direction.
It would be interesting to understand, if we could, just why this happy and healthy-natured child—a miracle of brain and will-power, as everybody could see—did not rise to a position of respectability and comparative honor in Russian society. Instead he crawled under Russian society, disreputable and like dynamite; and only because of the whole of that society toppled and fell, he rose to his position of honor.
It appears that the fact of his being a Jew had little influence in the formation of Trotsky's character and destiny. It was of course an objective limitation of the things that were possible to him under the czar, but it was not a thing that entered into his heart in childhood. His father had belonged to a community of Jewish people-"colonists," who took up free land wider an edict of the czars designed to increase the population of southern Russia.
But while the others all stayed in the colony, hating the land and satisfied with small trade, his father moved out into the fields and got rich working and hiring the peasants to work with him. He controlled almost three thousand acres of land around the little Ukrainian village of Ianovka, owned the mill, and was altogether the important man of the place. Trotsky had no chance to develop an "inferiority complex" here.
And he received his early education in Odessa, a sea-port trading city, where commercial necessity disciplined the races, Greeks and Jews and Russians, and their relations were in normal times courteous, at least, and not constrained. Unfriendly allusions to his race were "merely another kind of rudeness"; they were not one of the things he cried about. And they hare left no traces apparently in his consciousness of himself. Trotsky has the bearing and the manner toward life of a prince, if you can imagine that nature has her princes, and nothing seems more remote and petty in his presence than the distinctions of race.
It was from his father that Trotsky inherited the most obvious traits of his endowment, the intellect, the confident and penetrating judgment. His father died in a little village near Moscow four years ago at the age of eighty-three. He was managing a mill with energy and success, and he died not of old age, but of typhus fever.
A strong man who had been wealthy, who had been respected with a good deal of fear by his neighbors, he found himself at the age of eighty—thanks to his obstreperous son—in the most uncomforted condition of any man in Russia. Persecuted by the Reds because he was a kulak, a big land-grabber, by the Whites because he was Trotsky's father, and by Machno's bandits on the general theory that he might have something that they wanted, he got the full weight of the "Russian problem."
He thought it over under those circumstances and read it over a little too—for he had learned to read at the age of sixty—and finally gave up the faith of a lifetime and left home. Be went three hundred miles through battle-ridden territory on foot—eighty years old-seeking a friend with whom he could take shelter, and in 1920 he arrived in Moscow, reconciled to the revolution and glad to ask his errant son for a job.
Trotsky is proud of his father, proud of the fact that he died working and understanding. He loves to talk about him.
His memory of his mother is less affectionate. I think it is because he loved her too much when he was a child. But perhaps it is only because she died longer ago, and Trotsky never lived much with his family.
He went away to school at the age of nine, and very soon after that he began living in jail. He remembers both his parents as they came to see him in the little cell in the prison at Odessa. It was a very tiny barred shaft into which he had been admitted only for the purpose of the visit; but when they saw him there with his big black mane and gentle eyes, like a wild animal in a cage, they did not understand. They believed that he was kept in that cage to protect the czar's domains from the rage of his terrible ideas.
His father expressed no feeling, but turned white and had to support himself against the wall. But his mother's anger and pain expressed themselves violently. She had not so much of the reserve that Trotsky loves, and that gives to his presence an exciting quality of power. She had the power, however. Her neighbors remember that she was an "insistent" character, and a "great manager," and that the Bronsteins' estate was as efficiently run, and their household as spick and span and punctual to its dates, as the famous military train of the Commander-in-Chief of the Red Armies. They remember that she was a handsome woman, with "a face full of goodness," and that neither she nor her husband was "the kind to sit down in front of any kind of work."
So far there is no reason to see why Trotsky should not become a "regular person" and go serenely upward to that respectable position which his parents desired for him. But there was a difference between them. Trotsky was in the first place an extremely intense and sensitive child. He seemed to "care too much" about things. There never was a child born who had less of the disposition to "let well enough alone." And the things he cared about were unusual.
One day a neighbor's horse broke into his father's wheat-field. The neighbors' horses were always breaking into his father's fields. His father had so many fields. And perhaps it wasn't just the horses who were so clever. At any rate his father was very severe in the administration of justice on these occasions. He locked the horse up, and told the peasant he would let him out when the damages were paid.
Trotsky saw his father striding back into the house and the poor peasant coming after him with his hat in his hand, crying:
"I didn't see him, it wasn't my fault! I didn't see him, it wasn't my fault!"—bent over as though he were a little old woman who needed help.
Trotsky ran into his mother's bedroom and into the bed by the window. He lay there curled up on the blanket, crying. It was dark, 'and it was dinner-time, but he did not answer when they called him to dinner. He felt all the sorrow in the world then, and he looked out of the window in the dark. His mother finally got up from the table to look for him, calling out of both doors and receiving no answer. She found him at last. Perhaps he let her hear a sob from the bedroom. But she came back without him.
"That's a queer child," she said. "He's been crying for a half an hour, and I don't know what he's crying about."
His father was more understanding.
"I think he heard Ivan wailing about that horse," he said. "Tell him Ivan has the horse, and he didn't pay anything."
So Trotsky found himself in the embarrassing position of having to stop crying suddenly because he had made a mistake. He managed it by denying that he had been crying about Ivan's horse, and coming up to the table snuffling and pouting in a solemn way, as though he had been communing with some sorrow too deep for grown-up people to understand.
He probably had been communing with a deeper sorrow—but perhaps we can dimly understand it if we try. Trotsky was devotedly attached to his mother in those early days. His relation with his father—according to the testimony of one who lived often in their house—was "none too cordial." That must hare been the fundamental fact in his emotional life, and it is easy to imagine that some egotistical and jealous pains of his own were mixed up with his sympathy for that unhappy peasant. The deepest and tenderest passion in his heart led him into a mood of rebellion against the dominance of his father. And that mood was more or less continual. It got him into trouble more than once.
Trotsky was a most extraordinary secretary. Sitting there with his big blank books, a big inkwell and pen, a big shock of darkening hair, but everything else about him incredibly small, his legs reaching only halfway down to the floor, he had nevertheless a very important, rapid and solemnly competent manner of doing what had to be done—changing and dealing out money, noting down the amounts paid and the amounts received. On pay-days he was especially busy, for his father had a mill and a threshing-engine on his big farm, and many different kinds of laborers. And here again there would be disputes—particularly with the season workers, who were compelled to pay for damage to property and for the days when they were ill.
You can imagine his father's emotion when in the midst of one of these disputes his small and perfect secretary suddenly stepped in with the announcement that he had computed the amount remaining to the worker, and it was not enough to get along on. He would have to have more. This was offered simply as a statement of fact. But as it seemed not altogether obvious to his father, it was backed up with something approaching the nature of a speech for the opposition, a thing exceedingly mal-a-propos in a seven-year-old secretary. An intolerable thing in fact. His father told him to "shut up," and that was the end of it.
It was in this manner that Trotsky varied from the conventional type and became such a care and disappointment to his well-regulated parents. His sympathies were belligerent. His tenderness was rebellious. He seemed to have an idea arising out of himself as to how things ought to be, and little or no discretion about expressing it.
His father thought that this cantankerous streak in his gifted son would disappear with proper education. He had unbounded faith in Leon's abilities, and he had vast and exciting ambitions for him. He used to exhibit his little magazine to everybody who came into the house—and also his colored drawings, of which Trotsky made enough to fill a hay-mow, all neat and accurate in perspective and without a glimmer of artistic value. And he used to call upon Leon to recite his "poetry"—of which he also poured out an unconscionable stream, for some reason that is beyond understanding. For Leon's poetry had nothing in it, neither music nor images nor emotion, and he himself had no disposition to show it off. In fact he rebelled violently against these exhibitions, dug his fingers in his eyes, crawled around behind the furniture, and on one occasion when a little girl from the neighboring farm had been called in to hear him, he just burst out yelling in the middle of a poem and ran away and hid in the barn.
He was a queer child from the standpoint of an ambitious parent—too sensitive, and yet too obstreperous. But he had brains, he had health, he had energy. The thing to do was to put him to school, and put him to school early. An uncle in Odessa—Spencer—the same one who had given him lessons in the summer months—offered to take Leon into his home as a "paying guest." He could live there in a cultivated family and attend the St. Paul's School, the best boys' school in Odessa.

Read next chapter | Eastman Internet Archive



 Trotsky-ch03



Leon Trotsky:
The Portrait of a Youth

Chapter III:
 A Garden of Ideas


THERE was no seventh class in the St. Paul's School in Odessa, so the boys were accustomed to go from there to another school in the same city. But because it was nearer to his lonely parents, Trotsky decided to finish his course in the smaller city of Nikolaev, a night's ride by steamboat down the coast from Odessa.
Here his father engaged a comfortable lodging for him, and here he arrived in the autumn of 1895, wearing a nicely pressed new suit of a rich tan color, his hair cropped short and a stylish hat on his head, very handsome, very bourgeois – according to those who offered him the lodging – and almost a bit of a swell. It is not quite true that he "had no interest in girls." He was very shy in his relations with girls and disposed when he was particularly interested in one to cover it up or express it by treating her with special rudeness and brutality – a method which did not get him along very fast. But he had a great love of social laughter and a boisterous good time and enjoyed the advantages of his good looks like any other boy excited about life.
Inwardly he was not quite so slick and cocksure, however, as he appeared. He was troubled about himself in two respects. He had an ambitious impulse toward knowledge and literary expression, and he had a perpetual sense of the impossibility of ever satisfying it. He lay awake at night, troubled about this. He did not know what he was going to do; he thought he would earn his living as a mathematician or an engineer.
The other thing that troubled him was an inability to make decisions. He thought that his will was sickly. He seemed to be perpetually going around in a desperate circle, considering the pros and cons of every little movement and doing nothing. He did not see how he could ever play the part of a man with this moral impediment!
Trotsky says that he still finds it difficult to make decisions in small matters. Perhaps it is choices, rather than decisions, that he finds difficult. In those days in Nikolaev and even in the great matters he had not chosen his goal. He had no calling, and he had no love.
He was a republican in feeling. He loved the victories of the people in history and hated their slavery in Russia to the czar. But he had not yet touched that dark current of political change that had been gathering power in his country for half a century. Two men brought him in contact with it – one, Franz Svigofsky, a thoughtful gardener; the other Galatsky, a book-seller. In czarist Russia all book-sellers were radical – to sell books was a radical occupation – and book-seller leaned to the left even among his own adventurous kind. He gave Trotsky radical pamphlets and rational-idealistic books to read, like Lavrov's "Historic Letters" and Michaelovsky's "What Is Progress?" – books painted a Socialist ideal and warmly glorified the lives of those who should devote themselves to its attainment.
These were among the first books in Russia which proposed a revolutionary social evangel in the place of the religious evangel which has absorbed so much of the aspiration of mankind. They advocated a "going to the people" on the oart of young men and women who had the advantage of education and wished to further the progress of the race. The peasants are the people, they said; go and live among the peasants in the villages; teach them all that you know; but teach them particularly about Socialism and about the advisability of overthrowing the czar, if necessary, in order to establish a Socialist society.
In these books, written in a very noble and elevated style, Trotsky found a common channel for many of the prevailing currents in his nature. Without offending his hard sense of reality they offered him an ideal. They offered him the world as a field for that instinct toward "having things right" which was so strong in him.
There is a terrible seriousness in people to whom religion seems trivial. And these books showed Trotsky how he might live life seriously, and with a goal greater than himself and his daily bread and bootblacking. They showed him the glory of the adventure of human progress. And they gave him companionship in those peculiarly strong feelings of social sympathy and revolt which he had brought with him out of his childhood. He felt that he belonged to this company of reasonable and devout rebels of human progress.
In this mood it was inevitable that he should come in contact with a group of bold and radical-minded and excessively noble-minded young people, who met in the outskirts of the town in the garden of Comrade Franz Svigofsky. Comdrade Svigofslsy's brother was in the high-school with Trotsky, and he already called himself a Narodnik – a believer, that is, in "the people" and in "going to the people."
And Comrade Svigofsky himself, while not exactly a Narodnik – not quite so revolutionary as that name implied – was a man of broad and free culture, who had gathered around himself by a kind of natural gravitation everybody in the town who had a radical opinion. A gardener by trade, he had leased this plot of ground, and was trying to make an independent living raising fruit and vegetables. His little house, however, had a comfortable dining-room and an open arbor under an apple tree where you could sit around the samovar and talk about the possibilities of perfecting human society; and it was always full of Narodniki and Narodsvoltsi and Narodopravtsi; and even now and then a Marxist would creep in, and it is to be feared that the fruit and vegetables led a very precarious life among all these high-minded people. At any rate Comrade Svigofsky's garden was better known to the police than it was to the green-goods merchants of Nikolaev; and when the news reached Trotsky's parents that he was "hanging around" this notorious place a very tempestuous situation developed.
His father invaded Nikolaev like an army. He fell upon Trotsky, and he fell upon the poor woman who kept the lodging where Trotsky lived, and who, he thought, should have had some regard for a young man's development. His son was to have a course in civil engineering at St. Petersburg or, if he preferred it, an education abroad. There was to be no nonsense about it. There was money enough in the family to produce something besides a radical ne'er-do-weel for a son!
Trotsky was not sure that he would not study engineering; but he was sure that he would not let anybody else choose his life for him, and he said so.
The conflict that ensued was sharp and rude and cruel. The will that had built up that great estate and personality in spite of illiteracy and the disadvantage of race had projected itself forward into this incomparable son. The farm was not enough – sugar-mills and breweries were to be built now – an engineer was indispensable.
The son, on the other hand, was far away from building sugar-mills and breweries. He was organizing the people who dropped in at Svigofsky's garden into a little society, which he took a poetic pleasure in calling the Razsadnik. It means a garden in which things are grown for the purpose of transplantation. And the things to be grown in this garden were revolutionary ideas. The members met every week or so to discuss the problem of the liberation of Russia and the regeneration of human life, and they paid each a certain proportion of his income, to be used in buying books for distribution among the peasants. It was only a "little circle of intellectuals" – but it was a typical forerunner of the events to come, a small forge in which instruments were being sharpened for the use of the great forces of history. And to Trotsky, who believed then that these instruments were the great forces of history, it was of more pressing importance than his hypothetical career as a civil engineer. He said this to his father, and he said it with a sharp and violent tongue.
His father knew nothing about defeat.
"You will either quit this business and get to work, or you will quit spending my money," was his ultimatum.
If any last touch was needed to drive Trotsky straight into the camp of the revolution, it was this act of paternal tyranny. His revolt against his father and his revolt against the social system now became united. To assert himself as a grown man was to assert the revolution. He made no remonstrance against the terms of the ultimatum. He gave up the lodging that had been rented for him, advertised himself as a private tutor and moved over to Svigofsky's garden to live.
The incident has repeated itself in Trotsky's own family. His eldest boy, having decided that the privileges of life in the Kremlin as the son of a Commissar are not befitting his dignity as an individual, has moved out into the town and lives there upon the small stipend provided by the university to its students. He visits his family once a week as a guest, refusing to accept even his car-fare when he leaves the house. He is only sixteen years old, and it was with a mixture of admiration and solicitude that Trotsky told me about it.
"We have made no protest," he said; "but it is too early – he is too young."
Trotsky was too young – he was just past sixteen. He had come to Nikolaev only in order to be near his family. He had no clear or defined purpose in life except to live it. It was a hard moment for his affections. But it was not altogether hard, for the world into which he had cast himself was warm and full of friends. Indeed it was almost an ideal world. Franz Svigofsky was a simple and most genial man, a man with a big beard and a big brow, and his relation with this brood of young rebels that surrounded him was that of an appreciative but prudent father. Together they had established in that garden a kind of Communal Utopia – he and his brother and the two Sokolovsky brothers, and in the summer-time a Doctor Zif who was studying medicine at Kiev.
Doctor Zif had a home in Nikolaev, but he was very fond of the Svigofskys, and particularly he loved Trotsky, and you could almost say that he lived there in the garden. By taking turns at the cooking and dishwashing, and with the very important help of Svigofsky's long-suffering vegetables, these five or six friends managed to enjoy the best pleasures of human society at the modest rate of eleven rubles apiece per month.
And Trotsky's income as a "private tutor" sometimes amounted to eleven rubles a month, although it was the most uncertain thing in the world. At one time he managed to rope in the son of a local dry-goods merchant and filled him so full of unnecessary knowledge that at the end of two months his father, taking fright at the boy's development, refused to pay the bill.
There could hardly have been a more unlikely location for a private tutor of Nikolaev's wealthy sons than Comrade Svigofsky's garden. And there could hardly have been a more inauspicious regalia than the blue workman's blouse, the wildgrowing hair and the cane of a special form which had been "standardized" by the habitues of that nest of liberality and sedition.
The truth is that Trotsky immediately accepted a real and complete poverty as a part of the choice that he was making. When he did earn money he did not spend it on himself. He gave up all those attributes, except fastidious cleanness, of the slick young man who had arrived in Nikolaev a half a year ago. He was no less gay and humorsome, but he had turned to a new life; and he lacks the capacity for half-hearted action. He is described as "ragged" by his bourgeois friends during the two years that he lived and worked for Socialism in Nikobev and Odessa, and he was often actually hungry for a meal.
His uncle, Spencer, remembers a morning when Trotsky appeared in front of his office window in Odessa, gaunt and ill-clad as a tramp. Spencer jumped up, shocked and startled, intending to open the door, but Trotsky beckoned him to come out and meet him a little way down the street.
"It was not because he was ashamed of his tattered clothes," Mr. Spencer explained, "but because he was doing illegal work then and did not want to involve me. I took him to a restaurant and bought him a breakfast, and then another breakfast, and then another breakfast, before I could get him filled up."
Trotsky remembers another time, however, when his income as a teacher amounted to sixty rubles a month, and then he was the rich one in the garden. He was the one who had money left over to buy books for the peasants!
Such was their life. And the heart of it – the sustaining joy and justification of it – was a relentless, exhaustive, young, brilliant, burning, day-long and night-long debate on the problems of the social revolution in Russia.
It is impossible for us in America to imagine with what intense realism the idea of a more perfect human society was conceived in Russia, and with what sheer practicality its problems were discussed. To us Socialism came as a gratuitous economic vagary, requiring a philosophic dissatisfaction with the forms of democracy, and proposing a kind of ideal uprising that had as little reality for our lives as the second coming of Christ. To the Russians an ideal uprising was inevitable. Everybody expected it. The czar expected it. And everybody knew that this uprising would destroy, if successful, the most sanctified relations between the classes in Russian society. What set of relations should take their place? That was a simple and practical question that every lively-minded person must ask. Socialism was one of the answers. It was the answer given by the most thoughtful, and also by the most thoughtless. Only a eertain mildly intellectual or dull professorial type of person believed in the Russian revolution without believing in "Socialism."
And so the debates in that Garden of Ideas were not debates about the possibility, or the probability, of overturning this old world and starting a new one. They were debates about the methods to be adopted in bringing this obvious thing quickly to pass. They were debates about the relative importance of "personality" and of "critical thought" in producing this change, and the relative strength of the different classes in Russian society, and the role which they might be counted on to play. In particular they were debates about "Marxism."
And there was a particular reason for this. It was not Doctor Zif – although the doctor had read Plechanov's book on Marxian theory and counted himself a defender of it. Doctor Zif commanded a very light intellectual artillery, as he himself has taken pains to demonstrate in a small book describing his relations with Trotsky.[1] No – there was another reason than the erudition of Doctor Zif why these bold, brilliant young Narodniki could never quite satisfy themselves that they had unhorsed and abolished Marxism. It was the occasional presence at their table, and the vivid image that stayed there after she was gone, of the gentle-eyed, iron-minded sister of the Sokolovskys, Alexandra Lvovna. Alexandra Lvovna was a Marxist – that was what made conversation so uneasy and life a perpetual statement for the defense among these otherwise so confident and unconquerable knights of "the People."
Alexandra Lvovna was older than her brothers. She was six years older than Trotsky, and she had lived through some of the darkest years of the reaction which followed the failure of the Terrorists in Russia. Born in utter poverty and reared by a father who loved the ideal of liberty, she had herself long ago accepted the rebel mood and philosophy of the Narodniki. Reading an account of the trial of Vera Zassulitch, remembering the deeds of that time, she could not endure the inaction, the pessimism, the dull color of revolutionary faith among her contemporaries. She was the new generation – she resolved to go again among the people and teach revolt.
It was a resolution which led her first to a course in midwifery at the University of Odessa, and there she found students who had been at the University of Geneva and had worked with Plechanov and Zassulitch herself and Lenin in the little group called "The Emancipation of Labor," who were sending illegal Marxian literature into Russia. She read the literature and becamea resolute adherent of this new and more coldly scientific method for the regeneration of and the world.
She was, to be sure, no profound wizard in the complexities of the science, but she had read enough to make her know that the boys in Svigofsky's garden were as ignorant as they were brilliant and "logical" and was swift to pounce upon anyone who proposed to cool down the lofty emotions with which they were approaching life.
She remembers how they first announced to her the arrival of Leon Bronstein:
"Oh, now you will see! Here is the man who can talk to you! Such logic! Nobody can beat him!"
She came to dinner that night expecting some mommentous and whiskered professor, who would "Inform her of the errors underlying the economic system of Karl Marx," as momentous professors have done since the system was invented. She was utterly amazed when this smooth young child appeared with the close-cropped black hair and pale-blue eyes.
Was this the great anti-Marxian debater they had been telling her about? But he was! From the first crackle of that voice she felt the force of the attack, and she defended herself sharply, ironically. There was hardly a moment of amicability between them. Not only on that occasion, but every time thereafter when they met some sharp, sarcastic tilt would take place.
"You still think you're a Marxist? I can't imagine how a young girl so full of life can stand that dry, narrow, impractical stuff!"
"I can't imagine how a person who thinks he is logical can be contented with a headful of vague, idealistic emotions!"
Such is Alexandra Lvovna's memory of their meetings. And instead of growing more friendly or more playful as they got better acquainted, these tilts grew more bitter and frankly hostile until finally she practically gave up attending the general meetings of the group.
"For instance, once I insisted on their reading Plechanov's kook, and they threw it on the floor in rage when they saw his bitter attack on Michaelovsky."
This spirit of fury reached out after her, it seems, even after she had ceased to appear at the garden. There was a Narodnik journal in Russia at this time called "The New Word," and had been subscribed to by the public library of Nikolaev at the request of their group. In the middle of the winter its editorial staff was changed, and its policy became Marxist. As was the first legal expression of Marxism in the Russian press, the journal was very precious to Alexandra Lvovna. Her emotions were bitter enough when she saw a letter posted in the public library and signed by all her friends in the garden, requesting the directors to cancel the subscription to this journal, which did not "respond to the interests or opinions of the readers."
Svigofsky himself was old enough and wise enough to see the ungraciousness of this act and subsequently crossed out his signature. But it was not Svigofsky, but Bronstein, who had done it, and Bronstein made no attempt at qualification or apology.
Omniscience is of course one of the privileges of a biographer, and I avail myself of this privilege when I say that it was not only the materialistic interpretation of history against which Trotsky was here rebelling with such ferocity. He has, to be sure, a faculty of burning absorption in problems of mere truth which you and I, chilly Anglo-Saxons, might fail to understand. But he has also a very living heart, and history demands a record of the fact that everybody else in that garden was in love with Alexandra Lvovna. She stood over them as a kind of Madonna, wiser than they, and more tender, and more firm. In this world of halfway things, a shining mind and heroic character have rarely lodged in so gentle and lovely-looking a person.
You will understand a great many peculiar things about the Russian revolution if you understand this quarrel between Trotsky and Alexandra Lvovna. It was the same quarrel exactly, that we saw subsequently between the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Bolsheviks. It was a quarrel between two ways of viewing human progress so profoundly opposite that no working reconciliation possibly could take place between them. The sincerest Socialist-Revolutionaries are in jail now; they would have jailed the Bolsheviks had they won the power. The difference is that they did not win the power. And they did not win the power because their science was not practical. Let me show you that science at its source:
"The seed of progress," said Peter Lavrov, "is indeed an idea, though not mystically existing in mankind; it is born in the brain of a person; it develops there; afterward it passes out of that brain into the brains of other persons, expanding qualitatively in the increased intellectual and moral worth of these persons, quantitavely in the increase of their number, and it becomes a social force when these persons are conscious of their agreement and decide upon a unanimous activity; it triumphs when these persons, penetrated by it, translate it into social forms."
This viewpoint of Lavrov's was developed by his more shining successor, Michaelovsky, into a whole system of sociology. Michaelovsky made it seem probable – and moreover made it seem scholarly – that the very essence of progress, both in nature's evolution and in human history, was the development of "individuality." And thus those "morally worthy" persons of Lavrov's – the "critical thinkers," the revolutionary intelligentsia – became the goal of progress as well as the power which should carry it forward.
Marx had an exactly opposite idea of the relation of thoughts to a social progress:
"It is not the consciousness of men," he said, "which determines their existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence determines their consciousness. At a certain stage of their development the material forces of production in society come in conflict with the property relations within which they had been at work before. From forms of development of the forces of production these relations turn into their fetters. Then comes the period of social revolution. With the change of the economic foundation the entire immense superstructure is more or less rapidly transformed. In considering such transformations the distinction should always be made between the material transformation of the economic conditions of production, which can be determined with the precision of natural science, and the legal, political, religious, asthetic or philosophic – in short, ideological-forms in which men become conscious of this conflict and fight it out."
The followers of Lavrov and Michaelovsky believed that Russia's critical thinkers, convinced of the idea of Socialism, would convince the majority of the Russian peasants, or hypnotize them, and that they would establish Socialism without passing through the period of capitalism or awaiting the development of a revolutionary working class. Marx declared that these critical thinkers would have no dynamic effect upon the process, and that even the enormous hordes of the peasants would not play the leading role. The relatively tiny number of the workers in the towns alone possessed the force and were in the position to overthrow the old society and create the new.
As capitalism and the factory system inevitably developed, the number of these workers would increase, and their dominating position in Russian life would increase faster than their number. The task of the social idealist therefore was not to carry culture and a Socialist evangel to the peasants, but to teach the industrial workers their revolutionary mission, and organize them for the task. They would have not only to overthrow the czar's government, but to overthrow capitalism as well – for these two tasks were alike, according to Marx, in demanding militant agitation and class war. Culture and the propagation of beautiful social ideals could no more produce Socialism than it could batter down the czar's police.
That was the new doctrine, and the tone of voice in which it spoke. Men like Lavrov and Michaelovsky had proposed a revolutionary social evangel in place of the religious evangels of the past. Marx proposed to replace all evangels with a science of historic engineering. The primary occupation of man, he observed, is earning his living, and the primary motive forces in history are economic. If you wish to mold future history you must calculate these forces as a mechanic calculates the forces of nature, and put yourself in a position to guide them. Instead of an evangelist you must be a technician; instead of a politician, a scientist; instead of a hot and windy preacher, a cool and practical engineer.
This is the doctrine which has given such incredible power to the Bolsheviks in Russia, and which makes the rest of the world look upon them either as saints or supernatural devils, according to the point of view – but never as ordinary, amiable human beings. They are, as a matter of fact, extraordinary. They are "visionaries," using in the interest of their vision that same hard, calculating "business sense" which has always been used by their opponents to make them look ridiculous. They are the "children of light" trying to become as wise in their generation as the children of this world.
But you can see how difficult it was for Trotsky at the age of seventeen, all full of fire and power and the sense of infinite possibilities, to accept this hard discipline of fact from the lips of a lovely young girl. There are two kinds of Marxians. There are those who like Marxism because it gives them an opportunity, as they think, to deny the finer values of life; and they enjoy denying. There are others who like Marxism only as they like facts, and as it is necassary to face facts, in order to go on and build up in concrete reality the finer values of life.
Trotsky's violent resistance to the matter-of-fact-interpretation of history, before he had read it or really knew what it is about, was an affirmation of life. It was the expression of a poetic iniversality and free play of interest over all the interests of man, which in spite of his consecration and superhuman hard work he has never lost. He is as little touched with the disease of revolutionary negativism as any Marxian I have ever met.
Thus his graduation from the high-school at Nikolaev, brilliant and resounding through the town as usual, was not for him a very clear or happy occasion. He felt in his thoughts of himself, even if he did not acknowledge in his "Philosophy of History," the feebleness and futility of a life of lonely propaganda in some peasant village under the surveillance of the czar's police. He had enough "moral worthiness" to send books into the country, but he had not enough scientific folly to go off and bury himself there. In short he did not know what to do with himself. For the first time since he stood up in his crib, swaying and beaming on the whole world, so that people went into the bedroom just to get a laugh out of his blue eyes – for the first time, here at the end of his school year in Nikolaev, his friends describe Trotshy as "gloomy."
He had been sick in the spring, had fainted away as he sometimes does upon a slight provecation, and then gone to bed with influenza. His father, learning of this, had declared a kind of armed truce and come to visit him in the garden. While there he had thrown the entire weight of his character into "counter-revolutionary propaganda." That is, be as revolutionary as you like, but at least have the common sense and deecency to urge my son to finish his education!
One of the principal culprits, Galatsky, had failed and moved off to another town, but this resolute father traveled off after him and brought him back to use his influence in behalf of "ordinary common sense." It was a desperate campaign, and if Trotsky's soul was not saved, you need not lay the blame upon this powerful and relentless man.
A friend who stayed often with the Svigofskys, Benjamin Vegman – the editor now of Communist newspaper in Siberia – has described to me his first vision of Trotsky's father at their garden. Vegman was sleeping on the floor in the living-room, and opened his eyes very early one morning to see this big-whiskered farmer standing over him, aggressive and implacable.
"Hello!" he shouts with a loud voice like a bugle. "You run away from your father too?"
The Russians have a word for stubborn, which means "like the stump of a tree," and that it is the word Comrade Vegman used to describe Trotsky's father. We need not wonder with this giant on one side waging the timeless and irresistible campaign of "common sense," and on the other a beautiful Madonna offering him the cold and stony-looking doetrines of Karl Marx – himself in the middle a flame of confused radical aspirations – we need not wonder that Trotsky was "feeling gloomy," he whose very genius is to be clear and to be self-confident.

Footnotes
[1] Doctor Zif is now practicing medicine in New York, a Socialist of the kind who defended the War-for-Democracy and the patrotism of the Allies. When Trotsky came to New York during that war – anti-patriot, anti-war, revolutionist to the depth of his heart – he met Doctor Zif, who he knew had been publishing a little pro-war paper there in the Russian language. He met him most cordially; and, wishing to remember the friendly emotions of these earlier days, he invited him to his house. They talked long and drifted back into the mood of their recollections. But Trotsky, knowing that Zif could teach him nothing and that he could convince Zif of nothing, refrained from opening the political question. It was a characteristically courteous, and a very friendly, exercise of judgment. But to the doctor's editorial vanity it seems to have been an unendurable offense, the manifesation of a self-seeking intellectual arrogance which he suddenly discovered had characterized his friend's activities from the cradle. Hence this little volume of weak and ludicrous personal spite. If a worm could snarl it would make a noise like Doctor Zif's book.

Next chapter | Eastman Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



Trotsky-ch05



Leon Trotsky:
The Portrait of a Youth

Chapter V:
 The work and the Danger


Trotsky was a shining example of that atrocious creature, familiar to all readers of American editorials, the "Outside Agitator." That is to say, he was a man with an extreme social ideal and enough mechanical instinct to know that the only force capable of achieving such an ideal is the organized self-interest of the oppressed classes. He himself possessed no thread of connection with those classes. Sitting there in a garden fragrant with peach blossoms and the memories of high conversation about justice, he was as much puzzled as Plato would have been to find his way to the facts.
Ilia Sokolovsky had once known a worker, a watchman in the public garden, who belonged to a radical religious sect. He might perhaps be radical practically too. Trotsky waited impatiently while Ilia Lvovitch went off in search of this worker. The man had gone away and nobody knew where, but Ilia Sokolovsky brought back the address of some friends of his with whom they might safely open a conversation.
Together they visited these friends, found them in a mood of intelligent revolt against the autocracy, and arrived very quickly at the cause of it—Ivan Andreyevitch Mukhin. Mukhin was a keen-witted mechanic with a sly way of wrinkling up his left eye when he talked, a man of high honesty and authority among the workers. He became the most important member, besides Trotsky and Alexandra Lvovna, of the organization that they formed, and he became one of Trotsky's best friends.
Together they gathered a handful of workmen around a table in the Cafe Russia, where a mechanical piano kept up enough noise to shield their conversation. They ordered an infinite quantity of tea and began to talk. It was not easy at first—Trotsky felt constrained. But Mukhin knew how to do it. He told them a story like this:
A man pulled a handful of seeds out of his pocket and set one on the table.
"That's the czar," he said.
Around that he placed some other seeds and said:
"Those are his ministers."
Around them some others:
"Those are the generals."
Then came the nobility, the great merchants, and finally the workers and peasants. When it was all arranged another man reached out his hand and mussed up the lot.
"Now tell which one is the czar," he said, "and which the nobility, and which the worker."
Everybody liked that story. It established a community of feeling among them and enabled Trotsky to talk. He was very moderate at first, not saying all that he thought; but the workers themselves were always pushing him forward. Before many evenings they were occupying all the tables in one wing of the restaurant, and one day when Trotsky came early the waiter met him with the words:
"Your folks are not here yet."
That suggested the necessity for a "conspirative apartment"; and this was secured and fitted up by Mukhin himself with a set of electric signals, making it possible in case of alarm to get away by the back door. Here Trotsky drew up a constitution, and this rapidly growing conversational group became the South Russian Workers' Union.
The organization consisted of "circles," which divided and multiplied very much in the manner of the cells which compose the tissues of organic life. The nucleus of the first circle was Trotsky and Alexandra Lvovna, and its growth was almost miraculously rapid. When it reached the prescribed limit of twenty-five members, it divided into two circles, Trotsky going with one and Alexandra Lvovna with the other in the capacity of nucleus—or, as the constitution says, "organizer."
In the new circle they would each attract to themselves another person capable of leadership, so that when another division took place there would be a nucleus in each circle. In this manner eight or nine circles were formed in the course of the spring and summer; and in a city which contained not more than ten thousand workingmen, over two hundred of them had become: dues-paying members of this conspiracy, all of them knew of it, and the majority read its proclamations, either with sympathy or excited antagonism.
These proclamations are extremely persuasive and extremely simple. They speak always about some concrete thing that just happened in the factory, the thing that the workers are talking about as they walk home at night. They speak in the tone of one who is walking along with them.
"You all know about the recent visit to the shipyards of the captain of the port, Fedotov, and you are all doubtless aroused by the ugly conduct of the rude old man; because a few of the workmen did not bow to the captain they were on the order of 'his excellency' immediately listed for discharge...."
Thus he opens a conversation with the workers in the shipyards.
An engineer in the employ of the bosses has called a meeting to denounce one of his proclamations, and he makes that the occasion of another:
"Neyman climbed up to the top story of the electric-dynamo shop, assembled the workers and made a speech in which there were more lies than words; It was not Neyman but his salary that made the speech. 'You are a mere handful,' cried the salary of Neyman,'and you dare to revolt against a terrible power!' Ask Neyman, comrades, whether he reads the papers and knows what is happening in this world. Does he know that 46,000 workers in St. Petersburg alone, by means of two strikes, compelled that same terrible power to give them the law of July 2d concerning the length of the working day?... 'You will suffer in prison,' said this engineer, 'and your wives and children will die of hunger and cold.' You understand how he is worried about your welfare? About you and about your wives and children? Answer Neyman, who knows no other joy but a fat meal and a luxurious dwelling, that there is a joy both higher and more glorious—a struggle for the great cause of freedom and justice."
There is no cant in these proclamations, none of that sarcastic propaganda singsong, which destroys the force of so much Socialist writing in America. They speak directly and warmly, and indeed almost with a feminine tenderness, about the problems of the workers and the beautiful future toward which they may move if they will but stand together in courage and friendship. There was still enough of the child in Trotsky to reveal naively the quality of the emotion that led him into this life of danger and sacrifice. You can read his heart here in these simple documents, the exquisite little letters printed with his own pen and then mimeographed—patient, artistic, clean, holding out the highest hopes to the lowest class.
"During the past year," he writes on New Year's day, "many of the workers of Nikolaev joined together in a union and prepared to begin the fight with the bosses; but we shall be able to fight only when you all, comrades, join with us and we unite in one fraternal union. Let us begin a new life with the new year—a life of men battling with their enemies. ... We do not want to rob or kill; we strive only to make our lives better and better, and to live as men should live.
"Do not believe anyone who says that we are some kind of dangerous persons, some students desiring only to stir up the people. No, comrades, we are workers just like all other workers. Only we want once for all to get out of our poverty and live a human life. We want this not for ourselves only, but for all the workers.... Let our first commandment be 'All for one and one for all.' Then we will soon win our right to assemble in the square and openly discuss the workers' cause. Comrades, for our sacred cause we are ready to lay down our lives...."
It is a different Trotsky distributing this serious and humble New Year's resolution throughout the working-class district of Nikolaev, from the brilliant midnight scoffer at Marxism. It has been a long year. Everybody seems to have noticed a change in him. His friends in Odessa, when he came back there to coordinate the work in the two cities, had no more question about the stability of his enthusiasm. If there had been a little of the young rooster in his radicalism before, it was gone now. If they had felt a fear that pride would take the place of purpose—that he would fall, as so many leaders fall, because he could not bear to see other big men beside him—that too was an error.
There will always be something a little arrent about him—always a little of the volcano. That is, he will be a smiling, disciplined, very reasonable and cooperative person; but if something arouses his indignation and he starts to spitting fire, why he will spit fire without any modesty or any regard for the size of the landscape. Trotsky's sense of right and wrong is as arrogant as Christ's, and it is not tempered with a strong love for his enemies. But for those with whom he works and lives, and for the working masses of this world, his will, though so reckless in its force, is altogether a giving and not a grasping one.
As you see in these proclamations, he has completely identified himself, as though he were a poet, with the workingmen for whom he writes. But he is not a poet, and that exercise of imagination must find its sanction in the actions of his life. It will find its sanction in a perfect loyalty.
"He can be very tender and sympathetic," said Alexandra Lvovna, "and he can be very assertive and arrogant; but in one thing he never changes—that is his devotion to the revolution. In all my revolutionary experience I have never met any other person so completely consecrated."
Trotsky had not yet yielded his theory of personality to Marxism; but his personality had yielded to this slender and beautiful Marxist, to her wisdom. He loved her passionately, and he had turned away from every other goal of devotion but her and the revolution. She was altogether different from him, glowing with the seriousness of her faith instead of flashing with its glory, instinctively respecting every other personality, not flooding over with the force of her own. Poised and warm-eyed and practical, gifted with every gift of gentleness, she was a young and well-loved mother to all the workers in their organization. One of them, a very youthful poet named Leikin, wrote verses in her praise:
She is not the goddess nor the saint
 Who brought forth Jesus to the earth,
But our organizer is divine,
 And she is holy,
 Who rescues lost brotherhood
 From the ruinous dark.
Hail to her courage!
 Hail to her strength!
 Hail to her priceless love for us !
It was an organization more like a band of early Christians perhaps than a modern labor union. There was more affection and more old-fashioned goodness in it, and less science and less business sophistication, than we are accustomed to associate with the colossal idea of organized revolution.
They published in the fall a little magazine entitled "Our Cause," and this magazine, like the proclamations, Trotsky himself printed with his pen. It is a monument of genius and devotion—clean, delicate-lettered, executed with the patient concentration of a Chinese artist-saint, and yet in every sentence hot and young and calling for world-wide action.
Trotsky smiles a little at the "pedantry" with which he used to perfect this journal, bent over his table all night long like a diamond cutter over his jewels. He had spent the day perhaps running from one end of the town to the other collecting three rubles to buy the ink and paper. He had conducted a meeting of his circle in the evening. The day before he had been on his weekly trip to Odessa, helping in the organization there, making speeches, establishing a bond of union between the workers of the two cities. He had gathered a package of illegal literature, and with that for a pillow had dropped for his night's sleep on the third-class deck of the little steamer traveling back to Nikolaev. On Sunday he had assembled a general meeting of the union in the woods with speeches, recitations, greetings brought by a delegate from the workers of Odessa. On Monday he had met the organizers of the separate circles, explaining the organization, settling all disputes, arranging the most minute details of the work. In the meantime he had written the major part of his journal, gathering information about the movement in other cities, in other countries, making up an economic interpretation of Russian history, composing poetry, writing editorials, manufacturing cartoons by cutting out, and combining the figures from different pictures. He had earned his vague living in the odd moments that he could find. And now he would sit up until sunrise night after night, printing this journal with his pen and ink, making each copy clear and exquisite as a prayer-book with his mimeograph machine.
In all this unresting labor in the shadow of danger, nothing was difficult for Trotsky except the "exhibition of his talents." He had not yet learned the three arts of the orator—how to begin, how to keep going and how to stop. The transition from those free-and-easy conversations in the Cafe Russia to the formal meetings in a conspirative apartment was a thing of dread. And still more the general assemblages in the woods or on the shore of the river, where, like John the Baptist, he would stand in the grass preaching a thing he knew nothing about but felt sure of, to people twice as old as he was. He would read and "interpret" some learned pamphlet that he had got hold of, or he would recite a revolutionary poem or call for their questions and boldly attempt to answer them. What he wanted to do was bolt and run.
One Sunday one of the disciples arrived half full of vodka and wanted to participate in everything that was said. He was led away under the bushes to sleep it off, but he slept only long enough for Trotsky to get a good start and then suddenly poked his head out of the brush and demanded an explanation of Darwin's theory of evolution. He was willing to concede, he said, that men were descended from monkeys, but what he wanted to know, and what he wanted to know before any further discussion, was, what was the first animal born from. He expressed this problem in a language more frank than scientific and almost broke up the meeting, for Trotsky knew practically nothing either about Darwin or about how to get out of an embarrassing situation.
Trotsky knew that he knew nothing. That was what made the situation so embarrassing and so full of infinite promise. There is no rest in Trotsky's sense of himself. The thought of all the things that he does not know is a perpetual exhilarating distress. He has now collected on his desk a little pile of books containing the theories of Einstein and is fretting against the duties that will not let him sit down to master them. He understands the theory in the same vague way that you and I do, the same way that he understood the science of the revolution in Nikolaev. But that is not enough. Trotsky has a mind of the highest quality—a mind, that is to say, which perceives precisely the division between that which it knows and that which it does not know—and this, combined with a perfectly dominating desire to excel, makes him an everlastingly young man, a man who can not stop growing.
As is well known, the czar had established a kind of disciplinary free education for young men of this singular promise, with a revolutionary university in Siberia. And Trotsky was heading for this course of education with all the reckless impetuosity of his nature. One day he came back from his weekly trip to Odessa with the news that Shrenzel, the stupid little stranger who hung around the garden, had met him on the boat, and in the course of their conversation had asked why there was not a revolutionary organization among the workers of Nikolaev.
"I wonder if we couldn't use that fellow in some way," Trotsky said. Alexandra Lvovna was more prudent, and she disliked Shrenzel.
"He is absolutely without political intelligence," she said, "and we don't know anything about him. I think you would better leave him alone."
Trotsky consulted Mukhin, and he too advised him to ignore Shrenzel. But Shrenzel met him again the next week, and his enthusiasm had grown.
"Let's start a movement among the workers of Nikolaev!" he said.
Trotsky put him off with some noncommittal suggestion and forgot about him—or tried to. But Shrenzel was always turning up. One day he called at the garden with the news that a worker whom he knew in Kiev had arrived in town, having lost all his documents on the way. There had been a letter of introduction to somebody named "Sophia Michaelovna," but he could not remember the last name.
"Who could that be—Sophia Michaelovna?" said Shrenzel, watching Trotsky's face.
Sophia Michaelovna was the pseudonym of Alexandra Lvovna in their organization.
"I don't know anybody of that name," said Trotsky. "Maybe Alexandra Lvovna does."
She was in the next room, and in order to warn her, he called out: "Do you know anybody of the name of Sophia Michaelovna? Shrenzel wants to know."
Alexandra Lvovna came into the room. "What's her last name?" she said. And as Shrenzel explained that he did not know, she laughed at the little half bald-headed man whom she detested.
"How do you expect to find a person in a town of this size without her last name?" she asked sharply.
And so Shrenzel went away again without getting what he was after.
In his effort to form bonds of union with the movement,in other parts of Russia Trotsky had brought an organizer named Albert Polak from Kiev with a message of greeting from the workers of that city. And in a conversation with Polak he happened to mention this incident.
"Shrenzel" said Polak. "Why, that's the provocateur that disappeared from Kiev! He betrayed one of our comrades to the police!"
Trotsky asked the name of that comrade, and a little later he had Shrenzel in to drink tea with him in Mukhin's apartment. He waited until the man had established himself in his gallantly confidential way beside them at the table and then remarked to Mukhin:
"By the way, did you know that comrade X is coming from Kiev?"
"Comrade X!" Shrevel exclaimed quickly. "Why, that's one of my best friends!"
"Yes," said Trotsky, still talking to Mukhin, "and do you know what happened to him a little while ago? One of his best friends, one who used to sit often with him at the same table, just as we are siting now"—and he indicated Shrenzel—"denounced him to the police, and they arrested him and ruined his whole life."
Mukhin jumped from his seat.
"Contemptible rascal!" he cried. "I would kill a man like that!"
"Well, there he is!" Trotsky shouted, turning; ferociously on the little man, whose lips were white with terror.
Shrenzel testified afterward that Trotsky drew a revolver, and it must have seemed to him like that. He was ordered to get out of the town on pain of death. But it is doubtful if Trotsky knew how to draw a revolver; and it is certain that Shrenzel remained in town and lived to tell the tale in high places.
The police, however, were not depending upon Shrenzel. They had another and more reliable source of information, as Trotsky might have found out one day if he had not been too busy to think. He was busy on his New Year's proclamation. This he was rolling off "the press" in enormous numbers, intending to shower it on Nikolaev like rain. He wanted every worker in town to know about his organization, and in that ambition he was entirely successful.
There were several specially trusted members who helped him in the work of distribution; and the most trusted of all, after Mukhin, was Anani Nesterenko, Alexandra Lvovna's coworker in circle number two. Nesterenko was very versatile—he could write sublime revolutionary poetry and at the same time keep the accounts accurately.
Trotsky had made an appointment to meet him in a lonely lot on the out-of-town side of the cemetery and deliver a large paper tube full of these proclamations. Nesterenko came a little late, and as Trotsky stood there waiting, a strange man rose out of the dusk by the cemetery wall and walked past him very close, staring at him. In a moment Nesterenko appeared from the same direction. Trotsky asked him who that man was, and he answered with just a noticeable confusion that he did not know.
Trotsky did not give any attention to this incident, but he could hardly fail to realize that the police were actively in search of the source of those proclamations—and not only the police, but a good part of the town besides. All of his prudent friends warned him. Svigofsky had long since abandoned the Utopian garden and hired out to a big landlord in the country; but he came back to his wild brood, attended a meeting and urged them to disband before the whole organization was arrested.
It was clear enough that their work was nearing an end. The ever-bubbling poet, Leikin, meeting an open-minded soldier, had decided that he was worthy to be numbered among the blest and explained to him in full detail just what a, proletarian is and what the proletariat intends to do with the world. The soldier went and had a talk with his officer—his mind was open in both directions—and the result was that Leikin was arrested and lodged in the city prison. From Leikin the trail led straight into the heart of their organization. It was only a question of days.
They finally decided to suspend all meetings for a time and disperse. They would allow the trails to cool a little, they thought, and then return and begin again more prudently. But Trotsky knew nothing about prudence. He "dispersed" as far as his father's house, where anybody could find him, and prepared to go to work on the next number of his magazine.

Read next chapter | Eastman Internet Archive



Trotsky-preface



Leon Trotsky:
The Portrait of a Youth

Preface


The chief thing to be gained by visiting Soviet Russia is a feeling of the characters of the Bolsheviks. To a simple man that makes Bolshevism intelligible. Instead of writing another dissertation about it, therefore, I decided to compose the portrait of one of these characters. I chose Trotsky because he seems to me the most universally gifted man in the world to-day. There is no one more whole-somely alive, more interested in all the interests of mankind. If we can understand how Trotsky became a Bolshevik, we shall have some human understanding of what Bolshevism is.
For that reason my book is not a record of his achievements, but the story of his youth. I hope to write about those achievements also, but that is a different book. Only remember, while you read, that in 1905, at the age of twenty-six, this Jewish boy, standing at the head of the Petrograd Soviet of Worker's Deputies, spoke with an authority in Russia not inferior to that of the czar. The czar's prime minister appealed to that Soviet for the privilege of sending a telegram--and this, while the Soviet was printing and posting in the streets Trotsky's audacious proclamations of its purpose to overthrow the czar's government and establish a socialist state.
Remember that in 1918--untrained even in the contemplation of military affairs--Trotsky organized an army out of the hunger- and panic-stricken remnants of a nation, and fought off on seven fronts an invasion backed up by all the great powers of the world. Remember that he is considered by many who have heard him the greatest orator of our times. And remember that his books of literary criticism, as well as his political and economic studies, are read by every lively-minded man in Russia, and his prose style is a thing of intense individual beauty, and power.
I succeeded with some difficulty in persuading Trotsky himself to co-operate with me in composing this story. The degree of his co-operation is described in the following letter.
DEAR COMRADE EASTMAN:
You wish to write my biography and ask my co-operation. My first motion was to refuse that co-operation. But afterward I thought that would be not right.
For better or worse, it befell me to play a certain role in the October revolution and its further development. Many people find their way to the general through the personal. In that sense biographies have their right. And, that being so, better they should he written without great distortions (small ones are quite unavoidable). In this direction--that is, in the direction of conscientious information--I will try to cooperate with you. But I cannot agree to read your manuscript, for that would make me somewhat responsible not only for the factual side, but also for the characterizations and valuations. It is quite obvious that this is impossible. I am ready to take the responsibility and that a limited one, for the facts I communicate in response to your questioning. For all the rest you must bear the responsibility alone.
With sincere greeting,
L. TROTSKY.
To this I ought to add that the facts stated in my concluding chapter about the relation between Lenin and Trotsky in the last years, were none of them supplied to me by Trotsky. These facts are accessible to anybody in Moscow who reads and speaks Russian and stays there a while.
I owe my gratitude for long conversations about Trotsky and his youth to Alexandra Lvovna and Natalia Ivanovna, to Mr. and Mrs. Spencer and their daughter Vera, and to many others who were his playmates and friends. And I owe a more general debt of gratitude to Eliena Vacilievna Krylenko, without whose infinitely generous help all this work in a newly acquired language would have been impossible.
M. E.
Moscow,
 May, 1924.

Read next chapter | Eastman Internet Archive



Trotsky-ch10



Leon Trotsky:
The Portrait of a Youth

Chapter X:
 The Birth of Bolshevism


AS YOU See, Lenin was clearly aware long before the convention of a line dividing him from his older associates. He had long ceased to try to regard himself as a pupil of Plechanov. He must have seen almost immediately the lack of dynamic force in that man. And he was beginning to see the same thing in Martov. He was already forming in his mind that division between the "hard" and the "soft," between the "workers" and "gabblers," the "fighters" and "reasoners"—between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks—which was his great fundamental contribution to the science of revolution.
It was in the last analysis a psychological contribution. For although it is an economic fact that makes Mensheviks dangerous to the revolution—the fact that they express in their mental attitude the equivocal economic interests of the petit-bourgeois class and the aristocracy of labor—it is not class interest that makes them Mensheviks. They belong with the Bolsheviks to the class of the intelligentsia, the revolutionary idealists, and what makes them Mensheviks is their attitude toward ideas.
It is impossible to understand Trotsky's life, or indeed the political life of our times, without clearly defining this distinction between two different types of intellectuals, which Lenin's policies have forced into the consciousness and the language of mankind. It is not a distinction merely among Marxists or the advocates of a proletarian revolution; it is a distinction that can be made wherever human beings gather together upon the basis of belief in an idea.
The belief in ideas has two contrary functions in our emotional life, and those in whom it fulfills one function will inevitably divide at the moment of action with those in whom it fulfills the other. We erect an idea in our minds because we are ill at ease or at pain in the circumstances of reality. The original function of the idea was to guide us in an effort to change the reality fundamentally and so get relief. But in order to fulfill this function the idea itself must have for us a certain reality. We must be able to love it, linger upon it, adhere to it in social groups, sacrifice our time and money, and even our respectability, to its cultivation. And in this process we often manage to alleviate the pain of the reality without changing it fundamentally. We do this with the greater ease if we are "intellectual" and ideas are very real to us. They become a kind of daily companion and redeemer of our world, consoling us with an extreme "belief" about its future and yet leaving us free to patch it up in little ways less disturbing and more ready to our hand.
It is obvious that while employing an idea in this latter fashion, we shall resent any attempt to rob that idea of its purity, which is essentially its mentality. we shall resent with equal violence an attempt to prove that the idea is incapable of realization and an attempt actually to realize it—because either of these attempts, if successful, will destroy its value as an object of devout attention, a love and consolation in the pain and ugliness of what is real.
Plato, the first Communist, was an intellectual of this static type. But he was conscious of the fact, and boldly declared that ideas were more interesting and more real to him than things. He had no method, and he had no need of a method, for realizing his Ideal Republic. The modern Menshevik is not conscious of his character. He has not the bold mysticism of Plato, and he has a method for realizing his ideal. The method as well as the ideal enters into the substance of his belief. It is a belief about a real future.
And when that method begins to be actually applied, when that future begins to show its harsh substance in the present, this unconscious Platonist finds himself in a very embarrassing position. He has solved his problem of life by believing in an idea. He has perhaps made it his profession to believe in that idea. And he is compelled in defense of his vital equilibrium, in defense of his very personality—for the belief is deep and sincere—to resist those who undertake to put the idea into action. He is compelled to play the part of hypocrite. But he is not a hypocrite; he is something far more complex and pitiable than that. He is a Menshevik.
It was his sense of this psychological truth, and the marvelous accuracy with which he could drive a line between these two types of intellectuals, that made Lenin's actions so startling during and immediately after this first gathering of leaders for the Russian revolution. He had already annihilated Economism and united a big majority around the banner of "Iskra." But he did not hesitate to go ahead and split this majority again upon the question—essentially—of the relation of intellectuals to the party organization.
Shall idealistic-minded people who give merely money and formal adherence—not disciplined service, risk, personal sacrifice—be considered members of the party? That was the issue upon which the convention split and upon which Lenin in the long run was willing to break with his best political friends, the five other editors of "Iskra," including his great theoretical supporter, Plechanov. For these editors, being of the Menshevik type, instinctively defended the rights of that type in the party constitution. Lenin threw them off, broke with them personally as well as politically—for politics was his life—and went on without their authority, building up that body of dynamic intellectuals whom history has christened with the name of Bolsheviks.
And what became of our altogether dynamic youth, Trotsky, in this startling turn of events? If I have told the reader anything in this book, I have told him that Trotsky is a Bolshevik. Trotsky means action down to the last letter of every word that comes out of his mouth. And Lenin knew that. He considered Trotsky, as we have seen, one of his men, one of the inevitable leaders of the Russian revolution. The relation between them in the first sessions of the convention is indicated in the fact that Trotsky received the nickname among the delegates of "Lenin's Big Stick."
But Trotsky was innocent as a child of the sharpening division which existed among the editors of "Iskra." He thought that they were a perfect and harmonious intellectual family. His first speech,at the convention, which was greeted with storms of applause, was a defense of the proposal to "confirm" this journal as the central organ of the new party. It was a brilliant summing up of the revolutionary history of the preceding decade, a demonstration of the achievement of "Iskra" and a warm, glowing, youthful, wholesale tribute to it and to its editors without distinction.
"It is not only the name that we confirm today," he cried, "it is the banner, the banner around which in actual fact our party united!"
That was the mood in which Trotsky attended the convention—a mood of ardent and indiscriminating admiration for this sacred group, who were assembling the real Marxians—the scientific fighters, as he thought—who would go ahead and achieve the Russian revolution: Plechanov, the great, sharp-minded scholar and father of Russian Marxism; Vera Zassulitch, the heroine of the Terror, who had shot the czar's prime minister for having her comrades flogged and yet afterward had become a Marxist; Martov, the most fluent and capable revolutionary journalist in Russia; Axelrod, for whose "sincere and simple" hospitality Trotsky still has a word of appreciation in his little book about those times; and Lenin, who was already the dominant figure in the group. It is no wonder that Trotsky was carried away with admiration for this galaxy and unable to consider the possibility of a serious discord among them.
"I swallowed 'Iskra' whole," he says, "and it was alien to me, and even a kind of inwardly hostile thought, to seek in it, or its editors, any different tendencies, shades, influences.
"I remember I noticed that certain leading articles and feuilletons in 'Iskra,' although they were not signed, employed the pronoun 'I':'In such a number I said'; 'I already spoke of this in such and such a number,' etc. I asked whose these articles were. They proved to be all Lenin's. In conversation with him I remarked that in my opinion it was awkward from a literary standpoint to use the pronoun 'I' in unsigned articles.
" 'Why awkward?' he asked with interest, supposing perhaps that I was not expressing my own or a casual opinion.
"'Oh, it just seems so,' I answered vaguely, for I had no clearly defined thoughts on the matter.
"'I don't find it so,' Lenin said, and smiled in a kind of enigmatic way.... The signalizing of his articles, although they were not signed, was a measure of insurance for his line of thought, due to a lack of confidence in that of his closest colleagues."

 Now, if you will add to this mood of Trotsky —the wholesale devotion to a solidarity which did not exist—the fact that he lived with Martov and Zassulitch, and all his unconscious growth was under their influence, while his meetings with Vladimir Ilych were "something of a little event," you will begin to understand imaginatively why he sided with the Mensheviks at the beginning of that split. His own character was wholly Bolshevik, and he had faith in his friends. He had faith in people that seemed to be like him—in the general run of bourgeois intellectuals who become "sincere Marxists.'!
He was, and is, a bad psychologist in so far as psychology means a penetrating sensitiveness to the dispositions of others. He felt in the first place that Lenin was making a great to-do about a matter of no vital consequence. He opposed Lenin on the floor of the convention in this spirit, and with a very poor speech. And then afterward, when Lenin's break with Martov took a personal form, he was personally incensed. He saw that sacred solidarity of "Iskra" breaking down, and he saw Lenin, in what seemed a wantonly dictatorial spirit, breaking it down.
Maxim Litvinov told me that Trotsky~ came to him in Geneva during the period after the convention, seeking to win him over to the position of the Mensheviks, and the principal burden of his argument was that "Lenin had insulted Martov." Trotsky was young then; he was only twenty-four. And proud people who are full of self-confidence grow up very slowly. A humble man might have been older at twenty.
The split arose specifically upon the adoption of the first paragraph of the constitution of the party; The paragraph offered by Lenin proposed that only those should be considered members of the party who "recognize the program and support the party, not only financially, but by personal participation in one of its organizations." Martov wanted to substitute for "personal participation" the "more elastic" idea of "regular cooperation with" the party, "under the control" of one of its organizations. Trotsky regarded this distinction, just as the uninitiated reader doubtless will, as a matter of no great importance, and he took the side of Martov.
"I am far from giving the constitution a mystic significance," he said. "Lenin ... wants to make it a constricting noose for those politically corrupt and corrupting denizens of the 'cultured circles' who call themselves Social-Democrats in order to assemble the youth and turn them over to Peter Struve. Believe me, comrades, I would be the first to grasp any formula which would be a noose for these ladies and gentlemen.... But what is to prevent them from entering into any broad party organization? ... And what is the sense, I say, in restricting the rights of those solitary intellectuals who stand on the principles of the party program and do service in solitude under the guidance of the organization?"
That was the character of Trotsky's first opposition to Lenin. His enemies like to quote this remark about "solitary intellectuals" and declare that it reveals a "knightly anarchism" which is organically unable to reconcile itself to the narrow frame of organization and party discipline. The real psychology of Trotsky's reaction was exactly opposite to that. His arguments in this speech were simply careless and entirely beside the point, and they show no reason for his subsequent emotional and dogged opposition to Lenin. The reason for that was his passionate and loyal devotion to the solidarity of "Iskra." If he had not had that feeling, which was essentially a feeling for organization and not an individualistic feeling, he would never have been carried out of his course—the course indicated by his own previous speeches and articles in "Iskra"—by the mere accident of personal association. And if he had not had in his mind, all through the years of his political isolation, his notorious "standing alone," the idea and the belief that the true party consisted of the sincere revolutionists in both these groups, he would not have stood alone. His position was one of stubborn loyalty to the true party as he erroneously but realistically conceived it—the party which would actually unite and actually lead the revolution.
It is noticeable that more than once at this convention Lenin spoke immediately after Trotsky, and although he had older and weightier authorities to deal with he gave his best arguments in answer to this youth. And he always answered him gently, too, and very teachingly.
Indeed, I don't know any better way in which to teach the reader what he ought to know about the origin of Bolshevism than by quoting a passage from one of Lenin's answers to Trotsky:
"Coming now to the essence of the matter, I will say that Comrade Trotsky ... missed the nub of the whole question. He talked of the intelligentsia and the workers, the class point of view and the mass movement, but failed to consider one fundamental point: Does my formula broaden or narrow the conception of a party member? If he had put himself that question, he might easily have seen that my formula narrows the conception, and Martov's broadens it, being distinguished (as Martov himself truly said) by 'elasticity.' Now it is exactly 'elasticity,' in such a period of party life as this we are living through, which opens the door for all kinds of dispersing, wavering and opportunistic elements. ...
"The root mistake of those who stand for the formula of Comrade Martov consists in their ignoring one of the prime evils of our party life, and not only ignoring but glorifying it. That evil consists in this: That in an atmosphere of almost universal political dissatisfaction and under conditions of complete secrecy in our work, the concentration of the greater part of our activity in narrow underground circles and even personal conversations, it is to the last degree difficult and well-nigh impossible to distinguish the gabblers from the workers. ... Better that ten workers should not call themselves members of the party (real workers are not so eager for position) than that one gabbler should have the right and the opportunity to be a party member. There is the principle which seems to me irrefutable, and which compels me to fight against Martov..."
Lenin was forming a party of leaders, the vanguard of a revolutionary class, and he knew by some natural miracle of wisdom that more than half of those who offered themselves for membership would be waging war against him when the day of action came. He knew moreover that Trotsky would not. That was why he concentrated such a wealth of fatherly-spoken counsel upon him in the convention. And that was why, when Trotsky went for some months into the camp of the Mensheviks, Lenin never lost confidence in him, never broke with him, as he did with everyone who he believed had realty gone over, consciously or unconsciously, to the side of the enemy.
And through all the long years when Trotsky stood between the two "factions," trying boldly and foolishly to unite them and saying many injurious and erroneous things about Lenin's policy, Lenin never responded to him in a way that would seriously injure his prestige. He never ceased to believe in him. He never ceased to love him with the confident admiration of a comrade in arms. Trotsky received a letter from Lenin's wife the week after Lenin died, which testifies to the personal side of this assertion.
"And I want to tell you this," she said, "the relation which was formed between Vladimir Ilych and you, when you came to us in London from Siberia, never changed with him to the day of his death."
That the political accord between Lenin and Trotsky was also as close at the end as it was at the beginning of their friendship, is known to everybody who has access to political information in Moscow. Lenin offered to Trotsky, when he first fell sick, the position of acting head of the government, which was subsequently given—because of Trotsky's own decision—to Rykov. Three times during his illness Lenin appealed to Trotsky to defend his policies in the party executive in opposition to an opposing group. Once he appealed to him to compel the party organ, "Pravda," to publish an article of his which they withheld because it fiercely criticised one of the institutions organized by this group—an article that has since become a guiding document for the party. And in the weeks preceding his last serious illness Lenin wrote a letter to the party convention, shrewdly characterizing the different party leaders and expressly designating Trotsky as the man in whom he had the most confidence when faced with the prospect of his own death.

Eastman Internet Archive



Trotsky-ch08



Leon Trotsky:
The Portrait of a Youth

Chapter VIII:
 The Summons of Lenin


A SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC party had been formed in Russia while Trotsky was fighting lice in the prison of Kherzon. But that party was little more than a constitution and manifesto. Practically all the delegates to the first convention had been arrested, as well as all the leading workers all over Russia. There remained merely the idea of a Marxian party, and widely scattered little groups of people, in jail, in exile, in hiding, ardently debating the problems of its tactics.
They were debating two questions in particular. One was whether the party should explicitly and immediately advocate a political struggle culminating in the overthrow of the czar, or whether it should confine its attention to the economic struggle of the workers, postponing the political issue or leaving it in the hands of the bourgeoisie. Upon this question Trotsky had already taken his stand in the Nikolaev days. He had no instinct for postponement. The revolution is political as well as economic, he said, and its first task is to overthrow the czar.
The other great question of debate among those Marxians was whether the party ought to be a centralized organization, commanded by its executive committee as an army is by its general staff, or whether it ought to be a very democratic federation of local groups with their own independent treasury and autonomous executive. Upon this question, in the Nikolaev days, Trotsky had taken the impractical view. His instincts were democratic, and as we have seen he was a rather Utopian conspirator.
But experience and reflection and his long study of Marxism had made him wiser. He argued against these diluters of the revolution now—the "Economists" as they were called—not only on the issue of political agitation, but also on the issue of centralization. When he visited Irkutsk in the spring of 1902 he made a speech before the Social-Democratic circle there which is still remembered as an impetuous assault upon the weak, disintegrating and counter-revolutionary tendencies of this prevailing group. Trotsky had not only mastered the science of Marxism and the art of writing during his four years of peace, but he had taken long steps toward becoming a practical engineer of history, A Bolshevik.
Trotsky brought back with him from Irkutsk some copies of the new journal, "Iskra," in which Lenin was annihilating "Economism" with his sledge-hammer of logic and fact and calling for the organization of an "all-Russian organization of professional revolutionarists." It was a journal founded in London upon the initiative of Lenin, but with the cooperation of five other revolutionary leaders—Plechanov, Martov, Axelrod, Potriesov and Vera Zassulitch.
The foundation of that journal was a momentous event in the history of human culture, and its creeping into the little far-off Siberian city, after a year and a half of secret traveling, was a momentous event in Trotsky's life. He was restless already. He had finished his education. His trip to Irkutsk had been the expression of an impatient impulse, a feeling for the path that should lead him back into his life's work. Lenin showed him the path. An all Russian organization of professional revolutionarists—that was where he belonged. And it was in order to go to Lenin and put himself at the service of that organization that he made his escape from Siberia.
I am yours, my friends, I will be yours,
Ready for Labor and the sword,
So in our union there begin
 A living deed, and not a word!
Trotsky and Alexandra Lvovna lived in a little two-story house in Verkholensk, and in the evenings after they had put the babies to bed downstairs they went up into the second story to read and study. They went up a ladder and through a trap-door in the ceiling, and they closed the door after them. Every evening at about ten o'clock, while they sat there reading, this door would slowly rise from the floor, and the big, red-whiskered face and watery blue eyes of their police inspector would peer silently around the room and then silently disappear again as the door descended into place. This event always made Trotsky mad, and one night he jumped off his chair and gave a lunge with his foot at that disappearing face.
"Don't ever show your face above this floor again!" he said.
It was a preposterous thing to say, a command delivered in circumstances where a bribe would have been more appropriate. But Trotsky has a peculiar genius, as we have already observed, which consists in the fact that his commands are obeyed. That face never appeared above the floor again, and five days later Trotsky's absence from the village was discovered accidentally by the chief of police. Trotsky had ridden away, buried under the straw in a peasant's wagon, and now he was in Irkutsk, disguised and supplied with a passport and buying a railroad ticket to Samara.
Trotsky's passport, supplied by the underground organization at Irkutsk, was a carelessly forged blank which he himself had to fill out. It was a vain thing for safety, but it gave him the opportunity, which a great many people might enjoy, of choosing his own name. He could never be Leon Bronstein again in Russia —and moreover in the existing circumstances he could not be a Jew. For Jews, except as convicts and condemned exiles, were legally debarred by the czar's government from Siberia. Trotsky borrowed his name from the head keeper of the prison where he had lived in Odessa, and he chose it not only because he liked it, but because from the standpoint of race it seemed noncommittal.
Samara was the Russian headquarters for the distribution of "Iskra," and Trotsky carried a letter from the circle in Irliutsk to Glyeb Krizhanovsky, the head of the Russian organization. He presented it in the summer of 1902. To Krizhanovsky thus fell the task of deciding what Trotsky should do—whether he should travel to London and serve as a writer, or whether he should stay in Russia as an organizer. As Trotsky is probably both the best writer and the best organizer that the Socialist movement ever produced, this decision could not have been an easy one for Krizhanovsky.
He began by sending Trotsky on a mission of persuasion to Kiev and Poltava. He was to find centers there for the distribution of "Iskra" and local correspondents for the paper, and he was to establish an underground connection between these two cities and Samara. In Poltava there was a group of workers wavering between Economism and the policies of "Iskra," and a part of Trotsky's task was to win them over. He was to persuade them to send delegates to the coming convention of the party, for which the "Iskra" group were acting as an organizing committee. Trotsky fulfilled all these tasks with adequate success and without having to display his dubious passport, and he returned to Samara for further orders.
Kriehanovsky had decided in the meantime that Trotsky was a writer and should go to headquarters—a decision which he revoked soon after, and wrote to headquarters asking that Trotsky should be sent back to Russia as an organizer. He christened Trotsky with the party nickname of "Piero"—the Russian word for pen—and supplied him with a railroad ticket to the Austrian border, and enough money to get him thence to Zurich, where lived Axelrod, the nearest of the six editors of "Iskra."
On account of the imperfections of his passport Trotsky arranged his departure from Samara with a good deal of care. A young student named Soloviev, whose apartment he had shared, took his bags to the station and got on the train with them. The plan was that Soloviev should sit there in the car until the very last moment, when Trotsky would rush in with just barely time to catch the train, and then Soloviev would withdraw. Trotsky would thus be on board with his baggage without having had to linger in the station or pass slowly through the gates which were so well watched by the czar's police.
This plan worked admirably up to the point when Trotsky was supposed to rush in at the last moment and catch the train. At that point Trotsky was off in the by-streets taking a walk, having been told at the station that the train would be an hour late. He heard the whistle and ran all the way to the station; but he arrived just in time to see the train moving off and his friend Soloviev sitting among his bags in the middle of the track. He was trying to explain to a large public, including all the police officers and detectives in the station, just why he had jumped up and tumbled off the train the moment it started, with passengers, who naturally thought he was a maniac, hanging on to his coat tails. Trotsky sneaked out of the station and went home in a hurry. And after another evening of hilarious laughter with his friends in Samara, he left town without any elaborate preparations.
His trip was uneventful until he reached the little village of Kamenets Podolsk on the Austrian border, where revolutionists and revolutionary writings were smuggled in and out of Russia, along with other merchandise, by the poor Jewish trading population. The price for passing over a "comrade" was fixed and well understood. It was eleven rubles. Trotsky knew that the price was eleven rubles; nevertheless he paid twenty-five-not out of philanthropic intentions, but just because he is an "easy mark."
Whether it is a survival in him of the conscience of his childhood, when he used to feel guilty of the wealth of his parents, or whether it is merely his natural generosity, it is a fact that Trotsky can never be trusted to carry the money. He can not get through any form of polite hold-up work from anybody who does anything for him, with a cent in his pocket.
He knew quite well that the young student who engineered his transfer, kept him waiting two days in his bedroom while a mysterious cargo of "literature" was being passed over, merely in order to impress him with the momentousness of the enterprise. He knew quite well that he was carried across the river in a deep place on a man's back and given a good soaking in order further to impress him with the services he was paying for. He saw a place where he could have crossed the river wading only up to his knees.
And he knew that the old Jewish peasant with a horse and sulky and a rooster tied by the legs, who drove him at midnight into an Austrian village, entertained him in hoarse whispers with tales of the danger they were running, the probability of being shot when they crossed certain bridges, with the same commercial purpose. Just before they reached one of these most dangerous bridges, the old man went astray in the dark, and his wheel slipped into a ditch. The sulky tipped over, and he and Trotsky and the rooster were all dumped out into a mud puddle. The rooster was pinned under the wheel, and screamed and cackled hysterically.
"Kill him! Can't you kill him?" Trotsky whispered fiercely.
"I can't find him!" whispered the old man, groping about in the dark. "Besides I can't kill him—he has to be killed by a schocket."
Trotsky smiled grimly and helped the old man to right the sulky. The rooster continued to advertise their arrival at intervals all the way into town, but there was no shooting. There were no questions asked. There was no sign of life anywhere. All these things Trotsky observed and understood and commented upon within his own ironical mind.
But when it came to paying the money, he had no power of resistance. He gave each of these experts twice as much as he was supposed to and got on the train for Vienna without a cent left of what Krizhanovsky had given him for the journey to Zurich.
Trotsky was hungry when he arrived in Vienna, but he was not worried. His arrival was that of a Russian revolutionary leader escaping from Siberia, and his only problem was to make this momentous fact known to the leaders of the Austrian Social Democracy—to Victor Adler, for instance. That was the state of his feelings. You will never know Trotsky if you do not know what it is to feel important and absolutely self-confident. He managed to get hold of a copy of Victor Adler's paper, the Arbeiter Zeitung, without paying for it, and he managed after some wandering to arrive at the address printed on it.
A sedate and severe intellectual with two pairs of glasses on was coming down the stairs. It was Austerlitz, the editor-in-chief.
"Excuse me," said Trotsky in very bad German, "but I must see Comrade Adler."
The editor-in-chief paused and examined him through his glasses.
"The Herr Doktor?" he corrected.
"Yes."
"Impossible!" he exploded. "Impossible!"
"But let me explain who I am," said Trotsky. "I am a Russian revolutionist escaped from Siberia, and I am on my way——"
"It wouldn't make any difference if you came to announce that you had assassinated the czar, you can not see the Herr Doktor on Sunday!"
Trotsky managed to extract from Austerlitz the Herr Doktor's home address, however, and he presented himself there, subdued but not conquered. The doctor himself came to the door, and Trotsky recognized him from his pictures. He too was severe, and when Trotsky began to apologize for arriving uninvited on Sunday, he interrupted with an impatient:
"Ja Weiter, weiter!"
But there was kindness in his eyes, and while Trotsky was trying to find some German words to explain his situation, the doctor turned and called into the house:
"Katia!"
A young Russian girl appeared in answer to his call, and the doctor said:
"Now it will go better!"
It did go better. It went so well that Trotsky stayed some days in the house of Victor Adler, receiving quite as warm a welcome as his self-confidence had predicted and being supplied on his departure with twenty-five crowns for the rest of his journey to Zurich.
It was an ample sum. But again there were porters, there were conductors, waiters. There were panhandlers. There were bookstalls. And Trotsky arrived in Zurich once more without a cent in his pocket. He arrived in the middle of the night. ...
I remember the first impression I had of Trotsky's character. I got it from an American journalist, who told me that Trotsky was a "queer irresponsible sort of a guy," so very "communistic" that when he arrived in a strange town, he would go and knock at the door of the first house he saw and order the people to pay for his taxi and put him up! Trotsky is so entirely opposite to that, so punctilious about money matters, and with such a very keen sense of privacy too, that I wondered what was the source of the story.... I found it here. He took a taxicab that night in Zurich straight to Axelrod's house, routed him up at two o'clock in the morning and said:
"Please pay for the cab, and afterward I will explain to you what it is about."
There is something almost ludicrous in Trotsky's self-confidence. Those who do not like him call it self-importance. But that is not right, for it is an instinctive attitude, not a result of reflection. Trotsky has, to be sure, that sense of self and its rights and dignities that proud people have—a trait that goes better in a feudal than a proletarian society—but this does not mean that he thinks about his own importance. My opinion is that Trotsky thinks about himself very little. He does not like to think about himself. He tried to read a page of this book once and shoved it away in disgust.
"It makes me uncomfortable," he said.
In conversation with him my continual difficulty has been to get him to relate his own experiences and not tell me the life-stories of all his friends. I doubt if there are many famous people who, in the same circumstances, would reveal the same weakness.
Axelrod gave Trotsky some more money and started him on his way to London by way of Paris. It took Trotsky two months to get from Paris to London, and as we are describing him as a young man upon a pilgrimage of consecration it is necessary to pause a moment and explain this fact. There was always a colony of Russian revolutionary exiles in Paris, and in this colony, as elsewhere, "Iskra" had its own group.
This group had a kind of unofficial committee of welcome for new emigrants and exiles from Russia, and the head of this committee for the moment was Natalia Ivanovna Siedova. She was a strong-hearted, quiet girl with high cheekbones and eyes a little sad—a girl of noble birth, who had been a rebel since childhood. From a young ladies' boarding-school in Kharkov, where she had persuaded her whole class to refuse to attend prayers and to read Chernishevsky instead of the Bible, she had gone to Moscow University and from there to Geneva, seeking knowledge and revolutionary companionship. And in the circle surrounding Plechanov in Geneva she had found them both. She had become a member of the organization of "Iskra," and had already made one trip into Russia, carrying illegal literature, when Trotsky met her in Paris.
Her task of welcoming emigrants consisted chiefly of finding them cheap rooms to live in and leading them to the cheapest restaurants. And the room she had found for Trotsky was little more than a cupboard opening on an air-shaft. She had been arranging it for him, and was coming down the stairs when he met her. ...
I imagine there were enough romances in Trotsky's life at this period to occupy a really conscientious biographer for several chapters. He had lost all that diffidence concealed by roughness which characterized his boyish relations with girls—or he had retained just enough of it to make his charms most fatal. And he belonged, to judge by the fame which he retains in the minds of those who knew him then, to the school of Engels, and not of Marx, in this important matter. Therefore it is not a very significant fact that he fell in love with Natalia Ivanovna when he met her on the stairs coming down from his room on the air-shaft. But it is significant that he formed with her a friendship so deep and understanding that they have lived together all their lives, and that he loves her now.
Natalia Ivanovna is not Trotsky's wife, if you have a perfectly legal American mind, for Trotsky was never divorced from Alexandra Lvovna, who still uses the name of Bronstein. Natalia Ivanovna is Trotsky's best and dearest friend, his daily companion. She is the mother of his sons. ... And to sum up a number of things that are not the business of a contemporary biographer — Alexandra Lvovna is also his friend.

Read next chapter | Eastman Internet Archive



Trotsky-ch04



Leon Trotsky:
The Portrait of a Youth

Chapter IV:
 Love and Marxism


Trotsky consented to visit his father "as a guest" during the summer after his graduation. It was the summer of 1896. And during this stormy visit the forces of common sense made their last stand. Trotsky was alone in the field, and his father moved up his reserves in the shape of a prosperous but "liberal" uncle from Odessa. Here was a man who could "sympathize with the aspirations of the working man," but had made his own way, in spite of this sympathy, to the head of a good-sized boiler factory. He was the kind of man who is chosen to "represent the public" on an arbitration board, and his function here seems to have been to "see Leon's point of view" and then lead him by gentle steps back into the path of tradition.
What he did see was that Leon's instinct for revolt against tyranny, born in a baby's protest against this father, could never be conquered or lulled to sleep on the original battlefield.
"Get the boy out of the house and stop arguing with him," was his advice. "The more you insist, the more determined he is."
And so it was arranged between them—at least Trotsky believes it was arranged—that his uncle should stumble in upon one of the daily scenes of battle and offer a practical suggestion along this line.
Trotsky had just announced "again and for the last time": "Very well, I will live my own life!" And he stood there beating off the fiftieth assault of the old man's intemperate will.
"Is it really necessary," said his uncle, "to settle this question all at once? Suppose you come with me to Odessa. My wife will be staying on here for a while, and we can live together in my apartment. There is a mathematical faculty at the university, and you can attend some lectures there—or not, just as you wish—and take your time making up your mind."
Trotsky accepted this proposition—not without a mental note to the effect that they were clever, but he could be as clever as they. He wanted to get out of the house, too. He wanted to get into the world where he would be free to consider a problem more engrossing to him than the problem of his personal career. He might study mathematics or not; but what was to be the future course of the Russian revolution? That was the state of mind in which he left home again, during that August or September, to go and live in Odessa with his uncle.
Trotsky did attend some lectures at the mathematical faculty. His gifts in this direction were enough to tempt him. An engineer in Petrograd, the Technical Director of the Baltic Shipyards, who went to school with Trotsky, described to me the superiority of those gifts. He is a friend of the revolution and proud of his playmate, but he could not keep back a sigh of regret that such an engineer had been lost to the profession. A lightning aptitude for mathematics, a restless constructive imagination, a commanding personality—and then a father with plenty of land, plenty of money, and a monumental ambition to build—it is indeed a miracle that Trotsky did not become an engineer. And in order to understand the unique thing that he did become, it is well to bear in mind this original propensity.
Trotsky even went to call one evening upon the professor of mathematics and open the question of a career in that science for himself. He was cordially welcomed, and the idea enthusiastically endorsed, and he came down the steps thinking :
"How pleasant, and what a pity to waste his time!"
He was wasting his uncle's time, too—talking all evening about Napoleon and about Tolstoi and about Julius Caesar and about whether the value in his uncle's goods was all created by the workers-a metaphysical question which for some reason people think they have to settle before they can decide whether to revolutionize this world or not. He was supporting here the view of Karl Marx, although perhaps he did not know it, and his uncle was supporting the view of the head of a boiler factory. And behind this view there was also another relative—at least a relative of his uncle—a more cocksure philistine who had amassed a little fortune in the vicinity of Minsk.
"Oh, we all had these ideas in our youth," he said. "Just wait ten years. I'll bet you a kopek that in ten years you will be laughing at all these ideas."
"I don't care to bring my ideas into relation with your kopeks!" Trotsky said.
I wonder how many revolutions will be required before grown-up people learn not to say to children, "I had those same ideas when I was your age." What made it so shameless for Trotsky to waste his uncle's time in these ideological arguments, was that he was employing his own time in organizing revolutionary "circles" among the workers in his uncle's factory. His uncle knew this, but he never said anything about it. He had taken the job of being a "liberal," and he held to it—until, by the grace of God, his wife came back for the winter, when of course Trotsky moved out.
He went to stay again for a while with the Spencers, earning his living as a teacher, studying a little at the university, playing a good deal and very jovially with his friends and cousins in the evening, but satisfying both the practical and the romantic sides of his nature in the illegal organization of those revolutionary circles.
They were the most amateur organizations you can imagine. Five, seven, or ten persons would come together secretly in somebody's apartment, and they would talk. They would talk about the pressing necessity of overthrowing the czar, establishing a republic, securing freedom of speech, press and assemblage, and calling a strike.
In particular they would talk about the necessity of calling a strike—for some instinct told them that those other necessities, although so pressing, were somewhat old-fashioned. They must call a strike; there was no question about that. But just what to do with the strike after it came, or what relation it might bear to a revolution of the Russian peasantry against the tyranny of the czar and the landlords—upon these points they were not at all clear. They had a "program," however. Somebody showed it a little later to Plechanov in Switzerland, and he laughed.
"They must be children," he said.
They were children, and the most childlike among them in some ways was their leader, around whose radiance they moved as energetically and aimlessly as planets. There never was a more beautiful, there never was a more obviously powerful and startling youth. Trotsky was not yet troubled with any modesty of demeanor. His incomparable ability and his arrant force of character were continually in view.
And so also were his revolutionary intentions. A good policeman would have arrested him on sight. The big shock of uncombed curly black hair, the shirt unbuttoned at the neck, the suit a little ostentatiously old and the shoes ostentatiously dusty, but the person delicately clean, the carriage arrogant, and the tongue as cultivated as it was bold and full of the brag of its extreme opinions—he was too obviously the rich man's son going wrong.
And he was intolerant of opposition, too, and used his terrible charm and facility not only to attract followers but to beat off rivals. He had to be the center of every circle and the source of knowledge, even though he had never read a revolutionary book and his mind was a mere glittering resume of radical magazine articles. To critical eyes, even within those circles of admiration, it seemed doubtful if there was anything more stable here than extreme youth and a romantic taste for outlawry and idealistic venture.
Trotsky sacrificed a great deal to that adventure. He abandoned his studies at the university. He gave all the money he could earn above a simple living. He sat up all night at those meetings, fervently debating, fervently teaching what he knew nothing about. In consequence he came so often late to the school where he earned his living that he was called before the directors, and a series of conditions were laid down to him, concluding with the suggestion that he should cut his hair and trim himself up like a gentleman. This last condition touched the heart of his "adventure," and he gave up the job.
It was not "serious revolutionary activity," to be sure. It was growth rather than activity. But it was serious enough to attract the attention of the police, or at least so his more cautious comrades assured him. He remains unconvinced of this, but after long disputation, yielding to their urgent advice, he decided to move. On the last boat that sailed down the coast that winter, breaking its way through the December ice, he went back to Nikolaev. He took an izvostchik from the port out through the cold to Svigofsky's garden, and he borrowed the money when he got there to pay for it.
Just what Trotsky was going to do here in Nikolaev, aside from earning his meager living as a tutor, was uncertain. He was still valiantly resisting the Marxian theory. He was still defending his "individuality" and the divine importance of "critical thought," and, as a logical although somewhat remote corollary, the divine right of the Russian peasant to conduct the Russian revolution. But he had not taken the trouble to look in the eyes of a peasant, and he had in fact been already at work as an agitator among the industrial workers.
His practical intuitions were in advance of his intellectual philosophy. He was a Narodnik in theory and in the moral emotions which controlled his speech, but as a general and a born man of action he had already placed himself where the great forces were to be deployed.
Perhaps it was doubt which led him to Nikolaev, a desire to consult again the friends who had first introduced him to the revolution. Perhaps he had already some dim idea of creating an organization among the workers in the factories of Nikolaev. Perhaps that passionate antagonism between him and Alexandra Lvovna played a part in his going. At any rate the first notable thing that he did upon his arrival was not to organize the workers in the factories, but to organize a new onslaught upon this lonely d implacable Marxist.
It was one of those elaborate and not usually very humorous things which we call "practical jokes." And it was operated in the following fashion: Not long after Trotsky's arrival in Nikolaev, and before Alexandra Lvovna had seen him, Svigofsky arrived at her house to congratulate her.
"Did you know," he said, "that Leon Davidovitch has become a Marxist?"
"Oh, don't tell me that," she replied, laughing. "If you want to fool me tell me something I can believe."
"No, it is true," he answered. "He has been doing a lot of reading in Odessa, and he has turned round completely."
Alexandra Lvovna was suspicious, but as she met other members of the group and they all confirmed this joyful piece of news she began more than half to believe it. She believed it in so far at least as to accept the invitation to a New Year's party at Svigofsky's garden, and that was all that was necessary for the purpose of this historic joke.
She found that the gloominess had all disappeared from Leon Davidovitch's bearing, and the sarcasm too. He was glad and friendly in his greeting, and to her question, "What is this they are saying about you?" he replied, "Yes, yes—absolutely—you don't believe it?"
She did believe it then. But she felt a certain levity in the group, such as usually accompanied their opposition to her more serious nature, and she was not comfortable.
At midnight they all took their seats at the table. A little wine had been provided for this exceptional occasion, and as the clock struck twelve Trotsky arose with his glass and proposed:
"A curse upon all Marxists, and upon those who want to bring dryness and hardness into all the relations of life."
There was more of that speech, but Alexandra Lvovna did not hear it. She pushed back her chair and walked out of the room.
Svigofsky came running after her, begging her pardon and urging her not to be angry.
"You know it was only a little joke!" he pleaded as she was putting on her things.
"I know you would sell your friend and your father for a joke," she said. "There are some things too important to joke about. And you can tell Bronstein that he needn't speak to me again. I don't want to have anything more to do with him."
It was a threat which she made good for several weeks, trying in the meanwhile to gather money to go to St. Petersburg, where she could escape from this magnetic tormentor and work among people who shared her beliefs.
The next thing that Trotsky organized in Nikolaev was a "series of lectures." There is some disagreement about the extent of this series. Some think there was only one lecture, and others think there were two. But at any rate the prospectus was very generous. Each of the dwellers in the garden was to take a certain sphere of "Universal Knowledge" and illuminate it with a discourse, to which the general public would be invited, and which would be followed by an open debate.
Trotsky very generously offered to take as his sphere both "Sociology" and the "Philosophy of History," two subjects about which he knew absolutely nothing at all. He also graciously offered to deliver the first discourse, and he took pains to invite to his discourse the most learned people in the town, including several who did know something about sociology and the philosophy of history.
Now Trotsky had, like all richly intellectual people who can think rapidly, a wonderful gift of bluff. He could catch so quickly the drift of an opponent's thought, with all its mental implications, that it was very difficult to overwhelm him with mere knowledge. He seemed to have the knowledge himself, and a little more too in the same line, before you could get it out of your mouth.
He was not unaware of this gift. Once at a mutiny in Odessa he gave quite an extended report of an article which he had merely heard about; he was persuaded afterward to read the article, and said, "Well, I see he agrees with me !"
What Trotsky was not aware of was the enormous difference between conversation and a lecture. He had no idea what it would be to stand up there all alone in Universal Knowledge with nobody to start him off, nobody to keep him going, nobody to stop him—not a word from anybody but himself.
There is no record of what Trotsky said in this first lecture. No one could possibly have made a record of it. He quoted Gumplowitz and he quoted John Stuart Mill—that much is remembered—and he got himself so terribly wound up in a sliding network of unintelligible big words and receding hopes of ideas that his audience sat there bathed in sympathetic perspiration, wondering if there was any way under the sun they could help him to stop. When he finally did stop and the subject was opened for general debate nobody said a word. Nobody knew what the subject was!
Trotsky walked across the room and threw himself face down in the pillow on the divan. He was soaking with sweat, and his shoulders heaved with shame, and everybody loved him. That was a very important moment in his life. He was born with too much self-confidence, not with too little.
Being delayed in Nikolaev by the lack of funds, Alexandra Lvovna could not very web help falling again into the hands of this indefatigable organizer. This time it was a revolution in the public library that was under consideration. It seems that the directors of the library were elected by the members, who had to pay six rubles each for a membership card; and the mere readers, the general democratic public who came there to use the books, had no voice. The books and magazines were becoming more and more exclusive and aristocratic, and Trotsky decided that nothing but a complete overthrow and seizure of power by the general reader would answer the demands of social justice.
For this purpose it was necessary to arm the general reader with six rubles, and a meeting must be called to collect these rubles. Well, the best collector in town, as also the best and most intelligent lieutenant engineer in any sort of conspiratorial undertaking, was Alexandra Lvovna. We must hold the meeting at her house!
So Alexandra Lvovna was informed that the public library was about to be overturned and that the conspirators would assemble around her stove on a certain evening.
"I will be very glad," she said earnestly, "to do all that I can."
"It is only fair to tell you," continued the committee, "that Leon Davidovitch is one of us."
"Naturally," she said. "But this I consider a matter of public interest."
And so out of consideration for the public—who were to receive as rude a shock as they ever received in their lives—this private quarrel was again a little prorogued or suspended. To tell the truth Leon Davidovitch himself was not very proud of the New Year's party when he got ahead and looked back at it. He greeted Alexandra Lvovna with an apology, and Marx and Michaelofsky joined hands most cordially in kicking the "nice people of Nikolaev" out of control of the public library. A large fund was collected—more than half of it Trotsky's re-doubled earnings as a private tutor.
The annual meeting of the members was called, and the astonished directors, accustomed to a routine endorsement from a sleepy half-dozen, found themselves in the presence of a large and lively-whispering assembly. They listened to a proud, gay and presumptuous denunciation from a very young man in a blue workman's blouse and found themselves voted out without further ceremony. Svigofsky was elected director of the library, and various more or less "unsavory" personalities—such as Osipovitch, a Russian novelist who had done his time in Siberia—were elected to the board of trustees.

 The kind of bouquets that grew in this garden of Svigofsky's was becoming more and more obvious. It was becoming a matter of public comment and moreover people were drifting in there who did not really seem to "belong." An ignorant, narrow-faced young "engineer" named Shrenzel arrived in town, a man with an amazing faculty for revealing his ignorance about everything that interested him. He decided that he was a disciple of Svigofsky. He sat there listeniing with stupid intensity like a surprised rat while Trotsky made that midnight speech about Marxism, but he liked it very much and became a great and boresome friend of the orator.
Another indication of their notoriety was the attitude of the two men employed by Svigofsky to work in the garden. One day Trotsky, who was always educating when he was not organizing, put his hand on the shoulder of one of these men, asking whether he knew how to read and write. The man drew back foolishly and made a strange noise as though he were half-witted. Subsequently he recovered his wits and asked Trotsky:
"What is a Terrorist?"
Trotsky explained to him the ideas of the Terrorists—sympathetically, although he himself never believed in their methods.
Another day the younger boy asked Trotsky: "What is a Terrorist?"
And this older man answered explosively, as though he could not contain himself:
"A Terrorist is a brigand!"
A suspicion crossed Trotsky's mind that these men might be spies, but he forgot it again.
It was just at this inauspicious time—in the spring of 1897—that Trotsky decided to undertake the illegal organization of the workers in the factories of Nikolaev. Gregory, the younger of the Sokolofsky brothers, was the one who proposed it. The fruit trees in Svigofsky's garden were showing the first green-tinted buds, and the Rind was coming wet and soft out of the south. The exhilarating miracle of regeneration was all around them while they talked, and they talked with a new sense of the reality of the great event to come.
A new excitement, a new force, was perceptible in the journals that they read. It had been a year of revolutionary awakening, the year of the enormous strikes of the textile workers in St. Petersburg, conducted by the "Union of Struggle," which acknowledged the leadership of Marx and Plechanov. Similar unions had arisen in Kiev, in Moscow, Kharkov, Ekaterinoslav. It was the year when Lenin, at the head of the Petrograd union, first won the confidence of the Russian workers and was shipped off to Siberia by the czar.
It was not a year when a born commander of men, who believed in the liberation of Russia from all her oppressors, could be content to play the game of personality, to organize lectures and intellectual parties, to distribute little innocuous books of culture or even to go off secretly and write a great revolutionary drama, as he and Ilia Sokolovsky had been doing. It was a year for action. All the years thereafter would be-all the minutes of the years—for action. "Faith without works is death"—that was the motto which Trotsky chose for himself in these decisive days.
His good friend Spencer saw him and asked him if it would not be a good idea to finish his education first and then take up the work of agitation.
"There isn't time," he said.
The Marxian propaganda that was finally searching the workers in these days had been born in Russia four years after Trotsky was born. In the year of Trotsky's birth, 1879, Plechanov's philosophic opposition split the old Narodnik organization, "Land and Liberty," into two groups—the Narodnaia Volia, which consecrated itself to a campaign of individual terrorism, and the Tchorny Perediel, which still rested its hopes more or less upon "the People." The Terrorists carried off all the honors of this split, rising thereafter to the height of their power, and becoming upon the assassination of the Czar Alexander in 1881 the most famous revolutionary organization in the world.
But the reaction was swift and terrible. Hanged, exiled and murdered at hard labor by the government of Alexander the Third, the leaders disappeared. The followers lost faith, and Russia entered into one of her blackest periods of political reaction and literary mysticism or despair. It is the period epitomized in Tchekov's writings—a period of the dead hopes of a most heroic movement.
In the mold of these dead hopes the Marxian seed was planted. Plechanov had been driven abroad by the czar's police, and in exile he had studied scientific Socialism. In 1883 he founded in Switzerland a little group called "The Emancipation of Labor," and they began pouring a thin stream of Marxian literature into Russia. In 1885 they issued a "Prospectus of a Program for the Russian Social Democracy," demanding that the workers, winning the sympathy of the poorer peasants, should seize the political power and establish a "temporary rulership of the working class." This still seemed a preposterous suggestion, and might indeed have remained so, had not history taken the pains to prove it.
But factories were building by thousands in Russia in the years that followed; strikes were multiplying; the czar's Cossacks were herding the workers hack to their tools, driving in with the thongs of their whips the truths that Plechanov was telling. It was inevitable that the Russian revolution should revive. It was inevitable that Marxians should play in that revival the leading role that had been played by the champions of personality and the peasant in the '70's. It was inevitable that a man born in Russia with the birth of the Marxian movement, having the intellectual equipment of an engineer and turning from the mechanical to the social field of engineering, should turn to Marxism.
Trotsky could get no support from Svigofsky in what he had decided to do. Svigofsky had discovered that the elder of the two workmen employed in his garden was to be seen on the other side of the town dressed in the uniform of a policeman decorated for service. He told hem that they would succeed in nothing but attracting a provocateur and landing themselves in jail. He criticized their opinions and advised against their plans.
Trotsky had only his young friend Sokolofsky with him. He had need of maturity; he had need of a counselor, clear-minded as well as courageous. He knew all along where she was to be found.
"What do you say we go seriously to work," he said, "organizing the men in the factories?"
Alexandra Lvovna agreed. She did not say anything about the change in his theoretical position.
"I thought I would let him find that out for himself," she says.
A long time afterward when they were living together in Siberia she asked him how "a person so sympathetic and sensitive in all the relations of life, could play such a crude trick as he had played on that New Year's day." He told her that he had come back from Odessa with certain doubts in his mind about Marxism, and when he expressed these doubts Svigofsky, instead of criticizing or counseling, had ridiculed him and taunted him with her influence. Then they had cooked up together this heroic last effort to save his soul from the truth.

Read next chapter | Eastman Internet Archive



Trotsky-ch07



Leon Trotsky:
The Portrait of a Youth

Chapter VII:
 Condemned to Write


We have an idea that to be "sent to Siberia" is the last extreme of human torture, but our idea is based upon the experience of hard-labor convicts, not of administrative exiles. Trotsky's life in that chilly village to which he was condemned as an enemy of the state was far richer than that of most of the inhabitants condemned there by the accident of their birth. It was a simple and romantically tranquil life, the kind you think of and wish, for a moment, you might live when you see out of the car window some picturesque little thatched cabin with roses or a snowdrift at the window. He was a generous and laughter-loving husband and companion, the affectionate father of two baby daughters, skillful with a broom, a firmhanded dish-washer, an early wood-chopper, and expert in the art of keeping the cook sober until after dinner-time. The cook was a fellow exile, Miksha, a political-minded Polish shoemaker in real life, but in this drama of the revolution a traveler lost in the arctic snow with nothing left about him but charming good humor and a terrible thirst.
Ust-Kut was the name of the village to which Trotsky and Alexandra Lvovna were exiled; but after a year there they secured permission to move southward to Nizhnie-Ilinsk, where a physician was available. And then after six months they moved again to the larger town of Verkholensk. But in all these places they lived the same tranquil life, the life of a Siberian peasant family, softened by the receipt of nineteen rubles a month from the government, enriched by the study of science and the world's literature and enlivened by the periodic arrival of mail and newspapers and the occasional passage of comrades and fellow-rebels, traveling north with resignation or traveling south with eagerness.
Among these passers-by Trotsky remembers seeing for the first time A. M. Uritsky, later the President of the Petrograd Soviet, who was murdered in the counter-revolution in 1918—"Uritsky with his unchanging, tranquil, kindly smile." Here too he first saw Dzerzhinsky, the man who was chosen because of the terrible strength and purity of his motives to be the head of the Extraordinary Revolutionary Committee —the Saint of Terror.
"At night around the fire," said Trotsky, "he read us his poem in the Polish language. I cannot remember the poem, but the face of that youth, so extraordinarily beautiful in its spirituality against a background of firelight, is still clear in my memory."
These were beautiful moments. But a more reliable excitement was the arrival of a three-horse sleigh which brought mail and newspapers from the capital. It came once or twice a week in good weather; when roads were bad, once a month, or once every month and a half. And the exiles dived into these newspapers like rabbits into a lettuce-patch, devouring them line by line in greedy silence. And if the sleigh did not arrive when it was due, or if it arrived too late in the evening for immediate distribution, then they trudged home and sat round the table, solemn and angry.
One evening when everybody else had given up and gone to bed Trotsky put on his big boots and overcoat and walked back to the post-office for a last look. The sleigh was there—and moreover when he entered the door he passed the police captain coming out with a letter in his hand. The letter crept under his uniform as he went by; but Trotsky saw it and rushed on up to the door he had come out of and demanded his mail. The postmaster looked him over and refused.
"It's too late," he said.
Trotsky is one of those unreasonable beings who never give up the idea that things are supposed to be just. He raised a storm around that post-office more like a nobleman than a convict, denouncing the illegality of the discrimination, calling all Russian law and history to witness against it, and so badly frightening the obdurate postmaster that he went into court subsequently and accused Trotsky of "obstructing him in the fulfillment of his official duties." The court found Trotsky guilty and fined him three rubles, but he got away from Siberia leaving it unpaid—"among my many other debts," as he says, to "czarism."
Trotsky's chief debt to czarism at this period of his life is the perfection of his literary style. He just needed to be snowed up in a little Siberian village with nothing but paper and ink to entertain him. He had the one indispensable gift—what the books of rhetoric call "sincerity," although the sincerest rarely possess it—the ability to be oneself with a pen.
But an artist has to train himself up to the level of himself. And that is what Trotsky did here in these idle years at the expense of the imperial government. He had not been three weeks in Ust-Kut before he began trying to make literature out of the life there. He sent his first effort to a newspaper in Irkutsk called the "Eastern Review," and it was printed. It looked beautiful!
Trotsky was filled with excitement, and plunged headlong into the life of a literary artist. He read and studied the literature of the whole world, tasting its qualities in five different languages, copying out extracts, estimating, molding his own style as he wished to have it. All night long he would sit up at his table, writing, rewriting, rejecting, writing again, until he would have something in his hand at dawn that he could weigh and believe in.
He was not allured into thinking of himself as a great creative writer. He had perhaps too generous a gift of literary appreciation for that. He loved his heroes too well—loved Gogol too well. He thought of himself as a revolutionary journalist, as one whose art; would be pamphleteering, and his style a fighting style. But he was doing something, and he had to do it well, and so his penal rears in Siberia became years of the most refined and fervent growth.
You would have a hard time finding in Trotsky's "column" in the "Eastern Review" the fierce and rabid trouble-hunter that you perhaps believe him to be. What you find is a genial and humane essayist of the smilingly discursive type of Charles Lamb—or perhaps it would be better to say of the type of Heywood Broun. For Trotsky seems to have been one of the founders of that modern art of being a complete human being upon the editorial page of a newspaper.
"The reader will not complain against me," he says, "if in our future conversations I mix together in one all journalistic-literary forms and kinds; if the general 'guiding thought' subsisting ordinarily under control of the watchful eye of the editorial writer is illustrated with private facts, the publication of which constitutes the task of the correspondent; if personal observations upon the life of this or that rural corner are brought into relation with the authoritative printed opinions."
After some little explanation in this kind Trotsky proceeds to establish himself in that newspaper as the friend of its readers. He is a literary critic, a dramatic critic—if one can dramatically criticize a lantern-show in the town hall—a philosopher of domestic relations, of education, of art, poetry, feminism, morals and international politics—kindly, keen and humorous and not unpoetic, loving justice, loving truth, loving all kinds of excellence and not finding any topic either too momentous or too trivial for his acute judicial attention.
He tells you about the perplexities of a neighbor whose child got bit by a mad dog, and he tells you why Nietzsche found it necessary to transvaluate values. He commiserates the fate of lunatics in the country, and adds that doctors themselves are not much better off for company; suggests a county medical congress and enumerates its uses. He describes with boisterous irony a stereopticon lecture on the career of a great Russian general, meditates upon the uses of history and suggests that it would go better if they would raise the screen.
He surveys the feminist movement with sympathy, declares that its goal is to "break the icy rind of dull reserve surrounding women of the middle class and the timid distrust even of the most 'emancipated' male," and shows that he himself is only an emancipated male by declaring that it has already achieved that goal. He explains the failings of Gogol as a moral philosopher and pays an infinitely loving tribute to his truth-telling art. He finds Max Nordau "more broad-talking than deep, minutely envious and not stingy with energetic phrases." And Nietzsche, he says, is too cloudy and contradictory to be explained except by examining the social soil that produced him; he examines that soil and finds it "rotten, malignant and infected." Gorky he sets aside somewhat reluctantly—just as Gorky has now set himself aside—as a rebel and not a revolutionist. Gorky represents the revolt against society—says Trotsky in 1900 —not the revolt of the proletariat within it. His characters are down, not because they fell vanquished in the contemporary social struggle, but because they held themselves superior to all contemporary society and withdrew from it. They are in fact "supermen," and Gorky is akin to Nietzsche in his irrelevance to the social problem.
That perception—or that prophecy—will show to what extent Trotsky had mastered here at the age of twenty-two the intellectual and emotional technique of the coming revolution. He had found his equilibrium. You sometimes feel in reading these essays that they are a little too literary, a little bit "high-brow." But you never feel any of the overstrain of a youth who is trying to convince himself of something, or to vanquish his opponents with an inadequate weapon. He is very confident of his opinions—as behooves those who are learning to write—but he shows a mature and surprisingly gentle explicitness in expressing them.
He is cruel to those who are without mercy, and without mercy to those who are cynical. But the weak, the sentimental, the professorial, the trivial, he is content to understand. And he understands without dogma. He does not feel compelled, as do so many believers in a cause, to deny in the interest of his belief the fundamental variety of life's problems. Repressed by the censor and robbed of the possibility to write revolution, he is able to write of other things with force and enthusiasm.
"Reader," he cries in one place, "we must raise the banner of revolt!" But it is only the continual appearance of abominable translations that evokes this note of violence.
It is one of the strange dispensations of our pecuniary gods that so long as the editorial column expresses their interest with orthodox stupidity the book-reviews may be slightly intelligent. And Trotsky, like many another obscure clover of truth, availed himself of this circumstance in order to "put across" occasionally a fundamental political idea. His ideas were popular, and he was soon recognized and rewarded by the "Eastern Review" with three kopeks a line—a sum which made life a little easier on the banks of the Lena than the imperial government had ever intended it to be. He received, moreover, at the expense of his newspaper, contemporary journals and reviews from St. Petersburg, and was thus able to keep in lively touch with the events of the world.
In 1902 he had a meeting with his editor and received an offer of sixty rubles a month as a regular contributor of feuilletons. He came back to Verkholensk amused and triumphant and prepared to enjoy to the full his extraordinary genius for being swindled by kind friends. But the joy was short. He had that great fortune only long enough to start spending it. In the place of his first pay-envelope came the news that the imperial censor at St. Petersburg had written to the editor stating that the contributions signed by "Antid-Otto" would no longer be received for consideration. The editor was regretfully compelled to withdraw his offer, and Trotsky's first literary career came to an end.
In one of his contributions he described the domestic life which he encountered in his first home in Siberia. It will give you an impression of his style as a novice in literature.
FROM A RURAL DIARY
Province of Irkutsk; Department of Polynsk;
 Village Urgutsk.
 Male population .. 279
 Female population. 290
 Domiciles ....... 91
Such is the location of our village, and its "poll capacity" as our assistant town-clerk expresses it on wooden boards attached to posts at the two ends of the town.
Urgutsk is to a certain degree an administrative center, and thus the "ruling classes" are fairly well represented—the justice of the peace, a college man, still young, with very slender mustaches and perfumed pocket-handkerchief ; the commissioner of agriculture; the police captain; the revenue officer, a small, fine-edged man of the type that is portrayed on boxes of shoe-polish...
Upon the spiritual side: Our pastor, a bustling Siberian priest who devotes much of his energy to horsetrading and other forms of commerce and is in general addicted to this world and its vanities; the deacon, who teaches the children in our parochial school and expresses himself concerning our local correspondent—alas, we have one—as follows: "And that pest has been scribbling again!" finally the psalm-reader, a sentimental and given to telling his lady friends how he "hit it up with the boys" on the road from Chiliabinsk: "Didn't we hit it up though!" he says, smacking his lips. "Simply delightful! I got so gay that— But you must pardon my frankness!"
In the absence of the priest this psalm-reader once summoned "the world" with the sound of the church bell in order to raffle off his share of the clerical meadow-grass.
The son-in-law and chief assistant of the county clerk, who formerly fulfilled two positions, and that of psalm-reader among them, reported this incident at the county seat (Deacon asserts that "the pest" reported it) and the ecclesiastical superintendent issued an ungracious paper: "In consideration of this misapplication of the sacred reverberations——"
I live with a well-to-do moujik who, they say, made his money dishonestly. I do not know whether that is true or not, but I like him better than the other moujiks of Urgutsk. He is not so greedy, is unusually hospitable, carries himself with a certain dignity and is no fool. His wife is of like character. But they both drink to a degree unusual even in drunken Siberia.
"Everybody is at work in the harvest," says the little old lady—something in the nature of a twice-removed aunt, who is living out her life with our landlord—"but our folks are drinking and cannot stop." The old lady is already over eighty, but exactly how much over eighty she does not know; maybe it is five, maybe it is fifteen, years. She is small-sized, all shriveled up, with fingers half-clenched over a cane, a real grandmother of the kind that you see in pictures. Grandmother fully retains her sound sense, however, and does not keep telling us about "the good old days."
"In our time it was bad—terrible!" she says, looking past you and nodding her wrinkled head. "Look at them ! Look at these hands, what they are from work! For fifteen kopeks a day what didn't I do?—Terrible! Now it is better; life is easier. A little free money in the house. But they drink and drink. They ought to hold each other back. But they've lost the way; they drink all the time. Terrible !"
And then, leaning toward you, she continues in a kind of aggrieved whisper:
"And it's all her fault ! He drinks and sleeps it off, but he finds her drunk—nothing is warm in the house, nothing is cooked, nothing swept—he gets drunk again. Then she comes to, and he is sprawling drunk—and she goes and drinks again. So they can't stop."
Although from her words it is evident that the two of them figure in exactly identical roles, nevertheless the old lady always concludes that she is to blame.
"Quit it!" she says to the landlord. "Stop, I tell you ! You brought that hay worth a hundred rubles-three hundred versts you brought it, and there it lies out in the rain on the boats. The boss is drunk, and the workers just fool around. Everything is going to smash."
Then, changing her tone to one of compassion, the old lady continues:
"I know it is bitter for you! She drinks all the time; she is no housekeeper-good-for-nothing !"
And here the landlord himself, a tall moujik with twisty, dirty hair hanging over his face, sitting solemnly on a bench and only half sobered up, begins in a repentant, broken, whimpering voice:
"Yes, you might say that, gra'mother ... to drink that way. ... That hay now.... Well, you take a look at it, gra'mother.... Everlastingly drinking. I should think that would burn up the heart....You can't eat or drink.... Why, the gentleman himself had to fetch water from the river. ... I was jigged out of four twenty-five ruble notes.... Such things never happen. ... What shall we do with her, gra'mother? There the mere lies, dead drunk. How long, Maria, will you keep on drinking?" He turns suddenly on his wife. "I ask you !"
Here begins an ugly scene. The landlord drags his wife out of the cottage, and the old lady follows, slowly bringing forward one foot after the other, bending over, stretching out her left hand for equilibrium and feeling her way with a long, thin staff in her right hand. The landlord beats his wife ferociously, pronouncing a string of meaningless imprecations. His wife, still completely drunk, grabs with one hand at the old lady, who slowly falls.
I hear a senile cry:
"Oh, they are killing me! The brigands are killing me!"
I run out there and lift up the old lady, who steadily continues to assert that they are killing her. My presence embarrasses the landlord. He stands tall and disheveled with hands spread out helplessly, and after I have set the old lady on the bench begins to repeat:
"We dropped gra'mother.... Mister, lift gra'mother up....Please, mister, lift up....We dropped the old lady. You, please, mister, lift her up!"
After that the landlord disappears, to come back in about an hour completely drunk again. His wife employs this intermediate time by running to me in my room, putting in my hand a twenty-five ruble note—probably one of those stolen from the landlord. Intoxicated, bruised, her shirt torn and her breast naked, she begins to beseech me in a wailing, tearful-drunken voice:
"Be my own father! Go out, for the love of God, and buy me a little bottle."
All Urgutsk seems to me at this moment a drunken pit without exit, a prison surrounded with that stockade of jungle trees. ..

 Trotsky's pen is alive in these writings. They tempt you to say that the world lost in him a literary artist. The world found in him one genuinely creative man who could not be tempted away from action.
I am yours, my friends, I will be yours,
 Ready for labor and the sword,
 So in our union there begin
A living deed and not a word.
He quotes this from the poetry of Dobroliubov, and it tells his real thoughts better than anything else in these censored articles.

Read next chapter | Eastman Internet Archive



Trotsky-ch02



Leon Trotsky:
The Portrait of a Youth

Chapter II:
 A Moral Matter


THUS at the age of nine Trotsky arrived in a new home with new parents to take care of him—to try, that is, to keep him from studying too hard and rocking the baby to death. For these were apparently his two principal bad habits. The baby was only three weeks old when he arrived in the house, and he watched over her development with intense affection. He detected her first smile, he taught her to walk, he taught her to read.
She is a gay and lively young woman now, studying dramatic art in Moscow and cherishing like jewels the memory of his friendship and the little shreds of his letters that used to come to her from Siberia, torn and blotted by the czar's censor. Her mother and father are still living, too—kindly-quiet, poised, intelligent. You can hardly imagine a more wholesomely peaceful environment for this boy of too intense mental energy, who cared too intensely about; having things right.
To the mother his coming to their home was turning on a light. She can only tell you how his eyes shone, and how beautiful he was, and polite, and terribly clean, and always busy, and always merry, and how all the teachers in their school loved him, and everybody loved him. And if you ask her, just for the sake of the picture put in a little of the darker color, she will answer:
"I never saw him rude and I never saw him angry in my life. The worst trouble I had was that he was so terribly neat. I remember once he had a new suit, and we went out walking, and all the way he kept picking imaginary lint off that suit. I said to him, 'If you do that everybody will know that you have on a new suit.' But it made no difference. He had to have everything perfect.
"That is why he stood so high in drawing. The first time he brought me a sketch to show me, it was so accurate and complete that I thought it was one they had given him to copy. But then he always stood at the tap of the class in everything. He would always get hold of other books besides the ones they were supposed to study out of, and then he would read all about a subject, and most of the teachers would skip him when they were asking questions, for fear he would tell them something they didn't know.
"There was one teacher there who never would give a mark of five. 'Only God gets five!' he used to say. But he gave Leon five—he simply had to. Another boy tried his best to get that mark, but the teacher told him again, 'I don't give fives.'
"'You gave Bronstein five!' the boy said.
"'That's Bronstein!' the teacher answered."
It is a relief to know that Trotsky committed at least one sin in those days. He abstracted a few of Mr. Spencer's best books from the bookcase and sold them to buy candy. He did not want the candy, either; it was worse than that; he just wanted to take the books. That gave him a great feeling of independence. He remembers standing in a doorway a little way down the street, eating that candy rapidly and laboriously, as one gets rid of the unpleasant consequences of an indulgence.
In general, however, his life there in Odessa seemed to have been as virtuous and serene as Mrs. Spencer's happy memory of it. Spencer remembers that this serenity was in part the result of a personal reserve extraordinary in so young a child. "We did not really know what Leon was thinking about," he said. "I can only tell you two things: That during that time he had no interest in girls, and he had no interest in sports. He was a very clever child—not only in his books—but he was tactful. He knew that he had come into a strang family, and he knew how to behave. He was only ten years old, but he was self-contained and self-confident. Ads he had an extraordinary sense of duty that must have been instinctive. No one had to take charge of his training, no one had to worry about his lessons. He always did more than was expected him."
To this somewhat appalling perfection of Trotsky, as reported by teachers, guardians and the like admiring elders, must be added the further appalling fact that he liked it. He liked to excel everybody. It was not the pure thirst of knowledge that brought him those high marks; it was a thirst of high marks. Indeed he was not even content to excel his school-mates, but he would go and think up impossible questions that he knew even the teachers could not cope with, and then when they floundered hopelessly he very politely suggested the answer.
The Russians, whose language often shows a better psychology than ours, have a special word for this quality, distinguishing it on the one hand from ambition, and on the other hand from self-conceit. Trotsky had at this time no particular ambition, and he could not at any time be called conceited. He was exceedingly samoliubiv, and you will have to know what that word means if you want to understand him and appreciate the difficulties that he must have had, or life had, in disciplining his nature. It means a fierce eagerness to excel others, and an intemperate sensitiveness to a challenge, or to the presence of a challenging personality.
It is that set of electric springs in the nervous system which we cultivate by selective breeding in race-horses, and which might be called in English an instinct for rivalry. It makes them, you know, even when they are ambling along at a resting pace, keep at least one white eye backward along the track to see if there is anything in the field that considers itself an equal. It involves an alert awareness of self, and is upon the whole a very disagreeable trait—especially as it appears to those horses who were not bred for speed.
It is something of a problem, in view of these facts, to know why Trotsky was so well loved as he was by his playmates. I can not find anyone who will say that he stood apart because of his superior ability. He was a popular boy in school.
"Even the boys in the upper class," said one of them, "knew that in the first class there was this little boy, Leon Bronstein."
It was not because of any heroism on the playground; Trotsky's genius for excelling did not seem to function here. He did not play much-i in all his seven years in Odessa he never went rowing with the boys on the bay. And he was not much of a fighter either.
His first arrival in the school was signalized by an event very little suggesting the future commander of an army. He was all dressed up in a brand-new uniform—and Trotsky loves to be dressed up; he loves gloves and shapely costumes—all those things that are supposed to be incompatible with revolution. His uniform had yellow buttons and a yellow buckle at the belt and a cap with a blue peak and crossed golden palm-leaves with letters signifying the "St. Paul's School of Odessa."
"Those yellow buttons afforded me an indescribable delight," he told me, "and in general it seemed to me that upon my shoulders, or at least in my knapsack, rested the dignity of the whole school whose threshold I was about to cross for the first time. I advanced, I imagine; with majestic solemnity. There came to meet me one of the so-called 'street boys,' most likely a pupil from a work-shop—fourteen years old, if not more. I was nine.
"As we met, he stood still, looked me over from head to foot, cleared his throat deeply and spat on my sleeve. That was as unexpected as if a burnt-out meteor had fallen on me from a clear sky. Especially it seemed incomprehensible to me, that he could spit on that magnificent brand-new costume, which signified so profound a turning-point in my existence. After a complete stupefaction which lasted several seconds—the boy meanwhile going away to his friends—I began to wipe off the shameful spot with chestnut leaves. To my offender I said never a word—in the main, I judge, through utter bewilderment, but perhaps in part also through awe before a being to whom nothing in the world was sacred.
"I understand him better now, I must confess, and in some sense sympathize with him. That wild spit was a form of protest for his dirty and degraded childhood."
Trotsky was not much of a fighter in the school-boy sense, but he was absolutely without fear. And that rare union of sensitive sympathy with imperious force, which so distressed his father, must have endeared him to his companions. They all remember one famous incident of his eleventh year, which sums up his character for them. They all remember it differently, but I think I have found out the true story.
One evening Leon, the happy, the strong-hearted, came home from school quivering and sobbing wildly. He could hardly say what had happened to him. Mrs. Spencer to this day does not know exactly what happened. He could only gasp:
"I don't want to be expelled! What will my papa say, if I am expelled from school!"
And he would not be consoled, though she and her husband promised to see the principal, and assured him that he would be taken back after everything was straightened out and explained. He felt that nothing could be straightened out, that nothing could be explained.
This is what had happened. A boy named Vakker, who was the son of the cook in a teacher's family, was a very stupid boy, who had already been two years in the same class. If he had to stay in that class another year he would be automatically dismissed from the school. A teacher named Gustave Burnand was a very priggish and unamiable teacher, with a big scar on his forehead and a thin, mean face lengthened with a little piece of a beard. Burnand gave Vakker so low a mark in his course that it was evident he could not pass out of the second class that year, and Vakker sat there almost all day crying.
Leon organized a protest. That was his crime—he organized. It was a very elementary sort of protest, but it was well organized and came off splendidly. When Burnand turned his back to go out of the room after the lesson, his exit was welcomed with a loud and prolonged "boo!" from the entire class. He wheeled around with an indignant glare, but all was still and respectful. He glared long enough to appall the most unruly, and then turned again. The "boo!" was repeated, a little feebler, but it followed him all the way down the hall.
Vakker, however, still was sitting in the corner crying, and it seemed as if nothing substantial had been accomplished. So Trotsky proposed a further measure of protest. He thought up the name of a very lofty official—something like the President of the State Board of Education—and proposed that they should write him a letter on the urgent need for rectification in the conduct of the second class in French in the St. Paul School. "But we would be expelled from school!" the other boys said.
"We will each write one letter of each word," he answered, "and they won't be able to say who did it. They can't expel us all."
In the midst of this more elaborate conspiracy on behalf of the oppressed, Professor Burnand appeared in the doorway with the principal of the school. They had come to ascertain the primary source of this booing, and they opened their investigation by dragging the oppressed himself out of his corner and inquiring what he had to do with it.
"It wasn't me," he wailed, pointing tearfully at the champion of his rights. "It was Leon done it!"
So Leon was invited to remain after school, and please to appear at four o'clock in the office of the principal. He remembers vividly the scene in that holy-of-holies from which no sinner returns unrepentant. He remembers the old priestly-ferocious German who conducted the school, and who was to give him his sentence of expulsion. He remembers the prim and exalted attitude of his accuser, and how as he entered tremulously the awful chamber this man announced with an inflection meant to wither the bones of the guilty:
"The first boy in my class is a Moral Monster!"
Mrs. Spencer put on her bonnet and coat and appeared early in that office the next morning to know why her boy should be expelled from school.
"Bronstein!" said the old German. "You want us to take that boy back? Let me tell you that's a bad boy. He has all the boys in the school under his power. That boy is going to be a dangerous member of society. We don't want him here."
"How can you say that about a child eleven years old!" said Mrs. Spencer.
"Madam, I have an experienced eye. I tell you that when that boy grows up he will be dangerous."
"But you have no right to deprive such a brilliant child of an education."
"Oh, he is brilliant all right. That's just the trouble." The old man was relenting a little. I'll tell you how much I'll do. I'll bring this matter up again before the faculty council; let them decide."
So Mrs. Spencer took her way to everyone of Trotsky's teachers, and from all but one she received the same answer:
"He is the pride of the school—we will do everything in our power to keep him here."
So early the disagreement began!
The old man did have an experienced eye. And Burnand, too, was not without a poetic felicity in his choice of epithets. The thing that makes Trotsky's moral arrogance seem monstrous is that it sleeps in the breast of so gracious a person. The Communists have agreed in large part with the rest of the world in picturing their military hero as a nervous, proud Satanic rebel, wearing a perpetual ironic scowl. But Trotsky is distinguished in an ordinary public assembly by his serene composure. His head held high, but his body solid and without nervous movement, he conveys an impression of alert and childlike quietude. What you see in his blue eyes is goodness; his mouth is sensuous and happy in its curve; and there is always the readiness for a social dimple in his cheek. If you add to these engaging qualities, extreme youth, a long-suffering attentiveness in the classroom, and a silent, diligent accuracy in doing the work, you will understand with what sincere horror a teacher might behold those dimples harden into iron ruts, those blue eyes shoot lightning, and some perfectly intolerable insolence come out of that mouth.
Trotsky's absorbing interest as a student in those days was history. He read the text-books of history at school, and then he read all the books about history that he could find in the Spencers' library. He read the Bible as history.
It had been an ambition of his father's—as combining cultural elevation with a certain conventional piety—to have a private tutor read the Bible with his son in the original Hebrew. Trotsky, being only eleven years old, was somewhat abashed before the bearded old scholar who undertook this task. And the scholar, being old and full of his duty, was hesitant about unveiling his own critical views to so young a boy. So it was not quite clear at first whether they were reading the Bible as history and literature, or as the revealed word of God. Trotsky remarked one day, in a reconnoitering spirit:
"I heard some people say that there is no God, and I asked them:
"'How, then, can you explain the existence of the world?'
"It was too much for the self-restraint of an old agnostic, who answered:
"'Yes, but after you have explained the existence of the world by means of God, by what means then will you explain the existence of God?'"
After that an intellectual friendship was established, and Trotsky was the more encouraged in the development of his own extremely positivistic mind.
In the later years his interest turned from history to mathematics as the chief concern. But all through these school-days—and indeed all through his life—Trotsky has had an interior thirst after literature and literary creation—a feeling that he cannot possibly know enough or attain enough in this field, that is restless and not happy. It is the wistfulness of a born man of action—the reverse of Hamlet's wistfulness. And it makes him the most indefatigable buyer of books in the whole world.
"If they would just let me come back to Paris once more," he said to me, "and wander along the banks of the Seine, selling my old clothes to buy books!"
It was this thirst that brought Trotsky again in the sixth year into conflict with the law and order of the school. His teacher up to that time, in literature and the Russian language, had been a sincere lover of his subject and of the art of teaching. He had encouraged the boys in founding a little magazine for their compositions-had encouraged Trotsky in particular, after the appearance of the first number, to study the laws of meter before he wrote any more poetry.
Upon graduating into the sixth class Trotsky came into the hands of another teacher of composition, a lazy man who cared little about composition and nothing about teaching. This man could simply never get around to the point of correcting the papers. Trotsky would labor through forty books gathering material for an essay, and then write the essay not with a pen, but with a sharp flame—such eagerness, such mental and manual energy and exactitude. And then he would hand it in to his teacher and never hear of it again. It was like dropping jewels into a well.
Trotsky decided to organize. One morning when the teacher had announced for the fiftieth time that he would return their papers the next day and was proceeding to give out the subjects for a new composition, he was startled to hear from the first boy addressed a weak but valiant announcement:
"I won't write the new composition until after you correct my last one."
("Keep still! What do you mean?" said the teacher.
"Well, you ought to correct our papers," murmured the boy, looking around helplessly for support.
"You may leave the room," was the answer. And Trotsky felt his organization crumbling. He jumped to his feet.
"He is entirely right," he said. "You will have to correct our first papers before you ask us to write a second!"
It was the voice of command. I have noticed that voice, and I am not surprised at what happened. It is deep, but it is not a big, liquid, luminous sound like Chaliapin's. There is an electric crackle in it. You feel when you are talking to Trotsky a little bit as though you were doing something dangerous.
The teacher walked out of the room. Trotsky was sixteen years old, and his popularity and mental brilliance had given him a rather formidable character. The other boy was expelled for insubordination, but Trotsky—on the ground that he had already been expelled once—was sentenced to twenty-four hours of solitary confinement.
He was locked up, but his former teacher, the good friend of his poetry, was now the "inspector" of the school. He came to talk with the culprit several times during the day, and at nightfall secretly unlocked the door and sent him home.
After that the compositions were corrected. And our moral monster succeeded in graduating from the St. Paul's School without further alarming the experienced eye and vegetative soul of its management. He left behind him, indeed, a glow of personal affection and intellectual glory which never entirely died out to this day, when the boys of the working-classes of Odessa go there to receive a free education in the "School of the Name of Comrade Trotsky."

Read next chapter | Eastman Internet Archive









The following letters are virtually self-explanatory. They arose out of a letter sent to Michael Gold, editor of the New Masses, by Comrade Max Eastman. In this letter comrade Eastman enclosed the article by Trotsky (printed in this issue of the Militant) and demanded the publication of the latter in the New Masses, in view of the slanderous attacks made by Gold and Earl Browder against the Opposition in general, and Trotsky and Rakovsky in particular, in a previous issue of that periodical. The first reply to Eastman’s letter was in the affirmative from Walt Carmon, managing editor of the New Masses, followed by a cowardly negative reply from the editor, Gold, which is answered by comrade Eastman. The three letters are printed below. – Ed.



*
NEW MASSES
112 East 19 St., New York, N.Y.
July 7, 1930
Max Eastman,
Chilmark, Mass.
Dear Max Eastman:
This will acknowledge receipt of your note and article by Leon Trotsky. We are certain to use this in the coming issue. Mike Gold is not in town. Back in a few days. You will probably hear from him as well on his return.



 


Yours,
WALT CARMON



* * *
NEW MASSES
312 E. 19 St., New York, N.Y.
July 16, 1930
Dear Max:
I’m sorry, but I really don’t think we should print this in New Masses. We reviewed Trotsky’s book, because it was “literature”, but all of us here agree that the mag. shouldn’t become an organ of political discussion and if we give up a lot of space to this Trotsky fight from now on – we immediately lose our function as a literary vehicle –



 


Sorry
MIKE GOLD



* * *
July 18, 1930
Dear Mike Gold:
Your pretense that you will not publish Trotsky’s rejoinder to your cheap attack on him because your magazine is too “literary” is an insult to my intelligence. The article to which Trotsky makes this rejoinder was written by an active head of the Workers Party and was a political attack from the first word to the last.
Moreover it was a[n abject] abandonment of the policy of your paper, which had been to pussy-foot on this whole issue of the Left Opposition. You refused to let me write about it as a member of your Executive Board, even with an answer by a Stalinist in the same number. When I resigned, the pussy-foot policy was carried to the point of not printing my letter of resignation. When I stated this fact in a communication to The Nation, suggesting that this was not a shining example of “brave thinking’’, you replied justifying yourself on the ground that “We none of us used the magazine to express our opinions”. (I quote this confession of yours from memory.)
Moreover about a year ago when I met you on 7th Ave. and asked how the magazine was getting on, you volunteered the information that, “We’re through with the Party, we’ve learned that much anyway.” (Here too I am quoting from memory but my memory is good.) It struck me strange that you should offer me this piece of inside information, when all previous negotiations with me had been conducted under the pretense that the magazine was independent of the Party – a “free revolutionary magazine” as it advertised itself. Upon reflection I wondered whether this gratuitous declaration of independence might now mean that you are now directly subsidized by the International.
Whether because you are subsidized, or because you depend upon the party for sales, the fact is that in publishing these attacks on Trotsky and Rakovsky you have at last shown your political colors. You are now overtly what you were before under cover, a Stalinist organ. And yet you have the brass to tell me that you won’t publish Trotsky’s rejoinder because you are too “literary”.
And you have the folly to add, “All of us here agree etc.,” although you know that ten days ago I received a letter from your associate Walt Carmon stating – what any courageous and independent editor having viciously attacked one man and slandered another would state – that “We are certain to use this in the coming issue.”
What happened during these ten days?
Do you really expect any grown person to believe that having attacked a political leader with a page and a half of vituperation written by a political opponent, you refuse to publish a brief rejoinder because you are literary? Even people who renounce thinking through a passion for “literature”, do not necessarily renounce honorable and decent editorial conduct.
What is your real reason?
Either you backed down because you are too cowardly to print Trotsky’s classification of you, or else you consulted your masters, the bureaucrats of the Workers Party, and they forbade you to print the letter.
Either position marks off your paper completely from The Masses, from which it borrowed its name. And yet I notice you have chosen just this moment to get out a new line of publicity giving what you call “the autobiography of the New Masses”, in which you falsely pretend that it is a mere continuation of the Masses and The Liberator. Have you forgotten that your publicity when you started the magazine was to the opposite effect? What is the reason for this change? Is this one more trick suggested by your bureaucratic masters for grabbing prestige at the expense both of sincere ideals and real facts? Did it not once occur to you while you were composing that sweet history, and using my name in advertising your magazine, that it might be honest to mention among those other charming incidents the fact that I resigned from the Executive Board of New Masses stating that I despised its sly pussyfooting policies and total lack of intellectual and moral courage?



 


Yours sincerely,
MAX EASTMAN



P.S. I offer this letter also for publication.
 



DEAR CORLISS,
In 1934, when I met you, and asked about your political position, you said: “I am a Communist, but I am a Truth Communist.” And you explained that striking phrase to mean that you believed in the theories of Marx as interpreted by Lenin, but that you did not accept the policy of political lying to the masses practiced by the official communist parties under Stalin. That gave me a high feeling of respect for you, and upon that basis there arose a certain intellectual and moral friendship between us. You expressed it upon your side by presenting me with a copy of your book, The Illusion of Immortality, and inscribing upon the fly-leaf:
To Max Eastman

Who believes with me that Truth is
“More sweet than freedom;
more desired than joy,
More sacred than the serving of a friend.”

Corliss Lamont
April 1935
Although so clearly seeing that lying to the masses was an essential ingredient of Stalinist policy, and so solemnly abjuring it for yourself, you continued to run with the Stalinist chiefs. You never exposed their political lies, or said publicly what you said to me in private. For a very long time you played friends with both Lie Communists and Truth Communists, and gave your money with one hand to the Stalinists and with die other to independent revolutionary papers which still believed that scientific integrity and honest education of the masses is essential to the proletarian movement. Anybody who plays both sides in quiet times will be found in a crisis on the side with power. And in the issue between truth and political lying, between science and Jesuitism, between intelligence and blind bigotry, between education and indoctrination, between the enlightment and manipulation of public opinion, between the life of reason and the totalitarian state of mind – and that is the paramount issue upon which in this day the fate of civilization rests – the Moscow trials are a crisis. They carry the whole cult, art, ideology and technique of political and party lying to so hideous an extreme that every man in the labor and radical movement must take his stand for or against. And you have taken yours with those whom you yourself so clearly defined as the “Lie Communists”, because they are in the ascendant, and because you lack the moral force to stand against them for the truth.
You have enough sensitivity to feel, if your feelings were free, the crime against knowledge and social understanding involved in the mystification of these trials, even if the men were guilty. You have enough brains to know that if they were guilty of the complicated conspiratorial acts charged against them, it would be easy to prove them guilty beyond a peradventure. You know that that would be the honest way, the way of Truth-Communists and of truthful people anywhere. You are not so blind to the rays of justice, if your eyes were not held shut, as to accept these show trials of a few dozen who were ready to “confess”, as proof of the guilt, and justification for the murder behind closed doors, of hundreds, and indeed thousands, who were not. You are not so superior to the idea of mercy that you would naturally ignore the still unanswered question: What has become of the wives and children of these thousands of murdered communists? You would, under normal conditions, sense the ugliness of your own position – the son of a leading finance capitalist engaging in a campaign of slander by private correspondence on engraved stationery against the executed leaders of the Russian revolution, a scion of the house of Morgan assisting in the process of their dishonor by circulating arguments from the Saturday Evening Post based upon the premises of black reaction. Surely you could find a more appropriate way to serve the cause of labor! And you would find it, if you were free from pressure, free to be your simple, chivalrous self. That is why I assert that you have joined the Lie-Communists, and are serving as their “non-member” stooge and mouthpiece, merely because you lack the force of character to stand against them for the truth.
The one priceless thing you could have brought to the proletarian movement, coming from the source you do and with your education, was true knowledge and absolute principled integrity. Instead you are bringing a little money, a small gift even when it is large, and an increase of mental confusion and moral decay.
You played a very small unhonest trick in the matter of the Trotsky Committee and the New York Times. The committee had issued a press release on its usual stationery, and in printing it the New York Times had remarked that “Among those supporting the Committee’s statement as members were ...” and then reproduced sixteen names from the Committee’s letter-head. You, following the lead of the Daily Worker, issued one of your privately-mailed letters, in which you said that in the New York Times these sixteen persons were “alleged to have signed” the statement, and that therefore the Trotsky Committee was guilty of “a shocking use of names under false pretenses”. If you could push away those who are pressing upon you and take space for reflection, you would know that the action both of the Trotsky Committee and the New York Times was perfectly natural, and that it is you who are guilty of false pretenses and a rather shocking misuse of facts. Not extremely shocking, perhaps – and in your own person this may be only a beginning. It is a significant beginning of the career that is before you as a defender of Lie-Communists.
A more significant beginning, although more subtle, is contained in your circular letter of March, protesting against what you call “vituperation” in the Secretary’s reply to you. It reads:
“I wish to say in conclusion that in these turbulent times it is possible, in my opinion, for intelligent men to differ sincerely on the grave issues which are confronting all of us. And I am deeply conscious of the tragedy involved in the present divisions in the labor and radical movement.”
There is pathos in that appeal for intelligence and “sincere” disagreement, but there is also a certain Pharasaism. As National Chairman of the Friends of Soviet Russia you are, and must be if you remain in office, on all basic issues an obedient adherent of the Stalin party line. You well know the “for us or against us” policy. You know that the unscrupulous vilification and destruction of critics is as essential a technic of the Monolithic Party as of the Totalitarian State. You know that your pose of detached intelligence is being used, and what it is being used for. Perhaps you will realize why I call the resulting state of consciousness Pharasaical, when I remind you that you have addressed these noble-sounding sentences to me, among others, and that they arrived in my hand just after I had been criminally advertised to the world by your colleagues and co-workers, on the basis of these same “confessions” whose credibility you are so eagerly advocating, as an “Agent of the British Secret Service”. You are hand in glove with the authors of that criminal libel. You are doing their work, the work of which it is an integral part. You know them to be, and have yourself named them “Lie Communists”. And yet you strike this pose, and make this plea against “vituperation”, and for a “sincere” disagreement about “the grave issues” etc. And you send the letter to me!
Corliss, the grave issue at the present moment is between truth and lies. It may seem to you that I am drawing moral issues rather fine against you here and now. But you will find that in your role of public defender of a deliberate policy of falsification, you will be impelled, and compelled, to more and more crude, more and more conscious, more and more debased and foul, and even as we see in Russia, murderous, tricks of public deceit and private knifing, until there is not a clear fibre left of the man who coined those words “Truth Communist” and “Lie Communist”, and who wrote that moving inscription in my copy of his book.



 


Yours sincerely,
Max EASTMAN






IT BORES ME TO HAVE TO reply to James Burnham’s article Max Eastman As A Scientist, because although written for the most part graciously and without the usual billingsgate, it is not the kind of article a man writes who really wishes to grapple with a problem. Burnham either agrees or does not agree with my criticism of dialectic materialism as a disguised metaphysical idealism. I suspect that he agrees more than he disagrees with it. But he is careful not to let anybody, perhaps not even himself, perceive this, for the very simple reason that he is politically a Trotskyist, and he knows that if he renounces dialectic materialism, or even questions it, Trotsky will renounce him – and probably call him a coward besides.
What I say about scientific method derives its essential meaning in the circumstances from my thesis that Marxism contains this element of wish-fulfillment metaphysics. It is impossible profitably to discuss the article either as criticism of Marxism, or as advocacy of scientific method, or as appraisal of the Russian experiment, or as anything else, without opening this question and honestly grappling with it. One need only read Trotsky’s excommunication of me in the same issue of The New International to see that for Trotskyists such questions are closed. The article Max Eastman As A Scientist therefore scrupulously avoids touching its real theme.
On any other subject – in any other situation – James Burnham, who occupies a responsible post in a scholarly university, would be ashamed to answer a clearly defined and plain-spoken thesis such as mine about the difference between Marxian socialist philosophy and a practical socialist hypothesis, and some of the consequences which result from substituting the one for the other, with the pretense that the author “meditates on a variety of problems” and reaches conclusions “so vague and general as to be hardly arguable”. Every word of his subsequent argument proves this a disingenuous pretense, particularly the statement soon following that my article “ends with the listing of eight proposed points for a revision” of the socialist ideal.
Equally disingenuous, whether consciously so or not, are the indecisive and elusive remarks which follow that introductory pretense:
“The problem what Marx really meant is an interesting one for scholarly research.”
“None of us is surprised that Marx was limited by the stage which scientific knowledge had reached in his day.”
“I, for one, agree that it is desirable to change, in part, his terminology [! ].”
“These problems of scholarly and linguistic [! ] reform.”
The italics are mine and so are the exclamation points, but they are unnecessary. Anybody who having read my article reads these remarks, and believes that Burnham has the slightest intention of grappling with my theses is either a natural born sucker intellectually, or else eager to pull the wool over his own eyes for Trotskyist party purposes.
Burnham’s suggestion that my article might be “mere eyewash and pot-boiler”, I regard as on a par with the statement of Trotsky that I have “fashioned a profession” for myself out of “the struggle against dialectics”. It shows about the same level of common sense, the same realism as to cultural conditions in America. I had that essay Russia and the Socialist Ideal on my desk for ten months after I wrote it, checking over and re judging every sentence it contained, so that there should be no word in it untrue to my most deliberate convictions. I received from Harper’s three hundred and fifty dollars for it. That is the only cent I ever made on any writing relating to dialectics. On the other side of the ledger, I paid for the publication of my book, Marx and Lenin, the Science of Revolution, and I paid for the publication of my brochure, The Last Stand of Dialectic Materialism. That is how it stands in America with the profession of attacking dialectic materialism, and with eye-wash and pot-boilers made out of painstaking studies of socialist theory. It takes no more than common sense to know it. When I come to writing pot-boilers, there are plenty of profitable subjects I can write on.
I introduced my article by remarking that I seem to be in a better position to reconsider the theoretical assumptions of the Russian revolution than Trotsky. That is a specific and unimportant judgment about two individuals, and has nothing whatever to do with my advocacy of the methods of science as opposed to the methods of Hegelian philosophy in socialist thinking. Here again Burnham is running excitedly up a side alley, hoping to be followed by his readers. In general the pretense of my critics that I am posing as a “scientist” makes me tired. I know what scientific method is, and so do they.
Burnham finds it “amusing” that although I oppose wish-fulfillment thinking, yet the “content and very wording of a number of the eight points listed in my revision of the socialist ideal are simply – wishes”. That is not true, but if it were, it would not be amusing except to a person ignorant of – or in a political position compelling him to ignore – the difference between wishes and wish-fulfillment thinking.
Burnham says that contemporary science “recognizes no problems of being or of universal history”; after that he says that such questions are “ruled out of scientific discourse”. The former statement is incorrect, the latter correct. They are ruled out of scientific discourse – except by a tiny group who maintain that logically they have no meaning – because now if not forever they cannot be answered. I advocated on the same ground that they be ruled out of socialist discourse. Burnham calls my simple formulation of scientific scepticism “rationalist metaphysics”. What is the use? Why not discuss the issues?
I make an allusion to “the universal attributes of human nature”, and Burnham, identifying that with “the essential nature of man”, jumps into a harangue about my wanting to “go back not merely to the Romantic, to the Eighteenth-Century Rationalists, but hurtling headlong into the Middle Ages”, my wanting to “revive the doctrines of Substance and Essence”. And then a long high-brow lecture about Substance and Essence. How pitiful!
Everybody knows that there are universal attributes of human nature. Does not blood flow in all our viens? Is not arsenic poisonous to us all? Sophistry unhappily is not.
Burnham calls attention to the obvious fact that often in social action “too detailed a blueprint is a defect”, and asserts that I demand a “blueprint in detail” of the socialist society. That is not true. I myself carefully warned against a too detailed blueprint, and also called attention to the difference between social and mechanical action in this respect. Burnham has invented this diversion for the same reason as the others – because he cannot discuss the real point I am making.
The point is this: Marx, on the one hand, dispensed with blueprints altogether, or thought he did – “the workers have no ideal to realize”. On the other hand, he adopted in the place of blueprints any and every extreme and absolute social ideal that happened to be floating in the wind. He did these two inconsistent things for one reason – namely that he believed in a universal benign evolution of Reality-As-Such to ever “higher forms”. My thesis is that both these errors, the alleged absence of blueprints and the existence of Utopian blueprints, and the inconsistency between them, are the result of that unscientific faith. Since Burnham dare not touch the question of that faith, he invents a disagreement between us about a matter of simple good sense – a disagreement which, so far as plain English could do it, I carefully forestalled.
“Eastman praises the Utopian socialists, Fourier and St. Simon,” Burnham says, “because they had blueprints. Revealing praise! Here as before Eastman does not “move forward” to contemporary science, but swings back to pre-Marxian fantasies.”
That again is not true. What I said was that even Marx’s Utopian predecessors raised the problem what there was in human nature to guarantee the possibility and success of a socialist society, and that, instead of developing these “amateurish but obviously necessary inquiries” [1], Marx abandoned them, because to him they were rendered superfluous by his faith in a benign universe. Again it is only because he dare not broach the question of that faith that Burnham misrepresents my statement. If he had quoted my remark about Fourier and St. Simon, not one sentence of his comment would have made sense. And he uses more space telling falsely what the remark was, than would have been required to quote it. Revealing measurement!
Speaking roughly, I advocate the amount of blueprinting that would seem sensible to a practical mind not misled by a “philosophy of optimism” (as Trotsky well describes the dialectic faith). On the other hand, I advocate that we abandon those Utopian and absolute ideals which we know cannot be realized unless that philosophic dream is true, and talk practical good sense about the future society. It is obviously impossible to discuss justly the equilibrium I am proposing, if one is debarred from grappling with the question of the truth or falsity of the said “philosophy of optimism”.
This question of blueprints and resulting mental equilibrium in large-scale social efforts, is the most important methodological question in the world today. Burnham, ignoring for political reasons my careful approach to it, merely asserts überhaupt that “the anti-blueprint temperament is ... necessary to decisive political action”. I wonder if he realizes how much that statement can mean in the present conjuncture. The lure of “decisive political action” without blueprints is the very magic wand of fascism. It is a wand also ruthlessly employed by Stalin. I do not know how much Stalin was helped in shifting the Bolshevik locomotive from the road toward socialism to the tyrant road by the Marxian mystic disposition to believe that any decisive political action taken with the support, or plausible support of the proletariat, would lead inevitably to “higher forms”. I know that he was helped a lot. He was helped in getting these disgraceful, world-deluding, lying “confessions” from his opponents. Americans, even when they pretend to believe in it themselves, hardly realize that the Russian Bolshevik leaders really did believe in that antique religion.
At any rate, in the present crisis of man’s hopes, to have able men going around advocating “decisive political action” with no scientific plans, no concept of human nature, no apprehension of the problems to come, no recognition that they will be in large part the same problems that have arisen in Russia – nothing but an antiquated German-romantic faith in a universe where planets are revolving in “ever more magnificent circles”, and things on them from bugs to bureaucracies are in a state of everlasting progress “from the lower to the higher” – is anything but helpful. To transplant all this disguised Hegelian rationalistic animistic balderdash into our western world, which has been so largely characterized by practical and therefore sceptical, empirical good sense, is unqualifiedly bad. When Trotsky says that what we need in this country is “more dogma”, he ought to be resisted as an obscurantist by every alert and free and educated mind in America – and he will be.
There is one other magic wand, wielded by Hitler and Mussolini – and also by Stalin. That is the redefinition of popular key words like freedom, democracy, socialism, etc., to make them mean whatever the tyrant and the bureaucrats may have in mind. This wand is also wielded by George Soule in his Future of Liberty, where we are told without a smile that we can cling to the ideals in the Declaration of Independence, if we will only “redefine” liberty and make it mean “subordination to a common purpose”. Soule is merely tracing out the road by which our soft-headed liberals can with some few scant ragged piteous relics of their mental dignity go over to Stalin. It is no accident that Burnham, defending not only “decisive political action” by the “anti-blueprint temperament”, but also the system of having instead of blueprints ideals so Utopian that by his own admission “many of them can never be completely realized”, finds himself also involved in the disgraceful business of redefining a clear term. Governmental regulation and freedom, he declares, are only “verbally contradictory”. Cooperation and governmental regulation would only “make impossible a romantic kind of freedom, which considers the free man to be one who does immediately whatever comes into his head, who acts from every momentary impulse with no thought of consequences or social effects”. Why “immediately”? Why “momentary impulse”? Did anybody say that freedom is opposed to hesitation, to deliberation, to judgment of consequences or social effects? Freedom is being in a position to do what comes into your own head, to set whether soon or late on your own impulses, to restrain those impulses when you do restrain them because of your own judgment of consequences and social effects. That is what freedom means, and anybody who clouds that meaning is well on the road toward “liquidating the opposition”.
The way to approach the problem of the relation between freedom and a well-organized economy is to say candidly and clearly what freedoms, and how many, must be sacrificed to such organization. That is the scientific compromise between anarchism and socialism. The metaphysical compromise effected by dialectic materialism, complete endorsement with indefinite postponement, leads with perfect logic down the road that Burnham and George Soule are mapping out, and Stalin has already travelled. Do not forget that Stalin was a socialist. Mussolini was a socialist. Hundreds of thousands of the followers of Hitler were socialists or communists, converted overnight by the lure of “decisive political action”, and by a small redefinition – a small sacrifice of what is “Romantic” – in the principle of human freedom.
We want blueprints definite enough to make that process of conversion difficult. Is it too much to ask of the professed defenders of civilization in its hour of crisis that they should have aims that they honestly believe in – that they believe can, and if the appropriate action is taken, will be realized. Is it just or truthful to impute “despair and resignation” to a person who makes this demand?
Burnham says in conclusion that “Eastman is compelled, if he is responsible, to propose another ... program”. Taking “program” in a very general sense, that is true. To my sensibility it is the one statement in his article that seems to come quite clearly from the heart. If I live I will complete my thesis. If the profession of struggling against dialectics were a little more lucrative, I would complete it sooner. But even so I would not hurry. I know it cannot seem so to party militants, and they have always my humble respect, but to me it seems just now in America a period for deliberation. It is so at any rate in my own life, and, both for pecuniary and intellectual reasons, I am combining this review of socialism with a review of my life.
 
Footnote
1. I quote from memory.



THE FIRST STEP towards understanding Marxism is to realize that Marx himself did not wish to be a philosopher. There were hints of this in the writings of Engels, but also evidences to the contrary. The full extent and passion of Marx’s revulsion against philosophy became known only a few years ago when an old manuscript, Die deutsche Ideologie, in which he and Engels first formulated their views, was deciphered and published by the Marx-Engels Institute in Moscow. This manuscript reveals an arrant rejection of the very conception of philosophic knowledge – a veritable holding of the word philosopher in contempt – lying at the basis of the whole edifice of Marx’s intellectual life.
In The Holy Family, written three years before, Marx had rejected Hegel’s metaphysics arrantly enough, describing it as “drunken speculation”, and Hegel himself as the “master wizard”. He had eulogized the materialist, Ludwig Feuerbach, for having “unveiled the mystery” of Hegel’s system and “annihilated the dialectic of ideas”, and he had endorsed the viewpoint of British materialism and of the French enlightenment, calling it “the philosophy of good sense”. “It opposes philosophy to metaphysics,” he cried, “just as Feuerbach opposed reasonable philosophy to er-aggerated speculation on the day when he first took a clear stand against Hegel.”
So Marx wrote in 1843. But in 1846 – as this old and new manuscript informs us – he did not want even a reasonable philosophy or a philosophy of good sense. He did not want any philosophy at all. He was ready to pitch Feuerbach out of the window after Hegel. Feuerbach himself had coined the aphorism, “My philosophy is no philosophy,” but nevertheless Marx now rejected him as a man who never learned to see “without the eyes – which is to say the eye-glasses – of the philosopher.”
But let us read some solid excerpts from this new and yet basic document of Marxism. (The italics are mine.)
“German criticism right up to its very latest achievements has not abandoned the field of philosophy; not only has it not examined its own general philosophical presuppositions, but on the contrary all the questions with which it is occupied have grown up out of the soil of one definite philosophical system, the Hegelian. There is mystification not only in its answers, but in the very questions it asks ...
“We therefore shall precede our special criticism of certain individual representatives of this movement with some general remarks (about German philosophy and about all philosophy in general). These remarks will be sufficient to make clear the standpoint of our criticism ...
“We recognize only one single science, the science of history. You can view it from two sides, and divide it into the history of nature and the history of people ... In direct opposition to German philosophy which came down from heaven to earth, we here intend to rise from earth to heaven – that is we will not start from what people say, imagine, represent to themselves, nor from thought-of, represented or imagined people, in order to arrive afterward at bodily people; we will start from really acting people, and try to deduce from their actual life-process the development of these ideological images and reflections of that life-process. For these misty formations in the brains of people are necessary sublimations of their material, empirically ascertained life-process, which is bound up with material conditions. In this way morals, religion, metaphysics, and other forms of ideology, lose their apparent independence. They have no history, they have no development; only people, developing their material production and their material relations, change also in the course of this activity their thinking and the products of their thinking ...
“Thus where speculation stops, that is, at the threshold of real life, a real positive science begins, a representation of the activity, the practical process of the development of people. Phrases about consciousness disappear, their place to be occupied by real knowledge. When you begin to describe reality, then an independent philosophy loses its reason for being. In its place may be found, at the most, a summary of the general results abstracted from an investigation of the historical development of man ...
“We fully realise that Feuerbach ... went as far as a theorizer could go without simply ceasing to be a theorizer and a philosopher ...
“Feuerbach’s mistake lies in the fact that he could not approach the world of sensation without the eyes – which is to say, the eyeglasses – of a philosopher ...
“And by the way, with this view of things, which takes them as they are in reality, all deep-thinking philosophical problems reduce themselves to some simple question of empirical fact ...
“For a practical materialist, that is for a communist, the thing is to revolutionize the existing world – that is, practically turn against things as he finds them, and change them.”
A more radical empiricism – a more “vulgar and profane” empiricism, to quote Marx’s own earlier description of his stand – is not to be found in the whole of philosophic literature, nor a more wholesale rejection of the idea that philosophy can be a guide or dictator of forms to science. [1]
Is it not surprising, then, and puzzling, that Marx should have become the founder of a new philosophy in the full sense of the term – a new theory of being – and that this philosophy should have become the equivalent of a state religion in the first proletarian republic, its teaching in the schools enforced by law, and its principles propagated throughout the world with rigid dogmatism by the supporters of that republic? It is still more surprising when you learn that he founded this philosophy, or drew the outlines of it, in the same year in which he completed this arrant attack upon the very idea of philosophy. Engels allots the old manuscript to the year 1845-6. And it was in 1845 that Marx “hastily scribbled down” – as a notation for further work along the same line – those famous Theses on Feuerbach in which, as Engels also tells us, he “planted the genial seed of the new philosophy”.
Obviously the next step towards understanding Marxism is to find out why Marx planted the seed of a new philosophy in the very labor of rooting up all philosophy forever. To this end we must recall the outlines of that Hegelian metaphysics in which he believed until Feuerbach liberated him, and then the exact nature of this liberation. After that we shall see in the Theses on Feuerbach themselves the reason why Marx did not succeed in getting rid of philosophy.
Hegel believed that the whole world is contained in, or made out of, Mind. And this Mind, when properly understood and arrived at in its totality by evolution, or by the thought of the philosopher, is the same thing as God. Hegel’s God differs from the old gods, however, in being active and changeful. He has his very being in a process of development. You can see this process in nature and world history, or you can see it in the way the logical categories work out their relations, the one merging into the other in a peculiar manner to which Hegel, following his predecessors, gave the name of “dialectics”. It consists of an affirmative assertion, and then a passing of that over into its opposite, a negation of it by its own self-active propulsion, and then a “negation of the negation”, or reconciliation of these two opposites in a higher unity which includes them both. It is astonishing how much of the change and motion in the world, as well as the relations among abstract ideas – if you examine them with a sufficiently casuistical determination to believe so, and particularly if you refrain from defining the word opposite – can be made to fit into this mould. For that reason when all the emotions attending the idea of divinity and of absolute or universal being are mixed up in a description of life and the world in these terms, you have – if you can stand the hard work involved – a great philosophical poem, a great experience for the feelings and the mind. And since we really know little or nothing about the nature of life and the world as a whole, it is easy for credulous people, or people brought up in such ideas, to lend to it the added glamor of belief.
The important thing about it for us, however, is that it enabled Hegel, without ceasing to be religious, to be very matter-of-fact and hard-headed, indeed brutally realistic, about the “phases” that a divine spirit has to pass through on its dialectic pilgrimage. It enabled him to accept in the name of God the hard and bloody world of universal change and evolution that scientists were then already coming to behold, to accept and even slightly to extend the downright understanding of it. In particular it enabled him to bridge in a new way the gap between what we know and what we want, between the “pure” and the “practical” reason as they had been separated by Kant. Kant had given a different and a firmer root in “reality” to the active side of our nature, our wilful self, than to what our minds know. And Hegel, with his doctrine that reality is a process, and moreover a mental process, had united the two. The very essence of being, he said, and therefore the highest condition of the human mind, is one in which knowledge of the real and action toward the ideal are the same thing.
“Being is Thought,” Hegel said, but thought is a “process of becoming.” ... “The truth is the whole. The whole, however, is merely the essential nature [thought] reaching its completion through the process of its own development ... What has been said may be also expressed by saying that reason is purposive activity.”
Such was the flavor, and such for our purpose the essential drift, of Hegel’s philosophy. The development of what he called a “scientific” consciousness was a development away from the simple condition of sense-certainty, the sensing of an object by a subject, towards a condition of pure meditation in which subject and object are both known to be thought or spirit, a condition of “Absolute Knowledge, or spirit knowing itself as spirit.” This Absolute Knowledge is “the consummation and the final cause of the whole process of experience”; but then also this Absolute is not a mere goal or consummation, it is not static, but is “the process of its own becoming”. Josiah Royce, who greatly loved this Absolute
Being, or philosophic state-of-being, described it thus:
“The Absolute whose expression is the world and, in particular, the world of human life, is a being characterized by a complete unity or harmony of what one might call a theoretical and practical consciousness. The theoretical consciousness is a consciousness which views facts and endeavors to apprehend them. The practical consciousness is a consciousness which constructs facts in accordance with its ideals. The absolute consciousness is both theoretical and practical.”
For Marx, too, that must have been the great thing in the Hegelian philosophy. We may imagine that even in youth he accepted somewhat perfunctorily Hegel’s conception of thought, or “the Idea”, as “demi-ourgos of the world”. But Hegel’s conception of “science”, of the highest wisdom to which a human being can attain, as a state of mind in which he is cooperating with, or rather participating in, the forward and upward going of the world towards high ends, must have meant much to him.
At any rate, Marx believed fervently throughout his young manhood in this philosophy – or in some such philosophy as I have described, for there is no use pretending that Hegel’s emotional imagination confined itself to saying things with a clear meaning. And he was awakened out of this mystical condition by Ludwig Feuerbach, who, having been a Hegelian, became a man of simple good sense, and said that the world is not really composed of a process of thought, but it is composed of objects as they appear in sense-experience. Engels describes the “rapture” with which Marx and he greeted Feuerbach. He says that no one who had not lived through it, could possibly imagine the “liberating effect” that his writings had upon them. And from that you can imagine their previous state of hypnosis, the degree of their captivity to the thought-conjurings of the “master wizard”.
Feuerbach’s revolt against Hegel must have seemed very drastic. He seems even now at a first glance to have grasped the animistic personification of a material world involved in regarding ideas as more completely real than the objects of sense. He declared Hegelism, and indeed speculative philosophy in general, to be nothing but “theology rationalized, realized and brought home to the mind”. And he seemed to strike at the heart of this whole way of thinking when he renounced Hegel’s thesis that “being is thought” and that truth is arrived at by a development of consciousness away from the obvious testimony of the senses. On the contrary, he cried:
“Truth, reality, sensibility are identical. Only a sensible being is a true, a real being; only sensibility is truth and reality. Only through the senses is an object in the true sense given – not through thought in itself.”
As a revolt against Hegel’s idealism this is indeed exciting. But nevertheless it was not a hearty and thorough-going materialism like that of the British and French philosophers who grew up in a native atmosphere of sceptical common sense. For them not only were sense-objects the downright reality, but man himself with his gift of perceiving them was something of an incident in a vast world of these objects. For Feuerbach “sense” was the main thing in these “objects-of-sense”, and man himself continued to be, as with idealists, the chief concern and substance of the world. “The new philosophy,” he said, “makes man, including nature as the basis of man, the unique, universal and highest object of philosophy.” Indeed Feuerbach proposed to replace that speculative philosophy which he had rejected, not with the general body of the sciences, as Compte at the same time was proposing, and not with a “philosophy of good sense” as other materialists had, but with “anthropology” regarded as a “universal science”.
“In this undue prominence given to man,” says Lange in his History of Materialism, “lies a trait which is due to the Hegelian philosophy, and which separates Feuerbach from strict materialists. That is to say, it is only the philosophy of spirit over again that meets us here in the shape of a philosophy of sensibility. The genuine materialist will always incline to turn his gaze upon the great whole of external nature, and to regard man as a wave in the ocean of the eternal movement of matter. The nature of man is to the materialist only a special case of universal physiology, as thought is only a special case in the chain of the physical processes of life.” [2]
And this is true, we may add, not only to the materialist, but to the modern courageous mind in general. “Lyric experience and literary psychology, as I have learned to conceive them,” says George Santayana, for instance, “are chapters in the life of one race of animals in one corner of the natural world.” How far removed was Feuerbach’s philosophy from this natural assumption of the mind nurtured in modern science, may be seen in his statement that “The truth is only the totality of human life and being”. I do not mean to say that Feuerbach, by and large, denied to nature an existence independent of man. He spoke expressly in other places of nature’s independence. He was a disjointed, emotional, aphoristic thinker; he was moreover not trying to understand the world presented to him by science, but wholly absorbed in the effort to find in it a place for the religious emotion. To isolate a sentence like the one just quoted and impute to him all that it implies logically would be unfair and uncomprehending. Nevertheless it is obvious that the author of that sentence had only partially emerged from the idealistic philosophy. The “undue prominence given to man” in his system was a relic of that personification of the external world – or absorbing of it up into the mind – which is the essential heart of the romantic philosophies preceding him in Germany. He was in this respect – as was German intellectual culture at large – behind the contemporary march of the scientific point of view.
This becomes still more obvious as you read further in his Foundations of the New Philosophy, from which I have quoted. You learn that not only is “reality” identical with “sensibility”, and “truth” with “the totality of human life and being”, but that since nothing enters human life and being or becomes an object of sensibility unless it engages a man’s interest – unless it makes some appeal to his affective nature – “reality” and “truth” are, at bottom, inseparable from human feeling. “Only that is ...,” exclaims Feuerbach at the height of this argument, “which is an object of passion,”
By reasonings of this kind, Feuerbach managed to convert his “universal science” of anthropology into a religion of love. And although that religion seemed very large about accepting matters of fact, and Feuerbach’s love was not afraid of physiology, nevertheless it retained the essence of all religion, and of all theology too, and of that speculative philosophy which is but “theology rationalized” – namely, the personification of an objective reality or the universal reality of the world. His crowning aphorism, “not to love and not to be are identical”, is for the emotions substantially equivalent to the older aphorism, “God is love”. One need only approach Feuerbach with his own formula – the speculative philosopher is “a priest in disguise” – in order to perceive that he has merely once more altered the disguise.
And now let us see what was the nature of Marx’s revolt against Feuerbach. Did he point out the essential relic of Hegel’s idealism in Feuerbach’s philosophy, the making of “man, including nature as the basis of man, the one universal and highest object of philosophy”? Did he say that it was not really very materialistic to talk about “sensibility”, which is a mere function of the human body, as though it were identical with “reality”, which to the genuine materialist lies in the larger part outside of man? This was the course he must have taken in order to fulfill his wish to abandon philosophy altogether and adopt the method and the point-of-view of empirical science. He never dreamed of it. He was not himself liberated from the “master wizard”. He too did not, at least in his mature reflections, identify “sensibility” with the objective reality of the world, but he followed Feuerbach in talking about them as identical. He based his philosophy of action, just as Feuerbach had based his philosophy of love, upon a verbal assumption of their identity, repeating it in the very words of Feuerbach. His single objection to Feuerbach was that he had left out of this “reality”, this “object”, this all-too-human “sensibility”, the active element, the element of “practical human action”. He had left out of it, that is, the very essence of Hegelian metaphysics as Marx loved it – as Royce loved it – the conception that reality itself is a purposive process, and that the highest state of mind a human being can attain is one in which he conceives himself as cooperating with, or participating in, the forward and upward going of that reality towards high ends.
“The chief fault of all materialism heretofore (including Feuerbach’s)” – so Marx begins – “is that the object, the reality, sensibility, is conceived only under the form of object or of contemplation; not as sensory-human activity, practise, not subjectively. Hence the active side developed abstractly in opposition to materialism from idealism – [abstractly], since idealism naturally does not recognize real sensory activity as such. Feuerbach wants sensible objects genuinely distinguished from objects of thought; but he conceives human activity itself not as objective activity. In his Essence of Christianity he regards only the theoretical attitude as the genuinely human, while practise is conceived and fixed in its dirty-Jew phenomenal form. Hence he does not grasp the significance of the revolutionary, of practical-critical action.”
These Theses on Feuerbach have always presented something of a puzzle to the student of Marx, but their meaning becomes utterly clear when you realize that Marx was trying to be scientific in our sense, but having grown up in the habits of the German idealist philosophy, he did not know how. [3] He is, therefore, saying two different kinds of things. On the one hand he is saying things with which every modern realistic mind can agree. He objects, for instance, to Feuerbach’s retaining an exaggerated esteem for purely theoretical thinking after he has abandoned the myth of the reality of thought’s object. But on the other hand he is preserving the essence of metaphysics, and indeed religion – the conception of the objective world and the human mind as cooperating together in the tasks that are worth while. He is insisting that, although the world is made out of material objects as given in sensation, these objects or sensations are nevertheless to be “conceived subjectively” and regarded just as Hegel regarded ideas or “reason”, as purposive activities. With Hegel, he says, reality is to be regarded as active; with Feuerbach it is to be regarded as human-sensory. And so we arrive at “the seed of the new philosophy” – the conception that all the seemingly solid and external things in this world really are, and consist of, practical “human-sensory action”. Instead of Feuerbach’s religious philosophy, which teaches love and brotherhood by identifying it with the very substance of being, we have a revolutionary philosophy which teaches “practical-critical action” by identifying that with the substance of being. But we still have “philosophy” – and philosophy in the bad sense. We have not taken one step away from it.
In his second thesis Marx takes up the problem what to do with the idea or “object of thought” now that its superior reality has been abandoned for that of the “object of sense”. And here he speaks again like an experimental scientist. Where thought adds something to the reality directly given in sense-experience, the validity of this indirect kind of reality – indeed a mere reflected image of reality – is to be tried out in action. The test of its truth, in other words, is experimental.
“The question whether objective truth reaches human thought,” he says, “is no question of theory, but a practical question. In practise man must prove the truth, that is the reality and power, the this-sidedness, of his thought. The dispute about the reality or unreality of thought – which is isolated from practise – is a purely scholastic question.”
In his third thesis, however, Marx again speaks the language of the metaphysician who has read his own ideal program of action into a world conceived as inherently purposive. He is now objecting not to Feuerbach, but to the materialists of the eighteenth century whom three years before he had been praising for their “profane” and “vulgar” materialism, and their insistence that men are a mere product of the environment. “It takes no extraordinary sagacity to discover,” he then said, “what inevitably brings them to communism and socialism ... If man is formed by the environment, then we must form a humane environment.” He now objects to these same profane materialists because they have not the Hegelian wisdom to merge their own program into a conception of the environment as, by its own inherent nature, forming itself humanely.
“The materialistic teaching,” he says, “about the changing of the environment and education forgets that the environment must be changed by men and the educator himself educated. It is therefore compelled to divide society into two parts, of which the one is elevated above the other.
“The coincidence of a change of environment and human activity or self-change can only be conceived and rationally understood as revolutionary practise.”
In other words, you can not understand why you should want to improve the world unless you conceive the world which produced you as in a process of self-improvement. Here a scientific mind would ask: But when you have so conceived the world, how do you explain those who don’t want to improve it, but are steady on the job of making it worse ? Marx had lived too long in Hegel’s dialectics to be troubled by that question, or even to have it rise in his mind. Those ignorant miscreants are a negative and disappearing “phase”, an essential part of the very “contradiction” which is being “resolved” by your own “revolutionary practise”. The whole process is real, and it is all truth, but your part of it is more real and more true because closer to the consummation of the whole.
There is a real problem of knowledge here – the problem how there can be an objective science of social evolution when scientific ideas are themselves so potent a force in determining its course. You might call it the sociologist’s fallacy to ignore this problem. But the problem certainly is not solved for any scientific mind by this partisan personification of the whole body of the facts. We know quite well – whatever the problems involved – that no man can give a scientific account of any society without standing above it. Nor can such an account of a society be applied in an effort to guide its evolution without the problem arising how to relate those who have this scientific viewpoint to the blinder forces operating below – how to relate the socialists, if you will, to the trade unions. Marx is here merely insisting that sociology shall not become a science.
And in a subsequent thesis, numbered 6, he insists that psychology shall not become a science. Feuerbach, he says, talks about “the essence of man ...” “But the essence of man is not an abstraction dwelling in the separate individual.” Which sounds promising, and reminds us of his announcement in Die deutsche Ideologie that he is going to abandon all philosophical abstractions whatsoever and study concrete actual men in their process of development. But then he straightway adds: The essence of man “in its reality is the ensemble of social relations”, which is pure Hegelian metaphysics. For in this saying, and others like it, Marx is not merely insisting – as his modern champions like to pretend – upon the social nature of the mind and nervous system. He is not foretelling “social psychology”. Far from it. He is eliminating psychology altogether, eliminating “man” as a problem of study, in order to make room for a sufficiently hard-and-fast conception of “society” as a single thing – an “object”, “reality”, “sensibility” – the history of whose “practical activity” will constitute the whole essential history of man. He is making ready, in short, for the eighth thesis which reads as follows:
“All social life is essentially practical. All the mysteries which lead theory astray into mysticism find their rational solution in human practise and in the idea of this practise.”
Marx will devote his life to proving that this essentially practical object, social life, is destined by the inner law of its being to contradict itself (the class struggle) and resolve the contradiction in a higher unity (the cooperative commonwealth). True wisdom and the way out of all mysticism for man, who is but “the ensemble of social relations,” will be to abandon “theory” and join in the practical procedure of this essential reality, social life, toward its dialectically inevitable goal.
Only when you have mastered this, can you make intelligible Marx’s ninth and tenth theses, which read as follows:
“9. The highest point reached by contemplative materialism, that is the materialism which does not conceive sensibility as practical activity, is the contemplation of separate individuals and bourgeois society.
“10. The standpoint of the old materialism is bourgeois society. The standpoint of the new, human society or social humanity.”
What Marx is saying here is that a materialism which merely contemplates the world, and does not conceive the world and the perceiver of it to be in a state of practical and dialectic action toward something better, can not be a social revolutionist. He must not only conceive of sensible objects in general as consisting of a practical process, but he must conceive of “society” as such an object, consisting of such a process. In short, these two theses merely state succinctly that unless you read your ideal program into the movement of the objective facts you can not believe in or adhere to it. What other connection can exist between conceiving sensation as a practical activity and believing in a new human society, a social humanity ? Is it not a fact that millions of materialists have believed in a new human society, and in social humanity, and have adopted its standpoint, who have not had the glimmer of an idea – if indeed sixty people have up to this date – what Marx meant by “conceiving sensibility as practical activity”?
Marx concludes his theses with a brilliant epigram:
“Philosophers have interpreted the world in various ways; the thing is to change it.”
In Soviet Russia this has become almost the most popular slogan in the whole literature of the state philosophy. And no wonder, for in its elusive ambiguity it epitomizes the essence of the Marxian position, the delicate equilibrium of one who abandons philosophy for practical scientific effort, and yet preserves in that very act the essence of philosophy. On its face it seems merely to repeat what Marx had said in Die deutsche Ideologie:
“For a practical materialist, a communist, the thing is to revolutionize the existing world – that is, practically turn against things as he finds them and change them.”
But if that is all it means, why mention the philosophers? Why not say “Poets have sung the world ... painters have painted the world; the thing is to change it.” Marx in this aphorism is not only saying that we should quit philosophizing and change the world; he is saying that a true philosophy of the world and a resolute program for changing the world will be one and the same thing. And that, as we have seen, is the very soul of Hegel’s metaphysics.
Marx, then, was very accurate when he said in the preface to Capital that he had merely turned Hegel’s philosophy other side up. Hegel had been conceiving thought, or the idea, as the real thing, and the reality of the sense-object as illusory. Marx declared the sense-object to be real, and the idea a mere reflection of it. But he retained in his conception of that sense-object the essential virtue that Hegel had attributed to his idea, the property of purposive dialectic movement toward high ends. The only radical change was that, whereas Hegel’s ideal reality was travelling toward an ideal goal in the being of God, Marx’s sensible reality is travelling toward a sensible goal in the organization of the communist society. Marx thought that he had thus saved the “rational kernel” and got rid of the “mystical shell” in the Hegelian philosophy. He even thought, and tried to keep on thinking, that he had achieved his aim to get rid of “philosophy” altogether. But one does not get rid of “philosophy” by the simple device of turning a certain philosophy other side up. One does not get rid of “philosophy” without clearly understanding what one means by “philosophy”, and how it differs from the scientific point of view.
 

 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (App. 5)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Appendix V:
 
The Reply of the Politburo

THE members of the Politburo replied to Trotsky’s objective and conscientious letter with an abusive personal attack. To his patiently repeated exposition of the need for a thorough system of planning in the socialised industries, they replied in the following manner:
“We consider it necessary to say frankly to the party that at the basis of all the dissatisfaction of Comrade Trotsky, all his irritation, all his attacks against the Central Committee which have continued already for several years, his determination to disturb the party, lies the circumstance that Trotsky wants the Central Committee to place him and Comrade Kalegaev at the head of our industrial life ...”
It does not seem likely that if for several years Trotsky had been attacking the Central Committee and disturbing the party, through motives of personal ambition and irritation, Lenin would have endorsed Trotsky’s authority in the party when confronted with the possibility of his own death. The Politburo did not know about this act of Lenin’s when they wrote those words “for several years.”
The reply of the Politburo continued:
“Trotsky is a member of the Soviet of People’s Commissars, a member of the Soviet of Labour and Defence; Lenin offered him the post of vice-president of the Soviet of People’s Commissars. In all these positions Trotsky might, if he wished to, demonstrate in action, working before the eyes of the whole party, that the party might trust him with those practically unlimited powers in the sphere of industry and military affairs towards which he strives. But Trotsky preferred another method of action ... He never attended a meeting of the Soviet of People’s Commissars, neither under Lenin, nor after his withdrawal. He never attended a meeting of the Soviet of Labour and Defence, neither before nor after its reorganisation ...”
Again, it does not seem probable that if Trotsky had shown a disposition to shirk the work of the Government under Lenin as well as after his withdrawal, Lenin would have written a letter from his deathbed endorsing the authority of Trotsky in the party. The Politburo certainly made a misstep when they wrote the words “under Lenin as well as after his withdrawal.”
The punctuality and conscientiousness with which Trotsky meets and fulfils every engagement and every obligation he enters into is one of the natural wonders of Russian society. It is a thing that visitors go to see! And the fact is perfectly well known to everybody in Russia that Trotsky is the only man comparable to Lenin in the sustained intensity of his work, and that he organises his work to the highest possible degree.
There are three facts which explain the possibility of such a misrepresentation of Trotsky. The first is that there has been a gradual shifting of the location of the governing power in Soviet Russia – an organic evolution the significance of which it would be very interesting to trace. The details do not belong here, and I do not know them, but the real centre of executive action has steadily moved away from the Soviet of Peoples Commissars toward the Politburo of the party. There is often a difference, therefore, between the organ which formally takes an action and the organ which really decides upon it, even though the same individuals function in both cases. If to this fact you will add the fact that Trotsky, like all men of great executive mind and energy, is utterly impatient of time spent in formality and mere talk, you will understand what is the real fact under this incredible accusation – namely, that Trotsky has been entirely consecrated to the real business of getting the work done. Assuming the privileges of his genius, he has refused to attend meetings of a formal or conversational or educative nature. To people emotionally determined that he shall not be a genius, that there shall be no genius in the world but Lenin, this has been irritating. If anything further is needed to explain the possibility of this accusation against Trotsky, it is surely contained in that frank statement of the Secretary, Kuibeshev (quoted on p.26): “We consider it necessary to fight you, and we cannot declare you an enemy; that is why we resort to such methods.” There may have been meetings where it was futile for Trotsky to appear, with the cards thus stacked against him.
The reply of the Politburo continues:
“Trotsky categorically declined the position of substitute for Lenin. That evidently he considers beneath his dignity. He conductshimself according to the formula, ‘All or nothing.’”
If anything could prove that Trotsky is not acting from motives of personal ambition, and is interested solely in getting the work done, it is just this declining the position of acting head of the Government.
Trotsky’s whole life is an answer to this abuse.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (App. 3)



Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Appendix III:
 
The “Retreat” of Zinoviev and Kamenev

THE following letter written by Lenin to the party just a few days before the October revolution gives some indication of what Lenin meant by the “retreat” of Zinoviev and Kamenev in October. Lenin was in hiding, and he made four copies of this letter in minute handwriting, so that it might be sure to arrive at its destination. That explains its rather wide private circulation in Russia, although it has never been published.
“LETTER TO THE MEMBERS OF THE PARTY OF BOLSHEVIKS
“COMRADES, – I have not yet succeeded in getting the Petersburg papers for Wednesday, the 18th. When I heard over the telephone the full text of the article of Kamenev and Zinoviev in a non-party paper, Novaia Zhizn, I refused to believe it. But doubt proved impossible, and I am compelled to avail myself of this opportunity to get this letter into the hands of the party members by Thursday evening or Fridaymorning, for to remain silent before an act of such unbelievable strike-breaking would be a crime.
“The more serious the practical question, and the more ’prominent’ the people who perpetrate an act of strike-breaking, the more dangerous it is, the more resolutely one must throw out the strike-breakers, the more unpardonable it would be to waver because of any past ‘services’ of the strike-breakers.
“Only think of it. In party circles it is known that in September the party discussed the question of an insurrection. But nobody heard a word of one letter or leaflet of one of the people concerned. Now, on the eve, as you might say, of the Congress of the Soviets, two prominent Bolsheviks appear against the majority, and, quite evidently, against the Central Committee. This is not said directly, and from that the injury to the cause is still greater, for to talk in hints is more dangerous.
“From the text of the announcement of Kamenev and Zinoviev it is entirely clear that they have gone against the Central Committee, for otherwise their announcement ismeaningless, but just what resolution of the Central Committee they quarrel with, is not stated.
“Why?
“It is quite evident: because the Central Committee did not publish it.
“And what does this mean?
“Upon the most important fighting question, on the eve of the critical day of October 20th, two ‘prominent Bolsheviks’ in the non-party Press, and, moreover, exactly in that paper which, upon the question at issue, goes hand in hand with the bourgeoisie against the party of the workers – in such a paper they attack an unpublished decision of the party Centre. That is a thousand times more contemptible, and a million times more harmful, than even the publications of Plekhanov in the non-party Press in 1906-7, which the party condemned so bitterly. After all, the question then was only aboutelections, and now it is a question of insurrection for the conquest of power.
“And upon such a question, after a decision adopted by the Centre, to oppose that unpublished decision before Rodzianko and Kerensky in a non-party paper – can you imagine an act more traitorous, more characteristic of a strike-breaker? I should consider it a disgrace to myself if out of a former close association with those former comrades I wavered in condemning them. I say straight out that I no longer consider either of them comrades, and I will fight with all my power, both before the Central Committee and before the Convention, for the expulsion of both of them from the party.
“A workers’ party, which life is continually putting face to face with the question of insurrection, cannot fulfil that hard task if unpublished resolutions of the Centre, after their adoption, are attacked in the non-party Press, and wavering and confusion introduced into the fighting ranks.
“Let Messrs. Zinoviev and Kamenev found their own party with handfuls of panic-stricken people or candidates for the Constituent Assembly. The workers will not join such a party, for its first slogan will be:
“ ‘Members of the Central Committee, defeated on the question of the decisive battle at a meeting of the Committee, are permitted to go into the non-party Press for an attack on the unpublished resolutions of the party.’
“Let them build themselves a party like that; our workers’ party of Bolsheviks will only gain from it.
“When all the documents are published, the strike-breaking of Zinoviev and Kamenev will come out much clearer still ...
“As for raising again the question of the insurrection now, so near to the twentieth of October, I cannot decide at this distance just how far the undertaking is spoiled by these strike-breakers with their publications in the non-party Press. Unquestionably the practical harm done is very great. In order to overcome it the first thing to do is to restore the unity of the Bolshevik front by expelling the strike-breakers.
“The weakness of the intellectual arguments against the insurrection will be clearer the more we drag them out into the light of day. I sent an article on this the other day to The Workers’ Way, and if the editors do not consider it possible to publish it, the members of the party will doubtless get acquainted with it in manuscript.
“These ‘intellectual,’ if one may say so, arguments reduce themselves to two. First, to ‘waiting’ for the Constituent Assembly. Perhaps we’d better wait a while – that’s the whole argument. Perhaps with hunger, and ruin, and exhaustion of the soldiers’ patience, with Rodzianko taking steps for the surrender of Petersburg to the Germans, with lock-outs – perhaps we’d better wait a while.
“Perhaps and perhaps – that’s the whole strength of the argument.
“And second, a clamouring pessimism. With the bourgeoisie and Kerensky all is well, with us all to the bad. With the capitalists everything is miraculously ready, with the workers all to the bad. The ’pessimists’ as to the military side of the business yell at the tops of their voices, and the ‘optimists’ are silent, for the reason that nobody wants to expose anything before Rodzianko and Kerensky – nobody but strike-breakers.

“Heavy times. A heavy problem. Heavy treason.
“And just the same the problem will be solved. The workers will unite; the peasant rebellion and the extreme impatience of the soldiers at the front will do their work.Close the ranks tighter; the proletariat must win.
“N. LENIN.”
This was just before the seizure of power. Just after it another crisis arose, when the Left Social Revolutionaries refused to go into a Bolshevik Government, and the Bolsheviks were compelled either to form a coalition with the bourgeois Socialists or hold the power alone. At this point Zinoviev and Kamenev made a second ‘retreat,’ and again Lenin was compelled to denounce them. The following quotation is from an article published by Lenin in Pravda at that time. The article is not included in the Complete Works of Lenin, of which Kamenev is the editor, but it constitutes one of the most important historic documents of the period:
“Comrades: Several members of the Central Committee of our party and of the Soviet of People’s Commissars, Kamenev, Zinoviev, Nogin, Rykov, Miliutin, and a few others, withdrew yesterday, November 4th, from the Central Committee of our party ... In such a big party as ours, notwithstanding the proletarian revolutionary course of our politics, there must inevitably be individual comrades not sufficiently stoical and firm in fighting the enemies of the people. The task standing at this moment before our party is really immeasurable, the difficulties gigantic, and several members of our party, formerly occupying responsible posts, have trembled under the assault of the bourgeoisie and fled from our midst. All the bourgeoisie and its helpers exult, and rejoice in our misfortune, shout about collapse, and predict the ruin of the Bolshevik Government.
“Comrades, do not believe this lie. These comrades acted as deserters, not only abandoning the posts entrusted to them, but violating the direct resolution of the Central Committee to the effect that they should at least postpone their withdrawal until the decision of the Petrograd and Moscow party organisations. We decisively condemn this desertion. We are firmly convinced that all conscious workers, soldiers and peasants belonging to our party or sympathising with it, will as decisively condemn the behaviour of the deserters ...
“Remember, comrades, that two of the deserters, Kamenev and Zinoviev, had already, before the insurrection in Petrograd, acted as deserters and strike-breakers, for they not only voted at the decisive meeting of the Central Committee against the insurrection, but even after the decision of the Central Committee was made, they appeared before the party workers with an agitation against the insurrection. Everybody knows that the papers, fearing to stand on the side of the workers and inclining more and more toward the bourgeoisie (Novaia Zhizn, for example), raised at that moment, along with the whole bourgeois Press, a hue and cry about the ‘collapse’ of our party, the ‘collapse’ of the insurrection, etc. But life soon refuted the lies and slanders of some, the doubts and waverings and cowardice of others. The ‘storm’ which they tried to raise around the act of Kamenev and Zinoviev to the point of breaking the Petrograd insurrection, turned out to be a storm in a glass of water; the mighty rising of the mass, the mighty heroism of the millions of workers and soldiers and peasants in Petrograd and Moscow, on the front, in the trenches, and in the villages, removed these deserters as lightly as a railroad train tosses aside a chip.
“Shame on all unbelievers, all waverers, all doubters, and all those who let the bourgeoisie frighten them, and surrender to the yells of their helpers, direct or indirect! There is not a shadow of wavering in the masses of the workers and soldiers ...”
This is the conduct which Lenin, faced with his own death, saw fit to advise the party was “not accidental” in Kamenev and Zinoviev. He gave the further advice in his Testament that this incident “should not be used against them” – a piece of advice which Trotsky had instinctively followed. He coupled this with the advice that “Trotsky’s non-Bolshevik past” should not be used against him – a piece of advice which had already been violated to the extent of volumes by Zinoviev and Kamenev and their associates.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 7)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter VII:
 Zinoviev Creates A Panic

JUST as Stalin fell back upon brutality in order to beat Trotsky’s clear arguments, so Zinoviev fell back upon fear. Zinoviev called together a meeting of the Petrograd officials of the bureaucratised party, and told them to issue a cry of alarm stating that Trotsky had defied Leninism and attacked the unity of the party. In calling them the officials of a bureaucratised party, I am only following the statements of Zinoviev himself, written one month earlier in support of the resolution on Workers’ Democracy. I am only following the statement of that resolution. The one thing I add is that Zinoviev presided over the Petrograd branch of that bureaucratised party, and the only question that can be raised about my statement is to what extent was that party bureaucratised. And the extent of it may be inferred from the following fact: While the Moscow meeting of the same group of officials, presided over by Kamenev – who for some reason had not yet got in on the plan to destroy Trotsky – heard a friendly and temperate speech about Trotsky’s letter, passed a brief resolution supporting the programme of Workers’ Democracy, and went tranquilly home to bed, the Petrograd meeting, under instructions from Zinoviev, put forth a unanimous cry of fright that stampeded the whole Russian Communist Party, and produced a condition of intellectual mob-hysteria that lasted all winter, and went to such lengths that it seemed at times as though there was just one man in all Russia who had retained his emotional equilibrium, and that was Trotsky.
It is noticeable that Zinoviev, like Stalin, was in the beginning a little embarrassed by the facts. He began his speech by saying that he had heard of some “queer guys” who thought that Trotsky’s letter was really written in support of the resolution of the Politburo. And he dismissed these queer guys by telling them that Trotsky’s letter was “not at all clear,” it was “decidedly misty,” its language was “extremely in exact,” and these queer guys evidently did not understand it. A clearer piece of prose was never written. These introductory remarks were simply a confession by Zinoviev of the difficult job he had to do – namely, compel 3,000 people to believe, or pretend to believe, that Trotsky had meant what he had not said. I am not going to analyse the inconsequential old maid’s eloquence with which Zinoviev did this job. [1] The one seizable and unadulterated fact he adduced was that, in the far-off past, Trotsky had opposed the organisational platform of Bolshevism. He had been, to use the very careful words of Lenin, a “non-Bolshevik.” And in order to raise this historic ghost against Trotsky and start the cry of “Menshevik,” Zinoviev had to go back some five years beyond the time when he himself had been – to quote also the careful words of Lenin – a a “strike-breaker,” a “traitor,” a “deserter,” and a surrenderer to the bourgeoisie.
What I want to analyse is the formal indictment of Trotsky, obviously dictated by Zinoviev, and adopted by those 3,000 Petrograd party workers after he got through with his speech. [2] It begins, in substance, as follows:
“If Comrade Trotsky is solidary with the Central Committee – as one might assume on the basis of his voting for the resolution – how then can we understand his violation of its unanimity on the very day after his vote? ... The party can only spread out its hands in bewilderment when it reads in Comrade Trotsky’s letter an attack upon the direct disciples of Comrade Lenin, whom Comrade Trotsky compares with Edward Bernstein, Kautsky, Adler, Guesde and other Social Democratic leaders.”
That is the beginning of the indictment. Now go back and read the passage I quoted from Trotsky’s letter, and see if you can find anything in it about “the direct disciples of Lenin.” And if you want to realise the extent to which Zinoviev manipulated these party workers like automatons, let me tell you that this preposterous statement was adopted by a vote of 3,000 against five, with seven abstaining.
The resolution continues:
“If Comrade Trotsky seriously thus estimates the named (sic) disciples of Comrade Lenin, it was his duty not to adopt a resolution unanimously with them, but openly appear with an indictment before the whole party.”
In other words, the fact which makes it clear to a child’s intelligence that Trotsky did not mean to compare his colleagues in the Central Committee with Bernstein, etc., but that he meant what he said, is used to make his alleged comparison of them with Bernstein, etc., seem more insane and outrageous.
Before proceeding with Zinoviev’s attack, let us pause to consider this one point in isolation. There is no man in the world whose courtesy and delicacy in personal relations with his comrades has always been more striking than that of Trotsky. During the very height of this attack upon him, when wild slanders and abuse were flying about Russia like bombs in a battle, Trotsky sharply reproved a young Communist for speaking of Zinoviev by the name of “Grishka” – which is just equivalent to calling a person named Thomas W. Something-or-Other “Tommy.” That is an example of the almost quixotic delicacy of Trotsky’s conduct in the matter of personal relations with his comrades in the revolution. It has always been so, and it is known to everybody who knows Trotsky. His aesthetic, or, if you will, ethical elevation in such matters is painful. And his books, even the most polemical, are as clear of these dirty under-hints as a stream of spring water. Therefore you have the choice of believing that Stalin and Zinoviev are misrepresenting Trotsky, or that Trotsky has suddenly changed his character completely. And if you will consider all the facts which I have recounted up to this point, beginning with the time when Lenin urged Trotsky to take his place in the Government, and delegated to Trotsky the defence of their common policies against this same opposing group, and ending with the actual words of Trotsky in this very passage, which are as wise and tranquil as any ever written, you will concede, I think, that the former hypothesis is plausible and the latter is absurd.
The resolution of the Petrograd party workers continues:
“With a like heavy feeling we read further the wholesale arraignment against the party apparatus, the summons to dismiss the workers in the apparatus, the laying upon the party apparatus of the blame for the formation of fractions, and so forth.”
Let us ignore the “and so forth,” for Trotsky’s letter is very brief, and he can hardly have committed in that one letter all the sins that a reader might be able to think of. Let us take the first two of these actual accusations. Trotsky is accused of violating the unanimity of the Politburo by writing a “wholesale arraignment of the apparatus” and a “summons to dismiss the party workers.” [3] The unanimous resolution of the Politburo speaks in the following terms of the apparatus: It calls attention to a “noticeable bureaucratisation of the party apparatus and rising out of that the threat of separation of the party from the mass.” As a remedy to these evils, it demands “a serious change of the party course in the sense of an actual and systematic putting into operation of the principles of Workers’ Democracy.” It outlines these principles, and says that in order to guarantee their being carried into action,
“it is necessary to pass from words into action, proposing to the lower branches, the district, branch and provincial party conferences at the coming elections systematically to renew the party apparatus from below, advancing into responsible places such workers as are able to defend intra-party democracy in reality.”
It further states that
“an especially important task of the Control Commissions at the present moment is the struggle with bureaucratic perversions of the party apparatus and the party technique, and the bringing to justice of official persons who hinder the carrying into elect of the principles of Workers’ Democracy.”
Trotsky says in his letter:
“The renewal of the party apparatus – of course, within the strict limits of the constitution – ought to be carried out with a view to replacing the officialised and bureaucratised with fresh elements in close union with the collective life or capable of guaranteeing such a union. And first of all ought to be removed from the party positions those elements who at the first voice of criticism, of objection, of protest, are inclined to demand one’s party ticket for the purpose of repression. The new course ought to begin with this, that in the apparatus all should feel from bottom to top that nobody dares to terrorise the party ... Roughly, the task may be formulated thus: The party should subordinate to itself its apparatus, not ceasing for a moment to be a centralised organisation ... It is not necessary to say that the apparatus of the party, that is, its organisational skeleton, delivered of its self-sufficient narrowness, will not be weakened but strengthened. As to the fact that we need a powerful centralised apparatus in our party there can be no two opinions.”
To what extent has Trotsky violated the unanimity of the Politburo in his letter? The resolution of the Politburo demands the renewal of the apparatus from below, the advancing into responsible places of such workers as are able to defend Party Democracy in reality, the bringing to justice of those who refuse. Trotsky demands the removal of the bureaucratised and officialised, and their replacement by fresh elements from below. Can you advance new workers into responsible places without removing those who now occupy those places ? The whole party was agreed at this time that the apparatus should be, if anything, reduced rather than enlarged. Therefore there is no possible practical interpretation of the alleged difference here, except that Trotsky views the resolution as a thing to be put into operation, while Zinoviev and his obedient officials view it as a formula with which to quiet the rising agitation against their bureaucratic methods of control.
So much for Trotsky’s “wholesale arraignment” of the apparatus, his "summons to a removal” of the party workers. Now as to his “laying the blame on the apparatus for the formation of fractions.” Did he violate here the unanimity of the Politburo? If you will remember what I told you about the origin of this whole discussion – the discovery of two conspirative organisations among the members of the party – you will realise that laying the blame for the formation of fractions upon the bureaucratism of the apparatus, was the whole sense and meaning of the resolution onWorkers’ Democracy. And that sense and meaning was expressed in the resolution itself in the following words:
“Workers’ Democracy means freedom of open discussion by all the members of the party of the most important questions of party life, freedom of discussion upon them, and also the election of the governing official persons and collegiums from top to bottom. However, it does not by any means propose freedom of fractional groupings, which for a governing party are extremely dangerous, for they always threaten a bifurcation or splitting apart of the Government and the State apparatus as a whole ...
Only a continual, lively, intellectual life can preserve the party such as it was formed before and during the revolution, with a continual critical study of its own past, correction of its errors and collective consideration of important questions. Only these methods of work are capable of giving a real guarantee against the danger that passing disagreements will convert themselves into fractional groupings, with all the consequences indicated above. [4]
For the prevention of this, it is demanded that the governing party organs listen to the voice of the broad party mass, and that they should not treat every criticism as a manifestation of fractionalism, and thus impel conscientious and disciplined party members along the road of secrecy and fractionalism.”
That is the manner in which the unanimous resolution of the Politburo discusses the relation of the conduct of the “governing party organs” – that is, the apparatus – to the danger of the formation of fractions.
And here is Trotsky’s “violation” of that unanimity:
“Yes, the party could not fulfil its historic mission if it fell apart into fractional groupings. That must not, and will not be. The party as a whole, as a self-active collectivity, will prevent that. But the party can wrestle successfully with the danger of fractions only by developing, strengthening and making durable the course toward Workers’ Democracy. The bureaucratism of the apparatus is one of the chief sources of fractionalism. It suppresses criticism and drives dissatisfaction underground. It is inclined to tack the label of fractionalism upon every individual or collective voice of criticism or warning. Mechanical centralism is inevitablyaccompanied by fractionalism, which is at once a malicious caricature of Workers’ Democracy, and a terrible political danger.”
What is the difference here? The resolution of the Politburo declares that an abandonment of bureaucratic methods and an adoption of Workers’ Democracy is the only thing that can prevent fractions. Trotsky says that bureaucratic methods and the lack of Workers’ Democracy is one of the chief causes of their formation. In other words, there is no difference at all. The statement that Trotsky has violated the unanimity of the resolution of the Politburo under this item is a false statement. Why did 3,000 party workers, agitated by a speech from Zinoviev, put their names to this statement, which is obviously false? Because their excessive and “self-sufficient” power, like his, is bound up in the perpetuation of that bureaucratic regime whichthe resolution of the Politburo, as sincerely interpreted by Trotsky, would abolish.
And yet that bureaucratic regime was already so perfected that in one month after the promulgation of this obviously false statement, a conference of party officials called together by the triumvirate for that purpose, adopted a solemn resolution branding Trotsky’s letter as a “fractionalist manifesto,” and beginning its indictment of him with the statement that “The opposition, [5] with Comrade Trotsky at the head of it, has given the slogan ‘Destruction of the Apparatus of the Party.’” That is the resolution which first placed Trotsky before the party and before the whole world as intrinsically a Menshevik and an enemy of “Leninism.” Lenin died three days after the adoption of that resolution. Do you think it is surprising if Lenin’s wife wrote an affectionate letter to Trotsky, reminding him of his early friendship with Lenin, and assuring him that Lenin’s feeling toward him had never changed to the day of his death?
The reader may find it almost incredible that a conference of grown-up people could adopt such a resolution upon such a basis. He will surely imagine I have omitted, or failed to notice, some factor of importance here. I will give him, therefore, two more examples of the intellectual elevation of the arguments by which the conference was worked up to this action. The first from Bucharin: [6]
“Bolshevism has always valued very highly, and still values very highly, the party apparatus. This does not say that it would be blind to the point of not seeing the weaknesses of the apparatus, including its bureaucratism. However, Bolshevism, that is to say, Leninism, has never contrasted the party with the apparatus. That would be, from the Bolshevik point of view, absolute ignorance, for there is no party without its apparatus. Remove the apparatus, and you will see the party transform itself into an incoherent conglomeration of human masses ...”
Can anything more childish than this be imagined? Is it possible to “see the weaknesses of the apparatus, including its bureaucratisation,” and discuss them, without using sentences in which the apparatus and the party are contrasted? And does not the resolution of the Politburo contrast them in exactly the same way and to the same effect as Trotsky? Trotsky explicitly says in his letter that what he is trying to avoid is “an alienation between the apparatus and the mass.”
Now the argument of Stalin:
“The third mistake committed by Comrade Trotsky consists in the fact that in his writings he contrasted the apparatus with the party, giving the slogan of struggle with the Apparatchiks [the organisation men, as we should say], and the subjection of the apparatus to the party. Bolshevism cannot accept a contrasting of the party and the apparatus. Of what does the apparatus in reality consist? The apparatus of the party – that is the Central Committee, the Regional Committees, the Provincial Committees, and the District Committees. Are these committees subordinated to the party? Of course they are subordinated, for they are 90 per cent, elected by the party. They are wrong who say that the Provincial Committees are appointed. They are wrong. You know, Comrades, that our Provincial Committees are elected, just like the District Committees, just like the Central Committee. They are subordinated to the party, but after they are elected they ought to lead the party – that is the point. Imagine the work of the party if after the Central Committee was elected by the conventions, after the Provincial Committee was elected by the Provincial Conference, the Central Committee and the Provincial Committee did not conduct the work. Why, without that our party work is completely unthinkable!” [7]
Could anything be more obviously disingenuous than this indignant driving home of the obvious? Stalin has signed with Trotsky a resolution demanding that “the district, branch, and provincial party conferences at the coming elections shall systematically renew the party apparatus from below, advancing into responsible places such workers as are able to defend intra-party democracy in reality.” Trotsky, in commenting on that resolution, has declared that “the renewal of the party apparatus – of course, within the strict limits of the constitution – ought to be carried out with the goal of replacing the officialised and bureaucratised with fresh elements in close union with the collective life or capable of guaranteeing such union ... The party ought to subordinate to itself its apparatus, not for a moment ceasing to be a centralised organisation.” And Stalin pretends that Trotsky has attacked the principle of centralisation, has advocated a struggle against the apparatus as such, an attempt of the party membership to defy the leadership of the very men they have elected! Why does Stalin attribute to Trotsky an absurdity that would be rejected by the logical instinct of an unborn child? Because he is driven into a corner from which he cannot get out by any more honest or any more plausible method. He has signed a resolution demanding the renewal of the apparatus from below, and a real renewal of the apparatus from below will take his artificial power out of his hand, and give to Trotsky the influence which belongs to him. It is perfectly obvious that Trotsky is demanding nothing but a real renewal of the apparatus from below. And it is obvious that in defining his demand, he has been extremely prudent and careful to safeguard the organisational principles of Lenin. There is no way to beat him, therefore, except to deliberately and flatly falsify what he has said. And that is what Stalin does, and that is what the resolution of the conference of party officials, called together and whipped into an intellectual panic by Stalin and Zinoviev and Kamenev and their lieutenants, does. That is the only and the whole meaning of the statement of this conference that Trotsky has “given the slogan, ‘Destruction of the Apparatus of theParty.’”
 
“Fractionalism”
To return to the manifesto issued by the Petrograd party workers. It prolongs its cry of fright as follows:
“We read with alarm the lines of Comrade Trotsky which attempt to set the youth against the fundamental generation of old revolutionist Bolsheviks, the underground workers, the fundamental staff of our party ...”
I will not discuss this point again, for it is exactly the same falsification as that perpetrated by Stalin in his short article in Pravda of the day before, and merely demonstrates the close co-operation between him and Zinoviev. I will merely state, as to this question of ‘’old Bolshevism,” that if you drew up a list of the “Old Bolsheviks” whose names you learned to know and love while Lenin lived, you would find more of them on Trotsky’s side than on the side of the triumvirate. [8]
The manifesto of Zinoviev’s party workers continues, and, so far as the substance of it goes, concludes with the following statement:
“Against fractionalism, against groupings, Comrade Trotsky did not find one clear decisive word. In reality, under the present circumstances and in the present stage of the discussion, such a contribution by Comrade Trotsky is a support to those who demand the legalisation of fractions.”
Read now again the words that Trotsky wrote:
“The party could not fulfil its historic mission if it fell apart into fractional groupings. That must not and will not be. The party as a whole, as a self-active collectivity, will prevent that. But the party can wrestle successfully with the problem of fractions only by developing, strengthening and making durable the course toward Workers’ Democracy ... Mechanical centralism is inevitably accompanied by fractionalism, which is at once a malicious caricature of Workers’ Democracy and a terrible political danger.”
That is what Trotsky says in his letter about fractions, and, as I have already shown you, it is exactly what the unanimous resolution of the Politburo says. Trotsky only adds to that resolution the statement that to interpret its programme as a tolerance of fractionalism would be a “malicious caricature,” and that fractions constitute a “terrible political danger.” He uses the same adjective that is used to describe “Ivan the Terrible.” And upon the basis of this statement Zinoviev’s Petrograd party workers announce, 3,000 strong, that Trotsky has “found no decisive word against fractions,” and that his letter is a support to those who demand the legalisation of fractions. Four days before this the Moscow party workers, 4,000 of them, had met and discussed Trotsky’s letter without excessive emotion, agreeing or disagreeing with the statement that it “needed supplementation or explanation,” and going reasonably home to bed. From this you may infer that Zinoviev is an able agitator, and in that inference you make no mistake.
In order that you may taste the emotional quality of the panic generated in the party by Zinoviev’s agitation, I will quote one additional paragraph from his cry of alarm:
“We do not doubt for a moment that the immense majority of our party will appraise the letter of Comrade Trotsky, just as we, the Petertzi [9] have. The sooner Comrade Trotsky recognises and corrects his mistakes, the better will it be for our party.
We address ourselves to all the organisations of our party with a summons not to let the present discussion take the form taken by that preceding the Tenth Session, when Comrade Lenin had to come out with articles stating that ‘the party is sick,’ ‘the party has a fever,’ etc. Let us not forget, comrades, that the whole international situation, the whole internal situation, obliges us to be more cautious than ever before. And, above all, let us not forget this, that the universally accepted teacher and leader of our party, Vladimir Ilych Lenin, is still unable to take a direct part in the work of the Central Committee, and that this obliges us to observe a still greater solidarity and a still more hearty support of our Central Committee. ... If in the current discussion all kinds of legends have been created, this has been done by the ‘opposition ‘ only for fractional purposes. The unity of the party and the solidarity of its general staff will be protectedwhatever it costs ...”
Is it not strange that this extraordinary caution, and this exaggerated anxiety about the solidarity of the general staff, should not have led any members of that staff to call Trotsky on the telephone before his letter was published, and ask him to correct the statements in it which seemed to overstep their agreement?

Notes
1. His speech was printed in Pravda, December 21st, 1923.
2. Their resolution was printed in Pravda, December 18th 1923.
3. I translate as “party worker” the Russian word “rabotnik.” It means those who make a business of work for the party. The French call them “militants.”
4. All italics mine.
5. See Appendix VII.
6. Down with Fractionalism, Pravda, December 25th ff.
7. Pravda, January 20th, 1924.
8. I naturally do not feel justified in publishing such a list. It would include the names of people who, although their opinions are known, have refrained, for one reason or another, from publishing them.
9. Nickname for those living in Petrograd. I have employed the name Petrograd in describing events which happened in Leningrad before the name was changed.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (App. 6)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Appendix VI:
 
Trotsky’s Letter on the New Course




(In order that the reader may have a consecutive impression of Trotsky’s thought in the letter to his local branch, which was the original and fundamental basis of the campaign against him, I translate it here in full.)





DEAR COMRADES:
I have confidently expected each day that I should be able to take part in the discussion of the intra-party situation and the new problems. But illness arrived this time more inopportunely than ever, and has proven more prolonged than the doctors predicted. Nothing remains but for me to express my thoughts in the present letter.
The resolution of the Politburo on the question of party structure has an unusual significance. It means that the party has come to a serious turning-point on its historic path. At turning-points, as has been justly pointed out at many meetings, there is need of caution, but along with caution there is need of firmness and decisiveness. Procrastination, formlessness at turning-points would be the worst kind of incaution.
Certain conservatively disposed comrades, inclined to overestimate the role of the apparatus and underestimate the self-activity of the party, take a critical attitude to the resolution of the Politburo. They say the Central Committee is undertaking an impossible task, the resolution will only propagate false illusions and lead to negative results. It is plain that such an approach to the problem is saturated with bureaucratic lack of confidence in the party. The New Course announced in the resolution of the Central Committee consists in this, that the centre of gravity, wrongly shifted under the old course to the side of the apparatus, shall be shifted back to the side of initiative, critical self-activity, self-government of the party, as the organised advance guard of the proletariat. The New Course does not mean that the task is laid upon the party apparatus by such and such a date to decree, create, and establish a regime of democracy. Not at all. The party itself can realise that regime. The problem may be briefly formulated thus: the party shall subordinate to itself its apparatus, not for one instant ceasing to be a centralised organisation.
In recent debates and articles there is frequent reference to the fact that “pure,” “developed,” “ideal” democracy is unattainable, and that, in general democracy is not for us an end in itself. That is absolutely unquestionable. But with exactly the same right and foundation we may say that pure and absolute centralism is unattainable, and incompatible with the nature of a mass party, and that neither centralism nor the party apparatus is by any means an end in itself. Democracy and centralism are two sides in the structure of our party. The problem is to equilibrate those two sides more correctly – that is, in a manner better adapted to the existing circumstances. In the recent period this equilibrium has been lacking. The centre of gravity has been wrongly transferred to the side of the apparatus. The self-activity of the party has been reduced to a minimum. That has created habits and methods of administration fundamentally contradictory to the spirit of a revolutionary party of the proletariat. The excessive strengthening of this apparatus-centralism at the expense of the self-activity of the party has created in the party a feeling of unhealthiness. On the extreme flank this has found unusually morbid expression, even to the point of the creation of illegal groups under the leadership of elements clearly hostile to Communism. At the same time, throughout the whole party a critical attitude has arisen toward the apparatus method of deciding questions. An understanding, or at least a feeling, that party bureaucratism threatens to lead the party into an impasse has become almost universal. Warning voices have been raised. The first official and in the highest degree important expression of the crisis at which the party has arrived, is the resolution on the new course. It will be realised in actual life to the degree that the party – that is, the 400,000 members of it – desire and are able to realise it.
In a number of articles the thought has been insistently advanced that the fundamental way to revive the party is to raise the cultural level of its rank and file members, after which all the rest – that is, Workers’ Democracy – will be added of itself. That we need to raise the cultural and intellectual level of our party, in view of the gigantic tasks standing before it, is unquestionable. But exactly for that reason such a pedagogical, instructorial statement of the problem is wholly inadequate, and consequently wrong, and if it is stubbornly adhered to will only bring a sharpening of the crisis. The party can raise its level as a party only in completely fulfilling its fundamental tasks by the way of a collective, self-active leadership of the working class and the government of the working class. Not a pedagogical but a political approach is needed. We must not state the problem as though the application of party democracy was to be placed in dependence (by whom?) upon the degree of “preparedness” for it of the party members. The party is the party. We can present very severe demands to anybody who wants to join our party and remain in it; but those who join it become thereby active participants in its whole work.
Destroying self-activity, bureaucratism thereby prevents a raising of the general level of the party. And that is its chief fault. To the extent that the most experienced comrades, and those distinguished by service, inevitably enter into the apparatus, to that extent the bureaucratism of the apparatus has its heaviest consequences in the intellectual-political growth of the young generation of the party. This explains the fact that the youth – the most reliable barometer of the party – react the most sharply of all against party bureaucratism.
It would be wrong to think, however, that the excess of apparatus-methods in deciding party questions leaves no trace on the older generation, which incarnates the political experience of the party and its revolutionary traditions. No, the danger is great also on this side. It is needless to speak of the enormous significance – not only on a Russian, but on an international scale – of the older generation of our party; that is generally known and generally acknowledged. But it would be a crude mistake to estimate that significance as a self-sufficient fact. Only a continual interaction of the older and younger generation within the frame of party democracy can preserve the Old Guard as a revolutionary factor. Otherwise the old may ossify, and, unnoticed by themselves, become the most finished expression of the bureaucratism of the apparatus.
The degeneration of an “Old Guard” has been observed in history more than once. To take the freshest and clearest recent example: the leaders and parties of the Second International. We well know that Wilhelm Liebnecht, Bebel, Singer, Victor Adler, Kautsky, Bernstein, Lafargue, Guesde, and others, were the direct and immediate disciples of Marx and Engels. We know, however, that all these leaders – some partially and some altogether – degenerated into opportunism in the circumstances of parliamentary reform, and the self-sufficient growth of the party and trade-union apparatus. We saw especially on the eve of the imperialist war how the powerful social-democratic apparatus, protected by the authority of an older generation, became a gigantic brake upon revolutionary development. And we ought to state – we ourselves, the “old men” – that our generation, while naturally playing the role of leadership in the party, nevertheless does not contain within itself any automatic guarantee against a gradual and unnoticeable weakening of the proletarian and revolutionary spirit, provided the party permits any further growth and hardening of the bureaucratic-apparatus method of politics, which converts the younger generation into passive material for education, and creates inevitably an alienation between the apparatus and the mass, between the old and the young. Against that indubitable danger there is no other defence, but a serious, deep, radical change of course in the direction of Workers’ Democracy, with a continually increasing introduction into the party of proletarians who remain in the shops.
I will not pause here on this or that juridical, constitutional definition of party democracy, and juridical limitation of it. However important these questions are, they are secondary questions. We will decide them on the basis of the experience we have, and what needs changing we will change. But first of all it is necessary to change the spirit that prevails in the organisations. It is necessary that the party, in the person of all its local branches and associations, should restore to itself its collective initiative, its right of free comradely criticism – without fear and without favour – its right of organisational self-determination. It is necessary to revive and renew the apparatus, making it feel that it is the executive mechanism of the collective whole.
In the party Press of recent days there have appeared many examples characterising the extreme bureaucratic degeneration of party morals and relations. In answer to the voice of criticism: “Show your membership card!” Up to the publication of the resolution of the Central Committee on the New Course, the bureaucratised representatives of the apparatus treated the very mention of the necessity for a change of intra-party policy as heresy, fractionalism, and a loosening of discipline. Even now they are only formally prepared to “take cognisance” of the New Course; that is, bureaucratically reduce it to nothing. The renewal of the party apparatus – of course, within the strict limits of the constitution – ought to be carried out with the goal of replacing the officialised and bureaucratised, with fresh elements in close union with the collective life or capable of guaranteeing such a union. And first of all ought to be removed from the party positions those elements who at the first voice of criticism, of objection, of protest, are inclined to demand one’s party ticket for the purpose of repression. The New Course ought to begin with this, that in the apparatus all should feel, from bottom to top, that nobody dares to terrorise the party.
It is wholly inadequate that the youth should repeat our formulas. It is necessary that the youth should take the revolutionary formulas fighting, transform them into flesh and blood, work out for themselves their own opinion, their own personality, and be able to fight for their own opinion with that courage which comes from sincere conviction and independence of character. Passive obedience, mechanical drill, characterlessness, obsequiousness, careerism – away with these things from the party! A Bolshevik is not only a disciplined man; no, a Bolshevik is a man who, boring deep, has worked out for himself in each given instance a firm opinion, and courageously and independently defends it, not only in war with his enemies, but also within his own organisation. To-day he may be in the minority in the organisation. He submits because it is his party. But that obviously does not always mean that he was wrong. Maybe he sooner than others saw or understood a new problem, or the need of a turn. He insistently raises the question a second time, a third, a tenth time. In that he does a service to the party, helping it to meet the new problem full-armed, or to accomplish the new turn without organisational disturbance and fractional convulsion.
Yes, the party could not fulfil its historic mission if it fell apart into fractional groupings. That must not, and will not be. The party as a whole, as a self-active collectivity, will prevent that. But the party can wrestle successfully with the danger of fractions only by developing, strengthening and making durable the course toward Workers’ Democracy. The bureaucratism of the apparatus is one of the chief sources of fractionalism. It suppresses criticism and drives dissatisfaction underground. It is inclined to tack the label of fractionalism upon every individual or collective voice of criticism or warning. Mechanical centralism is inevitably accompanied by fractionalism, which is at once a malicious caricature of Workers’ Democracy, and a terrible political danger.
In clear understanding of the whole situation, the party will accomplish the necessary change of course with that firmness and decisiveness which is demanded by the depth of the problems standing before us. The party will thereby raise to a higher degree its revolutionary unity, a pledge that it can accomplish industrial and international tasks of immeasurable importance.
I have in no sense exhausted the question. I have purposely refrained from examining many of its essential elements, through fear of taking too much of your time. But I hope that I will soon get the better of the malaria, which – judging by my example – is in plain opposition to the new party course, and then I will try in freer vocal speech to supplement and make precise what I have not finished saying in this letter.
With comradely greeting,            



Dec. 8, 1923


L. TROTSKY





P.S. – Taking advantage of the fact that this letter appears in Pravda with a delay of two days, I want to make a few supplementary remarks.
I am told that certain individual comrades, when my letter was read at the meeting of the local branch, expressed an anxiety lest my reflections as to the mutual relations of the “Old Guard” and the younger generation might be employed for a setting against each other (!) of the young and the old. You can guarantee at a glance that this kind of thought will come into the heads of those comrades who only two or three months ago shuddered at the mere posing of the question of a change of course. At any rate, to advance into a prominent position such an anxiety in the present circumstances, and at the given moment, shows an incorrect estimation of the real dangers, and the order in which they stand. The present mood of the youth, which has, as every thinking member of the party understands, a highly symptomatic character, was created by those same methods of “dead calm,” of which the resolution unanimously adopted by the Politburo is a condemnation. In other words, it is exactly that “dead calm” which holds the danger of a growing alienation between the governing stratum of the party and its younger members – that is, its enormous majority. The tendency of the party apparatus to think and decide for the party, leads in its development to an effort to base the authority of the governing circles only on tradition. A respect for party tradition is undoubtedly a necessary constituent element of party education and amalgamation; but this element can be alive and steady, only if it is continually nourished and reinforced by an active and self-dependent verification of that tradition through the collective working out of the policy of the present day. Without that activity and self-dependence, a respect for tradition may degenerate into official romanticism, or even into mere officialism – form, that is, without content. It is needless to say that this kind of a bond between the generations would be wholly inadequate and unstable. Externally it might appear solid five minutes before there appeared an alarming crack in it. Exactly here lies the danger of a bureaucratic course, supported by a “dead calm” in the party. And in so far as the durably revolutionary, non-officialised representatives of the older generation – that is, as I firmly believe, its overwhelming majority – take clear account of the dangerous perspective characterised above, and, standing on the ground of the resolution of the Politburo, put forth all efforts to help the party convert that resolution into reality, in so far disappears the chief source of a possible setting against each other of the different generations in the party. This or that “superfluity,” or the impulse of the young in that direction will be then comparatively easy to overcome. But it is necessary, first of all, to create such conditions that party tradition will not be concentrated in the apparatus, but will live and renew itself in the daily experience of the party. By the same means we shall avoid another danger: a splitting of the older generation itself into the “apparatus men” – i.e., those who are useful in preserving the “dead calm” – and the non-apparatus elements. It is needless to say that the apparatus of the party – that is, its organisational backbone – delivered of its self-sufficient narrowness, will not be weakened but strengthened. As to the fact that we need a powerful centralised apparatus in our party there can be no two opinions.
One might also, perhaps, object that the reference in my letter to the bureaucratic degeneration of the Social Democrats was not right, in view of the deep distinction of the two epochs, the former an epoch of stagnant reformism, the present a revolutionary epoch. To be sure, an example is only an example, and not by any means an identity. However, that wholesale contrasting of epochs in itself decides nothing. Not without good reason do we point to the danger of the New Economic Policy, closely connected as it is with the protracted character of the international revolution. Our daily practical government work, continually becoming more detailed and specialised, hides in itself, as the resolution of the Central Committee points out, the danger of a narrowing of the horizon – that is to say, an opportunistic degeneration. It is perfectly obvious that these dangers become more serious, in proportion as party leadership is replaced with a tight-shut regime of “secretarial” command. We should be poor revolutionists if we hoped that the “revolutionary character of the epoch” would help us to wrestle with all our difficulties, and, above all, with intra-party difficulties. Let’s help the “epoch,” as we should, with a genuine realisation of the new party course unanimously adopted by the Politburo of the Central Committee.
In conclusion, one more remark. A couple of months ago, when the questions which are the topic of the present discussion first appeared on the order of the day of the party, certain responsible provincial comrades were inclined to shrug their shoulders condescendingly: Well, that’s only a Moscow invention; everything’s all right in the provinces. And even now in certain correspondence from the provinces we hear the same note. This contrasting of infected or busybody Moscow with the tranquil and reasonable provinces, is nothing but a clear expression of the same bureaucratism, although in a provincial edition. In reality the Moscow organisation of our party is the most inclusive, the most rich in abilities, and the livest. Even in the deadest moments of the so-called “dead calm” (a very expressive name, and don’t let it fail of a place in the history of the party!), there was more independent life and activity in Moscow than anywhere else. If Moscow is at the present moment distinguished from other points, it is only that she has taken the initiative in reconsidering the party course. That is not a minus for her, but a merit. The whole party will follow Moscow through the necessary stage of transvaluating certain values in the period just past. The less the provincial party apparatus opposes this, the more systematically the provincial organisations will pass through the inevitable and progressive stage of criticism and self-criticism. The party will harvest the results in the form of increased solidarity and a higher level of party culture.
L. TROTSKY


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 14)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter XIV:
 Recent Events

IN spite of Trotsky’s failure to “acknowledge his mistakes,” the machine did not feel strong enough at the time of the May Congress to exclude him from the Politburo. He continued to sit in the inner councils. And although he was prevented by the reorganisation of the Red Army from doing his practical work, he continued to bear the title of President of the Revolutionary Military Soviet. Moreover, his popularity among the masses continued to grow and flourish under this monotonous tirade, which bored the unthinking and disgusted those who know how to think.
His discourse in August on the financial domination of Europe by the United States, was seized upon with avidity by every Russian Marxian who really wishes to understand the current historic process. And his analysis of the failure of the German revolution was generally accepted as stating the real facts from the point of view of revolutionary science. To a query from a party local as to whether it was to be regarded as the official opinion of the party, the Central Committee replied that it was – and this although it contradicted their own thesis adopted by the Third International a short time before. The intellectual leadership of Trotsky thus crops out in spite of the most anxious efforts of the inferior minds that have displaced him.
But in proportion as Trotsky continued to mount above them in popularity and real grasp of their problems, the “educational” campaign against him, and the campaign of suppressing and discharging from office and expelling from the party his friends and adherents, became more violent. [1] The use of the secret police by the party bureaucracy for spying upon its own membership – noted by Trotsky as a dangerous symptom in his original letter to the Central Committee – became the daily and accepted method of destroying him. No friend of Trotsky would let you write him a letter that you did not want to have read before it reached his hand. The Leningrad pamphlet, proclaiming Trotsky a “revolutionary dilettante,” reinforced by other books and pamphlets of a similar nature, and by a special journal founded for the express purpose of combating this “deviation,” continued to be energetically circulated with the sanction, and with the funds, of a party of whose highest executive committee Trotsky was ostensibly a member. This was the anomalous condition of affairs throughout the summer and up to the anniversary of the revolution last November.
On that date Trotsky issued the third volume of his complete works, comprising all his preserved speeches and writings for the year of the revolution, and entitled 1917. As an introduction to that volume he wrote an article called Lessons of October, and that article constituted the “violation of discipline” spoken of in the despatches announcing his resignation as Commissar of War. I will tell you exactly what that article is. It is, in the first place, a demonstration that the success of the Bolshevik revolution depended, among other things, upon Lenin’s forcing the party to act at the critical moment, and overcoming the resistance of those in the Central Committee who wanted to postpone it, upon the assumption that their strength would continue to grow with the mere passage of time. Trotsky attributes the failure of the recently expected German revolution largely to the fact that this same erroneous assumption, and a similar tendency to postpone the critical action, prevailed. As Zinoviev was a chief representative of this tendency in both situations, a certain sensitiveness to this particular “Lesson of October” on the part of the ruling group would naturally be expected.
But that is only one-half, it seems to me, of the real thesis of Trotsky’s Lessons of October. Besides being a demonstration of the strategy of the Russian revolution, it is also a treatise upon the theme propounded by Lenin in his suppressed letter to the party, namely, that “the retreat of Kamenev and Zinoviev in October was not accidental.” I cannot, of course, declare that Trotsky intended his introduction for a treatise upon this theme, but I can declare that that is what it is. And I consider it by no means a coincidence that he introduces into his text the very words employed by Lenin: “The disagreements in 1917 were very deep and by no means accidental. But it would be a miserable thing to try to make out of them now, after several years, a weapon of struggle against those who were mistaken then.” Trotsky is not making out of these mistakes a weapon of struggle against the ruling group, for the simple reason that he is not struggling against them – not to the extent of raising a finger. But, nevertheless – in my opinion – he is taking this means of stating the real facts about these leaders, and others who stood with them then, and stand with them now, as they were indicated by Lenin in his suppressed letter.
The uninitiated reader may have thought that, in saying that their retreat in October was “not accidental,” Lenin meant merely that they were likely at any time to betray the revolution in a panic of personal emotion. He meant exactly the opposite thing. He meant that their act was not attributable to a temporary emotion, but was the expression of a political tendency. And it is this political tendency, an essentially anti-Marxian and anti-Bolshevik opposition to Lenin, as it manifested itself at every important crisis from the March revolution to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, which Trotsky analyses, and of which he writes the history in his Lessons of October. He shows that Kamenev opposed or sabotaged the policy of Lenin throughout this whole period, that Zinoviev joined him at both the moments of supremely critical importance, and that several other members of the present ruling group – Rykov, Lossovsky, Miluitin, and others – identified themselves in authentic documents with this same tendency. [2] He merely publishes these documents in his appendix.
The essay, whatever may be the ultimate judgment upon its thesis, is compact with indestructible facts. It has the weight of a sledge hammer, and is sincere and brilliant as blue steel. There is not any reason in the world why it should not be met and answered, with honesty and manhood, by those whose history it disparages.
Instead, it was met with a ruse and a new series of falsifications. Some “technical reason” was found for a three weeks’ delay in its publication after the first 5,000 copies had been sold, and while these were disappearing like drops of water in the sand, the whole literary and oratorical force of the ruling machine was turned loose to the business of “creating” an official opinion of Trotsky’s book. The public believed that the book had been suppressed, that Trotsky was arrested, imprisoned, exiled. People fought over the few copies in existence, and began typing off the Introduction for private circulation. And meanwhile the triumvirate filled the issues of Pravda and Izvestia, and the entire Russian Press with unscrupulous falsifications of its thesis and unrestrained vituperation against Trotsky. They called together a series of “representative” assemblies, fed them these official falsifications, these lies about Trotsky’s book, dictated to them the official denunciation, agitated them to the point of passing “unanimous resolutions” condemning a book of which not six in a thousand of them had ever read a single line. A firm supporter of Trotsky who attended one of these meetings was asked why he did not raise at least one voice against the resolution, and he replied: “In that fanaticised crowd if I had not applauded the resolution, I would have been beaten up.”
In short, the campaign of calumny and falsification against Trotsky was simply redoubled in quantity after the publication of his book. And it was redoubled in dishonesty and impudence and hate. The same slanders were printed and reprinted in all sorts of different newspapers and periodicals. On the counters of the book-stores you could find the same material under three or four different covers. Few bought them, but they were distributed gratuitously by tens of thousands to all clubs, to all libraries, to all unions and places of assembly. For this there was unlimited paper and funds. All Trotsky’s earliest writings were dragged up and subjected to the same process of falsification.
And more recent books, which had been universally accepted and advertised during the life of Lenin as expressions of official party opinion, were now found to contain subtle and terrible departures from Leninism – to be, in fact, nothing but a sly and sinister attempt to put “Trotskyism” in its place. Exquisitely printed anthologies appeared, of all the sentences ever written by Lenin in opposition to Trotsky or his opinions – sentences torn out of their context and their place in history, and simply thrown together to make a pile. An attack was even opened upon Trotsky’s career in the Red Army – it was “in spite of him,” and not with his help, that the revolutionary war was won by the party of Lenin. All the careerists and sycophants in Russia vied with each other in promoting this process, in devising new “loyalties” to the ruling group, new ignominies against Trotsky. His pictures and statues were chased out of store windows, out of the governmental institutions. Meetings at which he was scheduled to speak were called off or postponed. His salutation to the army of Budenny the papers were forbidden to print. The head of the Government printing house was discharged for publishing his book. Others involved in its publication were compelled to repent and abjure the heresy. It was made clear that a murmur on the part of any vulnerable Communist in defence of Trotsky, or in reply to the daily vilifications put out by the officials of the party, would cost him his place. The strong friends of Trotsky, or of the truth, saw that speech in such a tempest was futile. The campaign proceeded, therefore, in ominous and absolute silence from the most penetrating and the most honest minds in Russia. [3]
I have spoken of the “official lies” by which Trotsky’s book has been attacked, because, although the words are more agreeable, I cannot continue to call them falsifications or misrepresentations. There is some falsification, some misrepresentation. There is even occasionally a page of honest criticism. But, generally speaking, and speaking especially for the leaders, this business has gone entirely beyond the stage of falsifying or misrepresenting texts. They simply declare that Trotsky has said something which he has not said, and then they riddle it and ridicule it, and denounce it as an attack upon Lenin and upon Leninism. And, because the whole business of publicity and of the sale and distribution of literature is in their hands, Trotsky’s true texts do not appear in public to refute their statements. These texts are read privately, conscientiously, by those minds who have the courage and penetration to resist a universal official hysteria stimulated and supported by the State.
I am sure the reader has had enough of the quotation and analysis of so-called “arguments” employed in this pretended discussion. If I proved to him that the campaign against Trotsky’s New Course was carried on by means of falsifications, let him accept my statement that the campaign against Lessons of October was carried on by means of lies. Such a torrent of bigotry and irresponsible hypocrisy as the issues of Pravda were filled with from November to January of this year, when Trotsky resigned his command of the Red Army, has rarely been seen in history. I find it impossible to continue to mull over so much that is revolting. There are two recurrent motives in it, however, which I want to mention, merely by way of forewarning those who will meet this propaganda in a dilute form in England and America. First, Trotsky’s Lessons of October and his memoirs of Lenin, are advertised as an attempt to rewrite the history of the revolution in such a way as to discredit Lenin and give the glory to Trotsky. There is not a shadow of egotism in any of these books, and no solider and more real and beautiful tribute to the triumphant genius of Lenin will ever be written. Second, his Lessons of October is advertised as ignoring the party and writing the history of the revolution as though only the leaders and the masses played a role in it. Trotsky’s theme is not the role of the party, but the role of an oppositional tendency within the leadership of the party, but he founds his whole argument as to the importance of this tendency upon the explicit assertion that everything depended upon the party, that without the party there could have been no successful revolution. [4]
On January 20th, 1925, a meeting was called of the Central Committee and the Central Control Committee of the party, to discuss the so-called “attack” upon the party executive contained in Trotsky’s Lessons of October. Trotsky, being unable because of his illness to attend the meeting, wrote them a letter in which he defended himself in very restrained language as to a few of the more outrageous crimes and follies that had been imputed to him. [5] He concluded his letter with a recommendation that he be removed from his post as President of the Military Soviet, and a renewal of his offer to “answer this or that question, or give any necessary explanations.” His resignation was accepted, but his offer to answer questions or make any explanations was once more silently ignored.
Instead of welcoming such a direct and honest confrontation of the realities of the situation, as that invitation suggested, the defenders of “Leninism” preferred to wrap themselves up in a new and perfected series of ideological distortions of reality, lies and rationalisations, so extreme that it is almost impossible for a man in his right mind to read them. The only possible conclusion of such a wholesale indictment of a man’s character, conduct and opinions as was contained in their official resolution, would be his exclusion from the party – if not, indeed, his incarceration in a doubly reinforced and hermetically sealed cell or lethal chamber! And yet they not only did not exclude Trotsky from the party, but they did not even remove him from the Politburo! He remains a member of the ruling committee of seven, who exercise the sovereign power in a party, to whose whole essential nature, purpose and philosophy he is declared to be opposed. This anomalous situation means, in the first place, that there is not the slightest breath of sincerity in that outrageous indictment of Trotsky. And it means, in the second place, that there is a bitter rivalry between Stalin and Zinoviev for the position of leadership. Zinoviev demanded Trotsky’s exclusion from the Politburo, and he was supported in this by Kamenev. Stalin, for his own reasons, opposed this demand, and Zinoviev, in a huff, declaring that Stalin merely wanted to use Trotsky against him, tendered his own resignation. It was not accepted, of course, and the tragic comedy continues upon the same essential terms as before. The reader should not be deceived, however, into thinking that there is any length to which these men may not go in their determination to destroy the indestructible popularity of Trotsky.
According to the most intelligent information I receive from Russia, the majority of the party membership is still “indubitably sympathetic to Trotsky.” [6] To the masses of the workers and peasants he is a national hero, the one great man that Russia has left. The inevitable effect, therefore, of this rabid attack upon him by the party organisation and its Press is to discredit the party and its official organisation with the masses. All forms of political discontent, both revolutionary and counter-revolutionary, tend inevitably to express themselves in the form of indignant sympathy for Trotsky. In short, that “separation of the party from the mass,” cited in the resolution on Workers’ Democracy as the chief danger resulting from the bureaucratisation of the party, is being realised. And because the party bureaucracy attacks Trotsky – without any cause intelligible to the mass or related to their interests – Trotsky inevitably, and without any motion on his part, becomes identified with the mass in its divergence from the party. Undoubtedly Trotsky understands this situation better than anybody else, and he will never let himself be used by any social forces that have a purpose other than that defined and crystallized in the party of Lenin. But the dangerous confusion of the situation is no less real for that.

Notes
1. Trotsky’s own trusted secretary, Glazman, a hero of the Red Army, was expelled in September – for no real cause – and committed suicide. An obituary article which Trotsky sent from the Caucasus was not printed. The custom of suicide among party members has grown to such proportions since the beginning of this campaign that a special investigation was conducted, and a report made to the Central Committee recommending means to combat it. (See Pravda for October 9th, 1924.)
2. Kalinin was also of those who opposed the revolution or wanted to postpone it.
3. I do not think Trotsky had any anticipation of the political storm which would follow the publication of his Lessons of October. Russia was being flooded all summer with the false and scurrilous historical propaganda put out against him by his enemies. Under their direction the whole literate population of the country was taking an obligatory course – on pain of losing their jobs – in the new science of knowing that Trotsky is a Menshevik. It must have seemed natural to Trotsky that he himself should be permitted to write a little history. It must have seemed legitimate that his own view, and the suppressed view of Lenin, should find some expression in the midst of this whirlwind of “historical” tomes and treatises. He is not, you remember, in any sense of the word, a psychologist.
4. Whether Trotsky stresses too much the role of the leaders in general, as opposed to the masses of the workers and peasants, is a quite different question upon which a discussion would be highly profitable. The attacks of an unscrupulous bureaucracy upon Trotsky do not prove that everything that he says is right!
5. See Appendix VII.
6. Letter received in December, 1924. I left Russia in June, 1924, and throughout this concluding chapter I have relied upon my own reading of the Russian Press and on letters from Communists in Russia who are courageous and know how to tell the truth.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 12)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter XII:
 Real Economic Differences

MY Marxian reader is impatient by this time of so much personal and political history, unrelated to the prevailing economic currents of Russian life. I have purposely postponed mentioning the economic differences between Trotsky and the bureaucracy – certain minor ones because they were not sufficiently important, and the major ones because they are more important than anything else. The question of “commodity intervention” – the purchase by the Government of foreign goods in order to supply the peasants at reduced prices with articles of manufacture – is an example of the minor economic questions raised at the same time with the problem of Workers’ Democracy. Trotsky and most of the “opposition” advocated this measure, and it was denounced along with everything else they advocated as a “petty bourgeois deviation.” In his speech to the Party Congress Trotsky replied to this denunciation: “Comrades, let us wait a little with these questions, let us wait a little ... so far as there is a disagreement, it is of a purely empirical, practical character.” And now, eight months later, Rykov has announced that this policy, having been adopted in some small measure last year, will be extended this year, and that “if industry does not develop fast enough, we shall have to contemplate for a certain time the introduction of some foreign merchandise ... The question is being studied.” [1] In short, Trotsky’s “deviation” here consisted of a quicker grasp of the practical realities of the problem. It is absurd to try to convict either side of a “deviation” upon the ground of these practical disagreements, which are, of course, continual and inevitable.
There have been, however, three major differences about economic problems between Trotsky and the triumvirate – three differences fundamental enough to justify raising the question of a deviation from revolutionary Marxism. The first was about the need for a concentrated organisation and systematic planning of Socialist industry. I have already told you that Lenin came round, after some objection, to the substance of the change demanded by Trotsky in this matter. A resolution was adopted by the Twelfth Congress of the party (April, 1923) in accord with their views. But not only was Trotsky himself prevented from playing any part in the fulfilment of this resolution – no substantial motion was taken toward the fulfilment of it. An aggressive Communistic intention having been expressed, the policy of “muddling along” continued to prevail. And Trotsky’s letter to the Central Committee of October, 1923, besides demanding a New Course towards Workers’ Democracy, demanded the real carrying out of this resolution of the Twelfth Congress.
He wrote:
“I pointed out to the Central Committee before the Congress the great danger that our industrial problem would be presented to the convention in the abstract agitatorial form, whereas the task is to demand a turning of the attention and will of the party toward concrete life problems, with the goal of cheapening the price of the State products.”
In actual reality, he continued, the department of State Planning, since the Twelfth Congress, has gone still further backward.
“To a greater degree even than before the Congress, the most important industrial problems are decided in the Politburo, in a hurry, without preliminary preparation, and out of their planned connections.”
The truth of these statements of Trotsky was confessed by all the other members of the Politburo in the resolution on Workers’ Democracy, which demanded that the Department of State Planning be given “that position in reality which was assigned to it in the resolution of the Twelfth Congress.”
In short, the disagreement upon this economic question was psychologically similar to the disagreement about Workers’ Democracy. Trotsky demanded a real application of the revolutionary Leninist programme that had been adopted; his opponents, having adopted the programme in an “abstract agitatorial” manner, were content to let the actual reality of things continue to slide in the opposite direction. The programme has now been put in real operation, and the dominance of the Department of Government Planning is the most striking and most hopeful feature of Soviet policy. To accuse Trotsky of a “deviation to the right” in this matter is manifestly absurd.
That the ruling group are guilty of a deviation to the right, comes out more clearly in the second fundamental question at issue between them – the question of restoring the old czarist policy of financing the Government by means of a monopoly on the manufacture and sale of vodka. This scheme was long ago proposed by Zinoviev and opposed by Lenin. It was revived when Lenin fell sick, and would have been adopted by the ruling group had not Trotsky and Rakovsky vigorously opposed it. In his letter to the Central Committee, Trotsky reminds them also of this incident. He describes it as “an attempt to found our budget on the sale of vodka – that is, to make the income of a workers’ government independent of constructive industry.” And he makes this further observation, which I commend to the most thoughtful attention of the reader:
“It is absolutely indubitable that there is an inner connection between the self-sufficient character of our secretarial organisation, growing continually more independent of the party, and the attempt to create a budget as independent as possible of the success or unsuccess of the collective constructive work of the party.”
This “ruinous plan,” condemned by Lenin, and fought off by Trotsky and Rakovsky so long as their authority was feared by the triumvirate, has been adopted at last – Trotsky and the wife of Lenin opposing it in the Central Committee – and the revolutionary government is now financing itself upon the czarist method, with a difference (for the time being, at least) of 10 per cent, in the strength of the vodka. The revolutionary government has made its life dependent, in other words, upon the successful progress of the ancient industry of debauching the Russian people. Trotsky’s policy was to make it dependent upon the education of those people in the art of constructive Socialist industry. If Trotsky is an anti-Leninist here, then Leninism is something that was born since Lenin died.
As though to make the contrast with Lenin more glaring, the bureaucracy have publicly “explained” this reactionary measure – adopted for financial reasons pure and simple – on various ideological grounds as remote as possible from finance. The peasants are making bad home-brew, they would better have good alcohol, Marxism ought not to be “moralistic,” etc., considerations entirely irrelevant to the question of a government monopoly on the manufacture and sale of vodka. When Lenin took a backward step on the road to Communism, he stated that he was doing that, andhe stated exactly why.
The third economic disagreement between Trotsky and the ruling group was about the present condition of international capitalism and the prospects of the world-revolution. Trotsky declared last summer that the development of the world revolution is in a temporary ebb, and that the central fact at this moment is the domination of Europe by American capital. “America,” he said, “has put Europe on rations.” The question of the prospects of revolution, therefore, ought not to be put this way: “What is the strength of the social-democrats?” But this way: “What are the chances that American capital, by means of its stingy financing of Europe, will succeed in supporting the new regime?”
Here again the bureaucracy has, after six months, substantially come round to his view – driven to it by the mere crude piling up of the facts in front of them. But their first reaction was to deny these facts, or to waver and qualify, and dodge a real decision, until they gradually drifted into a position tantamount to denying them. After a month’s meditation, Stalin answered Trotsky’s declarations in an article which every day following has proven to be erroneous. There was no ebb in the revolutionary wave, according to Stalin. The decisive fight was still to come. The interference of American capital in Europe had “not solved any of the old contradictions in Europe, but merely supplemented them with new contradictions, the contradictions between Europe and America” (whatever that may mean).
“One of the surest signs [he said] of the frailness of ‘the democratic pacifist regime,’ one of the most indubitable symptoms that this regime itself is but foam on the surface from deep revolutionary processes taking place in the bosom of the working class, we must consider the decisive victory of the revolutionary wing in the Communist parties of Germany, France and Russia ... [That is – speaking for France and Russia at least – the victory of Stalin and Zinoviev over Trotsky.]”
That is the way in which the triumvirate persuaded themselves, or half-persuaded themselves, that there was a general “strengthening of the revolutionary elements in the workers’ movement,” exactly at the moment when there was a weakening of those elements. In obedience to this persuasion, they described the situation of the Communists in Germany as a “victory,” although the party membership had fallen from 350,000 to 150,000, and the decline continued. [2]
It is not difficult to see the connection between these three points of real disagreement between Trotsky and the triumvirate. Underlying them all is that one conflict, indicated by Trotsky in the passage just quoted, between the “abstract-agitatorial” attitude, and the attitude of a Marxian engineer engaged with the “concrete life-problems” of the revolution. Trotsky demands that the party shall aggressively attack the work of Communist construction in Russia while awaiting, and preparing for, the real development of revolutions elsewhere. The triumvirate are content to hold the power in Russia – and that upon a fiscal foundation devised by the czars – while satisfying their revolutionary dispositions and professional habits with abstract-agitatorial gesticulations in the International. [3]
Lenin abolished Utopianism out of the practice of Socialism, just as Marx abolished it out of the theory. In the place of the abstract idealistic agitator, he gave us the concrete realistic engineer. If the reader will go back to the days when Lenin’s character and attitude first began to dawn upon the Western movement, he will remember that this was the essence of the phenomenon. And in this, Trotsky was absolutely at one with Lenin. The question of employing bourgeois specialists, of studying the Taylor system, of using the czarist generals, the question of the Terror, of the new role of the co-operatives – all those questions of realistic practical technique which Lenin had to drive into the minds of so many of his followers with a sledge hammer, were as natural to Trotsky’s mind as they were to his. A partial lapse from this concrete practical driving realism of Lenin’s – and from that honesty of mind which is an indispensable part of it – a lapse into the old vague talk, the emotional self-deception, the separation of theory from practice, the practical Utopianism of the pre-Lenin days – that is what the triumvirate represents in these real disputes with Trotsky.

Notes
1. Speech at the recent Congress of the Trade Unions.
2. Figures received in November, 1924.
3. The most astute minds in the counter-revolution instinctively understand where their hope lies in Russia. “In the interest of European civilization,” says the London Morning Post (Jan. 20th, 1925), “it is perhaps a satisfaction to learn at last definitely that the triumvirate has won; for Trotsky ... in those diabolical qualities which lure men to destruction, is infinitely superior to the clique which has ... replaced him.”


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 1)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter I:
 Lenin and Trotsky

NOTHING that has happened in Russia has been so misunderstood by the entire Western world as the crisis in the Communist Party which has thrown into a silenced opposition men like Trotsky, Rakovsky, Radek, Antonov, Pitiakov, Krestinsky, Preobrazhensky, and many more of the intimate friends and aides of Lenin, and concentrated the whole ruling power in the hands of a group dominated by Stalin, Zinoviev and Kamenev. And yet there is nothing which the workers of other countries, who look to Moscow for leadership, have a more natural right to understand. As I was in Russia during the whole development of this dispute, and attended the convention of the party in which it reached its climax, and as I have the good fortune not to be separated by the barrier of language from the real facts and ideas involved, I think it will be useful if I explain the thing frankly and completely as it appears to me. I have hesitated to do this for over six months, because I wanted to be sure that I should serve not merely the ends of historic truth, or personal justice, but the real strategy of the revolution. I am convinced now that it is time for somebody to state a few facts exactly as he sees them, and not as they are dictated to him by a temporary political purpose or position.
In order to understand what has happened, it is necessary to know the history of the relations between Lenin and Trotsky. Their friendship began in 1902, when Trotsky, escaping from Siberia, came to London to put himself at the service of that “Organisation of Professional Revolutionists,” which Lenin was forming around the underground journal Iskra. Although Trotsky was only twenty-three years old, Lenin recognised his magnificent abilities instantly, and was only prevented by his older colleague, Plekhanov, from making him one of the editors of Iskra. He admired Trotsky with that wholehearted revolutionary affection which was the romantic motive in his life. They were so close together politically that in the early days of the great convention of the party in 1903, Trotsky received the nickname among the delegates of “Lenin’s Big Stick.” It was at that convention that the split arose between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks. Trotsky tried at first to prevent this split, and then he tried to mend it. And when Lenin proved inexorable, and ready to break with all the other editors of Iskra, including Plekhanov, the “father of Russian Marxism,” and including also Trotsky’s best friends and daily companions, Trotsky reacted strongly against him.
For a few months after that split – which was about a question of organisation – Trotsky went into the camp of the Mensheviks. But as soon as their political tendency began to define itself – the tendency to co-operate with the liberal bourgeoisie, instead of relying upon the peasants to support the working class in a popular revolution – Trotsky realised that he could not work with them. He sensed the compromise here, and withdrew from the Menshevik faction. But he did not reconcile himself to the organisational lines drawn by Lenin. He stood alone between the two factions, still believing that the real party consisted of the sincere Marxians in both camps, and devoting himself loyally to the foolish task of trying to unite them. Doubtless a personal pride contributed to the stubbornness and long duration of Trotsky’s opposition to Lenin. The two factions were compelled to work together in the revolution of 1905, and Trotsky, still standing between them, became a president of the revolutionary Soviet of St. Petersburg, and the chosen leader of the first Russian revolution. Under the shadow of the Czar’s palace he publicly prepared an insurrection, and actually wielded for some days an authority in Russia exceeding that of the Czar. It would have been a miracle if a young man of an oppressed race, rising to that height at the age of twenty-six, had remained free from all pride of opinion.
Trotsky’s pride of opinion was supported, moreover, by a piece of political thinking as far-sighted as any of those which foretold the events of 1917. Rejecting the theory of the Mensheviks that the Russian revolution would end in a bourgeois republic, and also the slogan with which Lenin opposed them, the “democratic dictatorship of the workers and peasants,” he adopted from Marx the concept of “permanent revolution.” He declared that the Russian revolution, once begun, and led by determined Marxists, would not stop at either of these preliminary stages, but would develop straight forward to a dictatorship of the proletariat, supported by the peasants, and opening an epoch of international revolution. This realistic prediction, and the resolute and yet flexible concept of “permanent revolution,” were peculiarly akin to the intellectual method of Lenin. They led Trotsky straight to Lenin’s side at the time when the real work began, the spring of 1917, when many of the oldest “Leninists” jumped away in fright at the audacity of his programme. At that time Lenin himself was entertaining the possibility of co-operating with the more revolutionary Mensheviks, and there was not the slightest divergence of opinion between him and Trotsky – for Lenin’s ideas were never fixed, and he never regarded his whole past course as faultless and infallible. But events soon taught them both the impossibility of co-operating with Mensheviks. Events taught them that Lenin had been right in drawing an inexorable line between these two factions, and Trotsky had been wholly wrong. Trotsky began to realise that, although his political analysis of the coming revolution had been the more happy, Lenin had created an organisation and invented a political method, or system of revolutionary engineering, wholly beyond the scope of his genius. His pride of opinion did not prevent him from acknowledging this fact and accepting the leadership of Lenin absolutely. “I came to Lenin fighting,” he says, “but I came unreservedly and all the way.”
Trotsky is a proud man, and he has that consciousness of his own self that proud men have, and that makes their relations with people too personal. [1] And, more over, he has an instinctive self-confidence, an unthinking aggressiveness of will, that is at times almost ludicrous, and at other times – or from other points of view – presumptuous. This makes it easy to say derogatory things about him, and get them believed. But those who know Trotsky intimately, all of them, know that the iron core of his character is a selfless and fearless, and to use just the accurate word for it – saintly, devotion to the revolution. And no one knew this better than Lenin. Lenin always believed in Trotsky. He attacked him violently enough, as he invariably attacked people who he believed were making even temporary mistakes. But he never identified him with the Mensheviks. He never broke with him, as he did with Plekhanov, Martov – with all those whom he felt had gone over, whether consciously or unconsciously, to the side of the bourgeoisie. He always regarded Trotsky as one of the real leaders of the Russian revolution, and always thought of him as a comrade in arms. It is well known among Trotsky’s friends that he received a letter from Lenin’s wife some days after Lenin died, reminding him of their early friendship in London, and assuring him that Lenin’s feelings towards him had never changed from then until the day of his death. Lenin’s wife shared his confidence completely; and her statement derives an added significance from the fact that it was written after the attack of Stalin, Zinoviev, Kamenev, and others, upon Trotsky’s character and authority as a Bolshevik had been raging in the party Press for almost two months, and after a special conference of party officials called by them for that purpose had formally branded Trotsky as an enemy of “Leninism.”
Trotsky’s tributes to the genius of Lenin in all his speeches and writings are such as to sweep out of thought the suggestion that he pretends to be Lenin’s equal, or stand beside him hi historic importance. But notwithstanding this fact, there has always existed among certain groups of the old followers of Lenin an extreme jealousy of Trotsky. It is nourished by Trotsky’s self-assurance and his lack of personal tact, but it is natural enough in any case. Trotsky seems to them a newcomer, and, by contrast with Lenin’s far more prodigious gift of practical thinking, the brilliant endowment, the picturesque and thrilling personality of Trotsky seem to them alien and unreliable. They cannot estimate Trotsky as a certain individual, namely himself, but they see him always as a personality which puts up claims to stand beside Lenin. And all the general population of the globe, including Lenin himself, have contributed to this exasperating thing. Lenin himself used the phrase “Lenin and Trotsky,” exactly as it was used by the rest of us in the public Press. [2] He was always at pains to support the growing prestige of Trotsky, and to deny the least rumour of a disharmony between them. Even Gorki was surprised at the warmth with which Lenin denied such rumours, and affirmed the greatness of Trotsky.
“They lie a lot, it seems, an awful lot, about me and Trotsky!” Lenin said to Gorki. And then, striking his fist on the table: “Show me another man who could organise almost a model army in a single year – yes, and win the respect of military experts!” [3]
Trotsky recounts in a little book of his memories of Lenin during the revolution a moment when Lenin suddenly said to him, “What if they kill you and me, can Bucharin and Sverdlov get away with it?”
“Perhaps they won’t kill us,” Trotsky answered jokingly.
“The devil knows about them,” Lenin answered, and laughed.
That anecdote is a reminder, and, of course, a deliberate reminder, of the relation which existed among the leaders during the critical days of the revolution and the formation of the Soviet Government. Lenin knew, just as all the world knows, that Trotsky stood head and shoulders above the other Bolsheviks, both in personal force and revolutionary understanding. It is absurd to debate this question, and drag up records of the disagreements [4] between Lenin and Trotsky – as though having always agreed with Lenin were the basis upon which you could judge the merits of a disciple. [5]
Such questions are not decided by debates and gossipy recollections, but they are decided by a man’s acts. And ever since Trotsky joined hands with the Bolsheviks, at every single point where it was possible to put a man in a position of supreme importance, both from the standpoint of prestige and from the stand point of service to the revolution, Lenin proposed Trotsky for that position. Trotsky was elected with Lenin’s support to the presidency of the Petrograd Soviet in the summer of 1917, and in that all-powerful position, while Lenin in hiding was guiding the deeper currents of the revolution, Trotsky made all the immediate great decisions which it was necessary for a general in the field to make. In that position, while Zinoviev and Kamenev, and many others of the faithful followers of Lenin in easier times deserted the advancing banners of the party, Trotsky marshalled the workers and soldiers of Russia for the Bolshevik insurrection. And when the power was seized and it came to the formation of the revolutionary Government, Trotsky was appointed to the Commissariat of Foreign Affairs. Why? Not because of any genius for diplomacy; a certain lack of diplomacy belongs to the essence of Trotsky’s genius. He was appointed to the Commissariat of Foreign Affairs because that is by general acceptance the second position in any Government, and because at that particular moment in the international revolution it was the position which required the most reliable audacity and the most comprehensive understanding. And when the situation passed out of that phase and into the phase of war, Trotsky was appointed to organise the first Communist army and defend the life of the revolution. He saved the life of the revolution. And when the last crisis came, when Lenin fell sick and was compelled to withdraw from the Government, he turned again to Trotsky and asked him to take his place as President of the Soviet of People’s Commissars and of the Council of Labour and Defence. And, moreover, when Trotsky declined, Lenin did not turn to any other strong man; he passed over the heads of those who might conceivably imagine themselves to be rivals of Trotsky, and divided the position among three men who are obviously not leaders. [6] In the face of these acts, to doubt the unique reliance which Lenin placed upon the force and devotion and revolutionary understanding of Trotsky is simply absurd.

Notes
1. See Appendix I.
2. I have in mind his comment on a counter-revolutionary romance published in Paris. As I have not his complete works here, I cannot cite the volume and page.
3. Gorki, Vladimir Lenin, in the Russky Sovremennik, Vol.I, No.1.
4. See Appendix II.
5. Having once invented and stood out for a fundamental change of programme, which Lenin opposed and was subsequently convinced of, as Trotsky did in the important matter of “Government Planning,” is worth all the impeccable records of “agreeing with Lenin,” which go to make up the mere popular history of the whole epoch. Agreeing with Lenin is certainly the easiest task that an uncreative and unthinking revolutionist could set himself.
I quote this sentence from a Note about Government planning, dictated by Lenin in December, 1922: “Trotsky advanced this idea, it seems, a good while ago. I appeared as his opponent then because I thought that in such an event there would be a fundamental disaccord in our system of legislative institutions. But after an attentive investigation of the thing, I find that, in the essence, there is a healthy idea here ...”
6. Rykov, Tzuryupov, and Kamenev.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 11)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter XI:
 The Meaning of the Dispute

IT is not Trotsky’s character, however, nor his sickness, nor any other personal accident [1], that ultimately explains the success of this stampede, but the dynamic situation within the party. The discussion about party bureaucracy and the need for a new course was not an academic discussion. It was an attack upon an existing force. A sincere enactment of the programme of Workers’ Democracy would have meant a decisive reduction of the arbitrary authority of many thousands of very powerful officials. This body of officials wields not only the political, but the economic sovereignty over one-sixth of the surface of the earth. The fact that they are committed to a regime of personal poverty does not impair their natural human self-importance, nor diminish their instinctive resistance to any attack upon it. Indeed, I am not sure but this “Soviet aristocracy” is more jealous of its authority than aristocracies whose authority has a soldier foundation. The resolution on Workers’ Democracy was an attack upon that authority, and it would be the natural and primitive egoistic instinct of the whole officialdom of the party, having adopted it “in principle,” not to let it go into practice.
Everybody knew that Trotsky was the one very powerful man within that officialdom who was pushing the resolution. Trotsky was the one big Soviet aristocrat, as you might say, who saw the increasing rigidity of that aristocracy as a fundamental danger to the revolution. Therefore, whatever may have been in the consciousness of different individuals, Trotsky had the primitive, unconscious instincts of the organisation men against him from the start.
Moreover, Trotsky insisted upon removing the one small guarantee possessed by this aristocracy of their permanent ascendancy. That guarantee is the idea of the sacredness of “Old Bolsheviks,” and friends of “Old Bolsheviks,” and friends of the friends of “Old Bolsheviks,” and people who have acquired an odour of sanctity from the laying-on of hands of “Old Bolsheviks.” I exaggerate a little, but the fact which I exaggerate is of the utmost importance. As Marxists we are accustomed to explain the nobility attributed to families with a heroic past as an ideology. The real basis of their nobility, we explain, is economic. Within the Russian Communist Party the situation is reversed. There is no economic basis of nobility. [2] The ideology is all there is, and the present value of the heroic past is accordingly defended with exaggerated violence.
To state that a new generation is growing up is no heresy in ordinary circumstances, and to state that an Old Bolshevik is not intrinsically, and just by virtue of his age, a perfect Bolshevik is not a crime. These two statements are as little subject to doubt as the dates on the calendar. But to remind 18,000 revolutionary officials, in many of whom [3] the habits of a superior caste are beginning to rigidify, that a revolutionary aristocracy is not hereditary – that is a disagreeable thing to do. And to tell them plainly that they are not any better than anybody else unless they are – that is violently disturbing. In fact it is revolutionary. Somebody said in the course of this discussion that the party needed a reform, but Trotsky wanted a revolution. That is not true, because Trotsky was attacking this tendency in time to stop it with a mere change of course. But it is true that, to the extent that a bureaucratic aristocracy is actually solidifying within the Communist Party, Trotsky’s position toward it is revolutionary. And the position of those who refuse to recognise it is a counter-revolutionary position. Moreover, Trotsky’s demand that, having recognised this condition and adopted a programme to cure it, the party should put that programme into drastic operation, is Bolshevik. And the attitude of his enemies, who, having adopted a revolutionary programme, employed all the devices of emotional oratory and academic argumentation in order to avoid putting it into operation, is Menshevik. The fact that these psychological tendencies have, within the party, a limited economic expression does not make their definition any less evident. Trotsky’s letters on the New Course are a Bolshevik approach to the problem of forestalling, by a programme of Workers’ Democracy, the further growth and solidification of a nascent bureaucratic caste. Starting with that definition, you will find it more simple to understand why the party organisation could be so easily stampeded against Trotsky.
There is no doubt, however, that under the agitation of Zinoviev another instinctive reaction besides bureaucratic self-interest made its contribution to this stampede, and that is fear. Nobody who has not seen Lenin or read his books can possibly imagine the force of that man’s will, and his intellectual authority. It was a phenomenon like Niagara, which the strongest men could merely stand by and watch. Lenin took the whole responsibility for revolutionising the Russian Empire, and the others faithfully and intelligently helped him as children help their father. That is only an extreme way to express it. And when Lenin was gone the party was left not only with the wisdom he had taught them, but also the irresponsibility, the childlike dependence upon his will and judgment. A large family of orphans suddenly found a sixth part of the terrestial globe in their hands, with all the rest of the globe against them, and no practice in the art of tackling big problems independently and with a feeling of ultimate responsibility for their solution. And their mood was one of exaggerated caution, as is proven by the sudden and surprising advancement of Zinoviev. Zinoviev is a notoriously timid man, and has never been a popular Bolshevik for that reason. And in this period since the departure of Lenin he has sounded the note of caution with hypnotic monotony. In practically every speech he has made and every article he has written, he has repeated these words: “We must be careful,” “We must be extremely careful,” “Since Vladimir Ilych is no longer among us, we must be careful as never before.” That we must be resolute, that we must be strong, that we must be devoted, that we must be at once flexible and firm, honest and astute, that we must be creative, that we must greet every new fact with a new idea, that we must be in a state of growth and permanent revolution, in short – these facts, which are equally obvious if the work which Lenin did is to be done, seem never to have occurred to Zinoviev. And yet his oratory has risen steadily in value during the last year, until from having been the least influential of the leaders he has become almost the mouthpiece of the party. That is sufficient evidence that the mood of the party after Lenin’s death is far from the mood in which they seized the power in October. It is a mood of timidity. And, as so often happens, this timidity toward the real job conceals itself from itself by an exaggerated audacity toward something else. The very wantonness and absurd insolence of this sudden attack upon the one great revolutionist among them, gives to many of these faint-hearted Communists a feeling that they are being very bold and ruthless and revolutionary – very Bolshevik.
At a revolutionary moment the Bolsheviks would throw off this leadership and turn to Trotsky with a single gesture. And they would do the same thing at a moment of critical danger. If Russia were invaded by a capitalist army Trotsky would be at the head of the revolutionary proletariat inside of a month. But in a mood of mere passive timidity no man would turn to Trotsky for leadership. Trotsky’s life is a record of aggressive personal courage, physical and moral, that is not excelled in the history of revolutions. Trotsky is, moreover, the one child in this orphan family who was always thinking and acting independently of the father. He grew up to maturity outside of it, opposing it. He came into Lenin’s party as a grown man, and by the road of pure intellectual conviction. And he never ceased to think creatively and put up independent plans for the advancement of the revolution, plans which he worked out in full, and for which he was ready to take the responsibility. He is ready now to tackle the problem of advancing the revolution, and not merely holding it where it is. He loves the future instead of fearing it. And, in contrast with the perpetual cries of caution emitted by Zinoviev, he has given expression, since Lenin died, to the complete revolutionary will of a man.
“At turning points, as has been justly stated in many meetings, we need caution, but along with caution we need firmness and resolution. Procrastination, formlessness, at turning points, would be the worst kind of incaution.”
That is a sentence from his letter on the New Course, which really distinguishes Trotsky’s attitude from the attitude of the organisation as a whole. Upon that they could honestly attack him. “I love Trotsky, but I am afraid of him,” sang the party poet, Demian Biedny. [4] And that was supposed to designate the weaknesses of Trotsky. It designates the weakness of Demian Biedny and the Russian Communist Party, bereaved of Lenin and agitated by Zinoviev. Trotsky is a great and audacious revolutionist, and yet he is not Lenin; and those two facts together go far to explain why, in the mood of anxiety which followed the death of Lenin, it was so easy to turn Trotsky into an object of dread.
Another thing distinguishes Trotsky’s attitude and makes him vulnerable to a demagogish attack. And that is that he really stands upon the difficult height of Lenin’s wisdom. He is “thinking dialectically,” to use the Marxian expression. He is thinking with a consciousness that the world is a process, and that practical science consists in the application of the right ideas at the right concrete points in that process. It does not consist of learning by heart a set of dogmas that are true in the abstract, and then making automatic and universal inferences from them. This method of thinking was very evident in Trotsky’s discussion about fractions in relation to the programme of Workers’ Democracy. He tried with infinite patience to explain that it was not a question of choosing between these two principles, but a question of understanding the right order of their application – “in our present party situation, in the given epoch, the existing fragment of time.” The principle of no fractions is being used by a bureaucracy to suppress that free discussion which constitutes the fluid life of the party. And the primary danger at the present moment is not fractions, but bureaucratism, which is destroying the fluid life of the party and causing fractions. It is an excellent sample – albeit an extremely cautious one – of that “dialectic” approach to reality which was the secret of Lenin’s political greatness. It is an example of that perfect flexibility of mind united with an inflexible will, which was Lenin’s greatness. But it is obvious that this kind of thinking demands an atmosphere of confidence. Hegel himself, who was the father of the idea of “dialectic thinking,” found some difficulty in distinguishing it from sophism. And Trotsky’s enemies had only to treat the principle of “no fractions” as an abstract law, a dogma of Leninism, and declare that Trotsky was really advocating fractions “between the lines,” as Zinoviev did, or that he “had advocated them” in the private meetings of the Committee, as Stalin did, in order to give to Trotsky’s very wisdom the look of sophistry. His very faithfulness to the method of Lenin made him vulnerable to their crass and dishonest attack.
The similarity of Trotsky’s thinking to that of Lenin is emphasised by the fact that, while the triumvirate are attacking him as a Menshevik in disguise, the Mensheviks are attacking him for not having the courage to be a Menshevik.
“He has not availed himself of one opportunity,” says their leader, Dan, in the Sozialistichesky Viestnik, Nos. 22-23 (Berlin), “to formulate clear and precise political inferences from his criticism of the Zinoviev course, and he has not missed one opportunity to take a stealthy jab at his opponents, to protrude his own personality, to decorate himself with the peacock feathers of senseless arch-revolutionary and bloodthirsty talk.”
To put it shortly, Trotsky is using the concept of “democracy” in a concrete situation, with a concrete meaning carefully defined, at a concrete time, to meet and solve a concrete problem, and he is leapt upon by the abstract dogmatists of democracy and the abstract dogmatists of anti-democracy alike, and with the same bitterness and the same stupid incomprehension. Lenin was forever finding himself in this position. His characteristic political attitude was to be in a state of motion with the concrete reality, while two sets of abstract dogmatists occupying fixed points on each side of him, howled.
Not many people in Russia truly understand the intellectual method of Lenin. We have Lenin’s own word that Bucharin does not understand it. [5] Zinoviev has proven that he does not understand it by announcing that “only Leninism, which Lenin and his co-workers, the old Bolshevik Guard, worked out as the theory of the proletarian revolution, can take Lenin’s place”! [6] Rykov has proven that he does not understand it by stating that “we are not going to introduce any changes into Leninism.” Nobody who understands what Lenin’s method of thinking was, could possibly say that any theory will take his place. Nobody who understands the role played by change in Lenin’s method of thinking, could possibly say that we are not going to introduce any changes into Leninism. Lenin’s place can only be taken by living minds who understand that method, and are as free from dogmatic and abstract formulations and fixed points as Lenin’s mind was. And this is what Trotsky understands.
“At every new problem, at every new turning point, the task is, not by any means to look up information in tradition and seek there the unexisting answer, but, on the basis of the whole experience of the party, to give a new self-dependent decision, which corresponds to the actual situation, and thus to enrich tradition.... If anything can be really fatal to the spiritual life of the party, and to the theoretic education of the young, it is the transformation of Leninism from a method which in its application requires initiative, critical thought, intellectual courage, into a canon which requires only interpreters with a permanent vocation.” [7]
If you know a little about human nature, you know that Trotsky has undertaken here a prodigious task. He has undertaken to keep alive the thinking of Lenin after his brain is dead and embalmed. And all the old religious, theological, metaphysical, absolutistical, canonical, scholastic and dogmatical-academic habits of the human race are against him. Only the fool of these habits could fail to detect, in this fanatical panic against Trotsky, the beginning of the transformation of Bolshevism from a science into a religion. The Russian Communist Party, from being the highest historic example of a purely practical idealistic organisation, is on the way to becoming a political church. From being an organisation whose value was relative, and whose laws were justified by its purpose, it is becoming an organisation whose value is absolute and its laws self-justified. You can convince yourself of this in a half-minute’s conversation with any properly indoctrinated “anti-Trotskyst” on the streets of Moscow. It was not only the beginnings of an official caste that Trotsky was attacking, but the beginnings of a priesthood as well.

Notes
1. A great many Marxians will consider this whole book of mine too personal. They will think I am concerned with the moral characters of people instead of the destinies of the revolution, and, unfortunately, the bourgeois reviewers will support this view. As a matter of fact, I have but little interest in moral indignation; I should have been glad to let the myth that all the leaders of the Bolshevik Party are “Supermen” die a natural death. It did good service in its day. My reason for demonstrating so exhaustively, and so often repeating, the fact that the attack upon Trotsky was and is dishonest, is not that I think this is the essence of the question, but that, unless he knows this, the western reader cannot possibly come at the essence of the question. Owing to the discipline of the party and the International, and the necessity of revolutionary solidarity in Russia, the whole news-explanation of this dispute is in the hands of the bureaucracy; and they are using Marxian ideas as weapons in a personal fight. The only way to get down to the facts which interest a Marxian, is to expose this dishonest use of Marxian ideas.
2. There are economic emoluments, to be sure, and special privileges which add to the value of office-holding in the organisation. They are tiny enough compared to the privileges and emoluments of the upper classes in a bourgeois society, but they are by no means insignificant. To lose them constitutes a pretty tragic change in a man’s personal life. They play an immense role, therefore, in explaining what has happened in Russia. But the fact remains that they are not a basis of ascendancy, but a privilege accorded to it. They are not owned.
3. Do not make the mistake of thinking that all of these officials were bureaucratised, or all of the Old Bolsheviks against Trotsky, or anything of that kind whatever. I am merely pointing to the most primitive and general egoistic force involved in the stampede against him. Trotsky himself declared that an “overwhelming majority” of these party workers were free from bureaucratic degeneration. Thousands of them were for him, and are still in their secret hearts. And, on the other hand, thousands of them are against him not through egoistic motives, but exactly because they want to sacrifice everything for “Leninism.” In a mood as heroic as it is undiscriminating, they have sacrificed their love of Trotsky for “Leninism,” and they are clinging to the ideal of the party and of “being impersonal” with their teeth set. Not only in Russia, but throughout the International, the strongest argument which supports the triumvirate may be summed up in this fallacious syllogism: “Leninism is a hard discipline; it is hard not to follow Trotsky; therefore it must be Leninism.”
4. Pravda, January 11th, 1924.
5. See p.30. [See Chapter 3 – Transcriber Note]
6. Bulletin of the Fifth Congress of the International.
7. Tradition and Revolutionary Politics, an essay in the brochure called The New Course.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Conclusion)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Conclusion

A GROUP of leaders against whose domination Lenin warned the party, having disguised their own thirst of power privately under the legend that Trotsky is a Bonaparte, and having disguised this private legend publicly under the legend that he is the leader of a “deviation to the Right,” and having thus built up an ideology exactly twice removed from the simple truth, have succeeded in deceiving, or bewildering, or bull dozing, or otherwise silencing, or scattering to the ends of the earth, all those strong Communists who might oppose them. They have established and solidified to an extremely dangerous degree a dictatorship of the officialdom within the Communist Party, entailing a separation of the party from the mass. They have taken backward steps in the political and economic development of the revolution, and instead of recognising them as backward steps, involving lost ground to be recovered, have put up a pretence that they belong to the true course of revolutionary development. They have initiated a way of talking about the peasants which, if carried to its logical conclusion, would involve a surrender of the essence of revolutionary Marxism. They are inculcating, in place of the flexible and concrete realistic thinking of Lenin, a bigoted religious devotion to a supposed abstract canon of Leninism. And they have thrown to the winds that intellectual honesty before the proletariat which was of the essence of Lenin’s character and teaching, and a main source of the unqualified authority of the Russian Communist Party in the international movement of labour.
That is what has happened in Russia since Lenin died. The Government remains in its ultimate source of power a government of the workers and peasants. And revolutionists in other countries ought to remember that it was to these workers and peasants, and not the “superlative spiritual qualities” of any particular leaders of them, that they pledged their loyalty. But they did not pledge themselves to ignorance of the real issues at stake and the real events that are happening in Russia. They did not pledge themselves to accept, in the name of “Leninism,” the international authority of a group against whom Lenin’s dying words were a warning, and who have preserved that authority by suppressing the essential texts of Lenin.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (App. 4)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Appendix IV:
 
Trotsky’s Letter to the Central Committee

THE following passages from Trotsky’s letter of October, 1923, to the Central Committee will give the reader a just idea of its tone, and the nature of his demand for a new course.
“One of the proposals of Comrade Djerzhinsky’s commission,” he began, “declares that we must make it obligatory for party members knowing about groupings in the party to communicate the fact to the GPU [the State police], the Central Committee and the Central Control Committee. It would seem that to inform the party organisations of the fact that its branches are being used by elements hostile to the party, is an obligation of party members so elementary that it ought not to be necessary to introduce a special resolution to that effect six years after the October revolution. The very demand for such a resolution is an extremely startling symptom alongside of others no less clear ... The demand for such a resolution means: (a) that illegal oppositional groups have been formed in the party, which may become dangerous to the revolution; (b) that there exist such states of mind in the party as to permit comrades knowing about such groups not to inform the party organisations. Both these facts testify to an extraordinary deterioration of the situation within the party from the time of the 12th convention [six months before] ...
“In the fiercest moment of war Communism, the system of appointment within the party did not have one-tenth of the extent that it has now. Appointment of the secretaries of provincial committees is now the rule. That creates for the secretary a position essentially independent of the local organisation ...
“The twelfth session of the party was conducted under the sign of democracy. Many of the speeches at that time spoken in defence of Workers’ Democracy seemed to me exaggerated, and to a considerable extent demagoguish, in view of the incompatibility of a fully developed Workers’ Democracy with the regime of dictatorship. But it was perfectly clear that the pressure of the period of war communism ought to give place to a more lively and broader party responsibility. However, this present regime, which began to form itself before the twelfth session, and which subsequently received its final reinforcement and formulation – [It all happened, that is to say, after the permanent withdrawal of Lenin. – M.E.] – is much farther from Workers’ Democracy than the regime of the fiercest period of war Communism. The bureaucratisation of the party apparatus has developed to unheard-of proportions by means of the method of secretarial selection ... There has been created a very broad strata of party workers, entering into the apparatus of the government of the party, who completely renounce their own party opinion, at least the open expression of it, as though assuming that the secretarial hierarchy is the apparatus which creates party opinion and party decisions. Beneath this strata, abstaining from their own opinions, there lies the broad mass of the party, before whom every decision stands in the form of a summons or a command. In this foundation-mass of the party there is an unusual amount of dissatisfaction ... This dissatisfaction does not dissipate itself by way of the open exchange of opinions at party meetings and by way of influence of the mass upon the party organisation (election of party committees, secretaries, etc.), but accumulates in secret and thus leads to interior strains.”


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 6)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter VI:
 Stalin’s Assault

THE reader who feels shut off from these facts by the barrier of language will perhaps find it hard to believe that the decision to destroy Trotsky by falsifying the meaning of his letter, was deliberate. In whose minds it was deliberate and whose were merely dragged along in the panic that followed, I am not able to say. But that the decision was deliberate is clearly proven not only by the date upon which the attack began and the intervening events I have described, but also – and beyond the shadow of doubt – by the perfectly wanton distortion and misinterpretation and direct turning upside-down of every word written and every position taken by Trotsky, both in his original letter and in his small series of supplementary articles, by the calumniation of his character, and the wrenching out of perspective of his whole history and the history of the party. To a detached reader the documents in this campaign of slander are so flagrant that, if he does not regard it as a deliberate perpetration, he can only conclude that the whole leadership of the Russian Communist Party has been in the hands of hysterics. The speeches and articles of Stalin and Zinoviev and Kamenev and Bucharin and their lieutenants, if regarded as a discussion of the points raised in Trotsky’s letter, would be thrown out of a prize essay contest in a school for defective children. But if regarded as an attempt to generate, by fair means or foul, the universal suspicion that Trotsky is an enemy of Leninism, to produce a thoughtless, blind, and convulsive stampede of the organisation men to throw him out, these speeches I command a certain respect. They show a keen sense of the emotional and intellectual weak points of the Russian Communist.
Of the reader who doubts whether this perpetration was deliberate, I demand the effort of minute attention to the following series of quotations. It is obvious that I cannot reproduce the whole fabric of falsification that has been weaved in the course of this discussion. I have read it all and listened to much of it, and I can only give you my assurance that these examples are typical, and they comprise all the essential points that have been advanced against Trotsky.
 
“Attacking the Old Guard”
Stalin opened the campaign in Pravda for December 15th with the sudden announcement that Trotsky’s letter was not a “summons to the members of the party to support heartily the Central Committee and its resolution,” but a disingenuous document which “could only be interpreted as an attempt to weaken the will of the members of the party toward an actual unity in support of the Central Committee and its position.” It was a “diplomatic attempt to support the Opposition in its struggle against the Central Committee of the party under the guise of a defence of the resolution of the Central Committee.”
This imputation to Trotsky of a duplicity and equivocation, which every stroke of his pen and every act of his lifetime of service to revolutionary truth belies, was necessary at the beginning of the campaign against him, because everybody was reading his letter. It was perfectly evident that it did not attack, but supported the resolution of the Politburo. A little later Trotsky’s letter and some supplementary articles in the pamphlet form were practically suppressed by the Politburo, and even when I left Moscow – though the crisis was past – it was still difficult to get a book seller to produce one. Under these circumstances it was no longer necessary to accuse Trotsky of meaning things he had not said. They simply declared that he had said things which he had not said. At the beginning, however, the whole campaign rested upon an “interpretation” of what were supposed to be “indirect hints” in Trotsky’s perfectly outspoken and only too ingenuous letter.
Let us read these “indirect hints” as they are quoted by Stalin:
The resolution of Workers’ Democracy declared that under the influence of the New Economic Policy the party is in danger of “a loss of the perspective of Socialist construction and of the world revolution; in danger of the degeneration of a part of the party workers as a result of their activities in close contact with a bourgeois milieu.”
Trotsky’s letter points out the obvious fact that no one is free from such danger, not even “we, the Old Bolsheviks.” Here is what he says:
“The degeneration of an ‘Old Guard’ has been observed in history more than once. To take the freshest and clearest recent example: the leaders and parties of the Second International. We well know that Wilhelm Liebknecht, Bebel, Singer, Victor Adler, Kautsky, Bernstein, Lafargue, Guesde and others, were the direct and immediate disciples of Marx and Engels. We know, however, that all these leaders – some partially and some altogether – degenerated into opportunism ... We ought to state – we ourselves, the ‘ old men’ – that our generation, while naturally playing the role of leadership in the party, nevertheless does not contain within itself any automatic guarantee against a gradual and unnoticeable weakening of the proletarian and revolutionary spirit, provided the party permits any further growth and hardening of the bureaucratic-apparatus method of politics, which converts the younger generation into passive material for education, and creates inevitably an alienation between the apparatus and the mass, between the old and the young ...”
This temperate and self-evident statement might almost be replaced with a quotation from Lenin: “History knows transformations of all kinds; to rely on conviction, loyalty, and other superlative spiritual qualities – that is no serious thing in politics.” [1] And it might be replaced with a quotation from the article, of Zinoviev, printed in Pravda two days before it [2]:
“One of the causes of the unheard-of collapse of the German Social Democracy, a once-powerful proletarian party, was undoubtedly the excess of workers’ bureaucracy and, in particular, the hardening of the party apparatus ... The party apparatus gradually degenerated and turned into a closed caste, hostile to the fundamental interests of the proletariat. The frightening example of the German Social Democracy ought to stand continually before the eyes of any mass proletarian party.”
Such a statement is obviously a natural amplification of what the resolution says about the danger of a “degeneration of a part of the party workers.” Nevertheless, from the pen of Trotsky this statement becomes a “hint about opportunism in regard to the Old Bolsheviks,” and upon the basis of this, and of this alone, Stalin declares that Trotsky, instead of “having in mind the interests of the party,” has in mind “designs for undermining the authority of the majority of the Central Committee, the guiding nucleus of the Bolshevik Old Guard.”
That Trotsky did not have in mind any hint or childishly concealed insult against the other members of the Central Committee is perfectly evident in what he said: “We ourselves,” who “naturally play the role of leadership in the party.” It is evident, moreover, in the whole texture of his character, his manner of life and intercourse with men, and his entire literary and political history. Trotsky himself told me that he had nothing of the kind in his mind when he wrote this sentence, and the fact needs no further proof for those who know him. But there is a proof which is interesting, and that is that Trotsky does not think that these other members of the Central Committee who are trying to destroy his authority, are examples of a “degeneration into opportunism.” I have talked with him about the principal figures among them, and he expressed very widely differing and very precisely discriminating opinions, and no one of these opinions could be brought under the head of a degeneration into opportunism. I think it is no great violation of confidence – and it is an important factor in the situation – to say that he described Stalin to me as, among other things, “a brave man and a sincere revolutionist.”
That Trotsky had not the remotest idea of “undermining the authority of the Bolshevik Old Guard,” is also perfectly evident in the paragraphs Stalin quoted. “We – our generation – naturally playing the role of leadership.” It is still more evident in a paragraph preceding what Stalin quoted, where Trotsky says that the more experienced comrades “inevitably enter into the apparatus,” and that is exactly why the problem of the old and the young arises in connection with the bureaucratisation of the apparatus. And lest that should not be enough, Trotsky reinforced this point in a postscript to his letter, printed with it in Pravda, in which he expressly alludes to the possibility of such a misinterpretation, and warns the reader against it. Here Trotsky makes it as clear as words can make it that what he is advocating is a real “party leadership” on the part of the Old Guard, as opposed to a “tight-shut secretarial regime of command.” And this, of course, is the whole sense and meaning of the resolution which had just been unanimously signed by the Politburo.
The simple fact is that Trotsky stated a thing here which is true, and which it was good for the party to hear, but which it was extremely bad manoeuvring for him to state at that moment, and Stalin was clever enough to see this, to grab Trotsky’s statement, falsify it, and use it as a weapon with which to assail Trotsky and turn his preliminary victory into a defeat. And Stalin had already in his hand so perfect a machine for the distribution and suppression of ideas that this falsification of Trotsky’s wise and temperate words has now become a rubber-stamp slogan with Communist editors all over the earth, and I have to sit here and read in the educational columns of L’Humanité, a year later, the outrageous statement – it is a flat lie, and nothing else – that Trotsky conducted “an impassioned criticism of the Bolshevik Old Guard.”
 
“Pitting the Youth against the Old”
But this accusation cannot properly be separated from the other one contained in Stalin’s article, namely, that Trotsky is “pitting the younger generation against the old” – “egging them on” is a more literal translation. Stalin quotes just two sentences from Trotsky’s letter to prove this statement. “The youth – the most reliable barometer of the party – reacts most sharply against party bureaucratism ... It is necessary that the youth should take the revolutionary formulas fighting.”
On the basis of these two sentences, snatched violently out of their context, Stalin delivers the following assault:
“Where did Comrade Trotsky get this setting-against-each-other of the ‘Old Guard’ who may degenerate and ‘the youth’ who constitute ‘the most reliable barometer of the party,’ the ‘Old Guard’ who may bureaucratise and the ‘Young Guard’ who must ‘take the revolutionary formulas fighting?’ Whence comes this opposition and for what is it needed? Haven’t the youth and the Old Guard gone always with a united front against the foe within and without? Doesn’t the unity of the old and the young represent the fundamental strength of our revolution? Whence this attempt to uncrown the Old Guard and demagogishly tickle the youth, so as to open and widen the little rift between these fundamental troops of our party? To whom is all this useful, if you have in view the interests of the party, its unity, its solidarity, and not an attempt to weaken its unity for the benefit of an opposition?” [3]
The question, Where did Trotsky get this subject of discussion? – perfectly well understood by Stalin from the endless debates in the Politburo – was answered in the sentence just preceding one of those which Stalin quoted:
“To the extent that the most experienced comrades, and those distinguished by service, inevitably enter into the apparatus [4] to that extent the bureaucratism of the apparatus has its heaviest consequences in the intellectual-political growth of the young generation of the party. This explains the fact that the youth – the most reliable barometer of the party – react the most sharply of all against party bureaucratism.”
And that Trotsky’s purpose was not to “set against each other” the youth and the older generation, but exactly the contrary, to prevent by a thorough abandonment of bureaucratic methods the possibility of such a setting-against-each-other, is stated explicitly four times in this brief letter and its postscript:
“In as far as the durably revolutionary, non-officialised representatives of the older generation, that is – as I firmly believe – its overwhelming majority, take clear account of the dangerous perspective characterised above, and, standing on the ground of the resolution of the Politburo, put forth all efforts to help the party convert that resolution into reality, in so far disappears the chief source of a possible setting-against-each-other of the different generations in the party.”
This quotation is surely sufficient to make it indubitable what Trotsky really said. He said that since the Old Bolsheviks inevitably play the role of leadership in the party, therefore the only way to avoid a gradual “setting-against-each-other” of these Old Bolsheviks and the rising generation, is for the latter to make this a genuine leadership (as described by the resolution of the Politburo) and not a regime of bureaucratic command.
Stalin, by first pretending that Trotsky has attacked the leadership of the Old Bolsheviks, is able to carry off the pretence that he is trying also to “set against each other” the two generations.
Any grown person can see at a glance what happened here. Both Stalin and Trotsky, and indeed every sincere revolutionist in Russia, was aware of the flagrancy of the bureaucratic methods employed in the party, of the special reaction against them among the youth, and of the dangers involved. But those bureaucratic methods, presided over by Stalin, were the source of his power. And that revival of initiative would automatically transfer the substance of that power to Trotsky, for the simple reason that the mass of the party, just like all the rest of the world, recognised Trotsky’s superior moral and intellectual revolutionary greatness. Therefore Stalin was compelled to sign a resolution attacking his own bureaucracy and demanding a revival of party initiative, and at the same time prevent its thorough-going application. He saw Trotsky bringing all the powers of his personality, his art of objective and concise thinking, his mastery of Marxism, and of the method of Lenin, his sensitivity to political facts, and his great literary skill, into the field in support of that resolution. He saw that Trotsky’s letter was enthusiastically received by an immense majority of the party. And, having no weapon left but his brutality, he walked up and hit Trotsky over the head with a club. That is the real meaning of Stalin’s sudden and dishonest article in Pravda for December 15th. And that is the only real fact which lies behind the universally advertised opinion that Trotsky attacked the leadership of the OldBolsheviks, or attempted to pit the younger generation against the old.

Notes
1. Lenin, Complete Works, Vol.XVIII., Part 2, p.42.
2. December 13th, 1923.
3. See Appendix VII.
4. My italics.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (App. 7)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Appendix VII:
 
What Was Meant by “The Opposition”

THE “opposition” alluded to in the resolution of the Party Conference in January 1924, includes the forty-six signers of a letter to the Central Committee in October demanding a change of course, and anybody else who had anything to say in divergence from the course adopted by the Central Committee. To treat this phenomenon of widespread dissatisfaction in the party as though it were an organised body, and to state that Trotsky “stood at the head of it,” was perhaps the most exasperating trick in this whole campaign. Trotsky could not organise an opposition and stand at the head of it, because fractions are prohibited. He could merely define his position, and leave other dissatisfied people, responsible and irresponsible, to define theirs. “The opposition,” therefore, was not a single existent thing, but merely a generalisation. And this very resolution which accuses Trotsky of “standing at the head of” an opposition, and “issuing a fractionalist manifesto” – this same resolution denounces the “criticisms made by the opposition” for their inconsistency. Some of them want to “renounce the New Economic Policy,” it says, and some of them want to make “further concessions to capital.” In short, Trotsky is made responsible for all the opinions of an unorganised opposition, at the same time that he is forbidden to organise an opposition, and accused of organising it!
Stalin stated in a speech of January 20th that one of the “six mistakes of Comrade Trotsky” consisted in his “not stating clearly” for whom he stands – for the Central Committee or the “opposition.” Kamenev at the same time was ridiculing the “opposition” for having no “political line,” “no programme” – nothing but a “many-coloured tail.” It is obvious that the only way in which Trotsky, who was in his own way opposed to the majority of the Central Committee, could possibly make a choice between the Central Committee and an “opposition,” would be to select among the various and many-coloured oppositional groups those who agreed with him, give them a programme, and organise them into a real entity. But that would be fractionalism. Thus, what Stalin was accusing Trotsky of was not forming a fraction. He must have sensed the inconsistency of this accusation with the statement of the resolution that Trotsky “stood at the head of” an existing fraction, for in his speech at the party convention five months later he succeeded in forgetting this point in his indictment. The “six mistakes of Comrade Trotsky” were reduced to five.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 10)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter X:
 Trotsky’s Personal Reaction

You will wonder how it could have been possible, by such obvious tricks, to beat Trotsky down from his great height, and grab the whole power out of his hands. One thing that goes a little way toward explaining it is the peculiar reaction of Trotsky himself. Since the stampede was produced by a campaign of subtle and plausible misrepresentation on the part of men whom the party had learned to trust, the only thing which could have checked it, would have been an act of transcendant candour on Trotsky’s part. He would have had to find a way to put forth his whole real warm and convincing personality in a deliberate response to a deliberate personal attack. He would have had to make the entire party feel that they knew him personally, and could, therefore, personally deny what they were being told. But his pride led him in the opposite direction. So far as the articles in Pravda were not replies to his words, but a deliberate falsification of them, he made no answer whatever. He not only made no answer to this enormous polemical and calumnious outpouring, which filled all Russia for half the winter, but he never read any of it. I asked him once why he did not take all these issues of Pravda, and retire for a week, and analyse them and write a complete factual explanation of the whole thing.
“Why, this is not an argument, it is a personal attack,” he said, “I can’t reply to a thing like that.” And he spread out his hands as though this proposition were perfectly obvious.
To me it did not seem obvious, and I continued: “Now, you could take that speech of Stalin’s about The Six Mistakes of Comrade Trotsky, for instance ...”
“What is that?” he asked, and he smiled at my expression. “I haven’t read any of those things,” he explained.
I murmured my amazement, and he spread his hands again in that gesture which indicates that something is quite obvious.
“Why should I read what they write?” he said. “They aren’t discussing anything that I said. There is no misunderstanding.”
That is the way Trotsky talked to his friends. But throughout the height of this panic he was ill in the Caucasus, and even those few conversations for which he finds time in the pressure of his work were impossible. And in his published writings he maintained an impersonal dignity and objectivity that might in ordinary times be admirable. The self-command and perfect equilibrium revealed by it were admirable. But as a reaction to an attack, it was not intelligible to simple people. It played directly into the hands of those who were propagating calumnious legends about him. It made him seem remote, and a little mysterious, and very sharply different fromLenin, who so often cleared the air by the simple device of saying all that he thought.
I talked once about Trotsky with the man into whose family he moved at the age of nine, when he left home to go to school in Odessa. And the first thing that man said in answer to my questioning, was: “We did not really know what Leon Davidovitch was thinking about – even at that age he was so perfectly self-contained.”
In my own acquaintance with Trotsky I have observed this same quality, and found it irritating. He has that part of a social nature which consists of listening with sympathetic attention while you explain yourself, but he has not that part which consists of instinctively explaining himself. He is extremely frank – quite startling in that respect – but you have to ask him questions. As I have said, the most significant part of his speech before the party Congress was his offer to answer “any question whatever” that the delegates might ask him. And I notice that in his letter resigning his post in the Red Army he repeated this proposal. He had remained in Moscow, although ordered south by his physicians, in order to be able to “answer this or that question or make any necessary explanations.” Again, of course, no explanations were asked for. Nothing has been more precious to his enemies, and more essential to their success, than this poised reticence of Trotsky’s, his lack of that irresistible impulse which most of us have to explain ourselves.
Trotsky said, in the note inserted in Pravda which I have already quoted [1], that he refrained from answering these personal attacks because he believed it was to the best interests of the party. And in his letter of resignation he asserted that he still believed “his silence had been right from the standpoint of the general interests of the party.” In attributing his absolute silence to his temperament, I do not mean to deny that he exercised this judgment and acted upon it. Moreover, in so far as the true answer to the attack upon him consisted of laying bare the facts that I have stated here, it would be bold under the existing circumstances [2] to question his judgment. The thing which I attribute to his temperament is the absoluteness of his silence. A man who was not proud and had a strong impulse toward social self-expression, would not have acted upon a rigid principle here. He would have found a way to make the party feel the response of his personality without violating its discipline or breaking its solidarity before the world. At least, that is my opinion. And I believe that Trotsky himself might have found this more practical course if he had been able to appear in public at the beginning of the stampede. Nobody can tell how much his sickness played into the hands of his enemies. It is certain that they consciously reckoned upon it in starting this unscrupulous campaign.

Notes
1. See p.79. [See Chapter 9 – Transcriber Note]
2. “The circumstances of capitalist encirclement,” to use Trotsky’s own phrase in another connection. Of course, neither Trotsky’s silence, nor the silence of many strong and courageous men and women in the party who share his view, can be fully understood except in the light of that governing fact.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 2)



Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter II:
 The Anti-Bonaparte Fraction

A LEGEND has been created and carefully nourished by those now in power in Russia that Trotsky attempted to use his popularity, after Lenin’s death, in order to manoeuvre himself into a position of leadership that Lenin did not want him to have. The fact that Lenin urged upon Trotsky his place at the head of the Government, and that Trotsky declined it, completely discredits this legend. But it leaves a perplexing question in its place. Why did Trotsky decline the elevated position which Lenin offered him? The correct answer I to that question will give you the key to everything that follows. He declined it because he has no ideal whatever of personal political manoeuvring. He has nothing but a complete incapacity for it. He is not only unable to play this game for personal motives, but he is unable to play it when his most impersonal ideals demand that he should. He knows how to fight his enemies, but he does not know how to manage his friends. He does not know how to manipulate men.He has no impulse to do it. He never thinks of it. That is his great weakness.
If Trotsky had appeared at the first break as Lenin’s substitute, the whole party and the whole world would have been set right about their relations, and more than half of what has happened would have been impossible; and certainly any man consciously entering a struggle for power would have grabbed this first and obviously essential strategic moment. Trotsky was incapable of seeing his duty as a struggle for personal power within the party. He was incapable of living the life of the party in those terms. “An intellectual struggle within the party,” he said once, “does not mean mutual rejection, but mutual influence.” [1] And he continued to act upon this maxim after Lenin withdrew, although it then quite obviously ceased to be true. Stalin and Zinoviev and Kamenev had already, at the very beginning of Lenin’s decline, formed a block against Trotsky in the Politburo, the ruling committee of the party. Trotsky was in a continual minority there at the source of power. He knew that he would be baulked at every point as the head of the Government. He knew, I suppose, his own inability to wheedle and coax. He is a natural commander. The situation was complicated, moreover, by his disagreement with Lenin upon that fundamental question of “Government planning,” upon which Lenin subsequently yielded to him. All this would have made no difference if he had seen the situation as the “triumvirate” saw it – as a struggle for power in the future. He saw it as an impossible situation in the present. And with a quixotic objectiveness which is far harder to understand than calculating ambition, he declined Lenin’s proposal that he should become the head of the Soviet Government, and thus of the revolutionary movement of the world. That peculiar reaction – an over-correction, perhaps, of the personal egotism which would dominate a simpler man in such a situation – does not command my admiration. I think it is a misfortune, but it is the fact about Trotsky’s action at this time, and about his character in general. And without understanding this fact andthis character you will not understand the events that followed.
This act of Trotsky’s was simply an invitation to his enemies to perfect and solidify the block which they had already formed against him among the leaders of the party. With Stalin – who possesses all the craftiness that Trotsky lacks – in the key position as secretary of the party, and with Zinoviev enthusiastically cooperating, Kamenev not unwilling, and Bucharin easy to influence, they proceeded, by all those subtle means which the reader understands, to build up an efficient political machine for grabbing and holding the power within the party. The ideology which served them in building up this fractional machine in a party in which fractions are forbidden, was that Trotsky is a potential Bonaparte – or a potential Danton, there was some disagreement about this at the beginning! – and that the revolution must be saved from the danger involved in his popularity.
There are two mistakes which you can make here. One is to imagine that this fractional machine was not deliberately built up, and built up for this specific purpose. The other is to imagine that mere personal ambition was the motive to it. These men were undoubtedly aided by their own thirst of power in arriving at the conviction that they were the true Bolsheviks, and that there was something fundamentally wrong with Trotsky. But the conviction was nevertheless sincere and profound. It is largely explained by the fact that Trotsky stands so high above all the others, both in intellect and self-dependent force, that if he gained an ascendant influence, he would inevitably occupy a position similar to that of Lenin. He would be a single leader. Whereas if his ascendancy could be prevented, there would be no leader – just a group of the old disciples of Lenin, replacing him with their collective wisdom. It is perfectly intelligible that people, who loved Lenin, and had so long followed him, should resent the idea of any leader in his place. Many even of the heartiest admirers of Trotsky felt this emotion. It was easy for his enemies to persuade themselves that in forming a conspiracy against him – a company which can best be described as “Bonaparte Limited” – they were not serving their own selfish ambitions, butthe true interests of “Leninism.”
They did persuade themselves of this. And since it was not objectively true, it carried them into the most extreme absurdity and inconsistency. It carried them to the point of suppressing the writings of Lenin himself, in order to make sure that “Leninism” should not suffer from the increasing prestige which those writings insisted upon giving to Trotsky.
For Lenin did not stop with a formal offer of his place of leadership to Trotsky. He continued to regard Trotsky as his best representative, and the real defender of his policies in the party counsels. Lenin fell sick for the last time in the late autumn of 1922, but from his house in the country he exercised a guiding influence in the party until March, 1923, when a complete collapse withdrew him from political life. And during that last winter when he was compelled to act indirectly, he appealed to Trotsky on three different occasions, and with increasing anxiety, to defend their common policies against this group which had taken control in his absence. The first time it was upon the all-important question of the monopoly of foreign trade. The controlling group had passed a resolution introducing exceptions into this fundamental principle of Lenin’s policy. Trotsky objected; and Lenin, after an extended correspondence with him, stated in a letter dated December, 1922, that he and Trotsky were in “maximum agreement,” and delegated to him the defence of their common view-point at the coming convention of the party. At that convention – in April, 1923 – Trotsky laid down the principle, now universally accepted, that the monopoly of foreign trade is “one of the pillars of the Socialist dictatorship in the circumstances of capitalist encirclement.”
The second time when Lenin called upon Trotsky to defend their common policy, an even more fundamental feature of “Leninism” was at stake – namely, his views on the “National Question.” Stalin and Djerzinsky had been sent to Georgia to investigate a dispute involving the autonomy of the smaller republics entering into the Socialist Soviet Union. Their investigation had apparently made things worse instead of better, and Lenin wrote a series of three Notes – also in December 1922 – in which he criticised their abandonment of his policies in very extreme language. He said, among other things:
“I think the hastiness and administrative impulsiveness of Stalin played a fatal role here, and also his spite against the notorious ‘social-chauvinism’; spite in general plays the worst possible role in politics. I fear also that Djerzinsky ... distinguished himself by his true Russian disposition (it is well known that Russified people of foreign birth always overshoot themselves in the matter of the true Russian disposition) ...  [2]
I wrote long ago in my works on the national question, that an abstract presentation of the question of nationalities is of no use whatever. It is necessary to distinguish the nationalism of the oppressing nations from the nationalism of the oppressed ...
Internationalism from the side of the oppressing, or so-called great nations (although they are great only in their violations) must consist in observing not only a formal equality, but an equality which would destroy upon their side that inequality which is created factually in real life. Any one who has not understood this, decidedly does not understand the proletarian attitude to the national question; he remains essentially at the petty-bourgeois view-point, and therefore may slide at any moment into the bourgeois view-point ...
It behooves us to hold Stalin and Djerzinsky politically responsible for this genuine great Russian nationalistic campaign.”
It was in his effort to combat this campaign, and check the further influence of the viewpoint of Stalin and Djerzinsky at the party convention, that Lenin turned to Trotsky. The great significance of the following letter is obvious. It was written when Lenin was exiled to the country, but still exercising a guiding influence in the Government. It was a few weeks before the relapse which withdrew him entirely from politics.
“March 5, 1923.
Strictly Secret, Personal.
ESTEEMED COMRADE TROTSKY, – I would earnestly request you to take upon yourself the defence of the Georgian affair at the party convention. That affair is now under investigation at the hands of Stalin and Djerzinsky. I cannot rely upon their impartiality, indeed just the contrary. If you would agree to undertake its defence, then I could be at rest. If for some reason you do not agree, then return to me all the papers. I will regard it as a sign of your disagreement.
With the very best comradely greetings,
LENIN.”
With this letter to Trotsky, Lenin enclosed an article on the national question, and the three Notes from which I have quoted. And he instructed his secretary to write at the same time to Kamenev, then Chairman of the “Politburo” [3], stating that he had intended to speak at the coming convention on the national question, that he regarded this article as of leading importance, and attributed great significance to it, and that he had authorised Trotsky to defend their common position. This letter to Kamenev he enclosed to Trotsky.
Trotsky immediately communicated to the Central Committee of the party the letter of Lenin, his article, and the three Notes, stating that he was in full accord with the view-point of Lenin. He said that in view of the leading importance of these writings he had made a copy for himself. And he added that since it was evident, both from the letter to him and the letter to Kamenev, that Lenin intended his article to be read at the party convention, he would await an answer from the Central Committee as to whether they agreed to read it or not. A disagreement he would consider a tacit desire to conceal it, and for that he disclaimed all responsibility before the party.
The article which Lenin considered of “leading importance,” and which he designed to have read at the party convention, but which constituted a direct attack upon the authority of Stalin, and a corresponding endorsement of the authority of Trotsky, was not read at the party convention, the triumvirate deciding that it was for the welfare of the party to suppress it.
The third appeal which Lenin made to Trotsky in those last days, was literally a cry for help against the suppression of his writings by this intra-party machine. And again it was an attack upon the authority of Stalin, and indirectly a confirmation of the authority of Trotsky, that the machine was suppressing. Lenin’s article was a demand for the reorganisation of a commissariat called “Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection.” This commissariat had been designed by Lenin to exercise the direct control of the party over the Government, and its personnel was identical with that of the “Central Control Committee” of the party. Stalin had stood for a long time at the head of this commissariat – to which Lenin had really confided the task of making the Government follow the lines of scientific communism. Trotsky moreover had long criticised the conduct of it. Nothing could be more disastrous to the authority of Stalin, and to the machine of which he was the centre, than an attack by Lenin himself upon this commissariat. And Lenin’s attack was absolutely denunciatory and unqualified.
“The People’s Commissariat of Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection does not enjoy at the present time a shadow of authority. Everybody knows that a worse organised institution than this one does not exist, and that under the present conditions you can ask nothing whatever of this institution.”
Bucharin, the editor of Pravda, who had already come under the influence of the anti-Trotsky machine, withheld Lenin’s article from publication. Lenin, not seeing his article in Pravda, became very much agitated, and asked his wife to telephone and insist upon its immediate publication. She did this, and she added that Lenin was dangerously agitated by its non-appearance. The article did not appear, however, and again Lenin was compelled to appeal to Trotsky to interfere on behalf of their common viewpoint. At his direction his wife telephoned to Trotsky, saying that Lenin requested him to insist upon the immediate publication of his article. Trotsky did as Lenin requested, and in view of the resistance offered, he proposed an immediate meeting of the Politburo. All those present at the meeting, including the secretaries, were not only against the policies proposed by Lenin, but they were against the publication of the article. And one of the secretaries, Kuibishev, proposed that they should print one number of Pravda containing the article, in order to show it to Lenin and quiet his agitation, but conceal the article from the party. Trotsky, backed up by the authority of Lenin and the fear of a premature scandal, succeeded in overcoming the resistance of Stalin’s machine, and the article was published. But the degree to which the policies outlined by Lenin have been followed may be inferred from the fact that Kuibishev, the ingenious secretary, is now the People’s Commissioner of Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection, and the head of the Central Control Committee of the party. [4]
Of course Stalin and his supporters would defend their action by saying that Lenin, having been confined in the country for four months, was out of touch with the actual situation. They could not pretend that he was not in the full possession of his faculties, because the article itself is a piece of political thinking as masterly as any that Lenin ever did. The title, Better Less and Better, has become a Communist proverb. And the article has been regarded by the members of the party, ignorant of its history, as a landmark in Soviet policy. Sentences from it have even been quoted by the triumvirate in order to prove to the party that there was a divergence of policy between Trotsky and Lenin!
Just where Trotsky stood in relation to the policies of Lenin is illustrated in a subsequent incident, involving this same secretary and Kommissar, Kuibeshev. The Politburo was discussing changes in the organisation of the Red Army, designed to weaken the power of Trotsky. Trotsky frankly stated to them that the real motive of their act had nothing in common with the motives officially announced. And Kuibeshev answered him just as frankly:
“We consider it necessary to fight you, and we cannot declare you an enemy; that is why we are compelled to resort to such methods.” [5]
It could hardly be an accident that the necessity to hoodwink Lenin and the necessity to fight Trotsky should have been voiced by the same man – and that man subsequently advanced into one of the most responsible posts in the party and the Government. It goes to prove what all these other facts and documents prove – that there was a condition of sharp conflict in the governing circles of the party, both before and after Lenin’s final collapse, and that the alignment of forces in that conflict was exactly opposite to what has been sedulously advertised by the victorious group. Trotsky with his back to the wall – and without any signs of tact or political subtlety – was defending the policies of Lenin against an opposing group, who were acting with an eye to power in the future.
The friendship of Lenin and Trotsky ended as it began, with Trotsky in the role of Lenin’s Big Stick.

Notes
1. See Appendix II.
2. Djerzinsky is of Polish origin.
3. The group of seven members of the Central Committee of the party – the governing authority in Russia.
4. The committee which looks after the Communist ethics of the members and controls the placing of them in the Government.
5. There is no mystery about my possession of this and the foregoing information; it is all contained in official documents stolen by counter-revolutionists and published in Russian, at Berlin, in the Sotzialistichesky Viestnik. This paper, which is a remnant of Menshevism, publishes a great deal of nonsense and irresponsible rumour about Russia, but the authenticity of these documents is recognised by the Bolsheviks. I took pains to assure myself of it absolutely before leaving Russia. One of the documents is a letter of Trotsky to the Central Committee, answering an intimation that he was opposed to “Leninism.” It is that letter which verified all the facts related above – most of which I had already found out in a less precise way in Russia. It is needless to say that I never spoke about any of these matters with Trotsky. I conversed with him only twice after this dispute began, and for about twenty minutes in all. Our first conversation was in regard to my biographical portrait of his youth. It occurred, however, in the midst of the clamour about The New Course, and I asked him one or two questions about that. All that I learned from him I have attributed to him in the text. Subsequently I met him for a moment accidentally; I told him then that I knew about The Testament of Lenin, and he told me to regard whatever I knew as an “absolute secret.” That has been an additional reason for my delay in writing this article.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (App. 8)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Appendix VIII:

Trotsky’s Letter of Resignation

ESTEEMED COMRADES:
The first point on the agenda of the coming session of the Central Committee is the question of the resolutions of local organisations concerning the “attack” of Trotsky. Since I cannot take part in the work of the session on account of my illness [1], I think that I will facilitate the examination of this question if I give you the following brief explanation:
1. I have considered and I consider it possible to bring into the discussion sufficiently weighty refutations, both in the way of principle and of facts, against the accusation that I pursue the goal of “revising Leninism,” and “belittling” (!) the role of Lenin. I have refrained, however, from responding, not only because I was sick, but also because, in the state of the present discussion, every utterance of mine on that theme, regardless of its character, tone, and content, would serve merely as a stimulus to deepen the polemic, transform it from a one-sided into a two-sided polemic, and give it a still more bitter character.
And at the present time, estimating the whole course of the discussion, and notwithstanding the fact that there have been advanced against me a multitude of false and actually monstrous accusations, I think that my silence has been right from the standpoint of the general interests of the party.
2. I can nowise accept, however, the accusation that I have pursued a special line (Trotskysm) and tried to revise Leninism. The opinion attributed to me, that not I came to Bolshevism, but Bolshevism to me, appears to me simply monstrous. In my introduction, Lessons of October, I say explicitly (p.62) that Bolshevism prepared itself for its role in the revolution by an implacable struggle, not only with populism and Menshevism, but with “conciliationism” – that is, with the tendency to which I belonged. It has never come into my head throughout these last eight years to consider any question from the standpoint of so-called “Trotskysm,” which I considered, and consider politically long ago liquidated. Whether I have been right or mistaken in this or that question coming before the party, I approached the decision of it from the standpoint of the general theoretical and practical experience of our party. Not once in all these years has anybody said to me that any idea or proposal of mine represented a special tendency of “Trotskysm.” This very word has swum out, to my complete surprise, only during the discussion about my book, 1917.
3. In this connection the question about the peasants has the greatest political significance. I decisively deny that the formula “Permanent Revolution,” which relates wholly to the past, has determined for me in any degree whatever an unattentive attitude to the peasants under the circumstances of the Soviet revolution. If I have chanced to revert to the formula “Permanent Revolution” in any particular instance since October it was only in the sphere of “Party History” – that is, a reversion to the past, and not in the sphere of present political problems. The effort to establish upon that question an irreconcilable disagreement between us has no justification, in my opinion, either in the eight years’ experiment of the revolution which we have carried out together, or in the tasks of the future.
Likewise I reject allusions and references to my alleged “pessimistic” attitude to the fate of our Socialist construction, in view of the decreased tempo of the revolution in the West. In spite of all the difficulties which arise from our capitalistic encirclement, the economic and political resources of the Soviet dictatorship are very great. I have more than once developed and established this fact, at the direction of the party, especially at international congresses, and I consider that this thought preserves its whole strength in the present period of historic development.
4. Upon the debated questions decided by the Thirteenth Congress of the party, I never appeared, either in the Central Committee or in the Soviet of Labour and Defence, much less outside the governing organs of the party and the Soviet institutions, with any proposals whatever which might either directly or indirectly raise issues which had once been decided. After the Thirteenth Congress there arose, or became more clearly defined, certain new problems of industrial, or Soviet, or international character. The solution of them has been a matter of exceptional difficulty. The idea was completely foreign to me to oppose any “platform” whatever to the work of the Central Committee of the party in the solution of these problems. To all those comrades who were present at the meetings of the Politburo, the Central Committee, the Soviet of Labour and Defence, or the Revolutionary Military Soviet, this assertion needs no proof. The debated questions decided by the Thirteenth Congress were raised again in this recent discussion, not only out of connection with my work, but, so far as I can judge at present, out of connection with the practicalproblems of party policy.
5. Inasmuch as the introduction to my book 1917 constitutes the formal motive of the last discussion, I consider it necessary first of all to deny the accusation that I printed my book as though behind the back of the Central Committee. As a matter of fact the book was printed (during my convalescence in the Caucasus) under exactly the same conditions as all other books of mine or of other members of the Central Committee, or members of the party in general. Naturally, it is the affair of the Central Committee to establish various forms of control over the party publications; but I in no direction, and in no degree, violated those forms of control which have been so far established, and I had, it goes without saying, no motive for such a violation.
6. The introduction, Lessons of October, represents a further development of thoughts expressed by me lately more than once, and especially in the past year. I will here name merely the following articles and speeches. [Follows a list of six speeches and articles.]
All the enumerated utterances, evoked by the defeat of the German revolution in the autumn of 1923, were printed in Pravda, Izvestia, and other publications. Not one member of the Central Committee, much less of the Politburo, once indicated to me the incorrectness of these works. Likewise, the editorial board of Pravda not only did not affix footnotes to my speeches, but not once made the slightest attempt to indicate to me that they did not agree with them in this or that point.
It stands to reason that I did not regard my analysis of October in connection with events in Germany as a “platform.” I never entertained the thought that this work might be understood by anybody whatever as a platform, which it was not, and could not be.
7. Inasmuch as certain others of my books have been dragged into the circle of accusation, and among them those which have gone through a series of editions, I consider it necessary to state that not only the Politburo as a whole never indicated to me that this or that article or book of mine might be interpreted as a “revision” of Leninism, but no single member of the Politburo ever did so. In particular, this relates to the book, 1905, which appeared during the life of Vladimir Ilych, went through a series of editions, was warmly recommended by the party Press, was translated by the Communist International into foreign languages, and now constitutes the chief material of the indictment against me for revising Leninism.
8. In setting forth these considerations, I pursue, as I have said already, a single purpose: to assist the session in deciding the question which stands as the first point in its agenda.
As far as concerns the statement often repeated in the course of the discussion, that I aim at some “special position” in the party, do not submit to discipline, decline this or that work assigned to me by the Central Committee, etc., etc., etc. – without permitting myself to evaluate those assertions, I will simply categorically announce: I am ready to fulfil any work whatever assigned to me by the Central Committee, in whatever position, or without any position, and, it goes without saying, under any conditions whatever of party control.
It is unnecessary to demonstrate that, after the recent discussion, the interests of the work demand that I be freed immediately from my duties as President of the Revolutionary Military Soviet.
In conclusion I think it is necessary to add that I remained in Moscow until the session in order, in case it was desired, to answer this or that question or give any necessary explanations.



Kremlin
January 15th, 1925


L. TROTSKY





Note
1. Trotsky has very rapidly recovered his health in the Caucasus. The present reports are excellent. – M.E. (March 1925).


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 9)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter IX:
 They Defend “Leninism”

To all this campaign of calumny and falsification Trotsky’s only reply was the following sentence inserted in the issue of Pravda for December 18th:
“I make no response to certain specific articles which have recently appeared in Pravda, since I think this better answers the interests of the party, and in particular of the discussion now in progress about the New Course.”
Having made this statement, Trotsky continued to define his position, impersonally, and with an elevation of thought and language that is unexcelled in the literature of revolution. Some of the essays in his little book on The New Course will take their place with the classics of Marxism.
In further defining his position upon the question of the old Bolsheviks and the new generation, Trotsky made the following statement:
“The point is exactly this, that the older generation should consciously change the course and thus guarantee their continued governing influence in the whole work of a self-active party.”
In further defining his position upon the question of renewing the party apparatus, he made this statement:
“It is monstrous to think that the party will break, or permit anybody to break its apparatus. The party knows that the most precious elements, in whom are incarnated an enormous part of our past experience, enter into the apparatus. But it wants to renew the apparatus, and remind its apparatus that it is elected by the party, and should not isolate itself from the party.”
In further defining his position upon the question of fractions Trotsky made the following statements:
“Fractions are the greatest evil possible in our circumstances, and groupings – even temporary ones – may transform themselves into fractions ... The party does not want fractions, and will not permit them.”
The articles containing these statements were published before the meeting of the conference of party officials in January. They were in the hands of these officials when they adopted the resolution which has put Trotsky before the world as having issued a “fractionalist manifesto,” attacking the leadership of the Old Bolsheviks, “pitting the younger generation against the fundamental framework of the party,” “giving the slogan ‘Destruction of the Apparatus of the Party,’” and “replacing the Bolshevik conception of the party as an organic whole, by another conception which makes the party an assemblage of groups and fractions.” [1]
Trotsky’s book was practically suppressed by the Politburo until they were sure of the success of their manoeuvre – and this, notwithstanding an order of the Central Committee, signed by Stalin and published in Pravda for December 15th, directing all the organisations of the party to permit a free and unhindered discussion of the resolution on Workers’ Democracy. This discussion ought, in the opinion of the Central Committee, to “involve the whole mass of the party membership in all corners of the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics.” Notwithstanding that excellent resolution, the unofficial suppression of Trotsky’s brochure was entirely effective. The brochure could not be openly bought, and a very general impression prevailed that it had been officially suppressed. Even after this embargo was removed, the whole apparatus of news and book distribution continued to impede its circulation. And in the meantime a stupendous “educational campaign” was undertaken in every town and hamlet of Russia, throughout the party locals, the trade unions, the schools, and the regiments of the Red Army, explaining that Trotsky had made an attack on the principles of Lenin, intimating that there had always been a conflict between them, and that Trotsky has always sought for some independent course which would set him off against Lenin, and make him seem as great. In short, an advertising campaign which outdoes anything known to the most enormous American manufacturing industry, a campaign endowed with the power to suppress the advertisements of its rivals as well as propagate its own, undertook to convince the Russian proletariat and Communist Party, and the proletariat and Communist parties of the whole world, that Trotsky is not only intellectually irresponsible and at heart a Menshevik, but that he is personally ambitious and would like to grab the power with a view to turning Leninism into “Trotskyism.” An irresponsible and ill-written pamphlet professing to give an account of Trotsky’s intellectual development, and stating that “Trotskyism” has always been “a form of intellectual opportunism ... guided in its political activities by the mood of the moment,” and that “Trotsky has always been in the sphere of political questions a revolutionary dilettante” [2] – was spread through the territory of the Union of Soviet Republics, like the Bible of the Gideons through the commercial hotels of the United States. The whole past history of the Russian revolution was revised and amended in order to create a picture of the original sin and unregenerate rebellion of Trotsky against Leninism. And not only the past but the present history, and not only the Russian but the more recent German revolution, was compelled to pay its tribute to this inebriate crusade. A wholesale redistribution of jobs was put into operation, such as to remove from positions of influence any persons who were known to support the programme of Workers’ Democracy as sincerely interpreted by Trotsky. Wholesale expulsions of students from the universities were enacted on the same principle. Old Bolsheviks, some of them the closest personal friends and aides of Lenin, were rooted up from positions of administrative importance, and shipped away to kick their heels in foreign embassies. And the organisation of the Red Army, created by Trotsky, understood by him, loyal to him, and under his hand the most powerful instrument ever possessed by a revolutionary movement in the world, was invaded and ripped to pieces and weakened of its power to defend the revolution, in order to make sure that it will never defend the name of Trotsky against those who are determined to destroy it.
The resolution on Workers’ Democracy had declared that “the party must facilitate the flowing in of new groups of industrial workers, and their promotion from candidates to members.” And Trotsky had emphasised this necessity, too, in his letters on the New Course. The bureaucracy seized upon this as an opportunity to change at a stroke the essential composition of the party. Passing a resolution to admit 100,000 workers, they opened the gates to almost 200,000. And, instead of “facilitating their promotion” from candidates (or probational members) to complete membership, they endowed them immediately with the right to vote for delegates to the next Congress of the party. At the same time they passed a resolution that no more “intellectuals” should be admitted. And in the spring they instituted a “purgation” of the party, directed particularly to the expulsion of intellectuals who failed in some respects to come up to the standards of “Leninism.” It is perfectly obvious that all these drastic measures, carried out in a hurry, and at the height of the panic about Trotsky’s alleged attack on “Leninism,” resulted automatically in perfecting the control of his enemies upon the party. One need not even attribute to them a conscious intention, though it would be idiotic to ignore it. The selections of new members and the expulsions of old were carried out by the existing apparatus, already “dangerously” bureaucratised by its own confession, and now very widely indoctrinated with the necessity of defending “Leninism” against “Trotskyism.” The result was a perfectly automatic change of composition of the party in the direction of support to the existing machine and opposition to Trotsky.
Even had there been no selection by the bureaucracy, the very admission of an enormous number of workers in the shops, and an expulsion of “intellectuals,” at just that moment, must inevitably strengthen the hold of the bureaucracy. This is not only because the workers are inherently more subject to organisational management than the intellectuals – their fundamental revolutionary strength being in this situation a weakness – but it is also because of the intellectual complexity of the trick that had been played upon them. It is perfectly clear from the citations I have adduced that only a man having some time for critical study, and also some training in such study, could save himself, except by a rare emotional intuition, from becoming the dupe of the official machine. The confident love of the whole underlying mass of the party, workers and intellectuals alike, for Trotsky was what originally compelled his enemies to resort to this campaign of slander and falsification. But after they had carried their campaign through to the end, brutally and ruthlessly, it followed as an automatic conclusion that Trotsky’s support remained firmest in those sections ofthe party possessing intellectual leisure and the habit of critical thought.
I promised to tell the reader all the points that were made against Trotsky in the course of this stampede. And this is the last one – that, after it was over, Trotsky appeared to be a man who was better supported by the intellectuals than by the workers. This inevitable result of the demagogue-method by which he had been attacked was converted into an argument against him as the leader of a proletarian revolution. And this argument was reinforced by an additional fact, namely, that the whole general population of Russia – including those who would like to hang him – admire Trotsky, and have the same involuntary respect for him that they had for Lenin. Everybody loves a hero, though the fight goes on. But those very same “proletarian” writers who repeated a thousand times in praise of Lenin the fact that his enemies admired him, adduce this fact about Trotsky in proof that he really belongsto the bourgeoisie.
Through all this proceeding Trotsky remained silent, doing his work so far as health and the will of the triumvirate permitted him to do it, preparing his own documentary history of the past, and studying the economic situation with a view to some comprehensive plan which may guarantee the future of the revolution. His personal popularity, however, supported by the simple fact that he had approached a revolutionary problem with Marxian understanding and in the spirit of Lenin, continued to embarrass his enemies. And not feeling strong enough to eliminate him from the government, they put forth the preposterous demand that he should “acknowledge his mistakes.” At the party convention in May, 1924, Zinoviev officially voiced this challenge, and it was the general feeling in the party, and even among the friends of Trotsky, that he ought to appear and speak at the party convention. Many had the impression that his illness and his subsequent absence in the Caucasus were the reasons for his not responding personally and polemically to the attacks upon him. Trotsky hesitated long about speaking at the convention. It was undoubtedly one of the most perfectly ‘’packed” conventions ever held in the history of the world. And what could be gained by repeating again, and redefining, those clear thoughts which they were inflexibly determined to pervert? Nevertheless, Trotsky finally yielded to the general demand. He acted upon the counsel of Lenin: “The party will learn not to exaggerate its differences.” [3] He spoke with the utmost moderation and restraint, reasserting his opposition to fractionalism, and his loyal submission to the discipline of the party, explaining once more exactly what he meant about the two generations, and merely recalling to the delegates that the danger of bureaucratism against which he had struggled was generally recognised, and that the admission of 200,000 workers, although improving the social composition of the party, had not removed that danger. The problem of the relation between the “old theoretically experienced and tempered generation” who govern the party, and the “innumerable youth,” had been made only “more pressing and more important.”
It was an admirable speech, quiet and profound and sure; but I think it was one of the hardest ordeals in Trotsky’s life. He came into the tribune with signs of pain in his face and bearing that I have never seen before. When it was over, these signs were gone, and the next morning, at a celebration in the aerodrome, he was radiant with energy and health and good confident laughter, as always. It was against his instinct to try to say anything to that convention, and the event proved that he was right. The heads of the party were determined to “exaggerate its differences.” His restraint and moderation only set them free. Nothing that he said was met and answered; there was no discussion of any problem. An exhibition was put on of the perfection of the bureaucratic machine – an exhibition which proved the truth of everything that Trotsky had said, but only by the process of automatically dismissing and ridiculing it. Trotsky had spoken in the morning, and all day long one obedient delegate after another, constituting a kind of representative bouquet from all sections of the party, stepped up and made his little superficial contribution, not to a solution of the great and real problem of the party’s future which had been raised by Trotsky, but to the business of confirming and perpetuating the false paper caricature of Trotsky, which they had learned by heart from the writings of Stalin, and Zinoviev, and Kamenev, and Bucharin and their associates.
The general drift of their remarks was that Trotsky’s speech had been unintelligible, equivocal, “diplomatic” – Trotsky had not been candid. In view of this, it is worth while to quote his opening sentences:
“I will concentrate, or I will try at least to concentrate, your attention upon that question, an explanation of which the Congress (or a certain part of it – more truly, all of it) expects from me, but in doing this I will set aside from the beginning – and I think the convention will understand my motives – all that which might in any degree sharpen the question, introduce personal moments, and make more difficult the liquidation of the difficulties which have arisen before the party, and from which we all want to extricate the party with benefit for its further work. If for this reason I do not touch upon a series of sharp issues with which my name has lately been associated, that is not because I would decline to give the Congress an answer to any question whatever ...”
Not one of the delegates who proceeded to pounce upon Trotsky’s speech for its unintelligibility and lack of candour, not one of them, though they devoted the whole day to this matter, essentially involving Trotsky’s personal attitude, accepted his invitation to ask him a question. That is a sufficient testimony to the machine character of the whole performance. They did not want him to answer any questions. They did not want him to introduce “personal moments” or touch upon any of those “sharp issues” of which I have written the history here.
I will give you an example of the intellectual level upon which this “discussion” was carried on. In declaring his loyalty to the discipline of the party, Trotsky had made this statement:
“The party in the last account is always right, because the party is the single historic instrument given to the proletariat for the solution of its fundamental problems. I have already said that before the face of one’s own party nothing could be easier than to acknowledge a mistake, nothing easier than to say: all my criticisms, my announcements, my warnings, my protests – the whole thing was a mere mistake. I, however, comrades, cannot say that, because I do not think it. I know that one must not be right against the party. One can be right only with the party, and through the party, for history has created no other road for the realisation of what is right. The English have a saying: ‘ Right or wrong, it is my country.’ With far greater historic justification we may say: Right or wrong, in separate particular concrete questions, at separate moments, nevertheless it is my party ...” [4]
Whatever you may think of this statement, and of the Hegelian-Marxian philosophy of history in which it has its roots, you certainly cannot imagine that it imputes to the party a papal infallibility in the solution of “separate, particular, concrete questions at separate moments.” And yet that was the meaning attributed to it throughout the discussion. And, thanks principally to Stalin and Zinoviev, all official Communist Moscow was seriously discussing for some days after, the question whether the Russian Communist Party is infallible! Here is what Stalin said – you must judgefor yourself whether with clever dishonesty, or naive stupidity:
“ ‘The party,’ says Trotsky, ‘cannot make a mistake.’ That is not true. The party often makes mistakes. Ilych taught us to teach the leaders of the party on their own mistakes. If the party never made mistakes, there would he nothing on which to teach the party.... I think this sort of an announcement from Comrade Trotsky is something of a compliment, with something of an attempt to make fun of us – an attempt, to be sure, not very successful.” [5]
And here is Zinoviev :
“Comrade Stalin said, and I, of course, am in full accord with him, that the party can make mistakes. It is useless to hand us these sour-sweet compliments. The party has no need of that. Can you imagine Vladimir Ilych ever coming out on the platform and saying that the party cannot make a mistake? ‘A switch!’ you remember. It was he that said it at one Congress of the soviets. ‘A switch is what you need. If we make mistakes, we will fail and go up the spout!’ That is what he said, and not, on the one hand, ‘the party is wrong, and, on the other hand, the party ‘cannot make mistakes.’There, that’s your answer to the question whether the party can make mistakes!” [6]
Are we to take this sort of thing, this solemn juvenile nonsense – “Stalin says that the party can make mistakes, and I, of course, am in full accord with him” – as the serious meditation of the leaders of the international proletariat? For my part, as I listened to their speeches, I found it impossible to credit them with so silly and superficial a pair of brains. The performance at this convention was a continuation of the deliberately unscrupulous campaign carried on during the winter. Sometimes a gang of mediocre bad boys will decide to make the world an impossible place for mature people, to whom truth is true and important things are important. If a gang of these boys had got their bottoms into the vacant chair of Lenin, they would behave towards Trotsky in about the same way that these great revolutionists have behaved.
As for the minor delegates, their performance reminded me of nothing so much as the Armistice Day exercises in a patriotic American private school. The originality of each pupil and, at the same time, their perfect training, is demonstrated by the clever variety of ways in which they all say the same thing, namely, that they hate the Germans and cleave to the Stars and Stripes. A greater contrast to the earnest and terribly honest analytical confronting of every suggestion concerning the problems of the revolution, which has always been the single occupation of the conventions of Lenin’s party, could not be imagined. The thing was so manifestly a mere staged ceremony of mutilating the corpse of Trotsky’s authority in the party machine, that at last Lenin’s wife asked for the floor, and reminded the delegates that they were not discussing any practical question and that, if Trotsky had declared that he was against fractions, that was enough. She was greeted with rounds of applause, which suggested that the delegates were sick of their own performance, and after a full day devoted to it, in a late hour of the evening, this post-mortem ceremony came to an end.
It remained plausible, however, that the “debate” must be “summed up.” And the better part of the next morning was devoted to a resume of the now perfectly stereotyped falsifications of Trotsky’s position by Stalin and Zinoviev – the speeches from which I have quoted. Stalin rehearsed his “Six Mistakes of Comrade Trotsky” – reduced to five now, because he had found it convenient to forget one of them. [7] And Zinoviev, holding Trotsky’s little book on The New Course in his hand, and sweeping the delegates after him in a torrent of contemptuous oratory – not omitting a sneer at the “Christian Socialism” of Lenin’s wife for her intervention of the night before [8] – made a series of statements, of which the following is a typical example:
“In this book there is a whole chapter on fractions and groupings. There it is not said, ‘I am for groupings and fractions.’ That is not said directly, but it is written betweenthe lines. Everybody understood it so at the time. That is just such a clever ‘diplomatic’ article as yesterday’s speech.”
Knowing that if anybody had looked inside of Trotsky’s book, he would have found fractions denounced there as a “malicious caricature” of the programme he was advocating, and as a “terrible political danger,” and that he would have found the assertion that “fractions are the greatest evil possible in our circumstances, and groupings – even temporary ones – can turn into fractions,” and the statement that “the party does not want fractions, and will not permit them” – knowing this fact, I walked out after the meeting into an adjoining enormous hall, which was full to the windows of piles of every species of revolutionary literature that has been published by any publishing house in Russia, from Marx’s Capital to the last little pamphlet of an aspiring high-school teacher – all for the instruction of the delegates – and I asked for a copy of Trotsky’s New Course, and I was informed that it was not on hand. I never saw a copy of the book outside of Zinoviev’s possession during the whole of this performance, which was supposed to be a discussion by grown men, “in the spirit of Lenin,” of the infinitely precise and conscientious thoughts contained in it.
It was a few days before this Congress that Lenin’s wife presented to the Central Committee the Testament of Lenin [9], his letter, which he had directed should be read to the Party Congress, and which demanded the removal of Stalin from his place of power, warned them that the behaviour of Zinoviev and Kamenev in October was not accidental, and that Bucharin does not know how to think like a Marxian, and explained that Trotsky’s fault is only an excessive self-confidence, and that he is a devoted revolutionist, and the outstanding revolutionist among them. Lenin’s wife demanded that the letter should be read as Lenin directed. It was a severe test for the machine – for the triumvirate – but there was only a moment of wavering. The letter was soon locked up in the safe. Zinoviev closed the convention with a benediction:
“Although we may not have seen so clearly, or so deeply, or so far, as Vladimir Ilych knew how to, yet one thing can be said, that the whole convention, like one man, has been inspired with a desire to work as though Vladimir Ilych were among us.”
If you danced on the corpse of Vladimir Ilych, you would insult his spirit less than by clapping the censorship on his own last words to his party, and juggling under the table with the cheapest tricks of the demagogue, the conscientious thoughts of that man whom he designated as the best of you.

Notes
1. This conference also condemned the “opposition” – “with Comrade Trotsky at the head of it” – for “interpreting the importance of discipline in a way absolutely contrary to the Bolshevik viewpoint.” It is, therefore, worth while to see just what Trotsky said in his supplementary articles about discipline:
“Where tradition is conservative, there discipline is passive and is violated at the first serious shock. Where, as in our party, tradition consists of the highest revolutionary activity, there discipline attains the highest intensity, for its deciding significance is continually verified in practice. Hence the indissoluble union between revolutionary initiative, bold critical study of problems – and iron discipline in action. Only through the highest activity can the young man receive that tradition of discipline from the old.”
2. This pamphlet was published by the Leningrad Soviet, of which Zinoviev is President.
3. See Appendix II.
4. Stenographic Report of the Thirteenth Congress, p.166.
5. Stenographic Report of the Thirteenth Congress, p.245.
6. Ibid., p.261.
7. See Appendix VII.
8. A parenthetical apology appears in the printed report of Zinoviev’s speech: “The term ‘Christian Socialism’ was employed in similar circumstances by Vladimir Ilych.” (!)
9. See p.28. [See Chapter 3 – Transcriber Note]


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 8)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter VIII:
 Bucharin Falsifies History

I DO not think it is necessary to carry these citations farther, in order to prove that the campaign to depopularise Trotsky by falsifying his position, was deliberate. Either it was deliberate, or the present leaders of the party are hysterics. But the campaign received a certain apparent dignity from the long article by Bucharin, entitled Down with Factionalism, from which I think it is worth while to show the reader a further specimen. Stalin had concluded his original attack upon Trotsky with the statement that Trotsky constitutes a block with the democratic centralists and a part of the “Left Communists.” And Bucharin’s attack begins in harmony with this latter phrase. It tells us that we can only understand the present errors of Trotsky by discovering their origin, and for that purpose it goes back to Brest-Litovsk, and shows us “in what consisted the error of Comrade Trotsky and the Left Communists” in that crisis. It declares that his error consisted in “letting himself be carried away by the revolutionary phrase” – a statement which would indeed place him, as all the readers of Lenin know, among the Left Communists. Trotsky, at Brest-Litovsk, had a marvellous project, but he did not see the “damned reality which the genius of Lenin saw with such prodigious clarity.” And especially he “did not see the peasants, who would not and could not fight.”
From this Bucharin passes to the crisis about the trade unions, and shows that “the error of Trotsky and other comrades” in this crisis sprang from exactly the same cause. They had an excellent “plan” for the amalgamation of the trade unions with the apparatus of the State, but it involved a “political line absolutely contrary to the real state of things.” And Bucharin concludes his historical treatise with the statement that: “Our present divergences with Comrade Trotsky can be traced to the same source. These divergences have always existed, etc., etc. ...” In short, Trotsky has always been a Left Communist.
Does it not strike you as a little peculiar that this campaign against Trotsky, which has resulted in classifying him definitely and decisively as the leader of a “deviation to the right,” should have begun with a suggestion from Stalin and a most elaborate demonstration by Bucharin that Trotsky is a Left Communist? Is it conceivable that if these terms were being used, as they were used by Lenin, to discriminate actual facts, they could have been interchanged in the middle of the discussion without anybody’s noticing it? They were being used as weapons with which to destroy Trotsky’s authority as a disciple of Lenin. And the reason why the weapons were changed in the middle of the discussion, was that it proved expedient to go back farther than the days of Brest-Litovsk – to go back twenty years, in fact, and rake up quotations from the attacks made by Trotsky upon Lenin when Trotsky was trying to unite what he imagined to be the real revolutionists in the Menshevik and Bolshevik factions. It proved expedient to adopt Zinoviev’s form of abuse, instead of the form invented by Stalin and Bucharin. It is obvious that Trotsky cannot be permanently advertised as both a Menshevik and a Left Communist. You may experiment a little in the beginning, but in the long run you have got to standardise your abuse.
I am going to call your attention to another thing about Bucharin’s article. It was not signed by Bucharin; it was described as The Reply of the Editorial Staff of the Central Organ to Comrade Trotsky’s Letter. The reason I happen to know it was written by Bucharin is that Stalin stated this fact in a speech printed in Pravda for January 22nd, 1924. [1] Now let me tell you how Bucharin would have had to write his historical treatise on the errors of Comrade Trotsky if he had signed his article.
He would have had to say: Comrade Trotsky and I “both” took an erroneous position during the debate on the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, because we neither of us had in that crisis an adequate sense of reality. But Trotsky’s sense of reality was so much better than mine that he opposed the program of “revolutionary war” advocated by me and the Left Communists. His programme was to declare the war ended, but make our revolutionary character clear to the German workers by refusing to sign a peace with their rulers. And, moreover, when the Germans advanced, and Lenin declared that if we did not sign the Peace of Brest-Litovsk he would resign from the Government and the Central Committee, Trotsky, stating that we could obviously not fight with a divided party, deliberately withheld his vote and gave the majority to Lenin. Whereas I, with an obstinacy of stupidity that I can now only describe as idiotic, continued to vote against Lenin.
That is how Bucharin would have to write, over his own signature, the history of Brest-Litovsk. And the history of the discussion about the trade unions would fare but little better. For instead of a history of “the errors of Trotsky and other comrades,” it would be a history of the errors of Trotsky and me, each of us composing and advocating “an excellent plan” which, nevertheless, ignored the “real state of things,” and each of us receiving a good sound lecture from Lenin. [2]
It is obvious that such a history could not conclude with the rather pious statement that: “Our present divergences with Comrade Trotsky can be traced to the same source. These divergences have always existed, etc.” It would have to conclude somewhat as follows: “Our present divergences arise from the fact that I, having been upon the whole a great deal foolisher than Comrade Trotsky, and having had a less practical sense of reality, have suddenly become far more wise.”
And to this Bucharin might have added that having always admired Trotsky without bound or limit, having defended his practical judgment and praised his revolutionary devotion – having remembered when others forgot, that Trotsky once cheerfully sacrificed his own prestige in order to defend the prestige of the party – having done all these things in his folly, Bucharin in his wisdom can find nothing better to do than imitate Stalin in imputing to Trotsky’s carefully spoken words exactly the opposite meaning from that which they express, and upon the basis of that imputation describe him as a demagogue. I am going to ask you to attend to one last quotation which is typical of the mode of refuting Trotsky’s arguments adopted in this rather comically top-lofty article of Bucharin’s:
“We must without doubt – and no divergence of views is possible on this point – try during the New Course to elevate as much as possible the political and intellectual activity of the members; we can only do this by employing in the party the methods of democracy. It is clear, and we affirm it, that this is not the question which has provoked the discussion. The question is by what means the party shall be revived. Shall it be by developing ideologically the young adherents of the party and assimilating them to it with the aid of the old staff? ... According to Trotsky, it is not the old guard which should guide the young, but on the contrary, it is the young who should take it upon themselves to conduct the old ... That is evidently a demogogic viewpoint sufficiently remote from Leninism.”
Now let us recur once more to the thoughtful words of Trotsky:
“We ought to state – we ourselves, the ‘old men’ – that our generation, while naturally playing the role of leadership in the party [3], nevertheless does not contain within itself any automatic guarantee against a gradual and unnoticeable weakening of the proletarian and revolutionary spirit, provided the party permits any further growth and hardening of the bureaucratic-apparatus method of politics, which converts the younger generation into passive material for education, and creates inevitably an alienation between the apparatus and the mass, between the old and the young. Against this unquestionable danger there is no other defence, except a serious, deep, radical change of course in the direction of Workers’ Democracy, accompanied by a continually increasing introduction into the party of proletarians who remain in the shops.”
Is not Bucharin’s imputation of demagogism to Trotsky founded upon an exact logical falsification of his words? And if you remove that falsification, what is there that you can insert into its place in the argument of Bucharin, except the honest and obvious truth about the whole situation, namely:
“We must without doubt employ the methods of democracy, ... This is not the question which has provoked the discussion ... The question which has provoked the discussion is whether those methods of democracy shall go far enough to let the party membership take the excessive power out of our hands, and give to Trotsky, whom they love better and trust more, a dominant influence.”

Notes
1. As this book goes to press, I learn that Bucharin’s article was subsequently printed over his own signature. – M.E.
2. See Appendix II.
3. Italics mine.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (App. 2)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Appendix II:
 
The Dispute about the Trade Unions

THE most important disagreement between Lenin and Trotsky arose in 1920, after the final victory of the Red Army. Trotsky, feeling that the energies of the revolution were at last released for Communist construction, devised a creative plan of co-operation and partial amalgamation of the trade unions and the branch of the Government which directs the industries. His purpose was to eliminate a wasteful friction between these two elements in the proletarian society, both of which have administrative functions in the same field. He proposed also to strengthen the trade unions by introducing into their administration a selected body of the ablest executives who had been developed in the organisation of the army. His plan – falsely described in our newspapers as a “militarisation of industry" – was by no means obviously unworkable, nor was it immediately opposed by Lenin. But Lenin’s mind was already travelling in the direction of the New Economic Policy. He felt that the country needed a rest. The Cronstadt rebellion came just in time to prove it. And in the end he opposed Trotsky’s plan, against which Zinoviev had already been conducting an agitation. This incident was a help to those people who wanted to believe that there was a fundamental disaccord between Lenin and Trotsky. And they were still further assisted by the fact that Trotsky, who, in zeal for his great plan, had committed one of his characteristic acts of childish presumption, received from Lenin a good sound scolding.
These words from a speech of Lenin make clear both what Trotsky had done and what he got for it:
“Only think of this: After two plenary sessions of the Central Committee devoted to an unbelievably detailed, long, hot discussion of the rough draft of the theses of Comrade Trotsky, and the whole party policy in the trade unions defended by him, this one member of the Central Committee, remaining alone out of nineteen, selects himself a group outside of the Central Committee, and, with the ‘collective work’ of this group as a ‘platform,’ appears and proposes to the party convention to ‘choose between two tendencies’! I do not speak of the fact that this invitation by Comrade Trotsky to choose between exactly two, and only two, tendencies, although Bucharin had already on the 9th of November appeared in the role of ‘buffer,’ plainly exposes the actual role of Bucharin’s group as helpers in the worst and most harmful kind of fractionalism. That is by the way. But I ask any member of the party: Does not such a sudden invasion and jumping in on the idea of a ‘choice’ between two tendencies in the trade union movement strike him as dizzy-headed?”
You can imagine the gratification which this afforded to those circles in the party who felt that Trotsky was an upstart, and that his immense prestige as a Bolshevik – created by the prodigious achievement of a few years rather than by the more hallowing process of the mere passage of time – was unjustified. They were very happy, and they lifted up their heads very high. And they did not by any means enter into the spirit of the words in which Lenin concluded his chastisement of Trotsky.
“The party,” he said, “will learn not to exaggerate disagreements. Here it is appropriate to repeat a correct observation of Comrade Trotsky in regard to Comrade Tomsky: ‘In the sharpest polemic with Comrade Tomsky I always said that it was perfectly clear to me that the leaders of our trade unions can only be people with the experience and the authority which Comrade Tomsky possesses ... An intellectual struggle within the party does not mean mutual rejection, but mutual influence.’ It goes without saying that the party will apply this correct observation to Comrade Trotsky.”


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (App. 1)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Appendix I:
 
Lunacharsky on Trotsky’s Character




A LITTLE book of Revolutionary Silhouettes, by A.V. Lunacharsky, the Soviet Commissar of Education, has come to my hand just as this book goes to press. It contains such a poised and sensible estimate of Trotsky that I insert here a few paragraphs, hastily translated.





I first met Trotsky in 1905, after the event of January. He came to Geneva, I have forgotten whence, and was to speak with me at a big meeting called to discuss that tragedy. Trotsky was then unusually elegant, in distinction from all of us, and very beautiful. That elegance of his, and especially a kind of careless high-and-mighty manner of talking with no-matter-who, struck me very unpleasantly. I looked with great disapproval on that dude, who swung his leg over his knee, and dashed off with a pencil an outline of the impromptu speech he was going to make at the meeting. But Trotsky spoke mighty well ...
I met him very little in the revolution of 1905. He held himself apart not only from us, but from the Mensheviks. His work was mainly in the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies ...
I remember how somebody said in the presence of Lenin: “Khristalev’s star has fallen, and the strong man in the Soviet now is Trotsky.” Lenin sort of darkened for a minute,and then said: “Well, Trotsky won that with his tireless and fine work ...”
Trotsky’s popularity among the Petersburg proletariat up to the time of his arrest was very great, and it increased as a result of his extraordinary picturesque and heroic conduct in court. I ought to say that Trotsky, of all the Social Democratic leaders of 1905 and 1906, undoubtedly showed himself, in spite of his youth, the most thoroughly prepared; least of all he wore the imprint of a certain emigrant narrowness, which, as I have said, impeded even Lenin at that time; he more than any other realised what a broad struggle for sovereignty really is. And he came out of the revolution with the greatest gain in popularity. Neither Lenin nor Martov made any essential gain. Plekhanov lost much in consequence of his half-cadet tendencies. Trotsky from that time stood in the front rank ...
At the Stuttgart Congress of the International, Trotsky carried himself modestly, and advised us to, considering us all knocked out of the saddle by the reaction of 1906, and therefore unable to impose ourselves on the Congress.
Afterward Trotsky was allured by the conciliatory line, and the idea of the unity of the party. He occupied himself with this at various plenary sessions, and he dedicated his Vienna journal, Pravda, three-fourths to that perfectly hopeless idea ...
I will say here immediately that Trotsky succeeded very badly in organising, not only a party, but even a little group ... A tremendous imperiousness and a kind of inability or unwillingness to be at all caressing and attentive to people, an absence of that charm which always surrounded Lenin, condemned Trotsky to a certain loneliness. Remember that even some of his personal friends (I speak, of course, only of the political sphere) afterward became his sworn enemies ...
For work in political groups Trotsky seemed little fitted, but in the ocean of historic events, where such personal features lose their importance, only his favourable side came to the front ...
I always considered Trotsky a big man. Yes, and who could doubt it? In Paris [during the war] he had already mightily grown up in my eyes as a statesman, and thereafter he grew continually – whether because I knew him better, and he could better show the whole measure of his strength on the wider field that history offered him, or because the actual experience of the revolution and its problems enlarged him and increased the spread of his wings.
The agitational work of the spring of 1917 does not belong to the task of these silhouettes, but I ought to say that, under the influence of its enormous scope and blinding success, many people near to Trotsky were even inclined to see in him the genuine first leader of the Russian revolution. Thus M.C. Uritsky, who regarded Trotsky with immense respect, said once to me, and, it seems, Manuilsky: “You see, the great revolution is come, and, no matter how intelligent Lenin is, he begins to dim a little beside the genius of Trotsky.” That evaluation proved incorrect, not because it exaggerated the endowment and power of Trotsky, but because at that time the dimensions of the political genius of Lenin were not yet clear ...
The chief external endowments of Trotsky are his oratorical gift and his talent as a writer. I consider Trotsky probably the greatest orator of our times. I have heard in my day all the great parliamentary and popular orators of Socialism, and very many of the famous orators of the bourgeois world, and I should have difficulty in naming any of them, except Jaures, whom I might place beside Trotsky.
Effective presence, beautiful broad gesture, mighty rhythm of speech, loud, absolutely tireless voice, wonderful compactness, literariness of phrase, wealth of imagery, scorching irony, flowing pathos, and an absolutely extraordinary logic, really steel-like in its clarity – those are the qualities of Trotsky’s speech. He can speak epigrammatically, shoot a few remark ably well-aimed arrows, and he can pronounce such majestic political discourses as I have heard elsewhere only from Jaurès. I have seen Trotsky talk for two and a half to three hours to an absolutely silent audience, standing on their feet, and listening as though bewitched to an enormous political treatise ...
As to Trotsky’s inner structure as a leader, as I said, he was on the small scale of party organisation ... unapt and unskilful. He was impeded here by the extreme definiteness of the outlines of his personality.
Trotsky is prickly, imperative. Only in his relations with Lenin after their union, he showed always a touching and tender yieldingness. With the modesty characteristic of truly great men, he recognised Lenin’s priority.
As a political man of wisdom, Trotsky stands on the same height that he does as an orator. And how could it be otherwise? The most skilful orator whose speech is not illumined with thought is nothing but an idle virtuoso, and all his oratory is a tinkling cymbal. That love, of which the Apostle Paul speaks, may not be necessary to the orator, he may be full of hate, but thought is absolutely necessary ...
It seems to me that Trotsky is incomparably more orthodox than Lenin, although this will seem strange to many. Trotsky’s political course appears a little winding: he was neither a Menshevik nor a Bolshevik, sought the middle road, and then poured his stream into the Bolshevik river. Nevertheless, Trotsky always followed, so to speak, the accurate rules of revolutionary Marxism. Lenin feels himself a creator and proprietor in the realm of political thought, and very often proposes completely new slogans, which afterward give rich results. Trotsky is not distinguished by that boldness of thought; ... he is infinitely bold in his condemnations of Liberalism, of half-way Socialism, but not in any kind of innovation ...
It is often said of Trotsky that he is personally ambitious. That is of course pure nonsense. I remember one very significant phrase spoken by Trotsky at the time when Chernov accepted a place in the Government: “What contemptible ambitiousness – to abandon his historic position for a portfolio!” In that you have the whole of Trotsky. There is not a drop of vanity in him ...
Lenin also is not the least bit ambitious. I believe that Lenin never looks at himself, never glances in the mirror of history, never even thinks of what posterity will say of him – simply does his work. He does his work imperiously, not because power is sweet to him, but because he is sure that he is right, and cannot endure to have anybody spoil his work. His love of power grows out of his tremendous sureness and the correctness of his principles, and, if you please, out of an inability (very useful in a political leader) to see from the point of view of his opponent ...
In distinction from him, Trotsky often looks at himself. Trotsky treasures his historic role, and would undoubtedly be ready to make any personal sacrifice, not by any means excluding the sacrifice of his life, in order to remain in the memory of mankind with the halo of a genuine revolutionary leader. His love of power has the same character as Lenin’s, with the difference that he is oftener capable of making mistakes, not possessing the almost infallible instinct of Lenin, and that, being a man of choleric temperament, he is capable, although only temporarily, of being blinded by passion. While Lenin, equable and always blaster of himself, hardly ever even gets into a fit of irritation.
You must not think, however, that the second great leader of the Russian revolution yields in all respects to his colleague; there are points in which Trotsky indubitably excels him: he is more brilliant, he is more clear, he is more motile. Lenin is perfectly fitted for sitting in the president’s chair of the Soviet of People’s Commissars, and guiding with genius the world revolution, but obviously he could not handle the titanic task which Trotsky took upon his shoulders, those lightning trips from place to place, those magnificent speeches, fanfares of instantaneous commands, that role of continual electrifier now at one point and now another of the weakening army. There is not a man on the earth who could replace Trotsky there.
When a really great revolution comes, a great people always find for every part a suitable actor, and one of the signs of the greatness of our revolution is that the Communist Party advanced from its midst, or adopted from other parties and strongly implanted in its body, so many able people suited to this and that governmental function.
Most of all suited to their parts are the two strongest of the strong – Lenin and Trotsky.



 


Revolutionary Silhouettes
Moscow, 1923
A.V. LUNACHARSKY





Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 5)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter V:
 Trotsky’s Bad Tactics

IF Trotsky had been a great politician and not just a great man, consecrating himself with a rather naive directness to the task of carrying forward the living wisdom of Lenin, he would have exercised the utmost caution after winning this preliminary victory. He would have taken pains, in agitating for a sincere application of the programme of Workers’ Democracy, not to utter one word which might by the most inflamed imagination be conceived as overstepping the literal meaning of the words of that resolution. These words were abundantly adequate to his purpose.
But Trotsky had learned only the larger wisdom of Lenin, his mode of approaching and solving revolutionary problems. He had not learned his political craft, his sly art of handling human beings. And because of that quality in him which Lenin called “too great self-confidence,” Trotsky never could learn this art. Trotsky is not any more self-confident than Lenin, but he has a peculiar obtuseness to the feelings and reactions of others. He is full of his own purpose and his own idea, and lacks that instinctive sense of the purposes and ideas of others which would make him adroit in the achievement of his own. He behaves at times with the blundering presumptuousness of a child.
It was certainly a childlike blunder that Trotsky committed after gaining this preliminary victory. For instead of clinging like a leech to the literal wording of the resolution, he opened his agitation with a discourse richly illuminating it, a profoundly thoughtful and far-seeing essay on the resolution from the standpoint of one who sincerely and whole-heartedly believes in its application. Trotsky’s discourse took the form of a letter to be read at a meeting of his own party local – he being sick in bed with a fever and unable to address the meeting in person – a letter which would subsequently come before the party by way of publication in Pravda. In this letter Trotsky draws the outlines of a new day of revolutionary life and growth that is dawning for the party, and he draws it with the hand of a master of Marxism and the wisdom of Lenin. [1] He draws it, moreover, in essential fidelity to the resolution on Workers’ Democracy. He proposes no practical step that is not contained in that resolution. But through the mere breadth of his view and the natural richness of his mind – unrestrained by a sense of the political manoeuvre he is engaged in – he oversteps in two respects the literal wording of the resolution. And he oversteps it in two respects upon which there had evidently been a dispute in the meetings of the Politburo, and upon which Trotsky had evidently made a concession to the other side. There is no use minimising the blunder involved here, or the legitimate irritation which it may have caused to those who had just reached an agreement with him. But it is important that this blunder should be accurately defined.
It was universally recognised that the discontent with party bureaucracy was strongest among the Communist youth. And it was also recognised that this discontent often took the form of a protest against the excessive authority attributed to “Old Bolsheviks” as such. There was a certain restiveness under the extreme application of the “priority system,” which necessarily prevails in a revolutionary party surrounded with counter-revolutionary influences. Trotsky evidently wished to allude to this discontent in the resolution on Workers’ Democracy. He wished to explain it as a result of the excessive bureaucratism of the party, and as indicating a danger which could be eliminated only by a thorough-going application of the principles of Workers’ Democracy.
I say “evidently” because he did advance this point in his original letter to the Central Committee. In paragraph 12 of that letter he stated and emphasised the fact that the staff of the Old Bolsheviks is “the revolutionary leaven of the party and its organisational backbone,” and he added that the Old Bolsheviks ought to occupy all the governing positions in the party. But he pointed out that the universal system of appointing them from the top, and the creation of a whole self-sufficient officialdom of appointed secretaries, who identify themselves with old Bolshevism, creates a discontent which may in the future endanger that very leadership of the old underground fighters which every one agrees should be preserved.
In the resolution on Workers’ Democracy this reason for its application is not stated. The resolution simply demands a “strengthening of the party’s educative work, in every way avoiding its regimentary presentation ... especially among the Communist youth.”
It is impossible to doubt that Trotsky must have argued for a full statement of his point of view here, and in the process of arriving at a compromise agreed to leave it out. Nevertheless, he proceeded to expound it explicitly and eloquently in his first contribution to the discussion that followed. His exposition did not, of course, add anything to the practical measures advocated in the resolution. He did not offer a further programme, or any amplification of the programme contained in it. But he offered an additional reason for its sincere application, touching a theme which the others did not wish to touch. There is no denying that this was an improper thing to do. It was a typical example of that fault which Lenin called “too great self-confidence,” but which might perhaps be better described as forgetting all about the existence of the other man.
It is obvious that people cannot co-operate if they permit each other to make blunders of this kind. But it is also obvious that they cannot co-operate if, when one of them makes a blunder of this kind, he is not given an opportunity to correct it. And an essential point in understanding what followed the publication of Trotsky’s letter is the fact that it lay in the hands of his enemies, and was read by them, and its contents, were discussed by them for four days before it was published. Moreover, as that delay was unusual under these circumstances, Trotsky spoke to Stalin about it, and Stalin, with entire good humour and with a laughing reference to the contents of the letter, assured Trotsky that they were printing it in a forthcoming issue of the paper. Its contents were known before it was published to every important man subsequently involved in the attack upon Trotsky. It was also known to every one of these men that Trotsky is minutely scrupulous in living up to any agreement that he has made, and that he had been infinitely patient and reasonable in all the long process of arriving at this agreement. It is therefore inconceivable that, if any of these men had had a real desire to support that agreement and preserve the unity of the Politburo, he would not have telephoned to Trotsky and called his attention to his transgression of it before the letter was published.
What they did do was to decide that it would be possible, upon the basis of this indiscreetly discursive letter, to bring the war against Trotsky out into the open. They decided to attack him all at once, and from every direction, and with every weapon except intellectual honesty, and destroy his authority in the party. The enthusiasm for the programme of Workers’ Democracy had taught them that there was no other way to make fast the power of their bureaucratic machine, which was now completely identified in their minds with the perpetuation of “Leninism.”
I do not know circumstantially when this decision was reached, but I am convinced that it was reached only after the publication of Trotsky’s letter. The friendly way in which Stalin spoke to Trotsky about the letter before it was published is a reason for believing this. Another reason is, that on the day of its publication, December 11th, at a meeting of the 4,000 party workers of Moscow, addressed by both Zinoviev and Kamenev, Trotsky’s letter was discussed at some length, and no decisive attitude was adopted towards it. Zinoviev alluded to it with animosity, but only hinted that maybe it foretold a violation of the unanimity of the Politburo. And Kamenev strongly defended Trotsky’s letter – which he described as an incautious formulation – against the insinuation that it was intended to serve as an attack upon the other members of the Central Committee. A third reason is that two days after this meeting, Pravda published an article by Zinoviev [2] – written, I suppose, some days before – in which he had carried out in good faith the agreement that had been made with Trotsky. Trotsky’s letter having “pushed the resolution from beneath,” Zinoviev wrote an article “restraining it from above.” His article is not a direct reply to Trotsky, but its relevance is shown by the fact that in the opening paragraphs he repeats the very things Trotsky had said about the danger of a bureaucratic degeneration, citing the same “frightening example” of the German Social Democrats, and then proceeds to dwell at greater length upon the dangers that lie in the opposite direction. Two days after the publication of this temperate and dignified counter-statement, which was in keeping with the agreement that he had made with Trotsky, Zinoviev launched into a wild and ill-prepared tirade against him before the party workers of Petrograd. And on the same day that he did this – December 15th – Stalin published in Pravda an equally hasty and ill-considered, and almost incredibly brief and offhand denunciation of Trotsky, tacked on to the tail of a long article about other people. Those are some of the reasons why I am convinced that the decision to wage this personal war on Trotsky was made only after the publication of his letter. It was based upon the reception accorded to his letter, and not upon the contents of the letter.
A month later, after the campaign against Trotsky had attained the proportions of a stampede, Kamenev described with great eloquence how they had all realised on the very night when Trotsky’s letter was first read at the meeting of his local branch, that he had “gone to war” on the Central Committee. “For us,” he said, “– I can say it before this responsible assembly and you ought to weigh it well – for us all, when we learned late at night that Comrade Trotsky’s letter had been read at the meeting of the Krasno-Presninsky local at his request – for us all it was clear, and we could understand it, and we did understand it only thus: it was a rupture of the achieved agreement. Comrade Trotsky had gone to war on the Central Committee, notwithstanding the fact that every concession which he demanded had been made to him in order to achieve unanimity.” [3]
Now, if you will consider how unlikely it is that a man of mature years, to say nothing of a man possessing the poise of a great military leader, after spending the better part of a month in the painful labour of reaching an agreement, would take up his pen and paper the next morning and deliberately violate it; and if you will consider further the fact that Trotsky had no need to violate it in order to gain his ends – the agreement had been a victory for him, and not for them; and if you will consider further the fact that no ordinary person in all Russia, reading Trotsky’s letter in his morning paper, so much as imagined that it was a violation of the agreement; and if you will consider in addition the little incident of a good-natured conversation about the letter with Stalin himself, which I have upon Trotsky’s own authority; you will agree that it is not very probable that on the same night when Trotsky’s letter was read at a meeting of his local, all the other members of the Politburo instantaneously realised that Trotsky had “gone to war on the Central Committee.” And this will prepare you for the rather surprising news that Kamenev himself, at the meeting on December 11th – five days after this tragical midnight experience which he describes – not only spoke of Trotsky’s letter with perfectly friendly respect, but said in so many words that he did not know whether it was meant as an attack upon the Central Committee or not:
“That Comrade Sapronov agrees to take the formula of Trotsky, in order to beat the Central Committee, of that I have no doubt. But does Trotsky agree with Sapronov? That I don’t know. (Applause.) Like Radek, I regret that Trotsky used a formula which permitted Sapronov to seize it and direct it against the Central Committee ... The article of Trotsky needs supplementation and explanation.” (Pravda, for December 14th, 1923.)
I do not know the personal reasons for this misstep of Kamenev’s. Like the distant historian, I merely discover it in the documents which have come with me out of Russia. But I assume that by the middle of January Kamenev had preached himself into actually believing what he originally knew to be a myth. Kamenev is a great and sincere talker like John Wesley, the evangelist, who says in his diary: “Once the devil suggested to me that I did not believe what I was preaching, and I said, ‘Well, I’ll preach till I do!’”
Zinoviev, in his speech on December 11th before the Moscow party workers, spoke of Trotsky’s letter as “foretelling nothing good.” “We will see how the matter goes farther,” he said. “Whoever shall violate the achieved agreement will answer for it before the whole party.” [4]
In his wild speech before the party workers of Petrograd, four days later, he said: “We achieved an agreement, and what happened? The unanimous resolution was printed and the next day Comrade Trotsky contributed his letter which was an indubitable violation of the agreement.” [5]
It seems obvious that between these two speeches a definite decision was reached. And this obvious-seeming thing becomes certain when you remember that Kamenev’s statement at the Moscow meeting was in direct contradiction to Zinoviev’s. Kamenev said that Trotsky’s letter was not an indubitable violation of the agreement. The only question is, How was this decision reached and what was the exact nature of the decision? And the whole answer is, that the decision was reached without consulting Trotsky, or asking him to explain his letter, although he was accessible by telephone, and lying in bed not three minutes away from the probable scene of any discussion that occurred. Is it conceivable that, if the doubtful point to be decided was whether Trotsky had in fact deliberately violated the agreement and “gone to war on the Central Committee,” nobody would have asked him a question? I am not talking now about the words in which the decision may have been expressed by this or that person, but about the real nature of the decision. It was a decision, not that Trotsky had gone to war on the Central Committee, but that the Central Committee should go to war on Trotsky. “We have got to depopularise Trotsky,” is the way in which one of the leaders expressed this decision.
To sum up: For four days after Trotsky’s letter was first read to his local branch, and for four more days after it was published in Pravda, the whole rank and file of the party, and the non-party workers, and the general readers of Pravda, continued to breathe the air of relief that had been generated by the unanimous resolution on Workers’ Democracy. Accepting Trotsky’s letter as but a characteristically luminous and human interpretation of that resolution, they continued to believe that the party was going forward unanimously and sincerely on a new course. The atmosphere is indicated and the fact proven by these words from Pravda for December 13th: “The firm word has been spoken, the direction taken. The party will tranquilly and firmly accomplish its historic change of course.”
That tranquil and firm accomplishment of a real change of course was, as I have said, exactly what the enemies of Trotsky feared. It was the thing that would loose their artificial grip on a party that, in its natural action, trusted Trotsky more than it trusted them. Therefore they were faced with the alternative of accepting a substantial defeat in the personal war on Trotsky, or bringing that war out into the open and “daring to name him an enemy.” They decided – while he lay in bed with a chronic fever – that they dared to do it. And they proceeded to denounce his wise but indiscreet letter as a “Fractionalist Manifesto,” an “Attack on the Old Guard,” a “Pitting of the Youth against the Old Bolsheviks,” an “Insinuation against the Disciples of Lenin,” a “Giving of the Slogan, Shatter the Apparatus of the Party,” a manifestation of “Left Communism,” a manifestation of “Right Communism,” a “Resurrection of Menshevism,” a “Demand for the Legalisation of Fractions” – as everything and anything except what it was, a sincere declaration that the programme of Workers’Democracy was to be taken seriously, just as Lenin had originally intended it, as a turning point in the life of the party.

Notes
1. See Appendix VI.
2. Workers’ Democracy and the Problems of the Party Apparatus, Pravda, December 13th, 1923.
3. Speech printed in Pravda, January 12th, 1924.
4. The Fate of Our Party, by G. Zinoviev, p.93.
5. The Fate of Our Party, by G. Zinoviev, p.117. Italics mine.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 13)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter XIII:
 The Peasant Question

THE inevitable grand result of this difference between Trotsky and the bureaucracy – the essence of it, perhaps, from the standpoint of philosophic Marxism – is a divergence upon the fundamental economic question, the question of the peasants. This is not as yet a concrete disagreement, but it is a difference of attitude which becomes continually more clear. It may be defined, I think, by saying that Trotsky regards the recent concessions made to the peasants – the turning over to them of leadership in the rural Soviets – as an expedient, the necessity of which is to be regretted. It is a necessary step backward along the path of the proletarian revolution. He is ready to take such steps, and still further ones, if it becomes necessary to save the revolution, but only after every effort has been made to meet the demands of the peasants by developing and organising and speeding up the industries which produce the goods they need. The triumvirate, on the other hand, do not recognise that these concessions to the peasant are a departure from Marxism, and from the path outlined by Lenin for the proletarian revolution. With the adoption of the new economic policy, Lenin ceased to orient the party upon the poor peasant; he recognised the necessity of supporting the “middle peasant.” The leaders of the party have now established a new category between the “middle peasant” and the “kulak,” and they have named it with a name which may be translated “progressive farmer.” The Bolshevik Party, which started life with the slogan, “Carry the class struggle into the country,” is now officially supporting the progressive farmer. And instead of treating this as a concession from their policy, the leaders of the party treat it as a policy. They call it “Leninism,” and they accuse Trotsky, who has all along insisted upon trying to obviate the necessity of it by a more aggressive and systematic organisation of industry, of representing a “deviation from Lenin” on the peasant question. Trotsky, they say, “underestimates the peasant.”
It is not likely that Trotsky, who organised the peasants in the Red Army – and he is the only Marxian in the world who ever did organise peasants – would be the one to underestimate them. That he does not underestimate them, is proven by the fact that he advocated the essential features of the concession to the peasants involved in the New Economic Policy a full year before Lenin realised the necessity of it. He was able to do this exactly because of his more immediate and realistic knowledge of the peasants. The statement that Trotsky deviated from Lenin on the peasant question is, according to the testimony of Lenin himself, a lie. And there is no better way to dispose of it than to quote this paragraph inserted by him in Pravda for February 15th, 1919:
“Comrade Trotsky says that the rumours of a disagreement between him and me on the question of the peasants is the most monstrous and conscienceless lie, propagated by the landlords and capitalists and their conscious and unconscious servitors. I, upon my side, totally confirm the statement off Comrade Trotsky.”
There is certainly no doubt about the meaning of those words. The reader should remember, however, that this united position of Lenin and Trotsky upon the role of the peasants in the Russian revolution, was arrived at after a long battle. [1] And in that battle it was Trotsky, and not Lenin, who first advanced the formula upon which they subsequently agreed – the dictatorship of the proletariat supported by the peasants. The bureaucracy has raked up all those old passages in which Lenin attacked Trotsky upon this question at a time when Trotsky’s formula was right and Lenin’s was wrong, and they use them without date or explanation in order to prove that Trotsky opposed Lenin at a subsequent time, when Lenin expressly stated that they were agreed. That is their method of argument, and it merely makes more convincing the assertion of Lenin that this story about a disagreement between him and Trotsky on the peasant question is a “monstrous and conscienceless lie.”
The question is, therefore, why have the enemies of Trotsky revived this lie after Lenin’s death, and gradually advanced it into the most prominent place in the attack upon Trotsky, although their attention has been called to the fact that Lenin denounced it? [2] Is there any doubt about the answer? If the bureaucracy declares that Trotsky diverged from Lenin on the peasant question, when Lenin declared that they were in perfect accord, is it not obvious that the bureaucracy is diverging from Lenin and Trotsky on the peasant question, and trying to do this in the name of Lenin? To me this would seem obvious, even if it were not preceded with that long record of opposition to Lenin and suppression of his writings in the name of “Leninism,” which we have examined. As the culmination of such a record, it is not subject to doubt.
Marxism asserts that the interests of the proletariat are identical with the future interests of human civilisation. And Lenin’s fundamental position in the history of the Russian revolution was determined by his assertion that Marxism applies to Russia, and that in spite of the overwhelming numbers of the peasants, the industrial proletariat must occupy the position of leadership. To depart from that proposition will be to depart from the very foundations of Marxism, and of Lenin’s application of it to Russia. It will be to convert the Communist victory embodied in the dictatorship of the proletariat into a democratic victory – the establishment of a peasant’s petty bourgeois republic. And the only conceivable way to avoid this, is for the proletariat to produce in the socialised industries a sufficient quantity of those manufactured goods which are needful to the peasant. Therefore, whether Trotsky is right or wrong in his practical proposals for increasing such production, to oppose him on the ground that he “underestimates the peasants” is itself a fundamental departure from Lenin’s Marxism. Trotsky estimates the peasants adequately, just as Lenin did. And he knows, just as Lenin did, that there is only one way to maintain the proletarian leadership of them. There is only one way to avoid making these gradual concessions which will ultimately convert the dictatorship of the proletariat into an agrarian republic. That is to abandon “abstract agitatorial” methods of talking, and “turn the attention and will of the party toward concrete life problems with the goal of cheapening the price of the State products.”
“Let’s stop chattering about undervaluation of the peasants,” says Trotsky in his New Course, “and achieve in reality a lowering of the valuation of peasant goods.” There is nothing which a sincere Marxian, or a sincere follower of Lenin, can reply to that. It sums up once more the real objective difference between Trotsky and the heads of the bureaucracy. It is the difference between a revolutionary engineer applying the science of Marx in the manner of Lenin, and a group of abstract agitators, capable of basing their policy in the most vital problem of the revolution, on a foundation of unreal and insincere talk.

Notes
1. See p.11. [See Chapter 1 – Transcriber Note]
2. Trotsky’s New Course, p.94.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 4)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter IV:
 The Resolution on Workers’ Democracy

IN order to understand what happened after Lenin’s collapse and complete withdrawal from the Government, you must know that Trotsky had the support not only of Lenin, but also of the underlying masses of the party membership. Any measure tending to give these masses a fresh and free opportunity to express themselves, would have resulted in the elevation of Trotsky to exactly the position of superior influence which Lenin desired for him. Without realising this, you cannot penetrate beneath the ideological surface of the dispute which followed. For it was a dispute about reducingthe party bureaucratism [1], and giving to these under lying masses a real and continuous opportunity to express themselves.
Hardly more than six months after Lenin’s collapse a crisis arose, which forced home this question upon every alert mind in the Central Committee as the critical question of the day. In that crisis Trotsky demanded a thoroughgoing abandonment of bureaucratic methods, and a return to Lenin’s original programme of “Workers’ Democracy.” The Stalin-Zinoviev-Kamenev machine also advocated this change – being compelled to it by the flagrancy of the conditions they had created, as well as by the authority of Lenin and Trotsky – but they advocated it with the firm determination that it should not go far enough to endanger their control, or result in the elevation of Trotsky to that position which the rank and file of the party desired for him. That is the whole real explanation of that confusing dispute about bureaucratism and Workers’ Democracy which shook the Russian Communist Party to its depths, and has disturbed the equilibrium of the whole international movement.
The crisis I refer to occurred in September 1923. An acute economic depression was causing discontent among the workers and peasants, in some cities even giving rise to strikes – a phenomenon as portentous as it is rare in Soviet Russia. And at the same time two secret societies were discovered within the Communist Party, called the “Workers’ Group” and “Workers’ Truth” – the one Menshevik in tendency, the other Anarcho-syndicalist. A number of members of the party who belonged to these groups were arrested, the groups were immediately disbanded and those members expelled. But obviously that was merely a treatment of the symptoms. The question remained how to explain this phenomenon, and how to prevent its recurrence in the future. And it was fairly obvious to all thoughtful Communists that these conspiracies were formed below because the party was too much ruled by appointment from above. Among the broad masses there was no initiative, no free discussion, no opportunity for the rank and file member to exercise a normal influence upon the conduct of affairs.
It is important to understand that it was not Trotsky alone who realised this. It was not he alone who pointed to the bureaucratisation of the party as the cause of this crisis, and demanded its correction by a programme of party democracy. [2] The initiative in this direction was quite general. The difference between Trotsky’s demand and that of the heads of the bureaucracy themselves, was that Trotsky’s demand was not qualified by contrary considerations of a personal nature. He could advocate that the party be thoroughly and genuinely revived from the bottom without the fear that such a revival would destroy his own influence. The triumvirate could not do so, because it would weaken them and take the control of the party out of their hands. Thus arose that peculiar situation which has been so difficult for western Communists to understand: Trotsky and the triumvirate split upon the programme of “Workers’ Democracy,” yet upon that programme they were all verbally agreed.
Another thing should be clearly understood: this programme of democracy within the party – called “Workers’ Democracy” by Lenin – was not something new or specially devised to meet this crisis. It was a part of the essential policy of Lenin for going forward toward the creation of a Communist society – a principle adopted under his leadership at the Tenth Congress of the party, immediately after the cessation of the civil war. [3] It was not put into operation then because of special objective conditions – the Cronstadt rebellion, the introduction of the New Economic Policy. Trotsky merely revived this original plan of Lenin, and demanded that it be enacted now in a different situation of which it was obviously the true solution. And the heads of the bureaucracy were compelled – in the name of “Leninism” – to join with him in reviving this programme. But in the name of their own ascendancy, they were compelled to continue to postpone its thorough-going enactment. Trotsky was perfectly aware of this, and he addressed a letter to the Central Committee on October 8th which, although temperate and cautious in describing the programme to be adopted, insisted with the utmost vigour that it must be adopted, and that it must be sincerely put into effect.
Trotsky’s letter – from which I have translated some essential paragraphs in Appendix IV – concluded with the following statement:
“It is known to the members of the Central Committee and Central Control Committee, that while fighting with all decisiveness and definiteness within the Central Committee against a false policy, I decisively declined to bring the struggle within the Central Committee to the judgment even of a very narrow circle of comrades, in particular those who in the event of a reasonably proper party course ought to occupy prominent places in the Central Committee. I must state that my efforts of a year and a half have given no results. This threatens us with the danger that the party may be taken unawares by a crisis of exceptional severity ... In view of the situation created, I consider it not only my right, but my duty to make known the true state of affairs to every member of the party whom I consider sufficiently prepared, matured, and self-restrained, and consequently able to help the party out of this blind alley without fractional convulsions.”
This honest and clear avowal gave to Trotsky’s enemies the opportunity to “censure” him for an action tending to “initiate a fraction,” and to set afloat the rumour that Trotsky is impulsive in a crisis and incapable of discipline. [4] It is quite plain that if Trotsky were forming a fraction in a party in which fractions were forbidden, he would not have made this honest and clear avowal. And if you wish to consider facts and not forms, Trotsky’s scrupulous abstinence from consultation with any party member outside the Central Committee for the whole period during which an efficient political machine was built up, in flagrant defiance of the principle of party unity, in order to deprive him of power, is nothing less than a miracle of submission to discipline. Trotsky made no motion against the proceeding so long as its result was merely to deprive him of power. When he felt that the revolution was endangered by it, he moved. Trotsky is the most disciplined character I ever knew. He is the one I would most implicitly trust to carry out to the last punctilious detail, and without regard to his own impulses or emotions, any line of conduct which he had decided was right. And if there is another equally striking trait of his character, it is that he has not enough ordinary human diplomacy in him to form a personal fraction if he wanted to. He does not know how to gather people around him, and that, as I have explained, is the very reason, why he has fumbled the torch of leadership which Lenin tried to hand on to him.
On October 15th the Central Committee received a letter signed by forty-six well-known party members, representing a great variety of positions and points of view, expressing a trend of opinion similar to that in Trotsky’s letter, and testifying to a strong current of feeling in the party in favour of the “New Course.” At the same period Radek addressed a letter to the Central Committee, in which, while not pronouncing upon the questions raised by Trotsky, he expressed urgently the necessity of reaching a working agreement with him. Pushed by these signs of party opinion, as well as by their own sense of the necessity of it, the controlling group proceeded to draw up a rather half-hearted programme of ‘’Workers’ Democracy.’’ Trotsky emphatically rejected as unsatisfactory to him this first draft of the programme, and they appointed a new committee, with Trotsky on it, to draw up another. That committee succeeded in arriving at a form of words satisfactory to Trotsky – it was quite obviously in its main features dictated by him – and the Resolution on Workers’ Democracy was signed unanimously by all the members of the Politburo and the Central Control Committee.
Before signing this resolution, Trotsky took the precaution to state formally that it was understood between him and the other signatories that he believed the programme should be “pushed from beneath,” and he would agitate in that sense, while they believed that its enactment should be restrained from above, and they would interpret it in that sense. And in order that there should be some record of this formal understanding, he accompanied his signature with a “special opinion” to the effect that he agreed to the resolution only upon condition that it should be regarded as a practical programme actually to be put in operation, and not a mere formula designed to quiet an agitation and serve a temporary political purpose.
The resolution was published in Pravda on December 7th, with the unanimous signature of the leaders of the party. And the whole party membership – not to say the whole of Russia – breathed a sigh of relief. The issue had been met, a decision made, and the party was going forward on a “New Course,” which was but the full enactment of a long-familiar policy of Lenin.
That was the ideological aspect of the thing. But it is obvious that the dynamic problem – the conflict of personal forces – had not been resolved. The resolution on Workers’ Democracy was exceedingly drastic in its attribution of the current troubles to the bureaucratisation of the party, and in demanding an absolutely new regime of “free discussion and election of governing officials and collegiums from top to bottom.” Its form of expression was a complete victory for Trotsky, and if it were put into operation by a disinterested power, the result would have been an automatic increase of Trotsky’s authority and the triumph of his policies in the Central Committee. Since, however, it was to be put into operation by the very bureaucracy which it attacked, and since this bureaucracy was inflexibly determined to hold its power at the expense of Trotsky, it is plain that nothing had been finally settled. Trotsky’s victory was merely a preliminary one. He had gained the right, under the literal meaning of the resolution, to agitate for a genuine stoppage of the system of bureaucratic appointments, and a genuine revival of party initiative, such as would break the strangle-hold of the triumvirate, and give him and those whom he trusted an authority in the governing organ of the party. And he had reinforced that right, and insured himself in the possession of it, by a formal announcement and a written declaration that he intended to agitate for just such a genuine application of the literal meaning of the resolution. That was all that he had achieved, and that was all that had been settled by the unanimous adoption of the resolution on Workers’ Democracy.

Notes
1. Lenin had already sounded the alarm more than once in regard to the bureaucratisation of the party. In that very article about Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection, which the ruling group attempted to suppress, he said: “Our new Commissariat of Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection, we hope, will leave behind the quality which the French call pruderie, which we may call a ridiculous affectation and a ridiculous self-importance, which is to the last degree characteristic of all our bureaucrats, Soviet bureaucrats and party bureaucrats alike. In parenthesis be itsaid that we have a bureaucracy not only in the Soviet institutions, but in the party too.”
2. Bucharin described the situation at the beginning of the discussion in just as extreme language as any ever used by Trotsky: “If we conducted an investigation,” he said, “and inquired how often our party elections are conducted with the question from the chair, ‘Who is for?’ and ‘Who is against?’ we should easily discover that in the majority of cases our elections to the party organisations have become ’elections’ in quotation marks, for the voting takes place not only without preliminary discussion, but according to the formula ‘Who is against?’ And, since to speak against the authorities is a bad business, the matter ends right there. Such is the election of the secretaries of our lower branches.
“If you raise the question of our party meetings, then how does it go here? ... Election of the praesidium of the meeting. Appears some comrade from the District Committee, presents a list, and asks, ‘Who is against?’ Nobody is against, and the business is considered finished ... With the order of the day, the same procedure ... The President asks, ‘Who is against?’ Nobody is against. The resolution is unanimously adopted. There you have the customary type of situation in our party organisations ... It goes without saying that this gives rise to an enormous wave of dissatisfaction. I gave you several examples from the life of our lowest branches. The same thing is noticeable in a slightly changed form in the succeeding ranks of our party hierarchy.” (From a speech subsequently quoted by Trotsky. See the Stenographic Report of the Thirteenth Congress of the Party, p.154)
3. The following sentences from the resolutions of the Tenth Congress will show this programme in its origin:
“A party of revolutionary Marxism radically rejects the search for any form of party organisation that shall be right absolutely and valid for all stages of the revolutionary process, and likewise any such method of work. On the contrary, the form of organisation and the methods of work are entirely determined by the specific character of the given historic situation and the problems which arise directly out of that situation ... The needs of the current moment demand a new organisational form. That form is Workers’ Democracy. A course of Workers’ Democracy shall be adopted with the same decisiveness, and as energetically carried into execution, as in the period just past the course toward militarisation of the party, to the extent that this does not meet an obstacle in the need for struggle with the counter-revolution.” (Stenographic Report of the Tenth Congress, pp.128ff.)
4. See Appendix V.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



 Eastman: Since Lenin Died (Chap. 3)


Eastman Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Since Lenin Died

Max Eastman
Since Lenin Died

Chapter III:
 The Testament of Lenin

LENIN evidently knew the drift of things in the Central Committee during those last months. And he had the intention to correct it at the forthcoming convention of the party. But he also knew that he might not be able to attend the convention – he knew, as they did, that he might drop out of the scene at any moment – and so he wrote a letter to the party, to be read at that convention. [1] This letter, which was an express warning of the danger of a split in the party, and an attempt to avert it, went directly to the question of personal authority. Lenin confided it to his wife. She did not read it at the ensuing convention of the party (April 1923), because although Lenin had suffered a severe relapse, and withdrawn completely from active life, still the doctors assured her that there was a hope of his return. And at the next convention (May 1924), the machine organised by Stalin and Zinoviev was already strong enough to defy the last will and testament of Lenin. The central committee of the party, by a vote of about thirty against ten – and against the demand of Lenin’s wife – decided not to read his last letter to the party. [2] Thus one of the most solemn and carefully weighed utterances that ever came from Lenin’s pen, was suppressed – in the interests of “Leninism” – by that triumvirate [3] of “Old Bolsheviks,” Stalin, Zinoviev and Kamenev, who govern the Russian Communist Party.
What does the letter say about these Old Bolsheviks? Of Stalin, it says that he has concentrated too much power in his hands, and it demands that he be removed from his dominating position as secretary of the party. It criticises his character as “too brutal.”
Of Zinoviev and Kamenev it says just one thing: “Their retreat in October was not accidental.” That this is the most damaging thing Lenin could say about them, from the standpoint of their authority as Bolsheviks, will not appear immediately to the English reader. I advise him to examine Lenin’s own characterisation of that “retreat” – the Russian word also means “apostacy” – which I have translated in Appendix III. There were, in fact, two retreats at two different times, and Lenin characterised Zinoviev and Kamenev the first time as “strike-breakers” and “traitors,” and the second time as “unbelievers,” “waverers,” “doubters,” “deserters,” “strike-breakers,” and surrenderors to the bourgeoisie. The first retreat was immediately before the revolution of October, the second was immediately after it. That Lenin so judged these men throughout the most critical days in the life of the party, had been by common consent forgotten. Their ability and prestige were needful to him, and neither of them ever opposed him upon a vital question again. Faced with the probability of his own death, however, Lenin saw fit to remind the party of that incident, and declare that their behaviour above characterised was “not accidental.”
Lenin said in his Testament, that of the younger men the two most promising were Bucharin and Pitiakov. He did not qualify his praise of Pitiakov – who has stood with Trotsky throughout this crisis. His praise of Bucharin he did qualify in a very damaging way. Bucharin’s prestige rests, by about one-half, upon his personal popularity. Revolutionary self-denial and devotion and courage and simplicity of life, are the causes of it. The other half of his prestige rests upon a supposed theoretic mastery of the Marxian philosophy. Bucharin has written a book about Historic Materialism, which is at once so scholarly in appearance, and so utterly undigested and confusing to the brain, that most people are willing to concede his mastery of Marxism in order to avoid having to read and study this book. What Lenin said about Bucharin is that he “does not understand the Marxian dialectic” – which means that he does not know how to think with the method of Lenin – and that he is scholastic. “His head is full of books,” is about the expression that Lenin used.
What makes these attacks upon the authority of Stalin and Zinoviev and Kamenev and Bucharin so significant, is that Lenin’s letter began with the statement that Trotsky, in spite of his “too great self-confidence,” is “a devoted revolutionist,” and “the outstanding member of the Central Committee.” [4]
There exist enormous rumours about this letter, extending its details to several pages. It was, like every communication of Lenin upon a subject involving personal emotion, extremely brief. Lenin knew the weight of every word he was writing. He knew what Bonaparte fable he was explaining away, when he said that Trotsky’s fault was only a “too great self-confidence,” and that Trotsky was a “devoted revolutionist.” And the word which I have translated “outstanding” [5] is the one which Lenin habitually used to mean simply, and without emotion, the ablest and the greatest. A more direct endorsement of Trotsky’s authority – and incidentally that of Pitiakov – and a more direct warning against the excessive power of the group that is now ruling the Russian Communist Party and the International, could hardly have been pennedby Lenin.

Notes
1. The letter was written early in the winter of 1922-23.
2. They decided that it might be read and explained privately to the delegates – kept within the bureaucracy, that is to say – but not put before the party for discussion, as Lenin directed.
3. I adopt the word “triumvirate” from the popular talk in Russia. It was these three, working together, who maintained a balance of power against Trotsky in the Politburo when Lenin fell sick, and they formed the nucleus of the subsequent movement against him. Kamenev is decidedly subordinate, and there is at present a bitter rivalry between Stalin and Zinoviev.
4. The reader can rely absolutely upon the phrases from this letter which I have placed in quotation marks. They were verbally agreed upon by three responsible Communists in Russia, whom I interviewed separately and who had all recently read the letter and committed its vital phrases to memory.
At the same time with this letter, Lenin dictated two others – one of them that in which he “came to meet” Trotsky on the matter of Government Planning. The peculiar state of amnesia developed by the leaders of the bureaucracy in regard to the suppressed letter may be seen in the following quotation from a recent article by Bucharin, referring to the two that were not suppressed:
“Ilych, it seems to me, saw that his end was inevitable, saw it better than his nearest comrades, better than the doctors and professors. And when the second attack felled him, he dictated his political testament, and on the edge of the grave said things which for decades will determine the policies of our party. Thus once again, and for the last time, Ilych says to the party his last substantial words ...” (Pravda, January 21st, 1925.)
5. “Democritus was the outstanding materialist among the Greeks,” is a quotation from Lenin which shows his use of this word – Sarnie Vidaiuachisa in Russian.


Since Lenin Died

Eastman Internet Archive   |   Marxists’ Internet Archive
Last updated on: 12 October 2009



