


The Tragedy of the Chinese Revolution (3rd edition)
by Harold R. Isaacs
Stanford University Press, £8.95
This third edition of The Tragedy of the Chinese Revolution
makes valuable reading for anyone wishing to understand Chinese
history in the 20th Century and also to know why the long drawn out
revolution in that country culminated in a Stalinist dictatorship.
However this third edition is inferior to the first edition
published in 1938 which is now unfortunately out of print and very
difficult to come by. This revised edition is inferior because in
1938 the author wrote from a genuinely Marxist and revolutionary
standpoint but abandoned this position in the period between the
publication of the first edition in 1938 and the second edition in 1951.
It is for this reason that in the second and third editions the
author eliminated the original introduction by Leon Trotsky in which
the original work was warmly endorsed. The author endeavours to
explain this in his new prefaces to the second and third editions,
but only succeeds in explaining his own confusion.
Although by 1951 the author has forsaken the basic Marxist
position of Trotsky, the book still gives an extraordinary factual
account of the false and opportunist policies foisted on the Chinese
communists between 1925 and 1927. The fatal nature of these Stalinist
policies for the Chinese workers is clearly demonstrated in the
numerous quotations given from the official documents of the
Communist International and from statements made by Stalin himself.
Despite his loss of faith in Marxist theory the author does not
deny the truth of Trotsky’s analysis and indeed is compelled to say
in his preface to the revised editions:
“He (Trotsky) predicted with startling precision every
turn of events as it took place. His analysis and criticisms of the
official course were confirmed again and again by the evidence which
this work examines in detail. This is a fact that is not altered by passage of time, or again by shifts
in a writers outlook.”
The value of this book for socialists therefore lies in the
enormous accumulation of factual evidence therein. It clearly shows
that the young Chinese working class movement which sprang up with
enormous speed and power after the First World War was torpedoed by
the opportunist tactics of Stalin, who through the Executive
Committee of the Communist International succeeded in dominating the
very new and inexperienced Chinese Communist Party.
 
Kuomintang slaughter workers
The tactics put forward by Stalin, Bukharin and other Stalinist
functionaries were based on the idea of dissolving the organisational
independence and political programme of the Chinese Communist Party
into a bloc with the Kuomintang, the political organisation of the
Chinese national bourgeoisie. This meant that by keeping their “heads
down” and soft-pedalling on any kind of socialist programme – by
discouraging the peasants from taking over the land and refraining
from any action which would antagonise the landlords or capitalists –
the workers would be able to come out on top when the Nationalist
revolution, led by the native capitalists, was completed.
As a matter of fact the Kuomintang under Chiang Kai Chek was
totally incapable of completing the National Bourgeois Revolution
because it remained under the financial domination of the Western
Powers even after they handed over to Chiang Kai Chek the territorial
concessions they had previously wrung out of China by military force.
The only way that the national revolution would be completed was by
the rapid carrying through of radical land reform which handed over
to the peasants the vast areas owned by the Chinese landlords. This
the landlords and the weak Chinese capitalists were unwilling to do.
They were dependent on the huge loans provided by the western bankers
and financiers. And as soon as they saw that Chiang Kai Chek intended
to destroy the great movement of the workers and peasants, the
British, American, French and Belgian capitalists gave him their
support in return for being allowed to maintain their financial
domination in Shanghai, Hankow, Canton and other trading cities.
The tactics of appeasing the native bourgeois, who were in the
pockets of Western Imperialism, was therefore the exact opposite of
the Bolshevik strategy worked out by Lenin on the eve of the October
Revolution in 1917. It amounted to a switch over to the policy
advocated by the right wing Mensheviks who said that the Russian
labour movement should trail along behind the Liberals and make no
bid for power until a capitalist “democracy” had been established
in Russia; to which proposition they added the proviso that at some
indefinite period in the future the labour movement would then be
able to enter into a contest with the capitalist ruling class through
Western style parliamentary democracy. This policy recommended to the
Chinese Communists in 1927 by the Stalinist Executive of the
Communist International was a repudiation of Lenin’s tactics which
for the first time in history had brought the working class to power.
This confused “Two Stage” theory, manufactured by the
Stalinists for China in 1927, subsequently became the official
doctrine of the Communist Parties throughout the world, with
disastrous results for the organised working class as well as the
peasants. The Left Opposition took a completely opposite point of
view, warning that such a policy of class collaboration would lead
the working class of China to disaster and result in the massacre of
all the best cadres of the working class, which although still a
minority was, in 1927 growing and fighting with immense vitality.
Once Chiang Kai Chek entered the great city of Shanghai he did
indeed turn on the workers; the very same workers who had already
taken over the city and who had greeted Chiang Kai Chek’s troops.
Within 48 hours he ordered his troops to massacre many thousands of
militant workers in the streets.
As a young man at the time I well remember the photographs brought
back to Britain by merchant seamen and others. These pictures
depicted the numerous summary decapitations carried out by axemen in
the streets of Shanghai.
On 21 April 1927, scarcely a month after the coup in Shanghai, the
Russian Pravda published Stalin’s Thesis to the Executive
Committee of the Communist International. This was entitled: The
Questions of the Chinese Revolution. Stalin began by saying:
“... the line laid down was the correct line ... This
was the line of close co-operation of the left wingers and Communists
within the Kuomintang, of consolidation of the unity of the
Kuomintang ... of making use of the Right, of their connections and
their experience so far as they submitted to the discipline of the
Kuomintang ...”
This, scarcely a month after the lower grade CP officials and
trade unionists in Shanghai were murdered in the streets by the
forces of this very same Kuomintang!
Trotsky replied to Stalin in The Chinese Revolution and the
Thesis of Comrade Stalin in May (his answers were never printed
in Pravda nor anywhere else):
“We know very well how the bourgeoisie submitted to
‘discipline’ and how the proletariat utilised the Rights, that is
the big and middle bourgeoisie, their ‘connections’ (with the
imperialists) and their ‘experience’ (in strangling and shooting
the workers). The story of this ‘utilisation’ is written in the
book of the Chinese revolution with letters of blood. But this does
not prevent the theses (Stalin’s theses – DE) from saying:
‘The subsequent events fully confirmed the correctness of this
line.’ Further than this no one can go!”
Stalin went on to say that the slogan of the soviets was therefore
inadmissible because it would mean “issuing the slogan of a fight
against the existing power in this territory (in Wuhan, where the
government was in the hands of the ‘left’ Kuomintang – DE)
... of the fight against the power of the revolutionary Kuomintang
for in this territory there is at present no power other than the
power of the revolutionary Kuomintang.”
Trotsky replied to this:
“These words fairly reek with the apparatus-like,
bureaucratic conception of revolutionary authority ... The government
is not regarded as the expression and consolidation of the developing
struggle of the classes, but as the same self-sufficient expression
of the will of the Kuomintang ... The provincial Kuomintang of Chiang
Kai Chek has an old, reactionary, mercenary bureaucracy at its
disposal. What has the Left Kuomintang? For the time being nothing,
or almost nothing. The slogan of soviets is a call for the creation
of real organs of the new state right through the transitional regime
of a dual government.”
But despite the slaughter of the militant workers in Shanghai the
Chinese Communist Party continued with this fatal policy of class
collaboration. Trotsky summed it up, saying that this policy was “to
bring one’s head voluntarily to the slaughter. The bloody lesson of
Shanghai passed without leaving a trace. The Communists, as before,
were being transformed into cattle herders for the bourgeois
executioners.” Other massacres followed at Changsha, Wuhan and
other cities, towns and villages but the official line continued for
another two years leading to the slaughter of the best workers and
peasant cadres in all the big cities.
At last in the early 1930’s there was a sudden and typical
Stalinist reversal after the damage had been done. But this is
another story. It included the setting up of abortive ‘Soviet
Republics’ in relatively small areas of rural China between 1929
and 1934. These were eventually overrun by Chiang Kai Chek’s armies
backed by the Western powers. This defeat lead on to the famous Long
March and the setting up of a peasant army which eventually took
power in 1949, without any significant contribution by the urban
proletariat, leading to the establishment of a Stalinist dictatorship.
 




Proletarian Philosophers
by Jonathan Ree
Oxford University Press 1984, £15.
“He will be a smart policeman who can arrest the spread
of ideas.” (Quotation from the old Plebs magazine which was
published by the National Council of Labour Colleges during the 1920s)
This book gives a valuable picture of those more thoughtful
working men and women, who during the first quarter of the century,
strove to grasp the principles of scientific socialism as it was
followed by Marx and Engels, elaborated by Lenin, Trotsky and others
and skilfully expounded in Britain by the Scottish Marxist John
Maclean, and the great Irish workers’ leader James Connolly.
In drawing attention to these early worker students of Marx, the
author has done the labour movement a service.
Unfortunately this long essay at no point sets out in a clear way
the main principals of Marxism considered as a ‘guide to action’
which if properly used by the working-class can bring about the
transformation of society and the carrying forward of mankind to the
next necessary stage in the organisation of civilization. Where the
author commits himself to any expression of view about the science of
Marxism, he reveals those prejudices frequent among university
lecturers on philosophy who see Marxism as a threat to their own
trade of teaching various philosophic systems, from which their
students may pick the one most suited to their taste. (“If you pays
your money, you takes your choice.”)
Here is an example of how that prejudice comes out in print:–
“Who, might it be asked, could trust a social theory which is
affiliated to the recondite, sectarian and implausible dogmas of
Dialectical Materialism?”
Yet nowhere does he attempt to set out what this theory is;
contenting himself with a priori condemnations of the above kind.
Neither he, nor any of his professional colleagues can explain why
this allegedly “implausible dogma” has been more successful in
predicting the course of historical events over the last 100 years
than any other social theory produced by university professors –
nor why the influence of Marxism has steadily increased in all parts
of the globe, even though government spokesmen and their university
allies have presented a false, but or dried, version of Marxism to
the masses of workers.
This book does give a useful historical outline of two sections of
proletarian would-be Marxists – those that supported the versions
of Marxist philosophy conceived by the older National Council of
Labour Colleges in the early ’20s, and the ever-changing versions
developed by the Communist Party theoreticians, constantly forced to
adapt their theoretical zig-zags of the Stalinist dominated Communist
International of those years.
The early NCLC versions of Marxist philosophy suffered from the
lack of any serious knowledge of the writings of Lenin, the most
successful revolutionary leader of the 20th century, who adhered to
the materialist philosophy of Marx, exactly defined as dialectical
materialism. He found it a guide to successful action.
The school of Communist theoreticians lambasted this early school
of working men and women because they did not acknowledge the
completely incorrect additions to Marxist philosophy made by Stalin.
Nor would they adapt their theoretical notions to the opportunist
political tactics of Stalinism which sprang from Stalin’s theory of
‘Socialism in one country’ – the idea of building a socialist
society alone without the assistance of working-class governments in
other lands.
Because this controversy between two distorted versions of Marxism
ended in confusion we are told that the whole materialist philosophy
of Marxism “collapsed”, when in fact a new generation of
working-class Marxists are now coming into being, many of whom are
gathering around the Militant
paper. Young workers in particular are learning to apply Marxism as a
guide to action.
Since this review charges the author with nowhere attempting to
define what he means by dialectical materialism, although he abuses
it, it would be well to conclude with such a definition. Two
quotations are taken from Engels, who formulated this materialist
theory, and Trotsky, who brilliantly continued to express those ideas
in the 20th century.
Engels tell us “... Dialectics is nothing more than the science
of the general laws of motion of nature, human society and thought.”
(Engels – Anti-Dühring) This scientific method came to be
know as dialectical materialism because Marx and Engels saw that
universal matter preceded the appearance of Man and therefore man and
his ideas are the product of material change.
The brief definition given by Engels is rounded off by a more
detailed explanation from Trotsky written 60 years later.
“The essence of Marxism consists in this; that it
approaches society concretely, as a subject for objective research,
and analyses human history as one would a colossal laboratory record.
Marxism appraises ideology as a subordinate integral element of the
class structure of society, as a historically conditioned form of the
development of the productive forces. Marxism deduces from the
productive forces of society the inter-relations between human
society and surrounding nature, and these in turn are determined at
each historical stage by man’s technology, his instruments and
weapons, his capacities and methods for struggle with nature.
Precisely this objective approach arms Marxism with the insuperable
power of historical foresight.” (Leon Trotsky – Address to
Mendeleyev Congress, Sept. 1925 in USSR)
 




Every AUEW member knows that the lynch-pin of the engineering
industry is machine tool production. It is this lynch-pin which was
knocked out last week, when Mrs Thatcher’s government encouraged
the close-down and break up of Alfred Herbet’s, at one time the
leading tool builders in Europe.
This latest example of Thatcher’s policy of deindustrialisation
aims at such a high level of unemployment that the unions will be
forced to accept a cut in real wages.
The jobs of every man and woman in the industry are now at stake,
and the only protection against a situation worse than the 1930s is a
fighting trade union. We need a union which will counter attack by
forcing the bosses to accept a 35-hour week as accepted by the
present Executive Council of the AUEW.
Our union has a proud record. It has always stood in the vanguard
of the working class to change society. Under its first socialist
secretary, Tom Mann, the old AEU fought for real amalgamation and
“one union for one industry.”
It led to the great battles of the last century for the 10-hour
and then the 8-hour day. It was the first to recognise the great
Clydeside general strike for the 40-hour week in 1919. It was because
of the courageous strikes led by our union that the “Industrial
Relations Act” was defeated under the last Tory government.
It was the vote of the AUEW delegation at last year’s Labour
Party Conference which made possible the passing of the resolution on
mandatory re-selection of MPs – one of the greatest steps forward
in the application of real democracy since the Labour Party was formed.
It is this progressive and militant tradition of our union which
is today being undermined.
At a time when the immediate application of the 35-hour week
without loss of pay is a crucial means of fighting unemployment in
the industry, our national leadership rewarded the enormous
self-sacrifice made by our members during last winter’s strike by
settling for a one-hour reduction and then accepting the employers’
demand for a four-year moratorium on any future demands for the
35-hour week.
At the rate that engineering factories are now closing down
[60,000 in the Birmingham area alone last month] the majority of our
members could be out of work in four years’ time!
Although some advance in the basic rate was achieved by the recent
strike, this was achieved by the determination of the AUEW members to
stick the strike out, despite the confusing tactic of one-, two-, and
three-day strikes called for by the Executive.
A much greater advance both on the rate and towards the 35-hour
week without loss of pay could have been won if the leadership had
been willing to mobilise the full strength of the union in an all-out
national strike.
Engineers now need a £100 minimum time rate index-linked, to
combat rises in the cost of living.
The Employment Bill, aimed at undermining our bargaining power, as
was the Industrial Relations Act in the 1970s by the Heath
administration. Yet we see our executive already preparing the way
for a policy of retreat.
Already Bro. Duffy has stated that the Executive can see no reason
why the union should not accept the “softening up” money offered
by the government to pay for all kinds of postal ballots. This means
that the Executive Council is already accepting the ‘carrot’
which will lead on to the eating of the whole unpleasant dish.
Just as accepting government registration was the key which would
have forced us to accept the whole of the Industrial Relations Act
which Heath proposed, so taking this ‘Judas’ money will place the
union under certain obligations to the government, and will be used
by it, to involve the unions in the whole process of the present
Employment Bill.
The one step that our Executive now seems to have taken toward Mr
Prior can lead to our union losing its independence.
Over many years the AUEW built up a democratic structure which our
members could be proud of, but unless we can remove the present
right-wing domination in the EC and National Committee, the
democratic rights of ordinary members will be seriously curtailed by
the moves of the present Executive to alter the rules.
By their success in pushing through the present form of postal
balloting for the election of national officers, the right wing
tipped the balance in favour of their own election. They are now
seeking to reap the fruits of that change of rules.
For the first time, the press was given the opportunity to
seriously influence the internal affairs of the union by discrediting
left-wing candidates and glorifying their opponents. The propaganda
favouring the right-wing candidates influenced large numbers of
card-holders who never attend Branch meetings or take any part in the
work of maintaining and building the union.
The idea of the postal ballot was that these non-active members
would swamp out the loyal and active members who dedicate themselves
to keeping the union organisation alive. We are therefore getting
National Presidents and General Secretaries elected as a result of
the intervention of the pro-capitalist press.
The enormously expensive postal ballot system certainly
produced a higher percentage vote than the old method of branch
voting, but it is still a minority vote and is now falling again. The
answer is to work for the transfer of balloting to the shop floor
where the real strength of the union lies. This method, already used
by the miners, would be by far the most democratic.
Policies of the candidates could be properly discussed at shop
meetings and the ballot organised under the supervision of the shop steward.
Having gained its position by the present unfair system of
balloting, the right wing is now moving towards other undemocratic
organisational changes. Already proposals have been made to scrap
most of the present branches and re-group them together into much
larger regional branches under full-time paid secretaries. This would
obviously make it more difficult for members to attend and is clearly
designed to lessen the possibility of genuine rank and file control.
In the field of amalgamation too it is clear that the approach of
our executive is one that favours a bureaucratic rather than a
democratic form of organisation. The President and other continually
complain about the TASS refusal to conform with the AUEW rule book
and accept election of full-time officers.
It has to be said that the attitude of TASS on this question is
indefensible and has allowed the right wing to point to the
undemocratic nature of the left. TASS is led by Ken Gill, a member of the CP.
But this is merely a smokescreen to hide the fact that our
Executive is not interested in an amalgamation with TASS because of
the left position it takes on many important issues. This hypocrisy
of the right wing was shown at rules revision conference when they
tried to push through the appointment of full-time branch secretaries
but were compelled to retreat by the weight of opposition to this proposal.
The right wing strongly favour amalgamation with the EETPU which
is bureaucratically controlled by the extreme right wing.
Of course a genuinely democratic amalgamation with the EETPU
should be supported by all trade unionists standing for working class
unity, but the EETPU under Frank Chapple, has succeeded in
introducing the general principle of selection rather than election
of full-time officers and changing branch structure along the lines
our Executive now seems to hanker after.
The question therefore arises, would the EETPU be asked to conform
with our rules as they stand or are we going to be asked to change ours?
What has happened in factories all over Britain in recent months
shows that the majority of working men and women in the industry do
want the union to adopt a fighting policy. In case after case, where
the workers have initially taken militant action against threatened
redundancy or the dismissal of militant shop stewards, but they have
been forced to accept defeat or a feeble compromise by our present
Executive officers.
An outstanding example of this was the dismissal of Derek
Robinson. True to our traditions, the workers in his factory took
immediate action. Had they been immediately backed by the AUEW
Executive, this disgraceful sacking of a steward for openly
expressing his opinion against the views of management would never
have taken place.
By their calculated procrastination, our union leadership turned
what should have been a workers’ victory into a defeat, a defeat
not only in one factory, but for the whole union organisation
throughout the Leyland combine and nationally. This surrender to the
will of the “Whiz-kid” Edwardes has lowered the whole standing
and prestige of our union in the industry.
How is the damage done to be put right? We must revive a new
genuine Broad Left, which will re-mobilise all the class-conscious
and militant members of the union, a left which will avoid the
mistakes of the past, which will strive to win the mass of the
members for a clear programme of action and socialist policies.
Experience has shown that it is not enough to put blind faith in
electing individuals to office, but to concentrate on winning the
workers for an alternative policy to that of the right-wing opportunists.
Industrial tactics under Scanlon turned out to be no more
effective than under Duffy. The guerrilla type of strikes practised
in 1972/73 and advocated by the lefts on the EC and National
Committee unnecessarily dispersed the forces of the union and
achieved very little. It is a strange paradox that the present
right-wing tactics advocating one-, two- and three-day strikes are
not all that different from those advocated during the Scanlon era.
Such purely partial mobilisation of the union’s strength is
inefficient and unnecessarily long-winded. To gain a real
breakthrough in minimum wage-rates – still more to win the 35-hour
week (now, not in four years) – we need an Executive with the
courage to mobilise all the resources of the union for all-out
national strike action.
In the coming presidential election, a revitalised left must of
course campaign to get Bob Wright elected against Duffy. However, in
doing this we must keep in mind how the “left” Scanlon, during
the period of his journey from union head office to the House of
Lords, ended up taking a right-wing position on most of the crucial
issues facing the working class at that time.
He supported the so-called Social Contract when his union
conference had opposed it, he supported incomes policy and the 5%
when the trade union movement opposed it. He twice defied the
decision of his own delegation at Labour Party Conference.
To win elections is not enough. Those we put forward must be
committed to a programme which the workers understand and fight for.
The whole working class movement is now threatened with a return
to the ’30s. Thatcher and her guru Sir Keith Joseph are
deliberately engineering mass redundancies so that unemployment can
be used as a whip to force the working class to accept a permanently
lower standard of living.




The Broad Left should stand for:

Elect Bob Wright as President.
 
£100 per week, tied to the inflation rate.
 
Immediate operation of 35-hour week.
 
Fight all redundancies.
 
Defend all trade union activists.
 
Total opposition to Tory Employment Bill.
 
Election of Labour government committed to a socialist programme.
 
For a fighting engineers’ union!




 




The National Conference of Trades Councils opening on May 31st
has exceptional importance for the whole labour movement this year.
Over a hundred years ago, it was this body which took the
initiative in bringing the TUC itself into existence. Yet, over the
years, it was relegated to a purely advisory role, carrying little
weight in the decisions made by the trade union movement as a whole.
Only at times of very great crisis has it become clear, as during
the general strike in 1926, that trades councils must play an
indispensable role in mobilising the whole working class by “hand
or by brain”.
In the light of the successes and failures of the TUC’s ‘Day
of Action’ on 14 May it has again been shown that this task of
mobilising the working people in the localities almost automatically
falls onto the shoulders of those thousands of delegates who give
their time to the building of trades councils throughout Britain.
Wherever the Day of Action was a success it was because the local
trades council rose to the occasion, taking bold steps in good time
to rally around it all affiliated organisations and the officers and
stewards of those unions.
Without these dedicated efforts, the hesitant and rather unclear
call of the General Council of the TUC would have been as ineffective
as the vile propaganda of the capitalist press has claimed it was.
In the event, in many areas, organised labour was able to put on
demonstrations which in size and spirit have not been seen since 1926.
It is for this reason that resolutions coming before the National
Conference have great importance for all workers in the labour
movement. Unfortunately these resolutions can only have an advisory
character, but they cannot be ignored by the TUC General Council.
They truly reflect a growing desire by thousands of the most
active, enlightened rank and file members of the labour movement for
active resistance to Margaret Thatcher’s attacks, both on working
class standards of living and hard-won trade union rights.
Some of the resolution to be debated at Conference reveal an
increasing demand that trades councils should become the
all-inclusive “working-class parliament” they were originally
intended to be.
Several councils have therefore put forward proposals for
constitutional changes to enhance the authority of trades councils
locally; enabling them to assist and co-ordinate all industrial and
social struggles in their districts.
Resolution No. 1 from the Brighton, Hove and District trades
council asks the TUC to “reconsider the possibility of direct
representation of shop stewards’ committees on trades councils.”
 
For direct representation of shop stewards’ committees
At present trades councils can only contact such stewards
indirectly through branches, but in most cases the branch delegates
are not stewards. Direct representation would enable trades councils
to more speedily reflect day to day struggles of workers.
At the same time it would make it easier to co-ordinate their
activities when a national call to action is made by the TUC.
If this resolution was implemented it would enormously strengthen
the cohesion and solidarity of the local trade unions.
Resolution No. 2 refers to the need “to strengthen
the TC County associations” with particular reference to their key
role in “co-ordinating long running official disputes and fighting
the employers’ practice of black-listing.” It also calls for
constitutional change and proposes that at least on representative
from each trades council be elected to TUC regional councils as a
constitutional right.”
There is also an indirect reference to the scandalous sacking of
Derek Robinson from Leyland. This resolution expresses “its grave
concern that shop stewards who put forward alternative proposals to
those of management can be dismissed without consultation with TUC
representatives concerned.”
It calls upon the “TUC to use all measures in its power to
ensure that shop stewards should not be dismissed without
consultation with the full-time officer of the union concerned.”
This resolution is therefore pressing for a real application of
the traditional working class principle that “an injury to one is
an injury to all.”
Too often has a valiant defence of trade union principles by rank
and file delegates, as at Grunwick and now at Chix of Slough been
abandoned by the TUC. Every time this happens the trade union
movement as a whole is weakened.
Almost all the 28 resolutions reflect the growing anger of trade
unionists against the ruthless attack of the Tory government on the
social gains won by the workers in a hundred years of struggle.
Resolution No. 9, for example, calls for
“non-co-operation with the government’s anti-trade union
legislation” and asks the TUC “to get assurance from the Labour
Party that when returned to office they will repeal all the
anti-trade union legislation.”
It also calls upon the TUC “to wage an uncompromising campaign
against these anti-working-class measures.” It calls for a
restoration of all cuts in social benefits and an extension instead
of a contraction of existing social services. All the demands in
these resolutions must certainly be backed by the Labour Party in or
out of office.
If there is a weakness in the resolutions, it is in the section
dealing with economic affairs. Resolution No. 7 “recognises
the reality of the world economic crisis of capitalism.” It also
calls for a reduction in working hours as a means of combating mass
unemployment. This must be supported by the entire movement.
The solution it proposes, though, is the ‘alternative economic
strategy.’ It does not define what this strategy is, but as the
articles on the centre pages of this week’s paper show, “you
cannot control what you don’t own.”
Only the taking over of all the commanding heights of the economy
and the driving through of a socialist economic plan will bring about
any real increase in the production of real wealth in Britain today.
Writing in the Labour Standard 99 years ago Frederick
Engels, who kept in close touch with the London Trades Council, wrote
the following inspired words:
“The workpeople of England have but to will and they
are masters to carry every reform social and political which this
situation requires. Then why not make that effort?”
Today this situation requires that that effort be made to
fundamentally change society. In bringing together all sections of
the working class, the trades councils of Britain can play an
historic part in bringing that change about.
 




Dear Comrade
I would be very obliged if any readers with knowledge of
unrecorded but historically important incidents in working class
struggle in their own locality would communicate with me.
I am trying to continue writing a series of pamphlets based on
such incidents, along the lines of ones already published (e.g. The
Last Stand of the Levellers; How Trade Unionism came to
Pressed Steel). All I need is a very brief description – I will
do the research.



 


Yours fraternally
Dudley Edwards
Flat 1, 14 St Aubyns, Hove, Sussex



 




The forthcoming National Conference of Trades Councils, meeting in April, gives a great opportunity to make the trades councils still more effective in the struggles that face the labour movement.
Included on the conference agenda will be a resolution, which if passed and then endorsed by the TUC, could have a big effect in enhancing the authority of trades councils throughout the country. It has already been endorsed by the Trades Councils Association.
This resolution has been submitted by the Brighton, Hove and District Trades Union Council. It requests the General Council of the TUC to reconsider the possibility of direct representation of shop stewards’ committees and joint councils on local trades councils.
Should such representations be agreed, it would enable trades councils to become the real ‘workers’ parliaments’ they were originally intended to be.
 
Powers reduced
Over the years the trades councils were reduced to purely advisory bodies with little real authority to effectively co-ordinate the local industrial struggles of the workers.
This was not always so. As a matter of fact it was on the initiative of the trades councils which preceded it that the TUC itself was created. At the first two conferences of the TUC in the 19th Century a large number of delegates actually came from trades councils.
Later the powers of trades councils were unfortunately whittled away and finally their delegates to Trades Union Congresses were excluded.
Historical circumstances no doubt justified the change in the form of election to TUC, and given the complicated structure of the British trade union movement it was probably inevitable that the number of TC delegates had to be restricted.
In spite of this, even though shorn of any real powers, the trades councils continued to play a vital part in building the unity of organised workers. Today the whole movement is moving into a period of sharp industrial struggles against the attacks of the most anti trade union government for generations.
It is therefore essential that the shop stewards, who today are the life-blood of the trade union movement, should be directly represented on the trades council.
In the general strike of 1926 the trades councils played an absolutely indispensable organising role, despite the absence of direct contact with the factories, and what is happening today on the industrial field clearly shows that the possibility of a general strike cannot be ruled out in the years ahead.
The resolution to be moved by the Brighton and Hove Trades Council seeks to establish direct links with the stewards representing the majority of workers in factories and offices, without in any way impinging on the rights and responsibilities of union branches which would continue to constitute the main body of trades councils.
The struggles of the working class will need an effective trades council movement in the years ahead. The steps outlined in Brighton’s resolution could play a vital role in their development.
 




The Pensioners’ rally at TUC annual meeting has now become a
regular event. This year over 1,000 people marched through Brighton
to demand a big increase in pensions.
However that such a march had to take place is a sad commentary on
the failure of our Labour government after nearly three years in
office to carry out the resolutions calling for older working men and
women to receive an adequate income passed at TUC and Labour Party
conferences over the last ten years.
The maximum old age state pension with supplementary benefits
added (obtained only after a humiliating personal means test) comes
to little more than one-third of the average wages paid to employed
workers. This low income leads to the frequent hypothermia which
carries off hundreds of the old and infirm each winter. The pension
increases are always six to nine months too late and therefore never
compensate for the enormous price increases which have repeatedly
taken place in the case of gas and electricity etc.
Because of this, old people are constantly receiving fantastically
high bills, often followed by threats to cut off all heat if they
don’t pay up. The “kind” permission of the government to allow
us to run into debt does not alter the fact that these demands still
come and with some old and infirm people it has actually hastened their death.
These are the people whom the Labour government should have
relieved of all financial worries by this time by providing all OAPs
with a minimum income which everybody working, unemployed, old or
sick should be entitled to as of right. That should be at least
equivalent to a £50 a week gross wage. Why should a worker who
reaches retirement age take a sudden drop in living standards just
because he is older. He has earned the right to an adequate living in
his last years.
And to be blunt how can Jack Jones and the other TUC leaders, who
have campaigned so hard on the pensions question, effectively fight
for a decent income for the elderly when they accept the spurious
argument that the public expenditure cuts must be accepted to keep
Labour in office. The truth is that the cuts will put Labour out
of office and 50% of average earnings for pensioners will be stopped
for another decade.
In my own borough, one of the richest in the country, after much
pressure by the local Labour party and other we were granted “bus
tokens” enabling a certain amount of local travel at reduced rates.
At first these tokens amounted to 100 every quarter at 2p each. Then
in the alleged interest of economy the Tory Council cut the number of
tokens to 60. In the meantime fares have been increased four times,
and if I wish to make a trip to the Labour Club to see a few friends
over half a pint of beer the trip costs 26p return. Four trips and
the total token allowance is gone!
On the face of it I can get a 50% reduction on train fares on
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday only. If I wish to visit old comrades
in Liverpool for instance this sounds reasonable until it is realised
I must pay £6 for the rail pass.
At one time a pensioner wishing to raise a query with the local
Social Security Office could phone from a call box and then give the
number and the clerk would then phone back when the pensioner’s
money had run out. Now this has been abolished – no reverse calls
are allowed. This means the pensioner must either put more money in
the phone box or got to the office over three miles on foot, or pay
out more exorbitant bus fares.
The fight for a decent pension cannot be separated from the fight
to reverse the public expenditure cuts, lower unemployment and raise
weal wages in general. That requires a new strategy by the TUC
leaders who spoke at the rally, based on the socialist aims of the
labour movement that many old age pensioners who were present at the
tally fought for in their years at work.
 







Dudley Edwards, a retired member of the AUEW (ENG) writes the first of two articles on the Inter-war and post-war struggles of the Labour Movement.






“The coming hope the future day,
When wrong to right shall bow,
And hearts that have the courage man
To make the future NOW”



These words of the Chartist leader, Ernest Jones, written nearly 150 years ago, kept coming to my mind when I attended the conference and rally of the Labour Party Young Socialists in April.
The spirit and the clarity of mind of the 2,000 young people I saw at this conference convinced me that, despite all setbacks, I have lived to see the preliminary stages of the Great Social Revolution which Ernest Jones and his Chartist comrades visualized only dimly “as through a glass darkly”.
In those fifty years of working class struggle which I have taken part in, many have fallen by the wayside, thousands had their hearts broken by the faint-hearted opportunism of Labour leaders. At certain periods during those years the foundations of a socialist society could have been established. It has been these leaders who have blocked the instinctive will of the masses of the workers to change society.
At least four times during my life time, it would have been possible to remove the capitalist anarchy of production, which today is again leading to economic crisis; a crisis which, as in the past, the working class will be made to pay for, unless it puts an end to the capitalist system.
Today again the inner contradiction of capitalism threatens to plunge the working class into mass unemployment, starvation, low wages, hyper-inflation. Even more; if this decadent system is allowed to persist for a long period, it will lead to some form of fascism in one or toehr of the major industrial countries and to the ultimate holocaust of a nuclear war.
 
Clause 4
In 1918, for the first time a really socialist clause was introduced into the Labour Party; Clause 4 – “the common ownership of the means of production and distribution” etc.
The inclusion of this clear-cut socialist objective resulted from the tremendous impact of the first successful working-class revolution in history, the October Revolution in Russia in 1917.
After four years of war, during which most Labour and Trade Union leaders became recruiting sergeants urging their members to slaughter their fellow workers on the other side of the national frontier, the Russian revolution came like a sudden clap of thunder. Though a very small lad, I can vaguely recall the atmosphere of hope this event created among the working people.
The Clause 4, which Arthur Henderson then introduced into the Constitution, could have been put into immediate operation during those days. All over Europe enormous demonstrations, strikes and mutinies of war-weary soldiers were taking place. Had the Labour leaders possessed real faith in the working class from which they had sprung, capitalism could have been swept away then. Unfortunately too many of them had become reconciled to being what Lenin called “the Labour lieutenants of capitalism within the ranks of the working class”.
Their excuse for being unwilling to lead the workers to a revolutionary overthrow of the system which had caused the war was that they wanted to go “the gradual and peaceful way”. Yet, if we take a ‘bird’s eye view’ of those years from the first to the second World War, we see only a period of unending violence, colonial and civil wars, culminating in fascist terror and another mass slaughter. Had the revolutionary lead of the Bolsheviks in 1917 been followed by Labour in Western Europe, then none of these things could have happened. German fascism would never have been able to start its war. It would never have existed.
 
Stalinism
The Stalinist political distortion workers’ state would not have been possible, because a European Federation of Socialist States would have been able to permanently raise production to unimagined heights. This production organized on socialist lines, would have been directed only towards meeting the needs of all the labouring populations, including that of Russia. No periodical suspension of production would have occurred, when big business was not satisfied that enough profit was being made out of the exploitation of the workers’ labour power. This main cause of capitalist crises, including the present one, would have therefore been eliminated.
As a stripling, I saw the enormous response of the British working class to the T.U.C. strike call in 1926. Once again the working class was defeated, not by its capitalist bosses, but by the defeatism of its own leaders. A courageous leadership with faith in the ability of our class to fundamentally change society could also in those days have led the movement to victory. All that was lacking was the will at the top. On the day that this great act of solidarity was called off, the strike was stronger in spirit and numbers than when it began nine days before.
It was during this period that I became a conscious, if confused, socialist. Before the General Strike I was nearly recruited into the infamous O.M.S. (Organisation for the Maintenance of Supplies). This body was cunningly built up by the authorities long before the strike, for the apparently innocent purpose of “helping the country in an emergency”. It was only when I saw the “gilded” youth coming down to Southampton Docks from Oxford and Cambridge to form an army of strike-breakers that I grasped the real class nature of the struggle.
It was the betrayal of this strike and the consequent victimization of thousands of workers which left the working class almost defenceless when in 1929 capitalism plunged the world into economic crisis. Then, as now, big business demand that the working class pay for the crisis which capitalism had created. The membership of the Trade Unions which in 1918 had nearly reached nine million (within a smaller population), by 1930 could barely muster five million members.
Despite this, the working class recovered its combative spirit fairly soon after the 1926 defeat and by 1929 had put a Labour Government into office. Then, as now, this Government was soon faced with this capitalist produced crisis. Being completely devoid of any firm socialist programme, it was therefore forced to apply the cuts in the workers’ standard of living, demanded by the international bankers and money-lenders.
This government did not have an overall majority, it is true, but had its leaders been willing to use their parliamentary position to mobilize the working class in their struggle against the cuts demanded by the ruling class, then the whole situation could have been changed and once again socialism could have been put on “the order of the day”.
The evidence in support of this claim was shown by the degree of spontaneous resistance which was put up by large sections of the working class. As a matter of fact it was the Labour leaders of the Cabinet who set up the notorious May Committee which recommended wholesale cuts in the wages and social benefits of the poorest sections of the unemployed, (by this time nearly three million) were singled out for attack.
 
Fight Back
However, not all these cuts could be imposed in their original severity, because, though almost leaderless, the workers soon began to fight back. The ruling class, supremely self-confident, was under the impression that once it had won over, by flattery and social bribery the most prominent Labour politicians, including Ramsey MacDonald, the Prime Minister and Philip Snowden, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, then everything would go smoothly. To the astonishment of the British Establishment and indeed the bosses all over the world, the first serious explosion came from the workers in uniform. The lowest ranks of the Atlantic fleet rose up as one man against the cuts in their pay. Until the Admiralty was prepared to negotiate over the cuts, almost all the lower ranks refused to put to sea.
This was the first widespread mutiny since the great “Mutiny of the Nore” at the end of the 18th century. Not an anchor was raised for our days, despite the frenzied efforts of the officers. During those days these “ordinary seamen” produced marvels of organization. This started from a huge mass meeting in the large naval canteen at Invergordon. Only when signals came from the Admiralty stating that the Government was willing to negotiate did a ship set sail. Eventually two thirds of the original cuts were restored.
During this period I was organizing ad hoc open air meetings at Portsmouth. The atmosphere was electric and many sailors attended. From these meetings developed an “Unemployed and Employed Workers Council” and a branch of the N.U.W.M. (National Unemployed Workers Movement) which took part in the huge unemployed demonstrations organized all over the country immediately after the Invergordon Mutiny.
 
No Lead
Of course without a fighting lead either from the Labour Party which had been thrown into confusion by the desertion of its Prime Minister, or from the Trade Union leaders, the workers were dragooned into acceptance of most of the cuts. Nevertheless, these mass actions did result in some of the cuts being restored and a modification of the means test which the new Tory dominated National Government had introduced.
By 1934 the worst effects of the capitalist slump began to subside and it is an irony of history that the victory of Hitler fascism in Germany was one reason for this partial recovery. Originally the British ruling class was sympathetic to the rise of the Nazis, while they restricted themselves to smashing the German Labour movement. However, when Hitler began to present a possible threat to British Imperialism, then the British Government began a re-armament programme. This was pressed forward as a precaution even although British diplomacy rested on the idea that Hitler’s military strategy could be diverted exclusively against the U.S.S.R.
The beginning of a new arms race, therefore, helped to bring about a fall in unemployment figures, though these never fell much below one and a half million until the outbreak of war in 1939. There will be thousands of working men and women of my generation who will not need to be told what this capitalist slump meant in terms of personal privation and hardships. However, a few examples will certainly interest the young readers of Left.
During the three worst years of this slump, various social and government institutions, including the British Medical Association, spent much time applying themselves to the question of “What was the absolute minimum expenditure required on food to keep one individual alive?” The Ministry of Health established that 5/1 or 26p would keep body and soul together. At this time the unemployment benefit for one person was 17/6, about 85p; a low rent, even in those days, was 15/– or 70p. This gives an idea of the semi-starvation existing among the unemployed.
My wife, who worked in a restaurant in Whitehall, together with other waitresses, would carefully wrap up pieces of left-over food from the plates of customers (among whom were Cabinet Ministers) and place these in the dustbins so that unemployed men could collect them at night. These were often not the traditional tramp types, but respectable working men who had taken to tramping the road looking for work.
 
Two Nations
Any miner of this generation could no doubt produce photographs of children going to work in the thinnest of plimsoll shoes during the depth of winter. These are only a few of the thousands of examples which could be quoted to illustrate what the capitalist slump meant to the average man or woman. At the same time, of course, our real rulers did not suffer at all. During the worst years of depression, all the most expensive West End night clubs were packed with society’s “Bright Young Things”. Meals with champagne even then generally cost £10 a time. Nightclub queens during the late twenties and early thirties were being fined thousands of pounds for infringing licensing laws, as in the case of the famous Mrs Merrick who was gaoled for bribing a high-ranking police officer to the tune of many thousands of pounds.
This is the real picture of the capitalist system, which some Labour leaders unfortunately worked day and night to save. Today this is often called “getting our priorities right”. When Denis Healey has to get up in Parliament to tell his Labour supporters that at least a million unemployed is almost inevitable by 1975 then it is time for the Labour Movement to say that the first priority should be the rapid dismantling of this rotten and decaying system and its replacement by a planned socialist economy under workers’ control and management. I believe this generation, especially those belonging to the L.P.Y.S. will succeed, despite all setbacks, in bringing about such a transformation of society.
 




The defeat of Bob Wright and Jimmy Reid in the recent elections
for the AUEW Executive Council now makes the struggle to defend the
standard of living of the engineering workers more difficult. For the
first time in nearly 10 years the right wing have a clear majority on
the leading body of the union. Couple with setbacks for the ‘Broad
Left’ in regional elections, this means that those who wish the
union to bow to the needs of capitalism in crisis will for a time
determine the policy of the union.
The strengthening of the right wing in the second largest trade
union will make big business more determined than ever to snatch back
the material gains of the working class over the last half century.
At the present moment the party of big business (the Tories) do
not want another election. They hope that a right wing dominated
Labour Movement, by exploiting the workers’ instinctive loyalty to
a Labour Government, will be able to cajole the working people into
accepting measures of severe wage restriction, cuts in social
services and unemployment, which would never have been tolerated from
a Tory Government.
These sacrifices are presented to the workers as being necessary
not only in the interests of the country, but of the Labour Movement.
Never was there a bigger ‘con’ in the course of history! If
this kind of argument is accepted by the working class for any length
of time it will result in disaster for the Labour Movement. It is
these spurious arguments made by the so-called “moderates”
(really extreme rightists) in the Labour Movement which undoubtedly
have affected some sections of the rank and file who imagine they are
saving the Labour Government.
These are the objective conditions that for the time being have
favoured the right wing contestants in the recent AUEW elections.
However it would be wrong to claim that this is the only, or even the
main reason for the defeat of the ‘Broad Left’ and the Communist
Party which manipulates it. Nor is it true as the ‘Broad Left’
argues that the right wing advance is entirely due to the
intervention of the mass media in favour of the right wing
candidates. It is true that the capitalist controlled press has
pretended to be extremely concerned about “democracy” in the
union and because of the introduction of the postal ballot the
newspapers and other media have been able to influence the thousands
of union members who never attend branch meetings.
Indeed the rules of our union have been subverted by outside
forces since no direct canvassing in favour of candidates is allowed
by union rule.
 
Involve members
However, the influence of the mass media is not the decisive
factor in causing the defeat of the left. The confused and
opportunist tactics of the ‘Broad Left’ are also responsible for
this setback to militant trade unionism.
In attacking the postal ballot it has tended to ignore the
indisputable fact that the postal ballot has produced a far higher
proportion of the membership voting than under the old system of a
show of hands or ballots at the branches.
It is not enough to say these masses of members who previously did
not vote are “backward” and “apathetic” and therefore are
most easily influenced by the capitalist mass media. These members in
fact represent a majority of the union membership and before any
progressive and militant policy can be carried out these thousands of
members must be won over. There is no way that the left can avoid
this necessary task if a policy of genuine working class struggle is
to be carried out.
Whatever means of voting for official positions is adopted, these
members, apparently written off by the ‘Broad Left’ as the
“backward mass”, must be integrated into the activities of the
union and the maximum possible number of their votes must be recorded.
The emphasis of the ‘Broad Left’ campaigning rested almost
entirely on the complaint that the small minority doing most of the
work – the old pillars of the declining branches – were being
unjustly excluded from the rewards of office. Further, the ‘Broad
Left’ appeared to advocate a return to the old branch system of
voting as the only alternative to the postal ballot, completely
ignoring the fact that year by year the proportion of members voting
has been declining until it reached less than 8% of the membership.
This 8% was electing the national officers for a union of 1¼
million members. A ludicrous position.
Certainly it must be admitted that the present form of ballot
plays into the hands of the capitalist press and therefore favours
the right wing. However this does not mean advocating a return to the
old method which was also undemocratic in actual practice. No, the
alternative should be to transfer the voting for offices to the
present day centre of gravity of the union – the workshop floor.
Then the voting can take place at the point of production where all
the members can be found.
The voting by ballot or otherwise should in this way be organised
by the shop stewards who are the only officers of the union that the
vast majority of the members know and take seriously.
The preliminary activities of such election should be preceded by
the calling of a series of shop meetings at which the vital issues
are explained to the members and where possible the candidates are
invited to put their respective points of view on policy.
Apart from the wrong approach to the postal ballot question the
faulty industrial tactics of the ‘Broad Left’/Communist Party
axis rebounded against their own candidates. The beginning of the
discrediting of the ‘Broad Left’ began in Manchester nearly three
years ago, when instead of calling on the whole membership to take
industrial action when the Employer’s Federation contemptuously
turned down our claim, the Executive Council recommended that the
battle should be fought at a purely local level. It was to be left to
the lads on the shop floor to organise their own independent and
separate actions to win the claim. A claim which incidentally could
be described as a ‘mini’ Engineers’ Charter.
This method was recommended by the Executive Council and endorsed
by the National Committee as actually being more militant and up to
date than that of national strike action! As should have been
foreseen, this vague recommendation to go on strike if the lads felt
they needed to was interpreted in different ways by different
districts. The Executive Council was in fact saying go on strike if
you wish, lads, then we’ll see how we can back you up.
 
Manchester sit-ins
In Manchester these confused guide lines resulted in a full
conference of local stewards and the calling of a ‘mini’ local
general strike, mostly consisting of sit-ins. Immediately the EEF saw
its chance. £1 million was put at the local employers’ disposal
and a war of attrition began. Unfortunately few similar movements
took place in other parts of the country and the Manchester strikers
became isolated. Meantime for five or six weeks the union paid out
strike benefit which eventually reached a very considerable sum
indeed. In no case did the workers who staged these guerrilla actions
win the full claim.
The large sums paid out in benefit for little return began the
period of the union’s financial difficulties exacerbated by
inflation. The lack of any clear cut victory resulted in a serious if
temporary decline in morale among the general membership. This was at
a time when the miners were going into battle and by fully
co-ordinating national action gained a great victory. If the National
Committee had called a national strike vastly superior gains could
have been made, and at less cost at that.
These guerrilla tactics gave the right wing all the ‘handles to
grind’ they could wish for. It enabled them to claim that not only
industrial tactics were wrong (of course they wouldn’t have
favoured national action either) but that the financial affairs of
the union were being mishandled!
Among the ‘Broad Left’ and Communist Party members are many
sincere and courageous workers but they have all been misled. For all
practical purposes the ‘Broad Left’ has been used almost
exclusively as an election machine to gain official positions. The
concentration of all efforts on capturing positions had now proved to
be counter-productive and allowed the right wing to creep back to the
detriment of all who wish to see a bold and militant policy in the union.
A really effective left would constantly point out that in the
period of the irreversible decay of British capitalism, the full
force of the union can be mobilised to defend and improve the living
standards of its members only if this struggle is linked with the
struggle to lay the foundations of socialism by taking over the
commanding heights of the economy, working on the basis of a
socialist economic plan.


Dudley Edwards was a member of AUEW Brighton no. 3, retired.
 




For generation after generation the working class has striven for greater unity in its struggle against the exploitation of its labour power by the capitalist system. This drive towards a comprehensive unit has generally intensified during periods of Capitalist economic crisis.
It is such a situation which has resulted in the huge increase in the scale of strikes since 1967 and also the demand for greater unity on the shop floor and greater control by the workers’ organisations over their factories and industries.
This desire for greater organisational unity is not adequately reflected in the desultory negotiations for union amalgamation by many of the full-time officials. In fact, often these officials fear amalgamation because unification may allow a reduction in the number of full-time officers. From time to time formal negotiations take place but the officials drag their feet and little comes of it. Eventually the workers become impatient with these interminable negotiations and real advance is made.
This seems to be the state of affairs in the negotiations which for the last two or three years have been proceeding between the old A.E.U. (now A.U.E.W.) and the old technical and supervisory sections of the industry and originally some smaller trade sections.
It will therefore be of value to all active lay members of unions, especially in engineering, to give a brief historical outline of those periods when demands for amalgamation pushed up from below, and the rank and file pressed for real industrial unity in order to defend or improve their standard of living.
Over the last sixty years, three periods in particular stand out, when amalgamation became a real issue on the shop floor. These were the stormy periods before the First World War – from 1909 to 1914, during the great industrial battles after the war from 1918 to 1922, and again today when the workers’ standard of living is threatened by capitalist economic collapse.
Tory Politicians, Liberal Sentimentalists and others often point to the period before the 1914 war as a glorious age of ‘social peace’. In reality, an enormous strike wave spread throughout the land, which if the lower figure of population is recognised, was greater in scope and intensity than during any other period of modern British history. This social upheaval was largely sparked off by economic factors similar in some ways to those which have caused the great strike waves witnessed in Britain since the mid-sixties.
At the turn of the century the great monopolies were taking over industry, prices began rising, and the real wages of the workers tended to fall behind the rate of inflation. At the same time, workers were becoming dissatisfied with the meagre results obtained by the Labour leaders in Parliament.
Max Beer, the classic historian of British socialism, paints a picture of those stormy years in the following words:
“The United Kingdom witnessed for the first time a class war in which all its component parts were involved: Scottish miners, English Railwaymen, Irish Transport Workers were joining hands across the borders and seas. Robert Smilie, Tom Mann, James Larkin, James Connolly, all born fighters, marshalled and led the new forces in battle array. Nothing like it had ever happened before.”
John Maclean the great Scottish revolutionary and Marxist scholar said in 1911:
The times we live in are so full of change that it is not impossible to believe that we are in the rapids of revolution.”
It was in this climate of rising class struggle that a powerful rank and file movement in favour of union amalgamation appeared. Tom Mann, whose reputation had been established over a decade earlier by his leadership in the great dock strike at the end of the 19th century, became one of the principal leaders of this campaign for unification of the extraordinary collection of Craft and General unions that constituted the British Trade Union Movement.
After the great dock strike, Mann had emigrated for a while to Australia. During these years he became strongly influenced by the ideas of the ‘International Workers of the World’ [1], which had spread from the U.S.A. They endeavoured to spread syndicalist ideas among the workers, and one of their slogans was the ‘One Big Union’. Tom Mann however came to stand for the battle cry of ‘One Union for One Industry’.
At the same time as the I.W.W. and other syndicalists were spreading their own brand of amalgamation, a quite separate and independent workers’ ‘Amalgamation Movement’ developed. The vast majority of these workers favoured the amalgamation of the existing unions rather than trying to set up new ones. Amalgamation Committees began to spring up, often led by skilled engineers, then, as now, not always free of old and narrow craft prejudices. Nevertheless, men who understood that the growth of large scale mechanisation, the breaking down of skilled jobs into separate and simple operations, meant that the skilled would be unable to adequately protect their own positions, unless the ever-growing grades of semi-skilled were organised into the same unions.
 
Amalgamations
On October 10th, 1910, the Chiswick branch of the old Associated Society of Engineers, called the first conference attended by sixteen London delegates from the Engineering industry. This conference pledged itself to work for the amalgamation of existing unions in the London area until the principle of “one union for one industry was achieved.” These delegates also insisted that this union should embrace all workers “regardless of grade or sex”. They then proceeded to set up a committee for amalgamating existing unions.
The leading spirit of this movement was W.F. Watson, a member of the Chiswick A.S.E. branch, who later became the main organiser of a National Amalgamation Movement. During the next two years the movement blossomed out. A much larger conference of rank and file engineers was called in London on September 25th, 1912, which established the ‘Engineering and Shipbuilding Amalgamation Committee’ and Watson of the Chiswick Branch was elected secretary.
Shortly afterwards a joint conference which the syndicalists also attended was held at the Holborn Hall, London. In a unanimous resolution passed at this conference, the delegates declared “That complete solidarity is the only way the workers can emancipate themselves”.
By 1913 the movement established itself on a genuinely national scale and the engineering section adopted the title of the ‘National Metal, Engineering and Shipbuilding Committee’. It had permanent committees affiliated to it in Derby, Erith, Guildford, London, Portsmouth, Southampton, Sheffield, Wigan and many other towns. The London Committee even rented permanent premises. At a further conference in 1914 the name was changed to the ‘Federation of Amalgamation Committees.’
The movement was intimately bound up with the innumerable industrial disputes taking place throughout the land and was also particularly interested in the question of Workers’ Control, which it regarded as the logical outcome of industrial unification. Today the question is again becoming a practical issue for workers with mass layoffs and all the consequences of a capitalist recession.
The constitution of this federation specifically defined the function of the Amalgamation Committees in the following way –
“To prepare the workers for their economic emancipation by their taking possession of the means of production, through an economic organisation outside the control of any Parliamentary Party or religious sect.”
 
Syndicalism
Here can be seen the confusing influence of syndicalist propaganda. This document still toyed with the mistaken notion that the Trade Unions themselves can solve the problems of the working class and achieve socialism. There is no understanding that a political party of Labour is needed, prepared to take over the commanding heights of the economy and make possible the organisation of a Socialist planned economy on a national scale; a plan that must be based on workers’ control in each industry, and throughout the economy.
The immediate successes of the Amalgamation Committee movement were meagre. In 1910 a proposal for total amalgamation put before the Federation of Engineering and Shipbuilding Trades was rejected.
By 1914, nevertheless, the ideas put forward by this movement were common currency among active trade unionists, especially the Engineers. The outbreak of war undermined its activities. The march towards real industrial unity became the march into capitalist made war. With the full endorsement of most official T.U. leaders, workers were urged on to shoot down their brothers in other lands, but that is another story.
Two years after the war started, the Amalgamation Committees began to revive and a conference was held at Leeds attended by 124 engineering delegates. The main resolution laid down the following principles:
“(a) The title of a new Amalgamated Union shall be the Engineering and Shipbuilding Workers’ Industrial Union.
“(b) That the Industrial Union shall embrace every worker in the industry regardless of craft, creed or sex.”
In further sections the resolution insisted:
“That representation on all administration bodies shall be occupational and not geographical.”
Finally this historic document laid down:
“That the definite object of the union shall be to secure complete control of industry and the abolition of the wages system.”
It would appear that a year later this last clause was changed to:
“To secure complete control of industry in the interests of the people.”
Once again after the First World War the working class became involved in huge battles to prevent the employing class revoking those concessions it had been compelled to give away during and just after the war. By 1920 a significant but still inadequate move towards the all-inclusive industrial union was made. Largely as a result of the work of Tom Mann and the persistent educational efforts of the Amalgamation Committees, nine small craft unions joined together with the old A.S.E. and formed the Amalgamated Engineering Union with Tom Mann as the first General Secretary. The often clear and sensible ideas of these pioneers of Amalgamation and Industrial Unionism have still not been realised today.
The words of John Maclean written in 1918 with perhaps some small changes still apply today:
“The process of trustification is at present evolving rapidly towards one big trust for all British industries.”
To counter this process, very much more advanced today than in 1918, Maclean went on in a way still largely appropriate, to outline the kind of industrial organisation the working class need –
“The one union implies workshop committees representative of everyone inside a separate works – scientific reorganisation from top to bottom and through district and national committees linking up with all industries organising the production and distribution of wealth.”
At the same time Comrade Maclean made clear in his conclusion that such industrial organisation could only reach full maturity when, in his words:
“Labour unites scientifically and controls all the land and workshops of the country.”

Footnote by ETOL
1. The correct name of the I.W.W. was/is the Industrial Workers of the World.
 




Long speeches are at present being made in Parliament and the House of Lords about the respective merits of long term pensions. Tory Peers, some in bath chairs – even Monday Club MP’s have the cheek to move ‘radical’ amendments to Barbara Castle’s pension plan, amendments which they opposed when in office! The real issue facing millions of workers over 60 is meanwhile being ignored!
The main reason that Labour’s future plan could be regarded as preferable to the proposals of Tory Sir Keith Joseph is that with the Labour scheme, a better pension will possibly mature in 20 years. Under the Tory one it would be 44 years before any aged worker would get a penny of the increased insurance payments he or she pays in to the Government!
The really vital question which all working class organisations should be raising now, is, what is to be done for the pensioners, the disabled, the widows over 55, now in 1975, not in 20 or 40 years time!
Few other sections of the population over the last two years has received no threshold payments of any kind. Last summer’s increase of pension to £10 and £16 was wiped out by inflation even while most Labour leaders were making it a main point in their election propaganda. The further £2 now due will hardly be noticed with the cost of living rising at an annual rate of at least 20%.
Many Parliamentary candidates, at the last elections, were fond of saying that the test of a civilization is how it treats its old people and children. What does this mean today?
Barbara Castle’s long term pension plan suggests that 50% of the average national minimum wage is the minimum required to secure an even tolerable standard for old people. (This is still less than many capitalist countries in Western Europe).
At this level , any aged working man or woman should be receiving at least £1,500 p.a., still a very small amount, especially in the light of the £420,000 extra state dole paid out to just one royal person, already a millionaire. Today, incredibly, millions of old people receive pensions of less than 15% of their previous wages. The purchasing power of this 15% declines every time they visit a food shop.
In 1973, the Labour Party Conference passed unanimously a resolution promising a very different deal for those who have worked in industry all their lives creating great wealth which is still in the hands of a handful of monopolies.
Only the first half of this resolution has been acted on by the Labour Government. It would therefore be well to quote the second and most important part. The resolution was moved by the TGWU. The second paragraph demanded the following:
“Conference emphasises this immediate demand [the increases to £10 and £16] must be regarded as only a first step towards ensuring that retirement pensions provide a proper standard of living related to average earnings and to increases in retail prices, by annual and quarterly reviews.”
Had the resolution been carried out, many thousands of working people over 65 would have been spared the grievous experience of seeing their small life savings slowly whittled away because their existing pension is not enough to meet the daily increasing cost of keeping alive.
With further huge increases, apart from food, now imminent, like gas, electricity, rate and probably rent, it is now vital that the full Labour Party resolution quoted above by implemented by the Labour Government now.
Not only old age pensioners but all workers unable to work through disablement, sickness, mental illness etc. should be paid a living wage. In a civilised society responsibility for this should be taken by society as a whole. Huge insurance companies should therefore be nationalised and their employees absorbed into comprehensive state social security organisation.
To ‘take pensions out of politics’ as Barbara Castle suggests cannot be done in this class divided society. Only when Labour carries through a socialist plan to take over all the economic resources of the country will real security for the older people be guaranteed once and for all. Such security is impossible in the increasing chaos of capitalism.
Right now the trade unions must mobilise all their strength to see that Labour’s conference decision is carried out. We have already waited too long!
On March 12th the National Trade Union and Old Age Pensioners Action Committee called a demonstration in London. For the aims outlined to be met, it will need the full mobilisation of all sections of the movement on such demonstrations and in a great campaign to ensure the Labour Government take all steps needed to meet this part of their ‘Social Contract!’
The writer of this article was a delegate to the 1973 Labour Party Conference and spoke in support of the resolution passed at that conference.
 







Part Two of an article by Dudley Edwards, a retired
member of the AUEW. Part One appeared in last month’s Left and
dealt with, among other things, the impact of the 1917 Russian
Revolution on the British labour movement, the 1926 General
Strike, the Labour Governments of 1924 and 1929, the 1931
Coalition Government and the rise of fascism in Germany.



From 1936 we were becoming increasingly interested in the
heroic struggle of the working class of Spain. Hundreds of those who
had recently marched in the columns of the Hunger Marchers now found
themselves slowly winding down the valley of Jarama in the face of
withering machine-gun fire from Franco’s Moorish troops. Many of
these men had nothing in their pockets but a ticket to the Spanish
frontier. They came from Glasgow, Newcastle, Liverpool, London,
Brighton, South Wales and many other places. Many gave their lives
because they knew that the Spanish working class was not only making
a stand on behalf of the workers of the world against the spreading
plague of fascism, but also because the victory of Franco in Spain
would lead to the even greater mass slaughter of a Second World War.
Here too in Spain, the workers were misled. Fascism could have
been stopped in Spain if the workers’ leaders, of the Socialist,
Communist and Anarchist parties had fought for a clear-cut socialist
programme instead of trying to appease the allegedly “liberal”
capitalists at home and abroad by limiting the struggle to a call for
a “democratic capitalist republic”. Only social revolution
could have won the war against Franco. On the level of a purely
military struggle, the odds were stacked heavily in Franco’s
favour. The LYPS has done a service to the whole of the labour
movement by raising these lessons of the Spanish Civil War in the
bulletins of the Spanish Young Socialists’ Defence Campaign.
 
Fascism
It was during those bitter years when European fascism was
trampling down the last bastion of democratic resistance in Spain
that at home a partial economic recovery was taking place. With some
increase in the demand for labour, the organised workers regained a
little bargaining power. The first successful strikes began to dispel
the memories of the years of industrial defeat. The London busmen led
the way with a solid strike gaining some advances. In 1937, as a
result of a successful apprentices’ strike which began in the
Glasgow engineering and shipbuilding industries, the AEU gained the
right to negotiate with the masters on behalf of all young workers in
engineering. The Shop Stewards movement became effective, especially
in the aircraft industry.
In France and the USA huge sit-in strikes took place, especially
in the new motor factories. Once more, the working class began slowly
to move forward.
This partial capitalist stabilisation did not last long. By 1938
all the signs pointed to a new economic blizzard on the way. In the
winter before the outbreak of war, the National Unemployed Workers
Movement (NUWM) was again organising large demonstrations. Many of
those who came back from Spain helped to organise unemployed
“laydowns” in snow-covered Oxford Street. In 1939 a new hunger
march was being contemplated. Mosley’s jackbooted blackshirts were
again on the prowl hoping to exploit a developing economic
downturn.
 
Crisis
Capitalism was once again looking for a way out of a new economic
crisis. It found this in the outbreak of another mass slaughter –
the Second World War. This was the price the working class was forced
to pay for the failure to carry through the socialist revolution when
it could have been carried through in the 1920’s, especially in
Germany.
In 1939, the capitalist establishments of France and Britain saw
that Hitler was not, as they had hoped, aiming his Nazi hordes
against the USSR, but was threatening their own economic and
political schemes of influence. As in the First World War, they found
themselves incapable of mobilising for war without gaining the
support of the labour and trade union leaders.
The Labour leaders gave this support and both the Labour Party
and, after the Nazi attack on the USSR in 1941, the Communist Party,
declared a “political truce” with their own ruling class.
However, contrary to the claims of the orthodox historians, it is
doubtful if the rank and file accepted the implications of this
truce. Indeed, the strike statistics during the war period show a
different attitude on the part of the industrial workers.
The desperate need of the capitalists for workers in uniform and
for intensified production of war materials strengthened the
bargaining power of the workers. Soon the membership of the unions
began to catch up and surpass the figure it had reached after the
First World War.
 
Coalition
In 1945, the “flying bombs” stopped and the survivors of the
battlefields and the POW camps began to stream home. Many Labour
leaders, but in particular the Communist Party, visualised a
continuation of the “political truce”. In fact the CP actually
advocated the continuation of an allegedly “Democratic” Coalition
with Churchill still in command.
The working class, in and out of uniform, drew an entirely
opposite conclusion. The workers gave Labour an overwhelmingly
landslide victory with a 206-seat majority in 1945. They were joined
by a significant section of the middle and lower-middle classes.
The Labour Party now had what its leaders always claimed they
needed – an overwhelming majority of the people behind it. This was
an historic vote in favour of a fundamental change in society and for
socialism.
 
Missed
Once again, the opportunity was missed. The broken down industries
which the capitalists did not want to invest in were nationalised.
This was done at enormous cost in terms of excessive compensation and
enormous capital outlay by the State in order to modernise the mines,
railways and power industries, which the bosses had ruined. 80% of
the country’s wealth and means of production remained in the hands
of the 5% of the very rich. Instead of carrying through the planned
socialisation of the economy, the Labour leaders preferred to prop up
the old system through American loans.
Their “theorists” then invented the “mixed economy” to
describe what was really the same old system of exploiting the
workers labour power, but now with state assistance. In this way, the
huge wave of radicalisation which swept through the working class in
1945 was channelled into safe waters, enabling the bosses to ride out
the post-war storm. On this basis, capitalism was able to stabilise
itself for a whole historical period – the period of the post-war
upswing, which lasted an entire generation.
Nevertheless, by 1964, the underlying sickness of the “mixed
economy” in Britain was openly revealing itself. The long post-war
boom had camouflaged the economic decline of the British Empire. Yet
all this time Britain’s share of world trade was falling from 25%
in 1949 to less than 10% in 1967. As soon as the world economic boom
came to an end, towards the very end of the 1960’s, this weakness
of British capitalism in the world markets became painfully obvious.
This precipitated the devaluations of 1967 and 1971.
 
“Affluent”
Now we live in another era of economic crisis and uncertainty when
attacks on the standards of living of working people and mass
unemployment are once again the order of the day. So much for the
myth of the ‘mixed economy’ and the ‘Affluent Society’!
Even though the period of the economic boom is now over and has
given way to a new period of capitalist crisis, it has left an
important legacy for the organised labour movement of today. The long
upturn after the War enabled the labour movement to heal the wounds
inflicted during the pre-war slump. The material standards of our
class, not without trade union struggle, did slowly rise. The trade
unions became stronger and stronger during the period of relatively
“full employment”. Today a new generation, no longer inhibited by
the defeats suffered between the wars has gained a new confidence and
will fight to retain the gains that have been made. Perhaps the young
workers of the 1970’s still suffer from the reformist illusions
built up during the period of alleged affluence when Tory Prime
Minister Harold MacMillan coined the phrase “You’ve never had it
so good”. They will nevertheless fight tooth and nail against
any return to the 1930’s, which is all that sick British capitalism
can now offer the working class.
So for the fourth time in my lifetime history presents the labour
movement with the opportunity to end the crisis-ridden and decadent
capitalist system. This is the perspective of the period ahead.
In 1917, the Russian workers broke the chain of imperialism at its
weakest link. The European working class did respond but its
leaders sidetracked the struggle, and the revolutionary wave failed,
leaving the Russian workers’ state isolated, weak and prone to
degeneration in backward Russia, despite the huge gains of the
nationalised, planned economy.
In 1926, the British workers, though weakened by previous fights
against wage cuts, were ready to carry the General Strike through to
a victorious conclusion but the right wing leaders preferred to
reprieve the capitalist system.
In 1945, the overwhelming majority of the working people in
Britain gave the Labour politicians a mandate to bring about a
fundamental socialist change in society. And yet again, despite the
carrying through of valuable reforms like the setting up of the
National Health Service, the Tories were given a chance to return to
power when the Labour Government “ran out of steam”, started to
“consolidate” and to “hesitate” in pushing ahead with its
programme.
 
Marxist
What is the prospect for the period ahead? There can be no denying
the tremendous opportunities open to the new generation of workers.
Their combativity and willingness to fight is beyond question. It
seems that the natural response of the workers of today to mass
redundancies is factory occupation and the most militant struggles.
The trade union movement is stronger today than it has ever been in
history – with 11 million workers organised in the TUC. This is a
colossal force that has defeated a Tory Government and overturned its
cherished Industrial Relations Act. But the key question that still
remains is to equip this immensely powerful movement with a clear
programme and perspective. A lack of leadership is what has “led”
the workers to defeat so many times in the past. This is the burning
need of the months and years ahead – the fight for a clear
socialist programme in the labour movement. The LPYS can play an
enormous role in this struggle if it learns the lessons of history
and intensifies the fight for its Marxist policies in the broad
labour movement.
 




Dear Comrade,
I am just old enough to remember the enthusiasm with which the organised workers of Britain greeted the October Revolution of the Russian Workers in 1917. As a life-long Trade Unionist and Socialist I have supported that revolution ever since.
However I think the blinkered view of the world expressed by Comrade Ivor Pearce in his letter (October 3, 1975) in no way helps the struggle towards the world socialist revolution today.
The essence of Lenin’s tactics was to tell the workers the truth however unpleasant this might be. My life time experience has taught me that it is ‘political treachery’ to use Comrade Pearce’s fierce mode of expression, to tell those not yet convicted of the need for socialism, that the political set-up in the USSR in any way corresponds with the kind of society visualised by Lenin in his work State and Revolution. I advise Comrade Pearce to read or re-read this book.
The truth is that while the state ownership of the means of production and distribution has, in Russia, shown this is the best way to plan an economy (despite the inevitable wastage of Stalinist methods) on the other hand the political gains of the workers were lost when Stalinism abolished the original workers’ democracy of Lenin and replaced it by a political system dictating everything from the top. This resulted in the appearance of a vast self-perpetuating bureaucratic caste.
To be true this vested interest will eventually be overthrown by the Russian working class and it will no longer have to carry through the economic and social revolution which the workers in the West will have to make.
What has helped the capitalist media to confuse some of the workers, Comrade Pearce, is the fact that when at the 20th Congress of the CPSU the crimes of the Stalinist period were admitted by the platform, some of the charges previously made in capitalist papers (for their own ends) turned out to be true. It is those who in a bigoted way had insisted that the leadership of the USSR could do no wrong who played (and still do) the role of discrediting the socialist idea, because they had refused to admit what was obviously true.



 


Yours Fraternally
Dudley Edwards



P.S. By the way, since ‘Communist’ Russia and ‘Communist’ China constantly attack each other, which in Comrade Pearce’s view is guilty of what he calls “political treachery”?
 




Dear comrades,
Yesterday, I attended the birthday party of Anton Nilsson, at a
small neat flat in a suburb of Stockholm. In less than three years,
Anton will reach 100 years of age, spanning the whole history of the
modern working class movement.
He was surrounded by his old comrades, mostly typical working
class men and women, in Sunday best in Anton’s honour. Each comrade
brought flowers and cards inscribed with signatures of inscriptions
of organisations and individuals.
All morning, Anton was called to the telephone to receive
congratulations from prominent people in the Swedish Social
Democratic Workers Party, and the trade unions. These congratulations
came from those on the right as well as the left. Among his comrades
was a kind of committee, or club, of old freedom fighters, people who
had served sentences for their devotion to the socialist cause.
Anton is still the undisputed and honoured leader of this group
and the only one sentenced to life imprisonment, for his action
against blacklegs in the great Swedish dock strike in 1908. Among
these old comrades were some communists, socialists, and other left
wingers who were thrown into concentration camps during the World
War, because they resisted the passage of Nazi troops and war
materials through Sweden. An act which was allowed by the Swedish
government of those days.
This is a little-known episode in the international fight against
fascism. As the afternoon wore on, it became clear that 96 year old
Anton was, in spirit, amongst the youngest of those present. He spoke
with great pride of his visit to the great Militant rally at
Wembley on September 10 of this year. He said it was a highlight in
his life.
He said the Militant supporters in Britain were now on the
right course and what he saw convinced him that a real turning point
had been reached in the revival of that revolutionary socialism which
he had joined as a young man 80 years before.
He asked me to convey his greetings to all those comrades he met
in Britain, and called again for a new working class international,
as he did at Wembley.



 


Yours fraternally
Dudley Edwards
Stockholm



 




We Shall Not Starve in Silence
A History of the National Unemployed Workers Movement 1920–46
by Richard Croucher
Lawrence & Wishart, £12.50, 1987
From the mid-1920s to the outbreak of war in 1939, the unemployed
workers movement was led by sincere and dedicated Communist workers,
men and women. But such gains as the National Unemployed Workers
Movement (NUWM) made were despite the zig-zag opportunism of the
Communist Party. Even today, although the unemployed are still
treated as second-class citizens and are relegated to the poverty
trap, they still benefit from the fight put up by the NUWM.
While it would be an exaggeration to say that the NUWM brought
about the welfare state (or what is left of it today), Richard
Croucher is right when he says: “the NUWM laid the foundation for a
new system of social benefits traditionally credited to the Beveridge
Report.” Beveridge himself was disappointed in the way his ideas
were implemented, as well he might have been; nevertheless he
provision of social security all became less humiliating than in the
1930s and the period of the infamous means test, the worst features
being the ‘on the parish’ relief from the Board of Guardians. It
is hard to conceive this would have happened without the work of the NUWM.
Many academic studies of the period including those on the left
either completely ignore the role of the NUWM or greatly exaggerate
it. But as Engels was fond of saying, facts are stubborn things. All
the contemporary newspaper reports show that in 1935 the NUWM did
rouse whole communities to march against the news scales of benefit
proposed by the National government. The NUWM organised mass
demonstrations. In South Wales these took on a genuinely mass
character because of unity with the miners union – bringing 300,000
onto the streets. This momentarily forced the government into
retreat. Croucher describes what followed these upheavals:
“Oliver Stanley, the Minister of Labour, announced next
day that Board benefit scales were to be suspended and claimants
would be entitled to UAB or PAC scales whichever were the higher. In
effect this means that there was to be no cut in benefit and the
means test conditions were to be ignored. Wally Hannington, the NUWM
leader, then sent out a circular on 4 January 1935 under with the
heading ‘Smashing victory for NUWM’.”
But the weakness of Croucher’s analysis is that it does not
adequately explain why from a peak of support in 1935, the NUWM
declined into a hard core of Communist and militant workers capable
only of organising publicity stunts such as laying down in
snow-covered Oxford Street, or chaining themselves to town hall
railings or gate crashing the Ritz hotel. Many of the lads performing
these exercises were ex-members of the International Brigade in Spain.
And that was one reason for the decline – the loss of these
cadres in the struggle in Spain as well as the recovery in the
economy after 1935 with the expansion of the arms industry preceding
the war. But this does not fully explain the withering away of the
NUWM when on the eve of the war there were still one and a half
million unemployed. Indeed, immediately after the outbreak of war, I
personally led a demonstration of around 1,000 unemployed laid off
from the old Morris works in Oxford Cowley – so there was still a
cause for the NUWM to fight for.
Instead we must look to the policies of the NUWM leadership to
explain its decline. And to give Croucher his due, he does describe
in some detail the often sharp differences between Hannington in the
NUWM and the Communist Party central committee which sought to direct
his work. The Comintern attempted to interfere in the work of the
NUWM. They almost split the NUWM when they insisted on loose and
vague ‘unemployed councils’ as an alternative to the union-like
structure of the NUWM which at one time had 50,000 people paying
dues. Hannington and the recently deceased Harry McShane, the NUWM
secretary in Scotland, tried to compromise with the Comintern
‘directive’ by proposing unemployed councils alongside the NUWM.
Anyway the Comintern’s idea never caught on. But from then on the
CP regarded Hannington with some suspicion and he was dropped from
the central committee.
Croucher shows how the CP’s line had completely altered by 1938.
The NUWM had become an embarrassment under the popular front policy
of the Comintern which meant alliance and cooperation with the
capitalist state. But he does not analyse the theoretical and social
causes of this change in the CP line, which clearly lay with the
false theories of Stalin and the leadership of the the Comintern who
now looked to support from the capitalist democracies to preserve
their position, rather than mass action from the working-class.
This explains the decision of the CP to close down the NUWM on the
eve of the war, despite many active branches and resistance from its
membership. This attitude has been maintained by CP members on the
TUC General Council when they opposed moves to form a successor to
the NUWM in the early 1980s. It is an attitude that must and will be
reversed when unemployment rises to new heights in the next world slump.
 




DUDLEY EDWARDS, who was active in the Labour movement for more
than 60 years died peacefully on his birthday, 8 July.
He was born in Reading, but spent most of his early life in
Southall and Ealing. In his early teens he joined the Independent
Labour Party Guild of Youth Cycling Club, which brought together two
passions that were to stay with him for the rest of his life – the
labour movement and the countryside.
As he was later to admit, in those early years he did not
understand the class nature of society. The General Strike of 1926
changed that. Dudley was in Southampton, looking for work: “I saw
Oxford and Cambridge students driving down to scab on dockers. I saw
armoured cars and soldiers protecting them.”
After the slump of 1929, Dudley became involved in the battles of
the unemployed, organising branches of the National Unemployed
Workers’ Movement in London, Brighton and Oxford.
He joined the Communist Party in 1932, after Ramsay Macdonald had
deserted Labour to lead a Tory-dominated National Government.
In Brighton he also became involved in the fight against the
Mosley’s fascist blackshirts.
He particularly remembers when in 1934, William Joyce (who later
became notorious as ‘Lord Haw Haw’) was booked to speak at the
Dome. Several days before the fascist rally, anti-fascists got into
the building and an electrician carried out a few changes to the
public address system.
When Joyce arrived to speak, the International blared out
of the loudspeakers and the fascists were blockaded inside by
protesting workers!
Dudley saw the meaning of fascism for himself on a visit to
Germany shortly after Hitler came to power. There were still
stirrings of opposition among the working class and Dudley later
concluded that if a correct lead had been given by the Communist
Party, Hitler could still have been defeated.
Just before and during the second world war, he was Secretary of
Oxford Communist Party and a a member of the AEU district committee.
He worked for the Pressed Steel firm attached to the Nuffield car
works at Cowley, but was sacked for union activity and became a
full-time air-raid warden.
In the 1950s and 60s, Dudley was convenor at an engineering
factory in Park Royal, West London, where he led a strike for union rights.
He had become increasingly disillusioned with the Communist Party,
but delayed his final break with Stalinism because there seemed to be
no alternative.
“I didn’t finally leave the Communist Party until
1958,” he said: “It was a long process-Hungary, the 20th Congress
and Krushchev’s secret speech showed me the true nature of Stalin’s regime.”
He joined the Labour Party “to avoid being cut off from
developments”, but it was not until after he had moved back to
Brighton in 1964 that Dudley found the full-blooded socialism he had
been looking for.
He met a group based around the new Militant newspaper
which had discussion meetings in The Eagle pub. He was still taken in
by what he often called “the Stalinist falsification of history”
and had still to be convinced of Trotsky’s ideas – “I was
hostile at first and argued, so I was invited to speak at the next
discussion group, where my arguments were completely knocked down.”
From then until his death, Dudley was an active supporter of
Militant. He particularly saw the need to share his
experiences with younger comrades, in Britain and internationally.
During the last decade of his life, he went on many speaking tours
in Europe, particularly Sweden and Germany, where he became almost as
well known as in Brighton.
Dudley’s special interest was in the history of the working
class. He wrote pamphlets on the Levellers and the Oxford militia
mutiny. But he regarded history not as something to learn, but to
learn from.
For a long time he refused to write his political memoirs, saying:
“That’s a way of saying that you’ve reached the end of your
political life and I intend on doing a lot more.”
In a way Dudley proved himself right on both counts. He did write
his memoirs when he realised his health was failing, but he never
became the type of ‘veteran socialist’ who only appeared from
time to time to speak at a meeting.
He remained actively involved in the Trades Council, which made
him a life member in 1982 and in the struggle of a new generation of
unemployed in the 1980s.
On the day of his death, Dudley had been invited to the opening of
a room at Brighton Unemployed Workers’ Centre which was to be named
‘The Dudley Edwards Room’. The opening ceremony took place sadly
without the guest of honour.
There is no doubt that Dudley’s biggest regret would have been
not living long enough to see socialism in Britain and throughout the
world. But as he said once at a meeting in Brighton:
“Even if I knew that socialism would not come in my
lifetime I’d still be a Marxist. That’s because the work that we
do now and the work that’s been done by every generation of
Marxists will make it easier for the working class to transform
society in the future.”


Bill North was Vice President of Brighton Trades Council.
 




DUDLEY EDWARDS has been a front-line class fighter for most of
his years – and has no intention of stopping. His 80th birthday
party in Brighton last month was attended by comrades from as far
afield as Wales.
Dudley, born in Reading, remembers lucidly past battles, victories
and defeats. These arm him with a perspective for the future – and
a goal, the socialist transformation of society.
He spent most of his early life in London – Southall and Ealing
– joining the Independent Labour Party Guild of Youth is his early teens.
“But I was not conscious then of the class nature of society,”
Dudley admits.
 
Rich scabs
The General Strike of 1926 made the true nature of society clear
in Southampton where he went in search of work.
“I saw Oxford and Cambridge students driving down to
scab on dockers. I saw armoured cars and soldiers protecting them.”
That early baptism in the practices of the ruling class steeled
Dudley for the struggle ahead: the great depression, battles against
the fascists in Brighton, disillusion with the Communist Party meekly
following Stalin’s treachery and finally, conviction of the
correctness of Lenin and Trotsky’s writings.
He remembers the time William Joyce (the traitor Lord Haw Haw) was
due to speak at a Blackshirt rally in the Dome, Brighton, in 1934. An
enterprising electrician wired up the interior of the hall about a
week before the fascist meeting.
As Joyce entered the Dome, scurrying past protesting workers
outside, and as the Union Jacks fluttered in the aisles, the
Internationale burst forth from the roof! The meeting ended in chaos.
Dudley remembers the comrade picked in his place for the
International Brigade to fight in the Spanish Civil War. Dudley was
turned down on medical grounds – he has a crippled leg. The comrade
fell in one of the early battles of the war.
He also recalls the long daily struggles as a victimised shop
steward in the Nuffield motor works at Cowley and later in Park
Royal, London where he saw the lack of support from the Communist
Party for workers’ struggles.
“I didn’t finally leave the Communist Party until
1958. It was a long process – Hungary, the 20th Congress and
Kruschev’s secret speech showed the true nature of Stalin’s
regime. “After I left, I shopped around the sects (ultra-left
groups) but soon came to the conclusion they hadn’t a clue what
they were talking about! So I joined the Labour Party to avoid being
cut off from developments.”
Dudley moved back to Brighton in 1963–4 and soon was arguing
with a group based around a new Militant paper, meeting at the
Eagle public house.
“I was hostile at first and argued – so I was invited
to speak at the next discussion group where my arguments were
completely knocked down”.
Dudley has read Militant since the second issue and has
seen the ideas take a strong hold in the labour movement.
 
Labour leaders
And he is clear about the position of the Labour leadership with
their bankrupt witch-hunting tactics.
“I think Kinnock and Co are scared of Marxism and know
in their hearts that they can’t deliver the goods under capitalism.
They could get away with cancelling out reforms it it wasn’t for Militant.”
Dudley has just returned from a fact-finding tour of Northern
Ireland where he was very impressed by the work of socialists and
convinced of the need for radical change, there and on a world scale.
“I look forward to the future when Marxism will strike
a chord with more and more workers. There will be a socialist
transformation of society.”
 




Original classic Marxist pamphlet by Dudley
Edwards
Reissued for the 350th anniversary by Coventry Socialist
Party
Introduction
by Geoff Jones (1975)

The Last Stand of the Levellers
Prologue – The Agreement of the People
Gathering Storm in Salisbury
To Banbury to Join Forces
Treachery at Burford
Retribution
Aftermath
Today
Author’s Postscript (1975)


Introduction
History is written by the victors; the process by which rulers
rewrite the past in their own image was not invented by Stalin or
even by George Orwell. The one date that everyone remembers in 1066,
but only for the defeat of the Saxon army at Hastings, not for the
far more crushing victory gained by that same army over the Norsemen
at Stamford nine days earlier.
Nowhere is this remoulding of history more apparent than in the
history of those revolutionary upsurges where a new ruling class has
taken over power or where oppressed common people have taken up arms
to destroy their masters. Whole revolutionary movements disappear
under the pen of the historian, only to be rediscovered generations
later. Lies and truth are entangled so closely that the concept of
impartial ‘historical truth’ becomes meaningless. The
unsuccessful risings of the peasantry and the working class are
stamped on so viciously and so thoroughly that their spokesmen, even
if they survive, are unable to speak in their own defence before the
bar of history.
The history of working class movements in Britain offers many
examples of this process. The leaflets produced during the Clydeside
strikes and army mutinies of 1918–19, the Chartist newspapers, even
the broadsheets of the Civil War still exist with their records of
the heroic struggles of the common people against tyranny and
exploitation. This material lies rotting in libraries while
professional historians either discount it or pick it over with great
care, separating it into a thousand tiny pieces, individually wrapped
in academic sterile dressings. With only a few honourable exceptions,
the history of the workers and peasants is left either to their open
enemies, or to ‘liberal’ minds whose understanding and experience
of working class struggles can only be compared to the experiences of
eunuchs in a harem.
This is no accident. Just as the international working-class
movement has always learned from its experience, especially the
crystallisation of that experience as provided by Marxism, so it is
in the interests of the present ruling class to hide and distort the
records of that experience. In Britain, the Universities, ‘seats of
impartial learning’ are bound to the capitalist class by a thousand
tangible and intangible threads of patronage, privilege and common
interest. For every academic historian sympathetic to working class
struggles we have ten or more hostile. The history of Britain is
presented to the general public as a slow inexorable growth of
democracy and justice from the departure of the Romans to the arrival
of Ted Heath. The British genius for ‘compromise’ and ‘peaceful
reform’ is praised to the skies and ‘unfortunate’ incidents
like the Civil War, the Chartist revolt and the 1926 General Strike
are swept under the carpet. The fact that every single civil liberty
has had to be fought for and paid for in blood and suffering is
denied by the upholders of ‘impartial’ history. The Civil War? –
Charles’ pigheadedness. Tolpuddle? – unfortunate miscarriage of
justice. Peterloo massacre? – local magistrate doing his best in a
difficult situation caused by drunken mobs. Army mutinies? – never happened.
Such dishonesty makes it all the more important to republish and
discuss the documents, pamphlets and writings of our forbears. The
present pamphlet was originally written in commemoration of the three
hundredth anniversary of the events in describes, the mutiny in 1649
of those regiments of Cromwell’s victorious army stationed in
Salisbury at the end of the Civil War, Its sources are Leveller
pamphlets stored in the records department of Oxford Corporation.
Who were the Levellers? For an answer we must ask who did the
fighting in the Civil War – that massive upheaval which started in
1641 with the refusal of MP’s to pay taxes demanded by the King and
ended with that same King beheaded by order of Parliament. Richard
Baxter, a leading Puritan clergyman of the time, put the division clearly:
“A very great part of the knights and gentlemen of
England adhered to the King, ... And most of the tenants of those
gentlemen and also most of the poorest of the peoples whom the others
call the rabble did follow the gentry and were for the King. On
Parliament’s side were (beside themselves) the smaller part (as
some thought) of the gentry in most of the counties; and the greatest
part of the tradesmen and freeholders and middle sort of men,
especially in those corporations and counties which depend on
clothing and such manufactures.”
In general, the old aristocracy and their hangers on supported the
king, while the new businessmen, the freeholders and free yeomen
supported Parliament. There was a profound difference between the
king’s armies, officered by the nobility and professional soldiers
with peasant tenants fulfilling their traditional role of fighting
for their lords and masters, and the soldiers of parliament. The New
Model Army built by Cromwell to win parliament’s battles was
composed of free yeomen, smallholders and the like who fought for the
return of such basic freedoms as an end to the enclosure of common
land, religious tolerance and an end to being taxed to pay for the
church. They had been promised these things by the parliamentary
leaders and they fought for a parliament pledged to carry out these
promises. In Cromwell’s own words ‘Russet coated captains who
knew what they fought for, loved what they knew.’
By 1649, the Parliamentary soldiers had learned a lot more about
their leaders, many of whom were doing very well out of the war,
buying up the land of defeated Royalists and raising rents, but
forgetting to pay the common soldiers who were fighting their
battles. Those soldiers articulate enough to put their disquiet into
words banded behind one spokesperson, John Lilburne. This man was,
after Cromwell, the best known and most publicly respected leader on
the Parliamentary side. He and his supporters pressed for the
implementation of the ideals for which the Parliamentary soldiers
fought. For their pains they were branded as ‘levellers’ just as
the word ‘communist’ is used today. The Levellers were of and for
the poor people against the war profiteers almost as much as they
were against the King. Obviously they were not revolutionaries, or in
most cases even socialists, as we understand the terms today.
Nevertheless, among their sometimes confused strains of thinking ran
for the first time a strong socialist current. As one of their
pamphlets The Mournfull Cries of Many Poor Tradesmen spelled
out in 1648: ‘Is not all the controversie whose slaves the poor
shall be?’ (preceding by two hundred years the famous remark of
Marx “The oppressed are allowed every few years to decide which
particular representatives of the ruling class shall represent and
repress them”).
Many Leveller mutinies took place and many of their leaders were
shot, imprisoned and exiled. The events described in the present
pamphlet were at the high tide of the movement and the beginning of
its destruction by Cromwell in the interests of the new class of
property owners.
Still, the fate of the Levellers might at first seem only of
academic interest. After all, their battle was lost three hundred
years ago. But the British ruling class neither forgets nor forgives.
After the return of Charles II, Cromwell’s body was dug up and
displayed in a barbarous manner. His head was used as a plaything and
curio, and was only decently buried a few years ago. When it meets
its enemies the ruling class has no more ‘honour’ or ‘decency’
than Hitler’s stormtroopers. Even now, all popular accounts of the
Civil War stress the ‘illegal’, ‘undemocratic’ nature of
Cromwell’s regime, and public library books are attacked by
lunatics scrawling support for Charles. The passions of the Civil War
still live.
But why the hatred for Cromwell, when it appears from our account
that his victories ushered in the rule of the present capitalist
class? Precisely for the reasons outlined in this pamphlet; the Civil
War was the first and so far the most nearly successful attempt by
the common people of Britain to gain the stage of history with arms
in their hands. Charles was not defeated by the merchants of the City
of London, but by the yeomen and artisans of the New Model Army and
by the apprentices and common people who streamed out to stop his
army on the western approaches to London. When the spokesmen of
British capitalism view Charles’ execution, they fancy their own
heads on the chopping block.
As the ruling class has not forgotten the lessons of its past
victories, neither should the working class.
Geoff Jones (1975)


The Last Stand of the Levellers
Three hundred years have passed since the revolutionary artisans
and yeomen of Cromwell’s army fought their last battle to win for
the common people something more than a mere exchange of masters.
Battle scarred, iron disciplined and politically conscious, they
saw that the overthrow of absolute monarchy and absolute tyranny was
leading only to a change of taskmasters, and that the great
parliamentary generals including even Cromwell himself were betraying
the interests of the masses to the Presbyterian merchant capitalists
of the City of London. They knew that these sanctimonious war
profiteers, victuallers and country squires now intended to reap for
themselves the economic fruits of the Civil War and awaited eagerly
the opportunity to buy up the requisitioned estates of the defeated
Royalists at knockdown prices. To realise their aims, however, they
first had to destroy the growing power of the politically aroused
petit-bourgeois masses, the artisans and craftsmen, who in the large
cities were beginning to form the nucleus of a working class, and
from which had sprung, in the main, the rank and file of the New
Model Army.
This mass of NCOs and privates, once cheered on but now scorned by
the city merchants, represented the cadres of the common people.
Their political morale had been carefully attended to by Cromwell
himself, who was the first general to realise that intense conviction
and faith in its cause enables a mainly civilian army to defeat the
traditional and ready-made military skill of an old ruling class. For
this very reason Cromwell had encouraged the development of the first
peoples’ army. Towards the end of the Civil War it had become, in
fact, the first genuinely revolutionary army in history. In some
respects its democratic structure was more complete than that of the
revolutionary armies of France. Only three hundred years later can an
adequate comparison be found in the revolutionary spirit and
solidarity of the Red Guard detachments created by Lenin, Trotsky and
the Bolshevik Party during the overthrow of Tsarism in 1917.
It is not the intention of the present writer, a non-academic
worker-student, to evaluate the role of Cromwell in this historic
struggle, nor the effect of his activities on the ultimate growth of
the working class movement, as this is being done by more
professional Marxist historians. That Cromwell was the great realist
statesman of those stormy days there seems little doubt, and it is
probable that he carried forward the English bourgeois revolution as
far as the economic and social conditions of the period would permit.
It does not follow from this, however, that the Levellers, who in the
end bitterly attacked Cromwell, were hopeless visionaries hitting out
blindly against a political brick wall. For several years their
policy represented the only serious alternative to Cromwell’s.
Their immediate programme was a realistic one based upon the facts
and issues of the day, reflecting the genuine grievances of the
masses. Their movement was no ‘flash in the pan’ but a well
organised and intelligently-led struggle lasting over several years.
Many of them were the very men upon whom Cromwell had relied to
maintain the morale of the army during the darkest days of the civil
war; dour, hymn-singing soldier-agitators, often self-educated and
ever-ready with an apt biblical text whenever their men needed
inspiration in their battles with the ‘forces of Baal’, as
they called the Royalists. Such veterans as these were a formidable
force and Cromwell had to use all his immense prestige, political
cunning, and even deception to defeat them. Indeed, if it had not
been for this the final battle at Burford might have had another result.
The final stages of this struggle were extremely tense and all
England must have been agog with rumour during these dramatic months
of 1649, yet for several hundred years after, few national history
books are found which devote more than a few lines to the whole
movement. No graves of the four ringleaders shot against Burford
churchyard wall can be found and their memory was buried so deeply by
the bourgeois historians that their very existence was almost
forgotten by the common people for whom they fought.
Today the working class movement with the aid of the Marxist
theory of social development is able to revive the revolutionary
traditions of the English people, and with the advance of Socialism
in all lands, mankind is again able to see the great historical
significance of these early English soldiers of democracy, who,
looking ‘as into a glass darkly’ saw that it was not a
change of rulers for which they were fighting but the end of
exploitation of man by man.
The bourgeois revolution started in England in the 17th century,
coming nearly one hundred and fifty years before the French
Revolution. In France the struggle was fought out to a clear-cut
decision, whereas in England a peculiar compromise was reached
between the old feudal rulers and the rising capitalist class lasting
until the Industrial Revolution. In these circumstances such
revolutionary traditions as the rising of the Levellers did not
retain a vivid hold on the memory of the people or inspire the
proletarian movement to the extent that similar incidents have always
done in France. This is all the more reason why our great
revolutionary history must now be popularised among the workers, not
only to counter the reactionary and distorted picture of British
history favoured by Tories and many rightwing Labour leaders alike,
but as an inspiration to the working class in the decisive class
battles which lie ahead.
The Levellers’ mutiny which culminated in the execution of their
leaders in Burford churchyard in 1649 was a relatively small incident
in the course of the left-wing fight for a democratic peace during
the years 1647–1650. No attempt is made here to trace all the
social conflicts which were being fought inside and outside the army
during this period. It is hoped only to give a description of the
dramatic series of incidents which led up to the final stand at
Burford and convey the heroism of the men of action who took part in it.
 

Prologue – The Agreement of the People
The men who rose against their officers at Salisbury in the Spring
of 1649 and set out on their historic march to Burford did not all
regard themselves as Levellers. The title was mainly used as a term
of abuse by the country squires and London merchants, just as today
the word ‘red’ or ‘Bolshevik’ is so often used to create
prejudice against militant workers. [1]
Lilburn himself, the national leader of the movement repudiated the
title; further, their demands did not include anything like a rough
and ready redistribution of property as the term leveller would
imply. There existed no organised working class movement as we know
it, nor any form of large scale manufacture, which are the conditions
in which the scientific conception of a classless society is
possible. Nevertheless, most of these men were politically conscious
and for several years they had been fighting for a truly democratic
government. On two occasions they had joined in great armed
demonstrations on a national scale, compelling Cromwell himself to
concede many of their demands, at least on paper.
These gatherings had taken place about eighteen months previously
at Newmarket Heath in June 1647 and at Thriplow Heath a few weeks
later. The first of these was endorsed by Cromwell but the latter
seemed to have been much more under the control of the rank and file
and more revolutionary in its decisions. Regimental delegates or
‘agitators’ as they were called were appointed by the rank and
file and a Grand Army Council set up on which the men’s
representatives sat together with an equal number of officers to
decide questions of policy. For some months this remained a genuinely
democratic body, remarkably similar to the system of soldiers’ and
sailors’ delegates elected throughout the armed forces during the
Russian Revolution of 1917. Eventually the army council came to be
dominated by the high officers and after the suppression of the
Levellers it was abolished. At Thriplow Heath the vast concourse of
soldiers who must have assembled there, took a solemn oath to keep
what came to be known as the ‘Engagement’ and not to disband
until the liberties of England were secured. At the same time they
adopted a clear-cut political programme written in stirring language
and entitled The Agreement of the People. Thus the Levellers
made clear to Parliament and the people what was meant by securing
the liberties of England.
This was a remarkable document originally drafted by Lilburn and
his Leveller followers. A year later, in 1648, it received its final
form at the hands of a sub-committee consisting of an equal number of
soldier delegates, high officers and parliamentary representatives.
It was finally accepted in principle, though in a modified form, by
Cromwell and his ‘Grandees’ (as the high officers were called by
the common soldiers). It represented the high tide of the English
Revolutions. It re-asserted the sovereign power of the people to make
and change all laws and demanded the re-election of parliament every
two years. It demanded a form of universal suffrage but did not
include hired labourers on the grounds that this would lead to
corruption. This was due to the fact that there was no secret ballot
and it was thought, therefore, that the hired labourers on farms and
in the few existing small workshops would be open to pressure from
their employers. It insisted on democratic control of the army and
election of officers, for whom civilians would have the right to
vote; complete religious toleration and the abolition of all tithes
and tolls. It also called for an alteration in the laws of land
tenure which would give the yeomen and tenant farmers proprietary
rights over the land they tilled.
There was another important immediate issue raised at these
meetings which was the subject of strongly-worded resolutions and
protests to the government. This was the question of arrears in army
pay. The government was trying to fob the men off with what today
would be called a form of post-war credit. These credit notes were
useless to most of the now impoverished yeomen, small traders and
artisans returning to ‘Civvy Street’. Many ex-servicemen were
forced by poverty to sell these certificates to speculators at a
fraction of their value, and Parliament itself was actually
participating in this mean robbery by employing agents to buy back
its own IOUs at three or four shillings in the pound. This secondary
demand eventually became a focal point of all the Levellers’
grievances, leading to open revolt, just as in modern times economic
strikes of the working class in defence of living standards have
often led to much more far reaching political revolts.
Most of the troops that marched out of ‘Old Sarum’ (Salisbury)
flying their own sea-green colours into the green countryside of an
English spring in 1649 would have attended the great popular
assemblies which had adopted the Agreement of the People.
Those who had not would have been fully conversant with its
principles as with the terms of the famous Engagement. In the period
since the first drafting of the Peoples’ Agreement the
leaders of the movement had written and distributed great numbers of
political pamphlets and tracts to reinforce the original arguments of
the agreement. The regimental agitators had followed this up with
continual verbal propaganda. The Leveller’s revolt was therefore a
conscious, level-headed and inspired movement, typically English in
its downright and practical methods of organisation; methods which
the English masses have improved upon and extended through the
centuries with increasing success.
An examination of various Leveller pronouncements during the
risings disproves the contention of many orthodox historians that
they were irreconcilable doctrinaires. The printed documents show
that all their actions were the result of reasoned and careful
discussion and they resorted to force only when they found themselves
threatened with violence. Neither must it be thought that the Burford
incident was an isolated one; mutinies on a larger scale had taken
place in widely separated parts of the country. While the revolt at
Salisbury was coming to a head, Cromwell with the very greatest
difficulty, and by means of the most specious promises was preventing
a much larger body of troops from taking similar action in London. In
1647 several regiments had raised the sea-green colours at Ware and
the leaders had been immediately shot. A short time before the
Burford revolt, the City had witnessed a great sea-green
demonstration at the funeral of a Leveller who had been shot in St.
Paul’s Churchyard for the part he had played in an earlier mutiny.
Those who set out on the fatal march to Burford were well aware of
the price they would have to pay for failure and although traitors,
spies and cowards appeared within their ranks, the degree of unity
and self-discipline they maintained to the end was proof of their
great spirit. That they were betrayed rather than defeated is proved
by an examination of contemporary documents. If they erred, it was in
being over-trusting in their dealings with representatives of the
high command who applied the method of delay until they were ready to
strike in overwhelming strength. It is this battle of manoeuvre,
quite familiar to the industrial worker engaged in strike action,
which we shall now endeavour to describe in detail.
 

Gathering Storm in Salisbury
At the beginning of May 1649, two cavalry regiments were stationed
in Salisbury. The second Civil War was over and Cromwell’s chief
anxiety was what to do with these turbulent soldiers who had become
infected with the revolutionary ideas of the Levellers. He decided
that the most effective diversion of their militant energies would be
a campaign in Ireland. This would not only divert attention from the
grievances at home, but would also solve the awkward question of
arrears in pay, by providing opportunities for loot and land
settlement in Ireland.
At first this astute move had just the opposite effect to what had
been expected. The soldiers under new and more revolutionary
‘agitators’ (or Commissars as they might be described today)
immediately invoked the famous ‘Engagement’ not to disband their
forces until they had obtained justice at home, claiming that this
was a deceitful way of achieving their dispersal. It must be
remembered that Cromwell himself had somewhat reluctantly endorsed
the ‘Engagement’.
The selection of the regiments to proceed to active service in
Ireland was to be arrived at by a lottery organised by the high
officers. The very method adopted would have looked suspicious and
when the lot fell on the two regiments of Colonel Scroop and General
Ireton stationed in Salisbury, the troops immediately declared this
to be an infringement of the 1647 Engagement and refused to go. They
were given the usual harangue on the parade ground, consisting of a
mixture of threats and pleading, whereupon the soldiers drew up a
memorandum called A Paper of Some Reasons, by way of Declaration
and despatched this to Colonel Scroop. In this they were joined by
one of the officers, a certain Cornet (sub-lieutenant) Dene who
pushed himself quickly to the front as an advocate of extreme
revolutionary methods, until the time of the final crisis, when he
revealed himself as a type the modern working class movement has
become very familiar with.
Their views having been presented to the Colonel, the troops were
called to a rendezvous by the officers and were told that no-one was
to be forced to go to Ireland, but that those who did not wish to go
could take their discharge and leave the army at once. This sounds a
simple solution, but it was in fact a cunning attempt to throw
confusion into the minds of the men, for it meant that if they stayed
at home all chance of getting their arrears of pay would be gone, and
if they went abroad the solidarity of the rank and file would be
broken and the whole movement for post-war justice would collapse.
When they refused to adopt either course but acted as one body,
Colonel Scroop (who seems to have been an ‘ultra-blimp’, even in
the opinion of his fellow officers) informed the men in strong terms
that they were already guilty of mutiny. An ironical note is added by
the fact that when the Colonel was asked whether he would go to
Ireland, he replied that he himself could give no assurance that he
would go.
After this Colonel Scroop’s regiment at once sent a letter to
the troops under General Ireton who then decided to join the original
mutineers. After further threats, Colonel Scroop ordered all the
horses to be placed some two miles from the men’s quarters. This
order the men carried out, proving that there was as yet no
repudiation of discipline and that the men were still only standing
on what they considered their Constitutional rights and remaining
true to the engagement undertaken by the whole army, including
Cromwell himself. However, when it became evident that the Colonel
was preparing to use force against them, the men regained their
horses and began to make preparations to defend themselves if
attacked. Whether the officers were actually disobeyed and driven
away is not clear. The survivors of the Burford battle afterwards
published a pamphlet in defence of their actions. This states that
the officers themselves left the regiment, and the men then elected
new officers. There seems to be some indication that the infamous
Cornet Dene who joined the mutineers urged violence against his
ex-colleagues. From the moment of the re-election of officers, of
course, the die was cast and the whole incident may best be told in
the words of some of those who survived:
“Our old solemn Engagement at Newmarket and Thriplow
Heath, June 5th, 1647, with the manifold Declarations, Promises and
Protestations of the Army, in pursuance thereof, were all utterly
declined and most Perfidiously broken, and the whole fabric of the
Commonwealth fell into the grossest and vilest tyranny that ever
Englishmen groaned under ... which, with the considerations of the
particular, most insufferable abuses and dissatisfactions put upon
us, moved us to an unanimous refusal to go ... till full satisfaction
and security was given to us as Soldiers and Commoners, by a Council
of our own free election ... Whereupon we drew up a paper of some
Reasons, by way of Declaration, concerning our said refusal to
deliver to our Colonel; unto which we all cheerfully subscribed, with
many of our officers (especially Cornet Dene, who then seemingly was
extreme forward in assisting us to effect our desires) which being
delivered a day or two after, immediately our officers called a
rendez-vous near under Salisbury, where they declared that the
General intended not to force us, but that we might either go or
stay, and so certifying our intents to stay, we were all drawn into
the town again, and the Colonel together with the rest of the
officers, full of discontent, threatened us the Soldiers, and because
we were all, or most of one mind, he termed our unity a Combination
or Mutiny, yet himself upon our request to know, told us, that he
could not assure us, that he would go. Which forementioned paper,
with a letter, we sent to Commissary General Ireton’s Regiment, who
took it so well, that they were immediately upon their march towards
our quarters to joyn with us.”
 

To Banbury to Join Forces
Having drawn up a further Declaration of Aims and
despatched it to Generals Fairfax and Cromwell, the two regiments,
which numbered over a thousand men, had to decide on their future
tactics and strategy. This must have constituted a serious problem
for the leaders. It is doubtful whether they would have known much
about the threatening disturbances that were taking place among the
much larger bodies of the London troops. News, which today spreads
over the land in a few minutes, would have taken two or three days to
reach Salisbury from London. They would know, of course that feeling
was very strong and that similar movements were likely elsewhere, but
that is all. Few of them would even have heard of the more
thoroughgoing communist and civilian arm of the Levellers’
movement, which, in that very spring of 1649, was making the first
attempt to occupy land in the name of the people and cultivate it
along co-operative lines. They therefore decided to strike for the
town of Banbury from which they had received indisputable information
that a similar mutiny to their own had taken place.
These troops, under an NCO by the name of William Thompson, were
at the same time declaring their solidarity in a powerfully worded
manifesto of their own. This refers to the news they had received
from Salisbury in the following terms:
“We do own and avow the late proceedings in Col.
Scroop’s, Col. Harrison’s and Major General Skippon’s
regiments, declared in their resolutions published in print; as one
man resolving to live and dy with them in their and our just and
mutual defences.”
In view of this information, the leaders who constituted a
regimental committee decided to make a junction with their comrades
at Banbury. This would involve a stiff march across country much
rougher than it is today and would include a great part of the
Cotswolds, a distance of over fifty miles. Once such a junction had
been made, a force of nearly three thousand cavalry would have been
able to take the field. This would have made a formidable force, and
using Banbury as a centre it could have reasonably expected to hold
out for some time. If threatened by overwhelming forces it could have
retreated into the Cotswolds.
Assuming that the leadership was made up in the main of those who
were eventually executed in Burford churchyard, the Military
Committee probably consisted of about six men, the most prominent of
these being Cornet Dene, ex-regular officer, Cornet Thompson (brother
of the Banbury leader) and Corporal Perkins and Private Church. The
two latter ordinary soldiers were the most stable and courageous
leaders remaining constant and incorruptible to the end, although
less vociferous than the others.
On May 11th the Salisbury regiments struck across Salisbury Plain.
They rode hard as they had heard that Cromwell and Fairfax were
already on the move, and had reached Andover. From Andover Cromwell
dispatched four officers to catch up with the mutineers. These
officers were supposed to discuss terms with the mutineers, but it
seems probable that they were actually dispatched for tactical
reasons and that their real orders were to delay the rebels as long
as possible and so give Cromwell and Fairfax time to get within
striking distance. They made several attempts to involve the
Levellers in long-winded discussions and, although the men were not
inclined to listen to them, these contacts must have reduced the
speed of the advance.
Cromwell’s agents first made contact with the main body at
Wantage late in the evening of May 12th. They evidently met with a
rebuff but were promised an interview at Stanford in the Vale the
next morning. This meeting was also abortive, apparently because the
men’s old Colonel, the detested Scroop suddenly appeared, and the
Levellers moved on to Abingdon. Again the officers rather
ignominiously trailed along behind the troops. At Abingdon the men
would have no dealings with Scroop but agreed to parley with the
other four officers. One of these, Major White, made a speech in
which he spoke of the need for army unity to save the Commonwealth
and concluded by reading a letter from Fairfax and Cromwell. This had
little effect on the men who believed that it was the salvation of
the Commonwealth that made their present fight necessary. Most of
their national leaders, men of great courage like Lilburn and
Overton, were imprisoned in the Tower of London. These men had fought
in every notable battle for the Commonwealth and had given
unconditional loyalty to Cromwell until the end of the Civil War.
Lilburn, in particular, had distinguished himself; he had been
wounded several times and risen to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel.
The soldiers now saw him as the only public man willing to fight for
a genuinely democratic Commonwealth instead of a dictatorship of the
high generals and the City of London merchant princes.
The Levellers had decided to proceed to Banbury via Abingdon – a
most roundabout route – owing to information that the troops of
Colonel Harrison would probably join their ranks near that town. They
now proceeded in this direction, with Major White and two officers
still following. Colonel Scotten, to use the mutineers’ own words
‘slipped away’ to give Cromwell news of their next
destination. In the pamphlet The Levellers Vindicated it
appears that many of the men saw through these tactics, as the
following extract from the original document indicates:
“Being in treatie with the commissioners, and having
intelligence that the General and the Lt. General were upon their
march towards us, many of us several times urged to Major White that
he came to betray us, to which he replyed, that the General and the
Lt. General had engaged their honours not to engage us in any Hostile
manner till they had received our answer ... We gave the more credit
to them who seemed extreme forward and hastie to make the composeure,
pretending so far to improve of our standing for the things contained
in our arrangement at TriploHeath, that himself with our consents
drew up a Paper or Answer to the General for us ... During this time
of treatie while the commissioners thus assured us all security, one
of them, the Colonel Scotten privately slips from us, and two others,
Captains Bayley and Peverill, left notes at every town of our
strength and condition ...”
Had Major White and his talkative officers been sent packing after
the first contact, it is very doubtful whether Cromwell could have
destroyed the Levellers by his final surprise attack at Burford. The
success of his plan clearly depended on precise information as to the
position of the mutineers. It is true that his travelling speed of
forty or fifty miles a day was remarkable, but it was the exact
knowledge of the point reached by the Levellers, that enabled him to
catch them at Burford with a large body of troops.
In spite of Major White’s protestations spoken at the time and
put in writing later, it is obvious that he created an effective
intelligence service under the guise of being an emissary to discuss
honourable terms.
 

Treachery at Burford
Just outside Abingdon the expected meeting with Colonel Harrison’s
troops took place. Delegates were sent by the Salisbury regiments,
who read out their declaration. This was favourably received by
Harrison’s men who stated that they were marching to quarters at
Thame, and in the morning would communicate their decision. Before
the two bodies separated, however, the first brush with some of
Fairfax’s reconnaissance troops took place, which thanks to Major
White, must have still further delayed progress to Banbury. These
hostile troops – not more than a hundred in number – placed
themselves astride a bridge at Newbridge. These troops could have
been routed probably without loss of life, but Major White persuaded
the Levellers not to force a crossing, pleading that they should not
be the first to shed blood in a new war. As a result the Salisbury
men withdrew and were compelled to ford the river at another point a
considerable distance away – a difficult and delaying operation.
It was now growing late on Sunday May 13th. The troops had already
travelled from Wantage; they were tired and wet after fording the
river. The question of quarters for the night was becoming an urgent
problem. The decision was left to Lieutenant Ray and – Cornet Dene,
who decided to proceed a further fifteen miles to Burford. This would
have appeared satisfactory to the men, as being well on the way to
their comrades at Banbury. Further, Burford had a solidly parliament
reputation during the Civil War. It was a centre of the wool clothing
industry and the population would probably be sympathetic. From this
town had come Lenthall, the speaker of the House of Commons, which
had resisted the King when he had attempted to impose his will on
Parliament on the eve of the Civil War.
Some time after dark, fifteen hundred grim and exhausted Leveller
horsemen entered Burford and proceeded to find suitable quarters and
billets for a night’s sleep. The little grey-stoned Cotswold town
was not large enough to shelter so large a body of men and many had
to go to surrounding villages. Arrangements were unfortunately left
in the hands of Cornet Dene who appointed a fellow traitor,
Quartermaster Moore to organise the guard. This he did in a very
casual way, and then, pretending to be going for refreshments left
the town, returning some hours later at the head of the General’s
forces to strike down his ex-comrades.
In the meantime, Major White, who was still accepted as a genuine
intermediary between the Levellers and the High Command, was exerting
all his eloquence to convince them that Cromwell and Fairfax had
pledged their honour not to attack at least until they had received
and considered the communication which the men had sent them. Major
White even asserted that if hostile forces arrived he himself would
go out and stand between the bullets and the Levellers.
It must be admitted that Major White afterwards denied any
treacherous intentions in thus endeavouring to lull the vigilance of
the men. It is, of course, possible that he was that type of
would-be-pacifist who was really deceiving himself as well as the
Levellers. Against this must be set the fact that several of the
NCO’s were ordinary paid agents of the High Command, and it seems
likely that Major White was in continual contact with them. It is
also significant that on his own admission, the professional ‘stooge’
Cornet Dene was with the Major at his quarters a few minutes before
the Fairfax troops broke into the town.
Whatever may be the truth about Major White’s conscience, the
effect of his activity was to create a false atmosphere of relative
security just at the moment when the greatest danger was threatening.
Believing Fairfax and Cromwell to be at least a day’s march away
(Major White must have certainly known better) the men settled down
without much apprehension.
At midnight Cromwell’s hand-picked cavalry burst into the quiet
little town with muskets firing and swords drawn. The Levellers had
little choice either of putting up an effective fight or of
surrendering without resistance. In the confusion of the darkness
each man was forced to defend himself as best he could. Only at one
point was an organised resistance put up. A small party of Levellers
barricaded themselves into an Inn (probably the Bull), maintaining a
brief but stout defence, during which they suffered several
casualties, one man being shot dead. After this all resistance was at
an end. Several hundred Levellers escaped into the surrounding
countryside, but three hundred and forty were captured and imprisoned
in Burford Church.
 

Retribution
Cromwell now began a deliberate and methodical campaign to break
the morale of those who had previously proved implacable. He aimed
not only to force the mutineers to renounce their previous views, but
also to deprive the Levellers of public sympathy by presenting their
actions in the most unfavourable light. He therefore did not order
immediate executions but subjected the mutineers to a ‘war of
nerves’ by keeping them locked up in the old church for the best
part of a week. This would have been a period of intense anxiety, as
for a long time no information was given them as to their fate. It
was during this long vigil, while the men were left to reflect on all
that had happened since they began their struggle at Salisbury, that
one of the troopers roughly carved his name on the lead lining of the
ancient font. Thus the words ‘ANTHONY SEDLEY 1649 PRISNER’ became
the only inscription to commemorate the last stand of the Levellers.
Thousands must have stood before this font unaware of its grim
significance, yet these crude letters mark the historical turning
point of the first great social revolution in England. It was not
until three hundred years later that the common people were able to
realise most of the political ideas for which Anthony Sedley fought
in 1649, while true economic emancipation is yet to be achieved.
Towards the end of the imprisonment, the Colonels Harris, Okey and
Scroop were sent into the church to inform the prisoners that there
would be a general death sentence. It is improbable that it was ever
intended to carry this out, but by these means Cromwell hoped to
bring about their humble contrition, which would be very useful to
him in his effort to dissipate all national sympathy for the
Levellers. It would seem that his methods met with some success and
it was claimed that the men drew up a petition beginning with the
words: ‘The humble petition of the sad and heavy hearted
prisoners remaining in Burford Church.’ This certainly looks
sufficiently contrite. Whether more than a small minority signed this
wordy plea is, however, an open question. Corporal Perkins proudly
averred his beliefs at the execution wall and it would be reasonable
to assume that his example influenced most of the others. It is most
likely that the petition was the work of Cornet Dene and that during
the last hours of confinement the mutineers were split into two factions.
Finally, after much hesitation, Cromwell selected four alleged
ringleaders for execution, leaving the others still in suspense.
These were Cornet Dene, Cornet Thompson, Private Church and Corporal Perkins.
Before the executions the whole body of Levellers were ordered to
a position where the executions could easily be seen, some being
placed on the roof of the church for this purpose. Cornet Thompson
was the first to be taken to the churchyard wall. He did not die too
well. The rank and file afterwards maintained that he had expected a
pardon at the last moment, and for this reason repeatedly proclaimed
his penitence. The conduct of the two common soldiers was a great
contrast to this. Corporal Perkins proudly avowed the part he had
played and his belief in the cause for which he was dying, and his
actual death is most vividly described in a contemporary news-sheet
in the following terms:
“Corporal Perkins was the next – the place of
death and the sight of his execution was so far from altering his
countenance or daunting his spirit that he seemed to smile upon both,
and account it a great mercy that he was to die for this quarrel, and
casting his eye up to his father and afterwards to his fellow
prisoners (who stood upon the church leads to see the execution) set
his back against the wall and bade the executioners shoot.”
Thus in his death Corporal Perkins saved the honour of the
Levellers movement and bequeathed to the common people a name which
down the centuries they would be able to honour and revere. Private
Church died equally bravely but without making a clear-cut statement,
and in the words of a contemporary document “after taking off his
doublet he took his place a pretty distance from the wall” thus
confirming his lack of fear.
The last to be brought to the execution wall was Cornet Dene, and
the nearer the moment of the execution, the more hypocritical became
his mode of expression. It was even asserted by the surviving
mutineers that he had previously bought his own winding street. In
his statement he continually harped on the remorse that he felt for
the bad ways into which he had led the other mutineers, and then
after he had commended his penitent soul to the mercy of the Lord, an
officer came forward with a last minute pardon, which was no surprise
to most of those in his unfortunate audience.
Having witnessed these executions, the Levellers were taken back
to the church, where Cromwell – no doubt using the pulpit for the
purpose – proceeded to deliver a sermon. This must have been a
distressing experience. Cromwell had always been given to long
rambling speeches, often difficult to listen to in the best of
circumstances. The speech was, of course, liberally sprinkled with
religious references. The official historians wish us to believe that
all this had the desired effect. However, the story afterwards told
by the survivors hardly supports this claim, for they describe his
remarks as being in ‘his old manner of dissembling speeches’.
To complete the men’s discomfiture, Cornet Dene was then
compelled to preach to the men on the need to repent their sins. If
some may have seriously listened to Cromwell because they still felt
respect for him as their old war leader, it is impossible to believe
that they would have listened to Dene with anything but scorn in
their hearts, and in their pamphlet they certainly leave no doubt
about their feelings for him:
“And to put an utter inconfidence and Jealousie for
ever amongst such upon all future engagements, they made that
wretched Judas Dene to that end their pandor and slave. They enjoyned
Dene to preach apostacy to us in the pulpit of Burford Church to
assert and plead the unlawfulness of our engagement, as much as
before the lawfulness to vindicate those wicked and abominable
proceedings of the General ... howling and weeping like a Crocadile,
and to make him a perfect rogue and villain upon everlasting record.”
After his release Dene continued to be used by the authorities as
a propaganda tool, and he was compelled to write a pamphlet along the
same lines as his hypocritical recantations at Burford. This was
broadcast throughout the land. Naturally Dene eventually received a
greater reward than the mere granting of his life, and a few years
later we find him well established as a preacher at Fenstanton in the
county of Huntingdonshire. Here some of his Baptist and Quaker
parishioners were imprisoned for refusing to take the oath and
characteristically, it is reported that he made every effort to
induce them to forsake their religious principles in this respect.
After the public execution the remainder of the mutineers were
drafted to Devizes, and the magistrates in all counties were ordered
to issue warrants against all those that had escaped. During his
sermonising in Burford Church Cromwell had made some vague promises
that the Leveller’s original grievances would be rectified, but a
short time after their arrival at Devizes the regiments concerned
were disbanded. Shortly after the collapse of the Levellers at
Burford, their comrades whom they had failed to reach at Banbury,
were defeated after a short battle in the streets of the town. The
Banbury leader had been William Thompson, a brother of the one
executed at Burford. Unlike his brother he died fighting, killing
three men before he himself was shot in a wood near Banbury.
 

Aftermath
With the collapse of the Levellers’ revolt at Burford, the whole
movement began to disintegrate. The unity and cohesion of the
Levellers was mainly the result of the close-knit type of
organisation, only possible within the army which brought them
together. The new bourgeois state was now becoming consolidated and
with the gradual disbandment of the more militant army units, the
Levellers found themselves isolated. Most of them were small
independent tradesmen, tenants, farmers, artisans and some casual
labourers. Their mode of existence did not reunite them in civilian
life in large industrial enterprises as is the case with the modern
working class. Once outside the army, economic necessity forced them
back to an isolated petit-bourgeois way of earning their livelihoods
which made effective mass organisation impossible.
Further, the old feudal class and the new merchant capitalists
were rapidly patching up their quarrel and this compromise was firmly
consolidated with the re-establishment of a new bourgeois monarchy.
In this way the ruling class erected a durable barrier against any
further social revolution which lasted until our own times.
While it is just conceivable that the Levellers might have seized
power for a short time, they could not have prevented the
establishment of a capitalist Britain. As Marx later pointed out to
the early working class movement of the last century: “Man makes
his own history but only within certain limits.”
These limits are set by the level of development of the productive
forces of a given epoch. Only if those revolutionary soldiers could
have linked with a great mass movement of the people would it have
been possible to set up a genuinely democratic republic. No heavy
industry existed, no large scale factories had yet been built, no
widespread and rapid system of transport had developed and,
therefore, the proletarian had not yet appeared on the historical
scene. Since none of these necessary economic conditions yet existed,
a Levellers’ government could have done little to change the march
of events.
A hundred and fifty years later the Jacobins actually succeeded in
seizing power in revolutionary France, but in spite of their
revolutionary measures, it was the big industrialists and bankers who
eventually gained the upper hand because, here too, no industrial
proletariat yet existed powerful enough to play an independent
political role in the struggle for power.
 

Today
Today capitalism, long past its heyday, has created just those
social and economic conditions which were absent in England in 1649,
and in 1789 in France, and for several decades the industrial
proletariat has been in a position to succeed where the Levellers
failed. Already in 1917 the Russian workers utilising the
revolutionary experience of the common people in the West were able
to overthrow their own absolute monarchy and capitalist class. It is
true that owing to the rise of the Stalinist bureaucracy and the long
delay in the socialist revolution in the West, the Russian workers
have not gained the full fruits of the October Revolution.
Nevertheless it did lay the economic basis upon which a genuine
socialist society can be built once the bureaucratic caste now in
control there has been removed. Petrograd 1917 did in fact mark the
beginning of a World revolution even though it was delayed much
longer than Lenin had calculated. Today there is worldwide evidence
that the revolutionary wave is once again gathering speed.
In England, capitalism is forced to lean on the opportunism of the
right-wing Labour leaders, but they cannot prevent the continued
decline of capitalism, and it is becoming increasingly difficult for
them to hold back the workers with talk about the ‘Middle Road to
Socialism’. They overlook the fact that for many years the workers
of the world have been marching along the right road to socialism, in
overwhelming strength. The bourgeois historians give every support to
the Cult of the ‘Middle Road’ (in reality the road back for the
workers) by the careful cultivation of the theory that it accords
with the historical traditions of the British people. This is the
reason why they have devoted but a few pages to the revolutionary
movement of the Levellers and whole volumes to the so-called
‘Glorious Revolution’ of 1688 which established the
constitutional Monarchy. Of course the real revolution took place
fifty years earlier in the course of which King Charles lost his head
and the common people began their long march to freedom.
The revolutionary social theories expressed by men like Lilburn
and the more nearly socialist philosopher Winstanley established a
tradition of militant struggle, the continuity of which can be traced
throughout the three centuries of English history that have passed
since the execution of Corporal Perkins in Burford Churchyard. In the
same way the revolutionary thoughts and actions of these Englishmen
inspired the revolutionary thoughts and actions of the common people
in other lands. The great leaders of the French Revolution were
indirectly inspired by the writings as well as the deeds of these
English revolutionaries of the 17th Century, just as many of the
political demands made by the Levellers were inscribed on the banners
of the English Chartist workers a hundred years ago.
Today the modern working class movement, and the Marxist wing of
the movement in particular, are the true heirs to this great
tradition of militant struggle against the exploiting classes.
We cannot claim that the Levellers ever adopted a clear-cut
socialist theory; on the contrary their ideas were often vague and
confused, but armed with the scientific theory of social development
– the theory of Marxism – socialism will eventually realise those
ideas towards which the Levellers were groping.
There is no recorded link between the army movement of the
Levellers and the more socialist movement of the so-called Diggers
which was led by Gerald Winstanley. Lilburn and many of his followers
repudiated Winstanley and denied any wish to interfere with private
property. Nevertheless, Winstanley described himself as a ‘True
Leveller’ and appealed to the soldiers for support, and it would be
logical to believe that some of the rank and file would have
sympathised with his ideas. Many of the common soldiers were
impoverished or dispossessed yeomen, artisans and landless labourers
who would have approved of Winstanley’s plan to take over all
uncultivated land in the name of the people. Indeed, when soldiers
were sent to eject the ‘Diggers’ from the land they had occupied
at St. George’s Hill, Surrey, the authorities had great difficulty
in inducing the troops to take any action against these primitive
collective farmers, and there is little doubt that Winstanley was
voicing ideas which were beginning to dawn in the minds of the common people.
In his great work The Law of Freedom the True Leveller
Gerard Winstanley clearly defines the only conditions in which a
really free society is possible:
“The storehouses shall be every Man’s substance
and not any one’s ... He or she who calls the earth his and not his
brother’s shall be sat upon a stool with those words written on his
forehead before all the congregation, and afterwards be made a
servant for twelve months under the taskmaster. If he quarrel or seek
by secret persuasion or open rising to set up such a kingly property
he shall be put to death.”
Thus would this typical Englishman have dealt with those who by
force or by cunning would seek a return to so-called ‘free
enterprise’. On capitalist trade and speculation his ideas are
equally stern:
“If any do buy or sell the earth or the fruits
thereof, unless it be with strangers or another nation according to
the Laws of Navigation, they shall be both put to death as traitors
to the peace of the Commonwealth.”
Exceedingly harsh measures perhaps; if they were included in the
programme of the Labour Party the capitalist press would call this
further evidence of ‘Bolshevik ruthlessness and the alien political
ideology of the Communists’. Would it not he nearer the truth to
say that, when the Bolsheviks adopted similar methods in 1917 against
the ex-landlords, White Guards and grain speculators, they were
influenced by the ideas of these revolutionary Englishmen of the 17th Century?
Today the right-wing Labour leaders and others tell us how
necessary it is to preserve an opposition of big-business and
anti-socialists in Parliament. This is supposed to be “protection
of the rights of the minority”, meaning, of course, the rights of
the minority of property-owners against the commonwealth. No more apt
answer could be given than the words of Winstanley written three
centuries ago:
“Everyone talks of freedom, and the actors for
freedom are oppressed by the talkers for freedom ... It is clearly
seen, that if we be suffered to speak we shall batter to pieces all
the old laws and prove the maintainers of them hypocrites and
traitors to the commonwealth of England ... Wherever there is a
people united by common community of livelihood into oneness it will
be the strongest land in the world for there they will be as one man
to defend their inheritance.”
In making this quotation from Winstanley, we do not mean to say
that we favour only one-party government. Lenin never declared in
principle for the elimination of all other parties or factions. Only
the terrorist methods of the White Guard and the old landlord
capitalist class forced the Bolsheviks to counterattack when these
elements threatened to destroy the infant Soviet State by violence,
sabotage and foreign intervention. Similarly, Cromwell was forced to
establish for a time a one party dictatorship when the monarchy
threatened a second Civil War and the importation of foreign troops
to destroy the new state which Parliament had created. In Soviet
Russia Lenin insisted until right up to his death that democratic
forms of rule including tolerance of a legal opposition should be
restored once the threat of violence had been removed. Contrary to
Lenin’s wishes, Stalin developed these temporary measures into a
permanent form to support his own “dictatorial” rule.
These noble words of Winstanley must therefore be seen in relation
to the bitter Civil War which had been raging. The execution of
Charles I finally came about as a result of positive proof that he
was preparing to bring in Irish and French troops to over-throw the
will of his own people and also because his person constituted a
rallying point around which counter-revolutionary forces continually
grouped. Cromwell himself did not set out to establish one-party
government, but only suppressed the opposition when the Commonwealth
could not be preserved in any other way. He turned and destroyed the
Levellers for the same reason. From his viewpoint they were a threat
to the only kind of social order that could effectively replace the
absolute monarchy which he had overthrown – a system wherein the
new ruling class, the men of property and trade, would be free to
develop the economy of the country in accordance with their own
interest, unhampered by arbitrary feudal rights and privileges
previously used against them by the king and the nobility. Cromwell
no doubt was right in insisting that this rule of the men of commerce
and property was the only alternative to chaos. But let us remember
that in the light of man’s age-long struggle for full political and
economic freedom, Winstanley, Lilburn and the simple Leveller
soldiers also stood for the brighter future of mankind.
Dudley Edwards – 1948


Author’s Postscript
I have been asked to give a brief bibliography and also explain
how a layman and active Trade Unionist who was a member of the Oxford
District Committee of the Amalgamated Engineering Union during and
just after the Second World War came to be interested in the doings
of our Leveller forefathers 300 years previously.
The bibliography is extremely easy to provide. Almost all the
material on which the story of the brief battle at Burford is based
can be found in the local history archives of the Oxford City
Library. Most of the quotations from Leveller pamphlets are also
included in this material. I merely wrote this up in what I hope was
a more interesting and gripping manner. Some quotations from
Winstanley and from other anonymous pamphleteers during the
Cromwellian period can be found in the works of Christopher Hill who
I believe to be the outstanding historian of this period in Britain
today. Most of Winstanley’s views and those of many other radical
thinkers can be found quoted in great detail in Christopher Hill’s
books Puritanism and Revolution, and The Reformation to
Industrial Revolution, and many other works on different aspects
of the English Civil War period.
I wrote this pamphlet in 1947–8 when, after the honeymoon with
Stalinist Russia during the Second World War, the mass media were
once again portraying communism as everything that was alien to the
‘true spirit’ of the British nation – a purely foreign
importation. As a passionate young follower of the history of British
socialism I was convinced that the insinuation that the communist
idea had no roots in our own history was essentially false.
Therefore I felt the need to show that when those emotive words
‘our national heritage’ are used by the representatives of
capitalist society, the aim is to blot out that other heritage –
the heritage of the common people. I wanted to show that for hundreds
of years, indeed, from the days of Wat Tyler’s peasant revolt, the
labouring masses have always fought against the establishment of the day.
As a matter of fact communist ideas were prevalent among the
common people long before the USSR or even Karl Marx were heard of. I
believed therefore that it is this heritage that must be revived. The
story of the Levellers is just one incident in the age-long struggle
of the rank and file to change society. The official historians have
buried such incidents as the battle at Burford under great files of
dry as dust manuscripts. The uncovering of these revolutionary
struggles will become an inspiration to the working-class movement to
realise those ideas which were seen by the old pioneers as ‘through
a glass darkly’.
D.E. 1975

Footnote
1. There was a curious pamphlet called
Terrible and bloudy Newes from the disloyall Army in the North
with a picture on the title page of soldiers impaling babies on
spears and swinging them up to dash out their brains. It proceeds to
relate the terror of the inhabitants of Market Harborough when some
Levellers arrived in the town on market day – they ran hither and
thither in fright. But the only facts to be related when it comes to
the point are that the Levellers proclaimed that there was nothing to
be afraid of, ‘stayed awhile at the Crown and so departed
peacefully’. Evidently some methods of modern journalism are
not new.
 




Dear Comrades
In the excellent report of the meeting of the WEA (Industrial
branch) where I spoke on the early struggles of the motor and Press
Steel workers in Oxford (Militant, No. 439) there was one
small mistake of fact.
The article stated that at the time of the great trade union
recognition strike at Press Steel, Cowley, Abe Lazarus was a T&GWU
organiser.
This is not so. He was an ordinary rank and file member. His
energy and speaking ability made him a leading spokesman for the
Cowley workers in the 1930s.
I would describe him as an old-style Communist Party member, a
very able agitator and propagandist.



 


Yours fraternally
Dudley Edwards



 




The second part of an article by Dudley Edwards
Written during the office of 1970–74 Tory government

The idea of broadening Trades Councils to include
representatives from shop stewards’ committees and councils is
gathering growing support among the rank and file of the trade unions
and from the leadership of some unions.
Such changes would immensely increase the co-ordinating power of
Trades Councils. They would then become the real parliaments of
Labour in each locality, drawing into their meetings representatives
from the factories, offices, transport depots and hosts of other
establishments.
This would infuse new life and strength into the entire labour
movement.
The areas where the trades councils have been playing a major part
in the local and national strikes and struggles are, significantly,
precisely those in which Labour has the most solid basis of electoral
support – Liverpool, Manchester, Tyneside. This fact destroys
forever the false argument of those right wingers who are forever
suggesting that militant industrial action on the wage front or
political strikes against anti-union legislation such as the
Industrial Relations Act harm the Labour Party in elections.
It is the determination to use both political and industrial means
against the Tories and big business who are attempting to solve the
capitalist crisis at the expense of the working class, which welds
the whole class together as a united force. It is this struggle which
increases support for the return of a Labour government – if Labour
fights on a genuine class policy.
No exact formulas can be laid down, but history suggests that such
initiatives to expand the scope of Trades Councils could prepare the
way for future genuine ‘councils of action’ uniting and
co-ordinating the struggles of all the working people in a local
area.
Trades Councils can become the lynch pins of that working class
unity which is the pre-condition for the overthrow of capitalism,
laying the corner-stone of the socialist society.
It was the National Conference of Trades Councils which first took
up a position of uncomplicated opposition to the big businessmen’s
club, the Common Market. At that National Conference (held at the
time of writing, under the Health government) the resolutions
included a straightforward socialist motion on the economy and
opposition to any further consultations with the Tory government:
“This Conference believes that no good will come to the
working people of Britain from the pursuance of tripartite
consultations between the government, the TUC and the CBI conference
and therefore calls on the TUC to waste no further effort in such
consultations, but instead redouble its efforts to establish a truly
socialist state and to work for the return of a Labour government
firmly pledged to the introduction of legislation designed to achieve
this end.”
It is true that such forthright resolutions are not binding on the
trade union movement, but the rank and file sentiment expressed here
is an indication of the direction which the whole trade union
movement is likely to take in the stormy years ahead.
There are few, if any, other countries where such a great mass
movement exists, entirely controlled by ordinary men and women from
their places of work.
Trades Councils can be built up into organisations capable of
not only changing society but of acting as a channel for the full and
democratic participation of the whole working class in the building
and control of the new democratic socialist society of the future.
 






The annual conference of Trades Councils takes place in
Harrogate on 19/20 May. Written at the time of the struggle
against the Heath government’s ill-fated Industrial Relations
Act, Dudley Edwards’ article outlines the history of the trades
councils and points to their potentially vital role.



Not only did trades councils precede the TUC [Trades Union
Congress], but it was these bodies which brought the TUC itself into
existence. As a matter of fact, they were an independent, grass-roots
working-class movement from the very first.
Today, many thousands of workers in Britain have served as
delegates to their local trades councils. This very numerous body of
working men and women often represents the most class-conscious,
active, and intelligent section of the working class in the locality
in which they work.
They spend many hours of their leisure time endeavouring to
co-ordinate all the working-class struggles for a better life in
their district. They discuss and take decisions on every conceivable
issue involving the interests of the workers.
The trades councils themselves can generally quite justly be
described as the advanced detachment of the organised working class.
Most of them are also inspired by the idea that they are working for
a greater cause than themselves. They believe there is a need for a
fundamental change in society.
At the same time, they struggle for a decent living wage, adequate
housing, a fair deal for old age pensioners, a better urban or rural
environment – they discuss and formulate countless other demands
and then campaign for them.
All this activity is done voluntarily, without thought of
remuneration or personal advantage. But of over 500 Trades Councils
no more than three or four have full-time secretaries. For this
reason the Trades Council movement is probably freer from the
bureaucratic mentality than any other area of the British trade union
movement.
Unfortunately, sometimes this self-sacrificing body of workers are
not sufficiently aware of the great significance of their own
dedicated work, or of the tremendous historical role of the Trades
Councils in the long struggle of the working class to create an
organisation powerful enough really to change society and put an end
to the system of monopoly capitalism under which we live.
History shows that the Trades Councils could well become the
organs through which working class power will finally be achieved. To
quote Frederick Engels: “The full emancipation of the working class
must be the act of the working class itself.” The Trades Councils –
which, significantly, were in the past combined with Labour Party
general management committees in some key industrial areas – could
be a vital means of carrying through this action to its logical
conclusion.
In the recent past, this revolutionary side of Trades Council
action has often not been very evident.
The decades of capitalist economic upturn which followed the
Second World War brought a period of relative lull in the class
struggle, and many Trades Councils become docile appendages of the
TUC, concerned with little more than “parish pump” politics.
Yet, whenever the working class began to move on a broad front
against the capitalist establishment, the Trades Councils sprang into
action. It is for this reason that the more right-wing section of the
trade union officialdom became concerned to reduce the Trades
Councils to purely consultative bodies, and many workers came to
think they had been created by the TUC to be nothing but the General
Council’s mouthpiece in the localities.
A look at history shows that this is a false notion. The TUC
actually grew out of the trades council movement. It was a number of
the key trades councils, already established as the leadership of the
movement locally, who took the initiative in bringing the trade
unions together in a national body.
Today, this aspect of trades councils is again becoming of vital
importance in the present growing struggle to repel the efforts of
the Tory government and big business to put the trade union movement
in a straight-jacket by means of various kinds of anti-union
legislation, wage freezes, and other reactionary moves.
It was Sam Nicholson, President of the Manchester and Salford
Trades Council speaking at its first meeting in 1868, who first
called “for a congress of our own”, and the first TUC was
actually called in that year.
The invitations were sent out only to “trades councils and
trades federations.” “Thirty four delegates attended this
congress of which eleven were from provincial trades unions. At the
1868 congress, the Birmingham Trades Council was deputed to convene
the next one.”
At this second congress in 1869, forty delegates attended, still
mostly from trades councils. For the first time delegates from the
London Trades Councils were present.
It is interesting to note that at this time a committee was
appointed “to prepare a statement to go out to the world, to trade
unions and legislators as to the reasons why we hold the opinion
therein contained.”
Its agenda reminds us of our fight against the Industrial
Relations Act today (i.e. under the 1970–74 Health government –
ed.). Most of the discussion centred around how a fight could
be waged against a report of a Royal Commission on TU legislation
which left unionists liable to criminal prosecutions under an 1825
Act.
The first victories for a really radical policy calling for an
eight-hour day – a potentially revolutionary demand at that time –
and other socialist demands were won at the 1890 TUC. This break with
the old-style trade unionism was largely the work of trades councils.
But in 1895, the more conservative elements retaliated are were
able to get the trades councils excluded from direct affiliation –
ostensibly because this involved dual representation.
Today, the trades councils have only one fraternal representative
at TUC. The Trades Council Joint Consultative Committee has only six
representatives elected by trades councils, with six appointed by the
TUC. It has therefore become a “policy executing, rather than a
policy-making body.”
Despite this constitutional restriction of their powers, however
the trades councils have rapidly increased their authority during
periods of economic crisis and sharpened class struggle. During such
periods they have become the focusing point of all working-class
struggles, especially in the big industrial centres.
In particular, the sudden increase in the authority and
independent action of the trades councils during the 1926 general
strike alarmed the right-wing leaders of the TUC. This was the basic
reason why such leaders as James Thomas worked frantically to stop
the strike as soon as it had started.
One could do no better than quote the words of the famous Labour
and Social Democratic historian, G.D.H. Cole, to illustrate what the
Jimmy Thomases were afraid of. In his book British Trade Unionism
Today, Cole wrote:
“The hour of glory of the trades councils came in the
General Strike of 1926, when either directly or through councils of
action which they took the initiative of creating on a broad base,
they assumed the task of local organisation and responsibility for
the conduct of the strike.
“A great many of them during this period issued local
newspapers or bulletins to replace regular newspapers ... They issued
permits for goods to be delivered to hospitals and other necessary
services; they improvised special transport services and conducted
intensive propaganda campaigns in neighbouring villages.
“On the whole this work, improvised in a few days, was
done with remarkable skill and efficiency and showed large resources
of strength and competence in the local leadership.”
It was this which struck fear into the hearts of the employers,
and worried the right-wing TU leaders. It was a flowering of that
amazing initiative and ingenuity of which the British working class
is capable, when the dead hand of officialdom is removed.
During the nine days which shook capitalist Britain, the embryonic
forms of what Lenin called ‘dual power’ were rapidly forming.
Some trades councils even began to set up their own workers’
defence force – to establish their own law and order. In Newcastle,
almost complete control over all transport was established. In some
areas in the North East, under pressure, the police even agreed that
the special constables should be recruited from the strikers
themselves.
Contrary to the views expressed by the TUC president at the 1973
congress, the workers demonstrated in 1926 that the organised working
class could take responsibility for the efficient administration of
each area and, if necessary, of the country.
If the leaders of the General Council in 1926 did not understand
this then, the Tory Prime Minister Baldwin certainly did when he
mobilised all the forces of repression: tanks, armoured cars, and the
OMS – the auxiliary strike-breaking organisation, backed and
subsidised by the government. The ruling class saw the whole movement
as a challenge to their system.
Naturally, when the strike was betrayed, the trades councils were
again reduced to the passive and secondary role allotted to them by
the right wing bureaucracy. Nevertheless, the trades councils remain
potentially capable, in any new period of great events, of mobilising
the working-class struggle to change society.

Dudley Edwards, now a member of Hove Labour Party, has been an
activist in the trade unions and trades councils for many years. He
was a shop steward at the Morris car plant in Oxford in the 1930s.
His publications include Last Stand of the Levellers [30p] and The Soldiers’ Revolt [35p], both available from World Books, 1 Mentmore Terrace, London, E8 3PN. Add 10p for postage and packing.
 




Dear Comrades
On May 1st I attended the great May Day demonstration at Gothenberg in Sweden. It was 30,000 strong, mostly workers.
It was a scene of extraordinary colour and filled the whole wide boulevard that leads up to the City Hall. A great river of red flags and banners with five very accomplished bands playing the Internationale.
They really made it into a splendid marching song; the sound of this inspiring music resounding throughout the whole city, stirred the emotions.
This combination of hundreds of waving red flags, some made of silk, singing and marching music, brought out the whole population to watch the spectacle. All the symbols of solidarity and socialism were there, although the long speech of the Secretary of the Swedish Social Democratic Party did not once mention the word socialism.
However the potential strength of the organised Swedish workers was truly reflected in the vigour and the swinging step of these thousands of workers.
Is it not time that our movement paid as much attention to organising a May Day show of strength as the Swedish workers do? We won the May Day holiday, but now it’d become just another Bank Holiday, apparently not necessarily on May Day itself.
We should press for it to be fixed on May 1st every year and really make it Labour’s day.



 


Yours fraternally
Dudley Edwards



 




There has been a 90% response to the AUEW call for one and two day
strikes in the Brighton area, which contrary to what many people
think has over 200,000 industrial workers.
Despite the view of many workers that the one and two day strikes
are not the best tactics to win the claim, the loyalty of the members
in the main factories has been outstanding.



 


Dudley Edwards
(Branch Committee member
AUEW No. 3branch
personal capacity)



 




Dudley Edwards writes on working class struggle in Cowley (the other Oxford)
Author’s Foreword
In writing this pamphlet I have not aimed at producing a detailed historical document which sets out every incident, name and date connected with the 1934 Pressed Steel recognition strike. On the contrary, I hope that it will bring out the political significance of the struggle at Cowley all those years ago and link the struggle of the Cowley car workers then to the even greater struggle that the car workers are facing today. While those incidents which are described can all be verified from documents published at the time and by eye witnesses, my main aim is to try and draw the lessons of this for the workers of today.



‘With the change of the economic foundation the entire immense superstructure is more or less rapidly transformed ...’
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Karl Marx



The Growth of Cowley
Oxford, after the First World War, was still the old city of ‘dreaming spires and lost causes’. Few people imagined that this very safe Tory seat would ever be won for Labour. In 1966 the Tory candidate was defeated.
This change was the result of economic developments which began in the 1920s. During this period ‘the dreaming spires’ remained, but the town divided into two communities and the old village of Cowley became a new industrial town on the east side of Magdalen bridge.
A rather sleepy Labour movement did exist before the coming of the Cowley motor and Pressed Steel industries. A Trades Council had operated for many years, but it was mainly influenced by the university printing and railwaymen’s unions which also played an active part in the building of an early but not very lively Labour Party. In 1913 there was the first unskilled workers’ strike of tramwaymen, but most of the working class remained unorganised and voted Tory.
The First World War brought big changes. Bill Morris, the cycleman, taking advantage of a war contract to build army lorries, set up the first really mass production car works in Britain. This became one of the original cornerstones of the large Leyland amalgamation which we know today.
After 1920, the labour situation became very favourable for the new company. The brief post-war boom collapsed, mass unemployment appeared, and large numbers of workers were driven from the crippled basic industries in the north, to seek work in the newer industries of the south. The dejected condition of British agriculture also greatly assisted the future Lord Nuffield.
At that time the agricultural labourers were eking out an existence on a wage of 27/6d a week. Early supplies of labour could therefore be attracted from the surrounding villages and the £3 to £4 a week which the company offered seemed a fortune compared to the wages the workers had been used to. Bill Morris claimed there was no need for unions because he was paying over the rate for equivalent work done elsewhere. As men were earning two or three times their previous wages, thus argument seemed justified. Like Fords in America, the company cleverly combined the ‘carrot with the stick’. As company pay was better than in union shops outside, militant trade unionists were regarded as ‘trouble makers’ who could not bring improvement in wages.
With the growth of a market for relatively cheap car in the mid-twenties, a great flow of labour from the distressed areas began. Workers poured in from South Wales, Merseyside, the North East and elsewhere. This reached the proportions of a ‘mini Klondyke’ rush and by the early thirties many hundreds of impoverished unemployed were taking one way tickets to this new promised land in the south.
The ‘good times’ were very short-lived. Morris was making huge profits at this time, and also spending hundreds of thousands of pounds on his famous Iron Lung Charities, so he could have provided houses for his own workers at low rents.
The Tory Council, which was ever ready to heap praise on the future Lord as a benefactor of mankind, soon found itself embarrassed by a housing shortage, induced by the large influx of labour. At the same time, the cost of living in Oxford was forced up, becoming one of the highest in the British Isles.
Then, as now, the Tory Council majority regarded council house building for the low paid as a rather ‘socialist’ and ‘subversive’ idea. They therefore kept it to a minimum. This, of course, left the field wide open to the private speculators and the jerry builders.
By 1932 Oxford and Cowley were suffering from severe social strains and conflicts and the ancient serenity of Oxford finally disappeared.
 
Cars and the Slump
Despite these social contradictions, the 1929–34 slump did not hit Oxford as badly as most other parts of the country. In fact the growth of the motor industry brought a veneer of prosperity to this fast growing area. Oxford almost doubled its population in 15 years. Morris Motors blossomed into a real mass production plant and the great Pressed Steel plant, run by a separate company, was built to provide the body structures for the new cars coming from the conveyer belts.
By 1934 the overwhelming majority of workers in this great Pressed Steel factory were from the old declining industrial areas. Most of them came from a background of industrial struggle and understood the need for trade union organisation. But, often ragged and exhausted, not a few of these men actually walked the whole distance from South Wales in the late twenties and early thirties. Not only did they walk to Oxford but sometimes back again and groups of such men were a common sight on the road. Such men were in no position to bargain when offered work, and had to accept whatever wages were paid.
At Pressed Steel this meant working for 1/6d per hour with the theoretical possibility of earning another 1s from the piece work scheme. Often when they failed to earn the piece work norm demanded by the management, their basic rate would be reduced by the piecework shortfall which could mean working for the pitiful sum of 9d an hour.
Married men were generally forced to leave a wife and children in the distressed areas. There was no social security for keeping two homes going. The only alternative was to remain unemployed on unemployment benefit which lasted six months, or accept a means tested Public Assistance payment which brought the income of a man, wife and two children to about 30/– a week.
In 1932 after the Labour Prime Minister, Ramsey MacDonald joined the Tory-dominated National Government this semi-starvation allowance was cut still further. In these circumstances, the new married arrival found himself not only desperate for a job but also for accommodation which would put a roof over his family.
 
Houses on Marsh Land
The first large housing estate was built by the speculating builders, N. Moss and Son, at Florence Park on marsh land which had previously been regarded as unsuitable for building. Some time after it was built, a council investigation showed that t had never been properly drained.
Nearly 700 houses were thrown up on this estate in nine months. Many of the workers who built it were themselves products of rather spurious training centres. Here they were expected to learn a new building trade in six months. Naturally the old apprenticed and experienced building workers objected to this.
The result of this excessive haste, and the use of mostly green labour, led to shoddy building as well as to the breaking of a number of local building bye-laws. Desperate for a house, workers often moved in before the plaster was dry. The use of green wood produced buckling window frames and doors which could only be opened by using the full weight of the body against them. Severe damp and fungus soon appeared on ground floors. Very soon deputations were being organised to the Ministry of Housing. During one of these visits a tenant actually let loose a frog which he had found under the boarding of his ground floor.
Space will not permit a detailed description of the Florence Park housing scandal, but when the council was forced to stage an enquiry, it was found that 17 bye-laws had been broken in the construction of the estate. However, by this time the managing director, F.E. Moss, had taken off on a world tour. For some years after, this company collected an average of at least £1 a week from each of these 700 badly-built houses. In recent years, the firm doubled and trebled original capital outlay by selling off houses at modern inflated prices.
 
Tradition of Solidarity
By 1933 many of the workers who had been driven from their homes by the violence of the capitalist slump were beginning to re-assess their new situation at Cowley. They concluded that they were little better off than they had been in the distressed areas they had come from. Many were ex-miners and they began to return again to the tradition of organised solidarity which their fathers had implanted in the mining valleys.
Until the middle of 1934, the vast majority in Pressed Steel as well as Morris Motors were completely unorganised. Morris did not become organised until 1940. In fact to display a union badge openly was to risk dismissal. A very small enclave of AEU members existed in the Pressed Steel tool room. Half hearted attempts had also been made to organise some other workers in the old Vehicle Builders’ Union. There was no recognition by the firm, and therefore no right to negotiate collectively existed.
The overwhelming majority of production workers were totally defenceless. Speed up was the order of the day and frequent dismissals of operators considered too slow took place.
A day’s work in the huge press shop was a test of endurance. No formal tea breaks were allowed and the noise was nerve shattering. The crashing action of huge presses, the rattle of innumerable trip hammers and clatter of sheet metal being carried on hand trucks cause, in some cases, actual deafness. No proper canteens existed and food had to be consumed on the factory floor.
At lunch time hundreds of workers poured out on to Johnson’s Field where they bought cups of tea and sandwiches. If it was raining they had to sit in two rickety and dirty old huts set up by a private trader.
Accident rates were high and no shop stewards existed to take up any of these issues with management. In short the workers were an unorganised mob, as much at the mercy of the boss as were their forefathers during the industrial revolution at the beginning of the 19th century. Here was an apparently docile work force which seemed resigned to what the Tory and Liberal economists call ‘free enterprise’; a condition which they still say we must return to 40 years later.
Then to the astonishment of the Pressed Steel management, who thought everything was going admirably, the spontaneous explosion of 1934 happened.
 
The Strike Begins
On Tuesday July 17th, 180 workers in the press shop walked out. At first they had no clearly defined demands. A few bolder spirits led the way but there was no recognised leadership of any kind. No union existed to call in. Organisation had to be created in the heat of battle. Strike pay was out of the question. The overwhelming majority were in no union.
The strike was than a spontaneous expression of revolt against the ruthless pursuit of profit conducted by an unbridled capitalism. Among the first 180 were a number of women workers who played a militant and loyal part in the struggle.
The first message to the manager, Mr. Otto Müeller, simply stated that the strikers would not go back to work until better wages were offered. No one at that stage knew what specific wages would be considered satisfactory.
After some confused discussion among the unorganised strikers someone proposed that a provisional strike committee be elected. Thus, the traditional form of strike organisation was created before any formal union organisation existed. This was a remarkable illustration that, in essence, the union is no more than the determination of the workers to act in union for the betterment of their conditions of labour.
As a matter of fact the one minute fragment of union organisation in the factory was that of the AEU which played no part in the organisation of the strike. Ironically on the third day, the District Committee even pronounced that, while sympathetic, it could not officially support the strike because it was unconstitutional; of course according to the book, it was.
The strike committee set up was not only non-union but its members had practically no experience of industrial action. Despite this, in a very short time, it became a knowledgeable and astute committee, well able to win friends and influence a wide circle of supporters outside as well as inside the factory.
The committee soon realised that it was playing an important and historical role in the revival of a working class fighting spirit which had been dampened down as a result of the tragically betrayed General Strike of 1926 and the sell-out of a Labour Prime Minister in 1931. The Pressed Steel strike was a sign that the workers were recovering from those defeats. From the first the committee welcomed assistance from outside their ranks. In particular the committee realised that the Pressed Steel workers needed capable propagandists who could spread the justice of their cause far and wide. It was soon to find one, though not himself a Pressed Steel striker.
 
Enter Abe Lazarus
Shortly before the Pressed Steel strike a rather spontaneous strike took place at the Firestone Tyre factory on London’s Great West Road. This was another of the new mass production factories taking in the victims of the slump from the depressed areas. In the courses of this turbulent strike, one of the leading spirits had been a certain Abe Lazarus. During mass picketing scenes at this factory he had been accused of dangerously obstructing a bus load of blacklegs attempting to cross the picket line. After this incident Lazarus had disappeared and the police had issued a warrant for his arrest.
He then came to Oxford to offer assistance and turned up on Johnson’s Field just as the first walk out took place. From then on he played an important part in the organisation of the strike. It has in fact been claimed that in the confusion surrounding the election of the provisional committee he was actually nominated and elected to that body.
The present writer has been unable to confirm this legendary election, but from the first day he certainly became a leading spokesman for the strikers, outside the works, and his chance appearance in Oxford was certainly a factor in the ultimate success of the strike.
In the summer of 1934 he was at first known as ‘Bill Firestone’ and not as Abe Lazarus. This was not because he wished to hide his Jewish origin, which he was proud of, but because at this stage he did not want to be taken from the scene of the strike to face the charge of dangerous obstruction in West London. After the strike when the court case had been settled, he insisted that the assumed name should be dropped and that everyone should know him by his correct family name. Nor did he hide his political affiliation. He was a member of the Communist Party. In his early twenties, he was already an eloquent speaker. He very soon arrested the attention of his working class audiences in Cowley. A sandy complexion and with gingerish hair, he was not only able to rouse indignation against the skinflint attitude of the management, but to set this local struggle into its true setting – the breakdown of the whole capitalist method of production during the great slump. He had a puckish sense of humour and successfully ridiculed all who suggested the workers should accept the pitiful wages they were offered without taking strike action. He was also a good organiser with a shrewd sense of tactics.
To give any serious account of the industrial struggles in Cowley during the 1930s without recognising the role played by this Jewish Communist would be to falsify history. On the other hand it is arguable that too much attention has been paid to ‘Bill Firestone’ activities.
 
The Role of Communists
For the above reason it will be necessary to interrupt this narrative which is largely about the 1934 strike and its consequences, to explain why Lazarus and other C.P. members whom he recruited where able to play a fairly important part not only bringing militant trade unionism to Cowley but in the life of the local Labour Movement generally.
Long before the Pressed Steel became the strongest section of organised workers in Oxfordshire, there had been a Labour Party and Trades and Labour Council. The Trades Council had little contact with the thousands of unorganised workers coming into the growing Cowley factories. There were, therefore, very few people with the experience of industrial organisation, especially of the militant type needed to raise the standard of living and confidence of these thousands of newcomers to Morris and Pressed Steel.
When this sudden industrial revolt broke out at Pressed Steel, Abe Lazarus was the type of militant the workers needed and turned to. He was able to inspire enthusiasm and quickly recruited a small group of young militants prepared to throw themselves into the struggle without counting the cost. They fitted the circumstances existing at Cowley in 1934. The workers did NOT support them because of their communist views, in fact these were very hazy, but because they were industrial militants and the only kind of leadership that could win this spontaneous and rather desperate strike.
As a matter of fact, Bill Firestone (Lazarus) and his followers paid scant attention to the various theoretical lines coming from the Communist Party centre. Rather they succeeded despite the handicap of the official Communist zig zags. Abe and his new recruits were in the right place at the right time.
Indeed any honest effort to write the history of the Pressed Steel TGWU branch would be forced to recognise the role played by this handful of C.P. members at its foundation. Of course, at the same time, their real political influence was very slight. It is an historical paradox that the tactics adopted by the local members of the party, including Lazarus himself, hardly harmonised with the official theory of the party at national level, which in 1934 was still passing through its ‘ultra left’ period.
This was the so-called ‘Third Period’ when, following the analysis of the Communist International, all Labour and trade union officials either at local or national level were described as ‘social fascists’ if they did not accept the official Communist line. All Social Democrats were ‘stirrup holders’ for fascism and, THEY, rather than the real fascists, were considered the worst enemy. Also at this time the main pamphlet issued by the Communist Party was entitled For a Soviet Britain. By adopting this theory the C.P.’s of Europe actually succeeded in alienating millions of sincere Social Democratic workers and this was one of the main reasons for the triumph of Hitler.
Shortly after the 1934 Pressed Steel strike when it became clear that Hitler had consolidated his position in Germany, the Comintern switched over to an ultra right line and began pushing the so-called ‘Popular Front’ with even the Tories becoming acceptable allies.
Abe Lazarus himself until his death was a loyal Stalinist – as was the writer of this pamphlet at the time. However, the actual tactics Lazarus adopted did everything possible to play down the ideological division between the Labour Party and the Communists which the official C.P. wished to be emphasised in all possible ways. Abe strove to win the confidence of the existing Labour Party and gain the support of all the leading local Social Democrats. In fact he anticipated the C.P. switch of 1935 and achieved considerable success. There had existed a small and not very effective C.P. before Abe Lazarus came to Oxford but its revival in 1934 was entirely due to his inspired ‘opportunism’. By 1935 when the new ‘Popular Front’ line became the order of the day at C.P. headquarters, the local C.P., under Abe’s leadership, had already carried out a peculiar form of this tactic, and the local C.P. often was able to have a decisive influence on the Labour Party itself.
 
Manipulating Labour
Soon after the Pressed Steel strike, the C.P. already had about 70 members but less than 5 per cent of these were open members. The majority became undercover members of the Labour Party. So much was this so that two membership books were kept – one of overt and the other covert members.
To the average citizen, the bright and cheerful face of Abe Lazarus, or the handsome one of Ernie Keeling and one or two others, represented the face of the Communist Party. The others were ‘good Labour men’.
Not all Labour politicians were unaware of this C.P. influence behind the scenes and it is ironical that some who are alleged moderates and right wingers still prominent in national politics today condoned these manipulatory tactics of the C.P. in 1934. One of these Labour members was the present Lord Longford, who came into the Labour Party from the Conservative Central Office, and proceeded to build close association with the left wing, maintaining in particular close relations with several members of the Oxford C.P. as well.
Perhaps the best example of how the C.P. could, for a time, manipulate the local movement was the staging of the famous ‘Popular Front’ election in Oxford in 1938. At the time the Labour Parliamentary candidate, Gordon Walker, was forced to stand down in favour of the all-party candidate, Dr Lindsay. This was done in the name of anti-fascist unity.
The secretary of the local constituency Labour Party was an undercover member of the C.P. as were several members of the general management committee and some members of the ward committees. Behind the scenes, the C.P. branch conducted an extremely skilful campaign and won the support of most Labour ward parties as well as the Liberal Associations, even gaining the support of Harold Macmillan, later to be a Conservative Prime Minister.
To be fair, Dr. Lindsay, the Master of Balliol, would no doubt have refused to accept nomination if he had understood what was going on. In this pressure campaign in the Labour Party, the Rt. Hon. Pakenham (now Lord) played an effective part in pushing Gordon Walker off the political scene. The ‘Popular Front’ candidate did no better than a straight Labour man would have done and Dr. Lindsay was easily defeated by the Tory Quintin Hogg. Lord Longford then took Walker’s place as the prospective Labour candidate for Oxford City.
 
The Noble Dupe?
In his book, Born to Believe, Longford presents himself as an innocent dupe.
‘This coup’ he says, ‘was engineered by the Oxford Communists with the rest of us more or less starry-eyed dupes, and I say this as the one person who at the time seemed to profit from his own guilelessness’.
Certainly Lord Longford was politically naive then, as he is now, but was he not less rather than more starry-eyed? It is difficult to put his activities down to ‘sheer guilelessness’ when at the time he was closely associating with the few open members of the C.P. and making visits to the secretary of that party for political discussions, during which he showed a very keen interest in the tactical decisions of the Oxford C.P. It appeared that the noble lord made more use of the C.P. then they did of him.
 
Danger of Isolation
To return to the events at Cowley. By June 18th, the second day of the strike, it became clear that those that took the initiative had a hard fight ahead of them. Not all the workers came out on the first day and the 180 from the press shop ran the danger of being isolated.
At first the Pressed Steel management was arrogantly confident it could defeat the workers. It began by using all the traditional methods of the employing class to break the strike and evidently expected the rather hesitant strikers to go back as soon as the management cracked the whip.
On the first day the managing director refused to see a deputation hurriedly got together to present the strikers’ case, but on the following day this high handed approach strengthened the strike. On July 19th, the Oxford Mail reported that the number out had increased to 600.
The same day a second mass meetings was held on Johnson’s field and for the first time officers from the TGWU, Brothers Geobey and Packwood, addressed the strikers. Other speakers were Harry Jones of the Strike Committee and a C.P. members, and Abe Lazarus himself. At this meeting large piles of TGWU membership forms were brought by car and hundreds of members were signed up. The AEU completely missed its opportunity, partly because of the long winded procedure required by the union before application for membership could be accepted.
It is of interest to note that Bro. Jack Jupp, in an interview with the author of this pamphlet, stated that he proposed at this time the AEU should form a special motor car workers section of the union. This idea was turned down but had it been accepted the basic union organisation of the later B.M.C. and British Leyland might have been in the hands of the engineering union rather than the TGWU.
At the second mass meeting, some provisional demands were formulated and for the first time submitted to the management. These demands seem pitifully small, even in relation to the much lower cost of living in 1934. However, in relation to the pittance which most workers had previously earned, they were a real advance. The essence of the demands was an increase to a guaranteed rate of 1/8d per hour – irrespective of the miserable piece work earnings – and union recognition.
The Oxford Mail, reporting the meeting, quoted some specific examples of the terrible low wages received at Pressed Steel. These cases included some girls who had received as little as [?]/10d for a week’s work. Another example was given of a man earning 1/9d for 3½ hours work and another man paid 6/5d for ten hours work. When one considers that the lowest rent paid at Florence Park housing estate was 11/6d but in most cases £1 a week, the desperation of many workers at the time becomes clear.
On July 19th, management placed a statement on the works gates saying that the factory would be closed on the following Monday. It was in fact a defiant declaration that the company did not intend to give an inch of ground.
By the end of the second day, not only were the Pressed Steel workers themselves getting organised but already support was coming from other workers in the town.
 
A Magnificent Stand
On the first day, Mr. Waterhouse, representative of the Oxford Solidarity Committee, had promised assistance. At the time he was also secretary of the Oxford Communist Party. On July 19th a special bulletin called The Conveyer was issued by the TGWU in hundreds of copies. It stated that ‘the whole of the working class in Oxford is stirred by the magnificent stand of the strikers’ and continued:
‘It is the duty of all workers to support the strike whether they are employed by Pressed Steel or not, the fight of the Pressed Steel workers is the fight of the whole of the working class. The acceptance of the infamous terms offered by the Pressed Steel bosses would lead to a general lowering of the standards of all Oxford workers.’
It was in this spirit of uncompromising class struggle that the strike committee led the strike and it was only by adopting this militant line that the Pressed Steel workers eventually won the day. It was the only way they could have won.
On Friday, July 20th, the fourth day of the strike, an evening mass meeting was held at St. Giles and it reflected the good work done by the Solidarity Committee in the town. Twelve speakers addressed this gathering of well over a thousand people.
Among these were Bro. C. Bowles, chairman of the N.U.R. and Oxford Trades Council; Bro. J.F. Ida, chairman of the Oxford and District TGWU; several Pressed Steel workers on strike; and Abe Lazarus again and his comrade, H. Waterhouse of the Solidarity Committee. One of the speakers said: ‘This meeting must mark the beginning of well organised union shops throughout the motor industry in Britain’. If we look at the organised strength of the motor car and accessories factories today, then the historic importance of the meeting has been proved by the march of history.
 
The Strikers’ Full Demands
At this meeting the full demands were finally set out in print. These included a scale of basic wages for each department, as well as a scale of wages for female labour, boys and youths according to age groups. At the end of the meeting a large collection was taken by Abe Lazarus.
As already mentioned the essence of the strikers’ demands meant a 2d increase all round to be guaranteed irrespective of any piece work earnings which were to be negotiated with properly appointed shop stewards. It is a measure of the ruthlessness of the employers that the workers were forced to fight one of the most stormy strikes in the history of the South Midlands, before the bosses would concede these extremely moderate demands.
 
Don’t Cross the Picket
On Sunday evening, July 22nd, a second and much larger meeting was held at St. Giles. The Oxford Mail reported that over 3,000 people attended, although trade union estimates were nearer to 4,000. At this meeting, speakers from the Oxford City Labour Party brought messages of support and the meeting was also addressed by representatives of the newly-formed Council of Action, the Solidarity Committee, the Trades and Labour Council and the strike committee itself. These speakers called upon the busmen not to transport ‘blacklegs’ through the picket lines and appealed to landladies not to provide accommodation to men transported into Oxford to work the machines. Some few months after the strike, the busmen themselves came out and received support from the Pressed Steel workers.
This St. Giles meeting showed how generally outside support was increasing and was the largest seen in the centre of the town for many years. It showed that the workers now held the initiative and would not be defeated.
A very large collection was taken again by Abe Lazarus.
 
Management Ultimatum
On Monday, July 23rd, the seventh day, the full strike committee of 20 members, including two women, for the first time submitted their demands at formal interview with the management. As a matter of fact, the management did little more than to hand a printed statement to the committee, signed by Mr. Otto Müeller, the managing director. This was no better than an ultimatum and a re-emphasis of the status quo. It ended, however, with a statement that the company would re-open the gates on Tuesday, July 24th, and that those who returned to work on that day would be ‘reinstated without prejudice’.
On the previous Saturday, the management had said that the works would close indefinitely on Monday. This statement, therefore, seemed like an attempt to intimidate, and the workers saw it as an indication that the strike would become a bitter struggle. They unanimously rejected the firm’s statement. Up until then the picketing had been fairly mild, but on Tuesday morning when the gates were opened, really determined mass picketing began. At 7.15 a.m. a bus with would-be ‘scabs’ drove up to the gates and there was a rush towards it by the strikers. But a police inspector was able to clear a path and the bus passed unmolested.
By now the workers were becoming well organised and numerous projects were being undertaken by the strike committee. The strike fund had already passed the £100 mark. A soup kitchen was organised and mainly supervised by Cowley Labour Party women. The very few cars available were mobilised, and parties of strikers were sent out to Birmingham, Coventry and Fords at Dagenham. Generous donations were made by the workers at factories in these towns. Large meetings were held, and at Fords the union representatives pledged that if jigs and tools were sent from Cowley to do Pressed Steel work, their Ford members would not handle them.
 
Strike Slogans All Over Town
During the night of July 24th and 25th, strikers were busy with white wash and tar, and as dawn broke on the 25th numerous large slogans appeared in prominent positions in the town. Suitable slogans were also inscribed outside the houses of a few blacklegs. Unfortunately, some of the work was a little over-enthusiastic and owing to an incorrect address being given to one of the signwriters, an inscription was placed outside the house of a member of the Strike Committee itself.
The atmosphere was now becoming electric in all working class areas of Oxford, but the strike was receiving growing support in other parts of the country. A significant example of this was a report in the Oxford Mail stating that nine soldiers had been sent from the Army Vocational Centre at Aldershot. When these men arrived, they refused to work and joined the strikers. They even sent one of their number back to Aldershot to explain the position to their commanding officer. There is no report of how this gentleman reacted to the surprising news. Another example of the initiative shown by the workers was the organisation of a special Fête in Florence Park in aid of the strikers’ funds.
A peculiar intervention by the ‘League of Industry’ was now made. This body, which was linked to another called the Economic League, as well as the Employers’ Federation, now pushed itself forward as a self-appointed arbitrator in a letter to the Oxford Mail signed by a number of ladies and gentlemen well known in the town. The strike committee immediately rejected the proposition, which indeed it regarded as unwelcome interference. The ad hoc committee appointed by the League then disappeared from the scene for good.
 
Stormy Scenes at the Picket
By Friday, July 27th, the trial of strength which had begun so hesitantly on the workers’ side was coming to a head. This was reflected in the stormy scenes taking place on the picket line. Three men were arrested outside the works while attempting to stop a bus containing a few blacklegs. After the arrest of these men, several bus windows were broken and glass scattered on the road, but no-one was injured. Two of the trio were workers, the other was David Floyd, a leading university Communist, and later a foreign correspondent for The Times. In the previous few days a considerable number of students had offered their services on the picket line. This was unprecedented and an event of historic importance to the future of the Labour Movement. The only time students had intervened in any industrial disputes was in 1926 when several thousands had volunteered to do blackleg duty during the General Strike. [1] At Pressed Steel they were on the side of the workers, indicating how the political climate in the university had changed since 1926. There was now for the first time a strong Socialist left appearing in the colleges and the Labour Club was soon to become the largest political club at the university.
 
Why Students Helped Out
This was undoubtedly due to the changed economic circumstances resulting from the 1930 slump and the collapse of the Labour Government in 1931. In 1932 another event had opened the eyes of many undergraduates. In that year a large contingent of the great Hunger March organised by the National Unemployed Workers’ Movement had passed through Oxford. The students were able to see the grim and undernourished faces of these men, many ex-miners, as they marched against the attempts to cut their miserable dole of 17/6d a week. But it was not just sympathy that was bringing a broader understanding to many of these young men and women. Many were themselves feeling the effects of the recession. In particular, those without private means were finding a dire lack of employment when they went down from the University and saw that they had a common interest with the rest of the unemployed. Another event bringing them nearer the ranks of Labour was the victory of Hitlerism in Germany and the appearance of Mosley’s blackshirts in Britain. The vicious destruction of all working class organisations in Germany and the brutal suppression of all democratic organisation including the Liberals, was disturbing to the traditional atmosphere of peaceful detachment cultivated in the universities. Many of the younger academics were therefore beginning to turn to the works of Marx and Engels in their search for an answer to the fascism which seemed to be conquering Europe. To the workers, many of these young men seemed to be no more than converts to romantic revolutionism which could not last; nevertheless, the welcomed the practical help that was now being offered.
 
Victory for the Strikers
By the end of the first week, the tide could be seen to be turning in favour of the striking workers. On Friday, July 27th, a long meeting had taken place in London between the management, TGWU officials, and representatives of the strikers. At 7 a.m. on Saturday morning, Bro. L.G. Teed of the strike committee informed a meeting of the workers on the picket line that though the terms were still provisional a favourable agreement had been reached overnight, which still had to be submitted to a mass meeting. At this second meeting after a two-hour discussion the terms recommended were accepted by a majority vote. The strike had been won. The main provisions of the agreement included the demands of the workers – a guaranteed basic rate of 1/8d irrespective of piece work earnings, full union recognition (appointment of shop stewards, etc.), outstanding grievances to be settled by negotiation. This did not specify the rates for different grades which had been outlined in the workers’ formal demands. However, in view of the full union recognition where there was none before, and agreement to settle the outstanding grievances in negotiations, the strikers could be satisfied that these questions would be settled in their favour. At the end of the meeting, the strike committee chairman, Bro. Jock Ward, collapsed: but he had won his spurs in a successful working class struggle as had all the members of the strike committee. The TGWU was firmly established in the factory. There were many more battles, some won and others lost, but from that moment the union organisation went from strength to strength.
As has already been said, the gains of the strike seem almost trivial by present day standards. However, looked at in perspective they had won a critical victory for themselves and the working class generally.
 
The Basis of Strength
Although Fords, who had their big strike two years before Pressed Steel, were already organised, the motor industry as a whole still consisted of ‘black shops’ in 1934. Today workers are able to meet in their many thousands to take and organise democratic decisions in defence of their standard of living. The determination and spirit of those very poorly paid workers in 1934 played an important part in making the present all-inclusive union organisation possible.
It is because of the willingness of workers like those at Pressed Steel 45 years ago to go into battle without any thought of strike pay that the basis was laid for the present strength of the Transport and General Workers’ Union. It must be recognised that these battles also helped the AEU to grow. But it is the view of the author that if the AEU had been more flexible at the time, if it had really been prepared to become an industrial union in fact, as it already was in theory, it might have been able to carry out the aims of its first chairman, Tom Mann, who believed in one union for one industry. Today there are still two main unions in many engineering factories and the next step is to achieve Tom Mann’s aim by achieving complete unity.
 
Hands Off Our Unions ...
The lesson for the working class coming out of that stormy strike in 1934 is that it is the ordinary shop member who constitutes the only real strength of the union. Without their determination to control their own destiny, the union can turn into just another institution, manipulated by the capitalist establishment. No form of government can be called democratic unless the unions remain independent working class organisations. This aspect of the struggle is often forgotten. If it is to become the function of Governments to fix wages, then the role of unions in society is under threat.
In opposing a government pay policy or any other bureaucratic attempt to hamstring the independent action of the unions, the working class is also fighting for its own conception of democracy. Under the capitalist method of production unions must represent the organised working class (the majority class) seeking always to advance and defend the workers’ standard of living against the employing class that makes its profit out of the labour power of the workers. However, under a system that is formally socialist, the unions would still have to preserve that same independence, including the right to strike, in order to defend the workers against the dangers of self-perpetuating state bureaucracies.
 
The Need for Social Change
At the same time, the trade union movement cannot simply stand for the ‘status quo’. The social conditions in which it exists force it always to strive for a fundamental change in society in favour of the working class ‘by hand and by brain’. This was the underlying motivating force of the trade union movement right from the early Chartist days. It may not be always apparent and some workers cannot see now how the economic and political struggle are inextricably locked together. But at all times of crisis the necessity to change society is forced into the foreground.
It is becoming clearer to millions of workers that the trade union movement is something more than an effort to put pennies on the pay and take minutes off the day or even just to win adequate pensions, and improve working conditions. To fight for these things is indeed the work of serious trade unionists, but in times of crisis such as we now live in, these reforms cannot be permanently preserved and guaranteed unless the whole structure of society is eventually changed.
The need for the trade union to play a major part in bringing about this social change was never more obvious than it is today.
 
Plan for Fair Shares
Within the present capitalist form of society there is no way that one man’s income can be justly related to another’s; no ‘incomes policy’ is possible when the value of a man’s work is measured by the profit that it produces for those who own 80 per cent of the means of production. Such a ‘just’ incomes policy – which some politicians like to talk about – is only possible when we own all the economic resources of the country and in a planned way can really reward people for the work they actually put in to society. Only when we are able to organise a planned socialist economy will the vast majority be satisfied by their own experience that they are really getting a fair share of the national cake in return for the work they do.
Starting with their struggle for a barely living wage in 1934 the motor workers of Cowley in both factories over the years won for themselves a fairly tolerable standard of living. The organisation they built gave them some dignity and self-respect. Thanks to the post Second World War capitalist boom and the existence of a powerful Labour Movement to take advantage of it, life became better for large sections of the workers. But today the gains which were made over the years are threatened by the decay of the British capitalist economy.
 
Take the Road to Socialism
Now, 45 years after the Cowley strike, both the Pressed Steel and the Morris workers are part of a union organisation in the motor industry 75,000 strong, but the disease of de-industrialization taking place in Britain could well destroy the motor industry as well as the great union organisation the workers have built.
Once again the workers are being told that if they don’t accept stand still wages and conform to management and Government requirements, British Leyland will be closed down. The withholding of Government subsidies is used as a threat to force the workers to give up the bargaining power they have built over the years. But even if the workers were to conform to the demands of the whiz-kid Edwards, it is still very doubtful if economic decline would be stopped. The £280 million subsidy which he mentioned last year, and said would be held up only if the workers don’t toe the line he lays down, is really only another stop gap sum. Nearly five years ago, Ryder of the B.M.C. was declaring the need for a £450 million investment plan. Practically none of that was carried out – a much greater sum is needed now when foreign cars have captured over 40 per cent of the market.
As in 1934, the workers in the motor industry, together with the rest of the working class are standing at the cross-roads. We must go forward to a planned economy and a socialist society or we shall be dragged back to the same terrible conditions which the Pressed Steel workers fought against in 1934.

Transcriber’s Note
1. This isn’t actually correct – students from Leeds University also helped to strike-break during the 1913–14 Leeds Municipal Workers strike. This does not take away from the substantive point however. – ID
 




The attempt of Len Murray the TUC General Secretary to pre-empt
the debate on Ireland at the National Conference of Trades Councils,
last weekend caused a sensational upset and spread wide resentment
amongst conference delegates.
Brother Murray used his privilege of addressing the conference to
attack a resolution on the issue of Ireland. Almost half of his
speech was devoted to denouncing this resolution which was not
debated until the last day of conference.
The main points of the resolution were for:–

A British government commitment to withdraw from Northern
Ireland
 
A bill of rights for Northern Ireland
 
The ending of the non-jury Diplock courts, and a review of
all cases tried under Diplock courts and restoration of special
category status to detainees.

Brother Murray informed the delegates that if the resolution was
carried in opposition to what he said was TUC policy, then the
General Council would completely ignore the opinion of delegates.
Nevertheless the resolution was carried by a big majority and is
now the policy of the Trades Councils.
Despite short comings in the resolution it now means that debate
on Northern Ireland will be opened up in all Trades Councils, Trade
Union branches and at the Trades Union Congress.



 


Dudley Edwards
(Brighton Trades Council)



 




Arriving in Paris on the night the poll was declared, I shared the elation of the mass of Parisians at the election of the first left president in France, François Mitterand.
Any impression received of apathy towards the result of the election was dispelled quickly. Almost as one, the population of the working class arrondisements [boroughs] poured into the Place de la Bastille as soon as the first rumour of Mitterand’s victory got around. The workers were joined by large section of the middle class.
I saw a small part of the enormous spontaneous celebratory gathering. I had previously gone out to the suburbs to meet a couple of comrades to watch the election results on the television.
Afterwards we went out and expressed surprise because the streets were deserted. When I returned to central Paris, the reason was obvious – the whole population seemed to be at the Place de la Bastille.
Only the packed Metro trains coming back home indicated there must have been tens, if not hundreds of thousands at the Bastille.
I sat till past midnight on the Boulevard St Michel, watching the extraordinary scenes of rejoicing. The noise of hooting cars was terrific, and made more deafening by a powerful thunderstorm which broke out at the same time.
After all the shilly-shallying of the Socialist and Communist leaders trying to gain the advantage, the workers, on this night at least, imposed their own awe inspiring and definitive unity. They made it crystal clear that they regarded Mitterand’s victory as an historic stage in transforming society and moving towards socialism.
I was also in France in 1936 when the first Popular Front government was formed and the great stay-in strikes broke out. As one older couple said at the Bastille assembly “it was like 1936 again – the first time we won the right to a paid holiday.”
Let there be no mistake, things will never be the same in France again. There may be many set backs due to the opportunist tricks of some of the leaders of both working class parties. The left reformist ministers may well fail to deliver the socialist goods.
But should they do, the French workers and large sections of the middle class too, will sweep them away and put in place men and women who have been tried and tested in the struggle and are prepared to carry it through to the end.
The French people are on the move. The long delayed transformation of old Europe may not just be around the corner but it is clearly beginning.
 




Dear Comrades
While on a recent visit to West Germany I heard it reported that
the right-wing Social Democratic Mayor of Hamburg, Ulrich Klose,
stated at a public meeting that the present form of state existed
only to “carry out repairs on capitalism,” thereby admitting the
truth of the Marxist analysis that the state exists to protect the
property of the monopoly capitalists who control the economy.
Such apparently ‘left’ remarks by a prominent right-wing
politician reflect the growing desire of the rank and file that the
German Social Democratic Party should return to socialist policies.
Our fight for a Labour government committed to a socialist policy is
not only the way to stop the attacks on our own standard of living by
a decaying capitalism, it is also the way forward to the Socialist
United States of Europe.



 


Yours sincerely
Dudley Edwards



 




Jim Brookshaw’s article in Militant, No. 345, on the proposed new programme for the British Communist Party should provide all serious members as well as ex-members of that party with food for thought.
Having spent most of his adult and politically active life in the party, the present writer left it not long before Jim Brookshaw joined. The reason for this was that I was slowly forced to the conclusion that there was a basic contradiction between the policies we were asked to support and our allegiance to the cause of the working class struggle to change society.
During its forty years of existence in Britain there have been thousands of ex-members of the CP who reached the same conclusion. Indeed it is probable that the ex-members would constitute almost the largest party in the country!
Many who left during and after my long membership eventually became hostile or politically passive. However there is a minority who remained dedicated to the cause of socialism and I hope my contribution will be useful in particular to these members of my own generation as well as to many who are CP members today.
There is one event over the last fifty years the significance of which all those who work for the socialist transformation of society will be agreed upon. That was the great October revolution of the working class in 1917. It was then that a socialist party – the Bolsheviks – won over the majority of the Russian workers and for the first time in history overthrew not only Czarist absolutism but capitalism as well.
At that time the Bolsheviks as well as many socialists in other lands saw the Revolution as the beginning of the world socialist revolution. Not only Lenin and Trotsky but also Stalin then believed it was not possible to create a genuinely democratic socialist society in backward Russia alone, unless the socialist revolution spread to one of the more advanced industrial countries in the West.
It was on the basis of this perspective that the Bolshevik party (then still known by the way as a section of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party) based its tactics. They assumed that workers’ power could hold out until the working class of the West came to the assistance of the young workers’ republic.
As a matter of fact revolutions did take place in the West as expected but these great spontaneous movements of the workers in Germany, Austria, Italy and elsewhere were sidetracked by the reformist leaders. This enabled bankrupt capitalism to re-stabilize itself after the frightful slaughter of the capitalist war of 1914–1918. Unlike in Russia, there was no Bolshevik Party in which the workers had confidence.
Previous to 1914 imperialism made enormous profits from the exploitation of tribes throughout the empires. So they were able to throw large crumbs to what Lenin called the “labour lieutenants of capitalism” at the top of the labour movement. In return these people who had control of the working class organisations produced their “theories” of social reformism to show that the socialist revolution had become unnecessary in order to bring power and wealth to ordinary working people.
After the final defeat of the German revolution in 1923 the history of the European labour movement was a series of almost unbroken defeats until after the Second World War. But these defeats could have been avoided, as well as the Second World War itself, if the Communist Parties controlled by the Third International had continued to apply the broad strategy advised by Lenin and his comrades.
 
This defeat of the German revolution forced the Russian workers exhausted by years of war and civil war to yield to the superficially attractive “theory” of the possibility of creating socialism in one country alone, without the assistance of socialist revolutions in other more advanced capitalism countries. This theory was suddenly invented by Bukharin and Stalin in 1924 as a means of protecting the privileged bureaucracy which they came to represent in the USSR.
From then on the Communist International became dominated by this bureaucracy in Russia and its constituent parties dependent on various subsidies from their masters. It was during this period that Comrade Pollitt the stalwart British CP leader was in the habit of saying “the sincerity of a socialist depended on the degree of his support for the USSR.” This really meant support for the bureaucratic caste which had usurped power over the nationalised economy, destroyed the original workers’ democracy and eliminated most of the Old Bolsheviks.
Today at long last the General Secretary of the CP is reported as saying that in the past the CP has allowed itself to be “too much identified with everything that happens in the USSR.” In recent times the CP Executive Committee, perhaps with less enthusiasm than some of the so-called “Euro-Communist” parties, has been distancing itself from some of the more obviously totalitarian methods of the Soviet regime by making protests about repressions in Czechoslovakia and the USSR itself. The Morning Star has given brief but objective reports about the various uprisings of the Polish workers against the economic policies of their own bureaucracy.
This is of course an advance! However on no occasion since the famous exposures of the crimes of Stalinism at the 20th and 22nd Congresses of the USSR has there been any serious effort to produce a Marxist analysis of why the CP slavishly followed the false “theories” and orders of Stalin for many years of its existence.
Such an analysis is needed not just to put the record straight, but because this long acceptance of all the tacks and turns of Stalinist foreign and domestic policy hindered any real political growth by the CP in Britain.
No really viable programme for a socialist revolution in Britain is possible unless the CP’s backlog of political somersaults are analysed and understood. Except for a brief period prior to 1926 the CP has won no really mass support from the workers and this is due to the failure to recognise its past mistakes. Only on this basis can a correct policy for today be evolved.
When we used to raise these questions about past mistakes and political zig-zags which seemed to us to have been forced on the CP by the requirements of Stalinist foreign policy, we generally received two typical answers more or less as follows: “We can’t afford long theoretical debates about the past. No doubt mistakes were made but right now we must get on with the job in hand.” Or alternatively: “Naturally comrades, tactics must be flexible. The situation is very different to what it was in Lenin’s day and therefore calls for a different policy.” The point where flexibility ends and opportunism begins was of course not explained.
This kind of plausible argument may be likened to a teacher of mathematics who has crossed his blackboard with erroneous calculations; when this is pointed out he simply proposes to wipe the board clean and start a new sum. The truth is that without an understanding why the original calculation was wrong it will be impossible to do correctly any sums at all. As Jim Brookshaw suggests in his article the draft programme shows that the CP has changed its mind about many things – implicitly if not explicitly. Let us consider how many of these “changes of mind” correspond to criticism made years before by the Marxist opposition (originally labelled as “Trotskyist” by the Stalinists).
All the left-right zig-zags cannot be listed here, but to mention a few:

The infamous Stalinist theory of ‘social fascism’ which described all left socialists as ‘social fascists’. This did as much damage to German working class unity as the palsied political cowardice of the social democratic leaders in the face of the Nazi attack. With Hitler’s victory it was suddenly and silently dropped. No explanation was ever given.
 
That ultra left line was followed by the ultra right line of the “popular front” which in all cases led the working class into disaster.
 
Today the new draft programme proposes a perspective of a series of left governments with the CP in support. This seems to be taking the place of Popular Front. But it has the same consequence for it is a process by which the capitalist class will be given the time to strike back. Nowhere are the workers told they will have to break the economic and political power of the capitalist class immediately a left government with a socialist programme comes to power to avoid the fate of the German workers in the ’30s or of Chile in 1973.
 
The two greatest powers on earth outside America, Russia and China, are at daggers drawn yet each calls itself “Communist”.

Their antagonism is based upon purely national interests and on no conceivable principle of internationalism.
This bears out the remarkable prediction of Trotsky forty years ago, that the false “theory” of the possibility of socialism in one country alone would lead eventually to the breakdown of any real political solidarity between the CPs of the world and to their transformation into parties of purely “national socialism” i.e. nationalistic and reformist.
It is clear that only if the present generation of politically conscious workers resolutely turns its back on the last remnants of the worn out ideas of Stalinism (still found in the CP) and strives to build out of the existing organisations of the working class new Marxist leadership can we be victorious in the battles for socialism that are to come.
 




The sudden calling of an election should have been an added reason for the Labour Party to proceed with the Old Age Pensioners demonstration at Trafalgar Square on Sunday 24 February. Instead they have withdrawn support, allegedly for electoral reasons.
At the same time the TUC has abandoned the one-day protest strike that had been prepared for November 25 and both bodies have thereby missed a magnificent opportunity to show the public that only a Labour victory on February 28 can offer any real prospect of an improvement in the new desperate conditions of thousands of pensioners.
Both of these events could have been part of a fruitful Labour election campaign. A magnificent opportunity has been lost. Of course the proposed increase of £10 for a single person and £16 for a married couple has now been overtaken by the ever increasing prices of everything pensioners need to keep themselves alive.
Nevertheless only the Labour Party is firmly committed by conference decision to immediately introduce this increase when elected to office. More important than the £10 and £16 is the implementation of the rest of the Labour Party resolution (No. 22 Blackpool 1973) which proposed the following:
“To provide a proper standard of living related to a percentage of national average earnings and to increases in retail prices by annual and quarterly reviews with a pension for women equal to that of men.”
 
Paraffin 7p Up
Now that Heath has staged his snap election the plight of pensioners has become a political football. In words, but not in deeds, the Tories and the Liberal Party are making all kinds of vague promises.
The Liberals because they will have no responsibility to implement these promises, are now suggesting pensions at 50% of national earnings.
The Tories are proposing a 6 monthly instead of an annual review, because Heath knows that in April, Barber if elected will introduce an austerity budget which will cut down still further on social services (hospitals, housing etc). This will have the effect of cancelling out any small increase pensioners might receive.
Meantime the immediate plight of the pensioners is worsening daily. It would be enough to quote only one item – the increase of 7p a gallon on paraffin with more to come, to show this. Of course, Heath brushes this aside by blaming everything on the Arabs (if not the miners), but the bitter truth is that 30p per gallon for paraffin means that very many pensioners will now have insufficient heating and therefore die of Hypothermia.
It is all very well for laughing boy Heath to go on his “walkabouts” trying to drum up votes, he would do better to watch the strained and worried faces of the old people as they stand before the counters at the supermarkets, wondering how they are going to make their present pittances buy enough food to keep themselves alive.
Heath’s confederate Anthony Barber now goes round with “hand on heart” telling us that he understands the need for better pensions, but the money to pay out for the moderate improvements proposed by the Labour Party, is “just not there”.
What this means is that the capitalist system cannot and will not accept the cost of even a minimum standard of living for pensioners. To the Tories and their big business backers, pensioners are really unacceptable overhead costs.
Such working men and women are no longer able to produce that profit which derives from the use of their labour power. It is this labour power which allows Heath and his class to have their “Morning Clouds” at £33,000 a time, or their landed estates like Lord Carrington’s, now valued at £10 million. When workers are too old to provide any of the profit that makes these things possible they are really regarded as industrial scrap by capitalism.
It has been the labour power of the older working men and women, that made it possible for a few “City Gents” to suddenly produce £80 thousand a day to bribe the miners back to work. This was because the city tycoons were losing much more than if the miners continue to withhold their labour. It is now reported that the revised cost of the Brighton Marina will be more than £100 million. Yet such sums of capital are produced by big businessmen at the drop of the hat.
The same class are telling us that to raise the incomes of pensioners to say £20 a week, or the wage of a coal face workers to £45 will bankrupt the country! The fact is that it would only reduce the profits of a few score monopolies who control over 80% of the country’s wealth. It might also mean a reduction in the “golden handshake” pensions paid out to company directors, including some cabinet ministers, when they cease sitting on boards of directors.
Such people, who have lived all their lives in secure circumstances are quite unable to understand what it means for working-men pensioners to find their small savings dwindling to nothing until they find themselves having to survive on their so-called pensions. Such savings are soon eroded by increasing prices, and a married couple – as in the case of the present writer – may have to live on a combined pension of £12.85 plus about £5 of supplementary benefit if they are lucky after submitting to an exhaustive means test.
When one looks at the enormous profits made out of speculation – one property company increasing its assets by £400 million since 1969 – it is an insult to the intelligence for Anthony Barber to say that it would be too costly to provide the older working men and women with a minimum income sufficient to give them a feeling of security in the evening of their lives.
 
First Step Only
The cash is there, Mr Barber, and it must be used to give the pensioners a fair and permanent new deal. This is what a Labour Government is committed to, as its very first priority. But let us remember this increase in the pension is only a first step.
At the same time we should be on guard against the Utopian illusions of those Labour leaders who claim to be so “practical and pragmatic”. The permanence of any of the reforms they propose to introduce “bit by bit” really depends on the carrying through of a Socialist plan for the complete reconstruction of society.
Even if they seriously try to carry out the reforms they now propose, including their commitments to Old Age Pensioners such measures will be met with every kind of economic and political sabotage especially at a time when world capitalism is sliding into an economic crisis.
The ruling class will stop at nothing to defend its profits and its privilege. Only the carrying through of a complete Socialist transformation of society will prevent the economic sabotage of the reforms which Labour’s Programme calls for.
 




Editor’s Note
The Socialist movement must learn the lessons of the past. In Britain today the fascist forces are weak and impotent in the face of a mighty Labour Movement, undefeated for a generation. Nevertheless in recent months and years the National Front and other racialist groups have gained an element of support, from sections of the middle class, frightened by social conflicts and driven into insecurity by inflation.
At the same time some politically backward workers, disillusioned with the Labour and Trade Union leaders and alienated by the failure of the past Labour Government to take any real action in their interests, have gravitated towards the National Front.
While recognising the power of the Labour Movement at the present time it would be foolish to forget that the German Labour Movement, also an enormously powerful force, went down under the blows of the German fascist movement, because of the cowardly policies of the leaders of the Social Democrats and the hopelessly ultra-left policies of the Communist Party, which prevented unity in action.
We are entering a period of stormy struggle and crisis in Britain. The inflation and attempt to cut into the living standards of the past few years is as nothing compared with what is in store over the next few years.
Under these conditions, attempts to create a large movement of reaction will be made, basing itself on racialist demagogy and chauvinism, exploiting the terrified insecurity of the middle class and sections of the workers.
As the author of this article demonstrated, even at the last stages of 1932, a clear lead from the leaders of the German workers’ movement could have cut across the appeal of the fascists to the pauperised middle class and lumpen proletarians, smashed the threat which they posed and offered a way out of the desperate conditions facing the German people at that time.
The Labour Movement today, will ignore these lessons at its peril. If the Labour Government continues with capitalist policies, the inevitable disillusionment among the workers and the middle class at the continuing crisis will provide fertile soil in which reaction can plant its seeds. If the leaders of the labour movement do not now stand up and answer the lies of racialists with a clear socialist alternative on the burning problems of housing, jobs, health etc, then their influence will grow.
Above all, if Labour is to learn from the awful lessons of Germany in the 1930s, the leaders must take bold action against the capitalist system. Action speaks louder than words. The way to win the middle class and the wavering workers and nip the fascist threat in the bud is to mobilise the movement around a clear socialist programme.

The German Labour Movement, in the years following the First World War, was the great vanguard army of the European working class. Had its leaders been worthy of the great sacrifices made by the German workers then not only would Socialism have been victorious in the West, but mankind would have avoided the 2nd World War and millions of lives would have been saved.
In what follows I would hope to convey to a younger generation something of the terrible tension of those days before the German Fascist movement was let loose upon the organised working class and to draw some conclusions from the visit I made to the industrial Ruhr over 40 years ago in 1932. Even at that late hour, unity in action between the Social Democratic Party and the KPD (Communist Party) which between them shared the majority of the votes of the German workers, could have turned the tide against the Nazis.
Basically, the aim of the German ruling class was similar to that of the British: to solve the crisis of capitalism at the expense of the working class. However, British Capitalism was still able to do this without completely destroying its own form of capitalist democracy.
Under the allegedly “democratic” National Government wholesale attacks had been made on the wages, unemployment and welfare benefits of the British workers. It was these economic attacks which made me aware of the class nature of society behind this democratic façade.
Seeing the terrible struggles of the German workers during that fateful summer of 1932 completed my political education as a Socialist.
Immediately our train crossed from Belgium into Germany we sensed the tension in the air. Continuing our journey through the great industrial complex of the Ruhr we saw many huge slogans whitewashed on walls, up the sides of factory windows and on railway bridges.
Most of these were Social Democratic or Communist slogans, though some were of obvious Nazi origin.
As we moved towards our destination, the small industrial town of Schwerte, near the great city of Dusseldorf, Red Flags flew from buildings and other high places. Some of these bore the hammer and sickle, others the three arrows of the Social Democratic Reichsbanner (the SPD defence organisation), others the crooked cross of the Nazis. (By some of these flags and slogans were groups of unemployed workers, stationed there to prevent them being removed).
At one point the train passed a huge brick built prison. At several of its windows we noticed that inmates thrust their arms through the barred windows giving the clenched fist salute.
When we arrived we were met at the station by an old veteran of the working class movement who had been an active left wing member of the Social Democratic Party for fifty years. We had contacted him through the correspondence columns of the New Leader, the old ILP Journal. In the recent elections in the town the Communists had gained nearly 50% of the votes so that our comrade was able to introduce us to many KPD as well as SPD members.
On leaving Britain there had been over 2½ million unemployed in 1932, but we were hardly prepared for the almost complete industrial shut-down in the town of Schwerte. Nearly 60% of adult workers were idle. Our first impression in the streets was of walking through a pedestrian precinct on a public holiday!
Practically no cars were in the streets. Perhaps our biggest surprise was the complete absence of any sign of Nazi activity, although Hitler’s seizure of power was then only six months away. Support for the SPD and the KPD seemed almost unanimous.
However we were quickly taken to see the grim and irrefutable proof of Nazi terrorism in the Town Cemetery. There we were shown the graves of two young members of the Reichsbanner and the Kampf Bund (the KPD Defence organisation). They had been killed in clashes with invading Nazi Storm Troops.
There, before the graves of these young men, our old German comrade explained how the Nazis came to town, like an invading army, brought by train and motor coach from all parts of Germany, organised in military formations, equipped with semi-armoured cars, food kitchens and all kinds of small arms. If in spite of this they could not make their way through the resistance of the local workers, the police of the “democratic” Weimar Republic world come to their aid.
When we were taken to the various organisations and clubs in the town we found that in spite of Nazi attempts to attract some of the unemployed the majority were organised by the Communists. A special meeting was organised in the local cinema at which we spoke to a mainly unemployed audience through an interpreter.
I was at that time still the secretary of the Marylebone Branch of the National Unemployed Workers’ Movement and a member of the London District Council of that movement and I expressed our solidarity.
The main speaker was a member of the KPD. As I had a smattering of German I was able to gather the gist of his speech. Mostly this seemed to be devoted to strong attacks on the SPD. Much of the political criticism of the supine attitude of this party was no doubt fully justified, but the speaker’s attitude seemed to us to be too derisory, particularly of the Social Democratic Reichsbanner (defence organisation).
Most of the members of this body we knew were sincere Socialists, if still confused by those who held the top positions in their organisations. These rank and file workers had been putting up a brave and often physical resistance to the Nazi storm troopers.
The speaker did not seem to express the desperate need for unity in action with the Social Democratic workers, but treated them rather contemptuously. Nevertheless the local militancy of the Reichsbanner was being cancelled by the cowardly national policy of continual retreat and acquiescence in the face of the anti-working class economic decrees laid down by the three dictators who ruled Germany before Hitler – Bruning, Papen and Schleicher.
For three years these representatives of Big Business, the officer caste and the Junkers of Prussia fought among themselves to get control of the state. Each change of the Head of State led to a worsening of the condition of the masses and between 1930 and 1932 the real wages of the workers were reduced by nearly 50%.
At each stage in the erosion of the workers’ standard of living, the Social Democrats lost votes to the Nazis or the Communists, but the SPD still had the support of a majority of the German workers.
In 1920 the working class had stopped, with a General Strike, the so-called “Kapp Putsch” when some German Generals tried to seize power while the leaders of the Social Democrats stood by. These leaders continued to dampen the struggle, even when the only way to save their own necks was to mobilise the working class.
Thus when the Papen Government simply sent policemen to kick out the duly elected Social Democratic Minister of the Prussian state administration, the only response of these bureaucrats was to appeal to the German High Court to re-instate them in office. Ironically 9 months later the High Court did decide in their favour. By this time Hitler had his jackboot on the threshold of power and the demoralised ex-ministers were on the run from the Nazi terror gangs.
All this was the consequence of the cowardly policy of the “Lesser Evil” which led eventually to the worst of all evils, when Hindenburg – who had been supported as President by these peace-at-any-price “Democrats” – invited Hitler to take control of the state.
Of course with the benefit of hindsight it is easier to understand what was really happening then when as young militant socialists we mixed with equally enthusiastic German Young Socialists. Today it is possible to see that we were over-impressed by the strength of the workers’ organisations in the area.
Like most of the German workers whom we met in their homes as well as at meetings we could not believe even at that late hour that all the enthusiasm and willingness to struggle we saw around us, would be destroyed by Social Democratic leaders whose party had been nursed into political strength by the early pioneers of scientific socialism, Marx and Engels. Nor did we understand the damage done by the fatal sectarianism of the Communist International which invented the theory of “Social Fascism”.
According to this theory all Social Democratic and Trade Union officials – and there were thousands of them – were to be regarded as “Social Fascists”. This theory, which antagonised hundreds of thousands of Social Democratic workers, was not changed until the last minute, when it was too late to create that unity in action which, had it been achieved eighteen months earlier, might have smashed the gathering forces of Fascism.
What is beyond dispute is that if Unity had been achieved, even at the eleventh hour, Hitler could have been defeated. We saw at first hand the evidence for this when we took part in the last mass demonstration against the Nazis in the Ruhr which took place in Dusseldorf. It was an unforgettable experience to march with 25,000 German workers under the already looming threat of the Nazi terror.
Today I often wonder how many of those workers are still alive. The discipline and determination of that march was particularly impressive because it had been officially banned by the heavily armed police. As we passed through the villages and countryside between Schwerte and Dusseldorf we obtained a true picture of the extraordinary political fluidity of Germany in those days. In some areas red flags had been hoisted from windows to greet us as we passed.
However in other places we saw the crooked cross of the Nazi flag. In some villages people welcomed us with the Red Front salute while in others we were met with the sign of a cut throat by Nazi supporters. Still more paradoxically, some uniformed Nazis actually greeted us with the Red Front salute and a few even wanted to join the Anti-Fascist demonstration in Dusseldorf!
When we returned to Britain a few weeks later I read that the bands of German unemployed had been seen marching behind banners inscribed with the words “give us bread or go red!” All this bears out the view that the Hitler victory was by no means inevitable even then.
Shortly after we left Germany in early September 1932, the November elections showed how much the issue still hung in the balance. The Nazis lost two million votes. The labour leaders promptly and stupidly interpreted this to mean the end of the Fascist threat.
The truth was exactly the contrary. The indication that the petit-bourgeoisie and the lumpen proletarian support of the Nazis might fall away was the very reason why German monopoly capitalism decided that the time had come to put its enormous financial resources at the disposal of Hitler. The mere possibility that German working class unity might be achieved after all, made the ruling class decide that the hour to strike against the Labour movement could be delayed no longer.
When I look back now, forty years later, to that working class march through Dusseldorf my chief recollection is of its grim and desperate character. We marched through the centre of the city in dead silence, the spectators silently watching us. No playing of bands, shouting of slogans or singing songs. This was forbidden by the police, who drove by us slowly in open trucks. All of them were armed with rifles which they seemed ready to use on the first possible excuse.
There is little doubt that we were affected by the over-confidence of the younger KPD members who had been taught by their leaders that the destruction of the SPD by the Nazis and the fall of the Weimar Republic might not really be such a calamity in the end. Hitler (so the theory went) could not solve the economic contradictions of German capitalism and therefore the Communist workers would be able to overthrow the Nazis quite soon after they got power.
This superficial and complacent attitude was exploded three months later when in a few weeks the whole of the Social Democratic and Communist organisations were destroyed including (almost) all the underground organisations prepared in advance. The leaders of the KPD stood by as Hitler took power, as he himself was to boast “without a pane of glass being broken”.
Having destroyed the Labour and Trade Union movement, the Nazi rulers turned to Cultural and Social organisations particularly prolific under the Weimar Republic. However remote the organisation or club from politics at all, without exception were automatically and forcibly merged into the Nazi organisational network.
In this way the class struggle was smothered and society atomised. Soon no-one trusted anyone else. Even leisure activities like card parties, bridge or chess clubs ceased to be places where people could talk freely or voice any opposition to the will of the Fuhrer for fear of being betrayed.
The German Labour Movement disappeared from public life for 15 years and the whole of the advanced sections of the working class, running into several millions, was either driven into silence, membership of the Nazi Party, physically exterminated in the concentration camps or killed in the 2nd World War.
It is this systematic extermination of the Labour Movement and the whole of the left wing supported by a very strong mass organisation which distinguished Fascism, even from the most brutal Bonapartist and military dictatorship. The horror of the Nazi regime is not a purely German phenomenon but, in similar circumstances, with certain national variations, they could appear in any capitalist country. We must therefore fully understand the stages that lead to fascism.
There is a veiled economic dictatorship hidden behind every form of capitalist parliamentary democracy. The march towards fascism generally begins when this hidden dictatorship takes an open political form in order to repress the growing strength of working class organisations. But this is not yet fascism. A military dictatorship – a bonapartist regime – tries to cut down the proletarian tree of life. Fascism aims to burn out its very roots. In Germany in 1933 it nearly succeeded – but not quite.
As Lenin pointed out, however horrible the repression resorted to, the capitalist system will always create those conditions which cause the working class movement to grow up again and revolt against those conditions.
Today out of the ashes of the defeat in 1933 a new and ten times more powerful German Labour Movement has arisen and the big industrial battles it has begun today will be directed against the capitalist system itself tomorrow.
 

