

THE PROBLEM that faced the YPSL at Cleveland as an organization of revolutionary Socialist youth may be summed up as follows. (1) The existence of the American Youth Congress is a living fact that cannot be altered by calling it good or bad. (2) The YPSL has been part of the AYC since its inception and therefore carries a certain share of the responsibility for its existence. It has a further responsibility to the groups that have looked to it for leadership in the AYC. (3) During the last year all the tendencies that make the AYC a Junior People’s Front have been strengthened and all the tendencies that make it a united front have been weakened. (4) The YPSL knew it could not permanently be part of a People’s Front movement even if it remained with objections to the character of the movement. It therefore had to hold the perspective of fighting to change its character and to assume the perspective of breaking when it became obvious that no hope of effecting such a change remained.
Only One Course Possible
The question then arises as to what change the YPSL could propose. The League understands that a united front organization on a permanent basis for even minimum demands like the American Youth Act becomes a propaganda organization in the end and propaganda is a function revolutionists always jealously reserve for their own organization. The circumstances permitted only one course. We proposed that the AYC become a machinery to keep organizations in contact with one another so that it could readily initiate united front actions as the need for such actions arose. This was our central proposal and we carried the fight around it as it effected every other question that arose before the Congress.
Comrade Thurber is correct when he says the YPSL stresses the need of a working-class base for the AYC and such activities as will align it on the side of labor in the class struggle. We did not however, approach the question from the need of the AYC declaring that it needs a working-class base. As Marxists we seek to involve the middle classes in the class struggle on the side of the workers not by saying that a movement without a labor base is valueless, but by involving the middle class elements in united front actions with the working-class. We rest assured that the working-class leadership of such united fronts will not be threatened as long as the leaders of the working-class themselves do not betray its interests. (The People’s Front is precisely such a betrayal of the interests of the workers to those of the middle classes.)
A “CIO” for the AYC
The YPSL has not broken with the AYC. We have remained in and built a bloc of powerful trade unions and other organizations to carry on the fight inside the AYC to convert it into a united front machinery. We still continue the agitation for our united front pact called a “Declaration of Purpose” which we proposed at Cleveland. We will engage in all united front actions the AYC carries out like parades, demonstrations, mass meetings (we will let the YCL run the art exhibits and boat rides). But we will do more than agitate for the correct united front structure. We will demonstrate what we mean by initiating united front actions outside the AYC in which we will involve youth organizations of both the working and the middle class youth organizations in the AYC and organizations outside the AYC. If the YCL remains obstinate and continues to impose its People’s Front concept upon the AYC by means of its mechanical control, it may become necessary to utilize these united front actions outside the AYC to build up a new united front center for the organizations of youth willing to act on specific questions of the fight against militarism, for civil liberties, and for the defense of the economic interests of the youth.



On May 22 in Basle, Switzerland, there sat down at the council table representatives from Germany, the United States, Great Britain, and other powers.
They were all bankers. They are the board of directors of the Bank of International Settlement.
Axis bankers and United Nations bankers sat side by side to act upon the business of the bank. Its business is to facilitate the payment of debts and reparations still remaining from World War I.
In the chair, as president, was Thomas McKittrick. He is an American. He is on the board to represent American interests. He is also the president of the First Mutual Bank of New York City.
The capitalist press said almost nothing about his meeting. It was buried in the financial pages of the New York Times.
However, the capitalist press had screaming headlines about a place only a few hundred miles south of Switzerland. Here Germans were meeting Americans also. This place was Anzio. But here it was a meeting across a battlefield, not a council table. The “discussion” took place with shrapnel and machine guns. Death, not dividends, was on the agenda.
In last, week’s column I discussed the great degree of class consciousness which the capitalist show in defending their system. The above news about the Bank of International Settlement induces me to return to that subject and expand upon it.
 
Capitalist Internationalism
American capitalists show class solidarity in action against the American working class. But that is not all. The capitalists ot the world have shown throughout their history that they will unite in time of crisis on a world scale against the forces of world labor and to preserve world capitalism.
The meeting in Basle is an indication of this. Does this mean that the capitalists don’t care about who wins the war?
No. Such a view is both childish and utterly fantastic.
The capitalists of the various nations are strongly supporting their own governments in the war. American bankers want an American victory over Germany just as much as German bankers want a victory over the United Sattes.
Wall Street sees in an American victory an opportunity for dominating the finance, industry and trade of the whole world.
German bankers see the opportunity in a German victory.
However, there is one thing both German and American capitalists are agreed on. That is that no matter which side wins, capitalism must continue.
That is why we have heard many reports recently which show that I.G. Farben, Krupp and other German corporations are making preparations – now that they fear Germany will lose – to become junior partners in the great world cartels which American and British capital will organize after the war.
Yes, the war at Anzio is a real war.
And the meeting at Basle is a real meeting.
The war at Anzio is part of the stupendous, world-shaking conflict to decide who will rule the world.
The meeting at Basle is a sideshow to take care of a few practical business matters to keep international finance from getting all gummed up during the war – because that would be bad for international capitalism.
However, if international capitalism were to crack up somewhere and threaten the whole structure, we would then see, as we have seen so many times in the past, the international solidarity of capitalists as the main business.
 
A Case in Point
When the Russian workers overthrew the rotten ruling class of Russia in 1917, both German and Allied armies invaded Russia to defend capitalism and fight the hew workers republic. The Red Army of the Russian workers and peasants fought the Germans in Finland and the Ukraine, the Americans in Archangel, the British in the Crimea, and the Japanese in Siberia.
Some of the most important discussions between Woodrow Wilson, Lloyd George and Clemenceau at the peace conference in Versailles in 1918 were devoted to international capitalism’s fight against the workers’ government of Russia.
And the people who called most loudly for an invasion of Russia were the defeated capitalists of Russia itself. They were patriotic supporters of the war as long as they were in power. But when the working class took over, they invited foreign bayonets to come in and butcher the men and women defending Russian soil.
 
Another Instance
Germany defeated France in 1871. However, when the workers of Paris set up their own government – the Commune – the German Bismarck assisted the Frenchman Thiers in putting down the workers’ revolt.
From these examples of history we can draw many valuable lessons for use today.
 



Of all the different kind of people who go to make up this world, none fills an honest man with such utter disgust as the creature who makes his living as a wage worker but does his thinking as a capitalist.
The old Wobblies called this creature a “Scissor Bill.”
There isn’t a shop, that, doesn’t have its share of them. Blessed, indeed, is the union man who doesn’t have to work near one of them. To hear a Scissor Bill sound off is enough to turn your stomach.
The Scissor Bill has his feet in the working class and his head in the capitalist class.
He works, eats and lives like a worker. But he thinks like a capitalist.
He does not identify his welfare and interest with those of his fellow workers. He identifies his welfare and interest with those of his employer and the capitalist class generally.
The Scissor Bill is the ideal wage slave. He is a working man, like any other working man. He has arms, hands, legs, feet and eyes with which to work for the boss. But in place of a brain be has an editorial from the capitalist press. Or else a record of a speech from the National Manufacturers convention.
The capitalists are, in his mind, men with brains and energy who “burned the midnight oil” and “worked up to where they are.” We should respect them for their ability and be glad that they keep industry running so we have work.
Labor leaders are all racketeers who are trying to get rich quick out of the dues “the poor workers are forced to pay.” The Scissor Bill knows this for a fact. Even Westbrook Pegler says so. And Pegler ^writes for the Morning Blah. Such a big and respectable paper certainly wouldn’t lie.
The Scissor Bill reads the Morning Blah on his way to work and then worries all day about what he read.
His face gets more and more mournful as he thinks about:
How are we ever going to pay of the national debt?
How will industry manage during reconversion, when .production stops and overhead continues?
How can they expect industry to give everyone a job, when industry doesn’t know whether it will have a market after the war?
And if everyone doesn’t have a job, where will the money come from to buy what industry will make?
How will industry be able to get on its feet after the war if they keep burdening it with taxes?
And at night, Scissor Bill, his shoulders bent with the load of worries, goes home to turn on his radio to hear more capitalist lies.
Scissor Bill is the modern counterpart of the slave whose aim in life was to be an ideal slave and serve his master well. All through human history the exploited class has always been divided between Scissor Bills and rebels, between those who crawl on their bellies and those who stand up on their legs.
The Negro people in this counry, through their centuries-long bondage, had both their Uncle Toms and their Frederick Douglases. And, unfortunately, they still have them today.
Ancient Rome had its slaves who were proud to die for their master and it also had its army of rebels who rose in insurrection under the leadership of Spartacus.
The Southern planter gave his old hat to Uncle Tom . and a worn-out dress to the faithful “Mamie,” but had whips and bloodhounds for the slave in whom the spirit of human dignity and love of freedom burned too strongly.
In like manner the boss today seeks to find countless little rewards (which cost him little) for the “company stooge” and countless persecutions of the class-conscious worker.
* * *
But the Scissor Bill of today usually differs in one respect from his cringing forebears. The Scissor Bill is usually also very dissatisfied with things today. He complains much about many things. But he is distinguished from the rebel in that the Scissor Bill always finds some other “little guy” as the source of his troubles.
He talks for days on end about some welders in a shipyard who were arrested for cheating on piecework reports, This, he tells us, is why we must pay such high taxes. But he thinks the big corporations are above such things.
He thinks the little grocers and butchers should be jailed for running up prices, but never understands that the real profiteers are the big interests.
He complains that unskilled labor is getting eighty cents an hour in shipyards. This proves to him how selfish people are. “They want to hog it all while our boys fight for $55 a month.” But he never says anything about the cost of living or shipyard profits.
He thinks that the trouble with this country is that people spend their earnings instead of saving them for a rainy day. “Most workers are lazy bums who want the government to feed them when they are out of a job.”
And following out this line of thought, the average Scissor Bill today ends up with the discovery that “the Jews have all the money and run the country,” that Negroes “are invading white men’s jobs,” that Jews, Negroes and foreigners have ninety per cent of the Civil Service jobs, that “there are too many women working” and that “this country is going on the rocks and we need a dictator to clean up.”
The Scissor Bill is always stupid and reactionary. But today his thinking is being guided into more and more open fascist channels.
The Scissor Bill is a worker who betrays his class. The Scissor Bill is a worker who fights in the ranks of the enemy.
As a traitor to his own kind, the Scissor Bill merits neither sympathy nor mercy. Out of his ranks came the scabs in the past and out of his ranks will come the fascist rank and file in the future.
 



The Socialist Party (Norman Thomas’ party) will hold its national convention in Reading, Pa., on June 2–4. The main purpose of the event is to nominate its candidates in the presidential race.
Though the call describes it as the twenty-fourth national convention, this, strictly speaking, is a very formal designation. The Socialist Party of today has about as much in common with the Socialist Party of Eugene V. Debs as the Communist Party of today has with the sincere revolutionists who founded it in 1919.
This does not imply that the Socialist Party of today is not composed, in the main, of sincere and idealistic people. Quite the contrary; the Socialist Party of today has the unique ability of attracting a most varied collection of humanitarians and believers in “do-good-ism.”
There is hardly a current of well-meaning confusion that is not represented in the Socialist Party. Every serious question finds as many different answers in the Socialist Party as among the liberal population of the country generally.
 
A Cross-Section of the SP
When the war crisis faced America before Pearl Harbor, views within the Socialist Party ran from Walter White’s “aid to England” brand of intervention all the way to “Keep America Out of War” isolationism that brought Norman Thomas to the same platform with Lindbergh.
The May Day issue of the Socialist Party organ, The Call, reflected a good cross-section of the people who compose the organization and its following. There were greetings from those who see victory being assured by the United Nations. There were greetings from dozens of socialists in conscientious objectors’ camps. There were greetings from courageous but mistaken socialists who are serving prison terms for their refusal to serve in the Army because of their opposition to the war. Then there was a greeting from one socialist who could not wait for the war before enlisting in the National Guard
All call themselves socialists – all are well-meaning.
One finds greetings from ardent Quakers, ardent co-operators and ardent Social Action Methodists. One also find greetings from two war manufacturers and from at least one trade union bureaucrat who is trusted by less people in the labor movement than is Laval by the French people. Among the other trade unionists the best known are holding jobs by appointment from the top – jobs that last as long as the appointees keep quiet about the no-strike pledge and support to Roosevelt.
However, there are other trade unionists in the Socialist Party who are workers from the shop or officers of their locals by vote of their fellow workers. These are generally serious and consistently progressive in their trade union views. The courageous speech of Mark Brown at the recent convention of the Steel Workers Union in opposition to the no-strike pledge, is an example of this. In northern New Jersey, Detroit and a few other places, the Socialist Party contains active unionists, devoted to the working class. However, their progressive activities have little or no relation to their membership in the Socialist Party, with its unbelievable muddle-headedness in matters of program and organization.
 
No Clear-Cut Position
Despite a close reading of the SP Call, it is extremely difficult to find out where the party stands on any specific question. Usually, it has no position. Try as one will, one is unable to discover what the party position is on the Second International, and a perspective for re-uniting the international working class; on the class nature of the Soviet Union; on the nature of the present war; on Russia’s role in the war. It has no clear attitude toward the United Nations; toward conscientious objectors and pacifism generally; on how socialism is to be achieved; on the role and functioning of socialists in the labor movement; and on a myriad of other questions.
Not that most of these questions have not been discussed at one time or another in the organization. But the very nature of the party membership is such that a definite position on these questions is impossible to arrive at. Nor does the national executive committee think it important enough to try to establish a party position. Does it perhaps fear that, this would lead to splitting the party into six different camps? If the EC were serious about this problem, it would provide a convention agenda that would permit discussion and decision.
 
The Convention Agenda
The agenda of the forthcoming Reading convention provides time for everything: a keynote speech; a welcome speech; election of eight different committees (six of which will never complete their work or find time for a report to the convention); a report by the national secretary on the state of the party (all in thirty minutes!); messages and greetings from fraternal delegates; a public meeting; nominations of party candidates and acceptance speeches; and sundries sandwiched in. Where, in the midst of this busy three-day agenda, the delegates will get down to serious discussions of what the Socialist Party stands for these days and where it is going, is a mystery!
These questions will, as usual, be referred to the incoming NEC. Here they will lie dormant for the next year. A discussion will go on in the ranks, desultory or lively, depending on the locality and the critical nature of the problem. However, the party will have no position.
Meanwhile, its public position will, as always, be stated by Norman Thomas without consulting the party (speaking as “an individual,” of course). Many of the left-wingers will grumble and be dissatisfied. They will make threats about caucuses and internal bulletins and electing a “left wing” NEC next time. Thus it has been for these many years. It seems to have gotten into the blood of the party. Neither the virtue and wisdom of the gods nor the designs and Machiavellian maneuvers of the evil spirits can ever make this party anything else than it is.
And just what it is, is hard to say. What it is not comes more easily. It is not a Marxist party. It is not working-class in its composition. It is not socialist, except in the broadest meaning of the term. It is not a class-struggle party. It is not a genuine internationalist party. It is not clear about what it wants or how to get it. It is not disciplined in action.
What have we left? The SP definitely is composed of nice people with good intentions. Within it throbs a great heart that encompasses all “good causes” – no matter how contradictory and confused – that aim at uplifting mankind. But that is, not enough!
 



“Across these Pennsylvania hills there is a great body of men and women who, due to the selfishness of their own ill-advised and greedy leaders, sit-in in one of the citadels that must be stormed by the forces of their own consciences and patriotic thinking if the war effort is to proceed on schedule and faith be kept with our war dead.”
These words were spoken about the men and women who “stayed in” at the Brewster plant in Hatboro, Pa., on Memorial Day to work in an attempt to save their jobs.
They were spoken at a Memorial Day ceremony of the Veterans of Foreign Wars at Doylestown, near Hatboro. The speaker who spoke them was a certain Lieut.-Comdr. Earl Estes of the Navy. His words were prominently displayed on the front page of the New York Times right next to the news story about Brewster.
Estes also advised the Brewster workers to “hit the sawdust trail which leads to the mourners’ bench, where they can purge their hearts and minds of the very selfishness which, whether true or not, many of our fighting men believe motivates similar actions.”
Many of these “selfish” men and women at Brewster were working for nothing on Memorial Day, a holiday, while Estes was standing out in the sunshine talking to an audience of small business men and lawyers who were taking the day off.
 
Behind His Uniform
Who is this man Estes? Would his remarks hit the front pages of the big papers if he did not wear the Navy uniform?
Of course not.
Because when Estes comes out from hiding behind the uniform we see at once the reason for his hatred of working people who fight for their rights.
In private life Estes is a big Texas oil man and newspaper publisher.
No wonder, you say. Of course, no wonder.
The New York Times headline says: “Navy Officer Scores ‘Sit-In’ Selfishness.”
What if the New York Times had been honest (which is really impossible for a capitalist paper) ? it would have said: “Texas Oil Man and Publisher Scores ‘Sit-In’ Selfishness.”
But that would impress no one. That’s hardly news. What else would one expect from an oil man and publisher?
It is expected that an oil man and publisher will stand in class solidarity with the rest of the capitalist class against the demands of labor. Just as it is expected that a worker who has a brain will stand in class solidarity with the rest of the working class in struggle against capital.
Therefore, it is necessary for Estes to speak as a Navy man. Therefore, it is necessary for Estes to pretend to speak for “our fighting men.”
 
Voice of Big Business
Does Estes speak in behalf of the oil workers of Texas who are now serving in the armed forces?
Estes and his former employees now wear the same uniform but that does not make their interests the same. Estes will come back after the war and still be an oil man and publisher. If times are bad, he will shut down his oil wells and go to Palm Beach. His workers will go on relief.
The armed forces, we must remember, have within them the same people who make up the population. We find all classes of people represented. Estes leaves his desk and becomes an officer. John Jones leaves the oil derrick and becomes G.I. Jones.
From Estes’ speech we see that he still thinks and talks like a labor-hating capitalist. The uniform only serves as camouflage.
But what about G.I. Jones? Does he still think and talk like a union man?
Estes would like to have us believe that he speaks for “our fighting men.” Estes would like G.I. Jones to believe that the working people are his enemies. Estes, the capitalist in uniform, would like to pit the workers in uniform against their brothers and fathers at home. Estes would like to hand out his capitalist propaganda as coming front the ten million men in uniform.
 
Labor Must Reply
And, it is sad to note, many men in uniform have fallen for this disguised anti-labor propaganda. A few of them, of course, are just sawdust heads who always fell for company propaganda, even when at home on the job. But many are union men who knew better at home.
The responsibility for this progress of capitalist lies among service men rests upon the unions themselves. What have they seriously done to offset the news monopoly of anti-labor propaganda? With millions of dollars in the treasuries of the labor movement, why can’t we have a CIO daily newspaper? Why can’t we have a network of union-owned broadcasting stations? Why can’t we have union-owned film studios?
A progressive labor movement would have these means of public education.
And what an answer we could give Lieut.-Comdr. “Oil Man” Estes!
 



(This is the list referred to in last week’s column, Straight Talk, by Ernest Lund)
I. The American Labor Movement
Walker – American City. The, story of the class struggle in Minneapolis, particularly the great drivers’ strikes in 1934.
Adamic – Dynamite. A history of violence in American labor struggles.
O’Neal – Workers in American History. A study of the role of the working people in American, history from the earliest colonial times.
Shapiro and Harris – Black Worker. The history of the Negro worker in the American labor movement.
Huberman – Labor Spy Racket. Revelations of how employers use spies in the labor movement. Based on La Follete (Senate) Committee investigations.
Coleman – Debs: Man Unafraid. A biography of the great leader of the railroad workers who became America’s foremost Socialistist spokesman.
Haywood – Bill Haywood’s Book. Autobiography of the rugged Western miner who for two decades was part of every great strike, struggle as the IWW’s leading organizer.
Walsh – CIO. An excellent account of the organization of the great industrial organization movement.
Tippett – Horse Shoe Bottoms. A novel about a miner’s family, written by a miner’s son.
Levin – Citizens. A novel dealing with the massacre of the “Little Steel” strikers in Chicago, Memorial Day, 1937.
 
II. The Truth About Capitalism
Lundberg – America’s Sixty Families. The outstanding, documented, study of who owns America. Proves that sixty rich families have concentrated most of the wealth in their hands.
Rochester – Rulers of America. Contains most of the basic facts given by Lundberg but is written from a more class-conscious viewpoint.
Corey – House of Morgan. A detailed study of the J.P. Morgan control of finance capital in the USA, his rivalries with Rockefeller, and his struggles with labor.
O’Connor – Mellon’s Millions. A study of the rise of Andrew Mellon in the cut-throat struggle among the early capitalists, his development of the aluminum monopoly, and his control over Pittsburgh and, finally, U.S. politics.
O’Connor – Steel: Dictator. The story how the steel industry developed to its powerful stranglehold on America by means of bloodshed, bribery and corruption. Shows how big business got that way.
Josephson – The Robber Barons. A revealing study of the methods used by the early capitalists in the period after the Civil War to found the great industrial empires of railroads, lumber, etc.
Josephson – The Politicos. A study of the political machines and the men who served the Robber Barons from their posts in the government.
Rorty – Our Master’s Voice: Advertising. A devastating exposé of the fraud of advertising by a man who thorpughly knows the field. Annihilates the argument that capitalist advertising has a useful purpose.
 
III. Fascism and Imperialist War
Van Paasen. – Days of Our Years. World politics as seen by an American correspondent who writes honestly of what he saw in the period between the two world wars. It contains much that was “too hot,” for his news service to print.
Grattan – Why We Fonght. A study that reveals the real reasons for America’s entry into World War I.
Stein – M Day. A review of the dictatorial measures used in World War I and a forecast of plans for forced labor and other methods in this war.
Guerin – Fascism and Big Business. A study of the connection between Big Business and the fascist movement, proving that the roots of fascism are found in the decaying structure of capitalism.
Heiden – History of National Socialism. The best history of the Hitler movement. Shows how it got its early start and rose to power. Should be read by every American anti-fascist to help identify fascism in its early “radical” stage.
Henri – Hitler Over Europe. A remarkable book written a few months after Hitler came to power. Analyzes the economic forces behind. Hitler’s foreign policy. Many writers made reputations by saying what Henri had foretold years earlier.
London – The Iron Heel. A novel written in 1908 that foresees the rise of fascism with remarkable foresight. Reading it some thirty years later Trotsky declared that Jack London foretold developments that neither he nor London guessed at.
Silone – Fontamara. The great novel about Italian fascism, what it meant to the people, and how they fought it.
 
IV. The Fight for Socialism
Reed – Ten Days That Shook the World. The most famous short history of the Russian Revolution. Written by John Reed with the swift pen of the on-the-scenes reporter.
Plivier – The Kaiser’s Coolies. The story of the mutiny in the German Navy during the last war.
Plivier – The Kaiser Goes, the Generals Remain. How the revolution came to Germany in 1918 and how the labor leaders sabotaged it.
Malraux – Man’s Fate. A novel based on the events in China during the Civil War of 1925-27 and the role of the revolutionary workers of Shanhai.
Hoellering – The Defenders. A novel about the heroic fight put up by the Socialist Defense Guards against the clerical fascists in Austria in 1934.
Bellamy – Looking Backward. The famous utopian novel by the early American Socialist propagandist which, aroused a nation-wide interest in socialism in the 1880’s.
Sinclair – 100%: The Story of a Patriot. The story of a stool-pigeon in the Socialist movement during the last war.
Sinclair – Jimmie Higgins. The story of a rank and file Socialist during the last war who ends up with the American troops in Russia during the Civil War.
 
V. Toward Understanding Russia
Beals – Proletarian Journey. The autobiography of the textile organizer and active Communist who preferred serving a twenty-year sentence on a frame-up in North Carolina rather than continue living in Soviet Russia.
Scott – Behind the Urals. One of the best accounts of life in Russia as lived by the industrial worker. Written by an American who worked as a welder on the giant steel center of Magnitogorsk.
Fischer – My Lives in Russia. A Russian woman who married the American correspondent, Louis Fischer, tells of her life in Russia as it changed from the days of Lenin to the days of Stalin.
Koestler – Darkness at Noon. A remarkable psychological study of what caused the Old Bolsheviks to confess in the Moscow Trials.
(CLIP AND SAVE FOR REFERENCE)
 



This week I want to devote my column to the question of reading matter for workers and, particularly, the book list I have compiled and asked the editors to print in this issue.
My book list is the outgrowth of the countless requests I have received at one time or another from workers who want to read to understand the many and complex questions facing the working class movement or from friends who want to know what they can give to a fellow worker in the shop to help him understand our point of view.
It has long been my opinion that many of our friends have a poor approach to this question. After a worker has read a few issues of Labor Action and shows interest in our paper, many of our friends conclude: “Now for some SIMPLE socialist reading matter.” And the next day they slip the grateful worker a copy of Value, Price and Profit by Marx or Anti-Dühring by Engels.
The worker remains gratified by this interest shown in his education until he gets home after a hard day’s work and sits down to read the above mentioned material. About on page three the stuff begins to work like the fifth beer on a hot day and the worker enters into a losing struggle with his sagging eyelids. By this time he has concluded that either he is too dumb to ever be able to understand socialism or that his shop mate is playing a joke on him by giving him the script for a double-talk act disguised as workers’ reading matter.
After a few days the worker will return the book and either admit it is over his head, which few do, or merely say: “Very interesting,” as most will. I recall the worker who returned a copy of Value, Price and Profit to me back in the days of the unemployed movement when workers had a lot of time on their hands, with the comment: “Never suspected there was so much to value.”
 
Getting Workers to Read and Think
The mistake most of our friends make in selecting material for their shop mates is to look for something that will give him the “whole works” in one volume. First of all, there is very little available that attempts to do this. And the best of this, precisely because it is so comprehensive, serves only as an over-all view and leaves big gaps that must be filled in with facts and arguments. That is why workers who read something like Plenty for All will say: “Yes, it sounds good, but it will never be,” or “It’s a fine idea, but it will never work” or similar comments. Such a pamphlet unrolls a vision before their eyes but they usually don’t have the background to understand that it rests on stubborn facts about our world today and on a scientific analysis of social development.
No one book can supply such a background. This is a matter of considerable reading and much discussion. Many of our friends came to our movement directly from college or from white collar backgrounds. In these circles they rubbed shoulders with America’s great reading public. But if the average worker in the shop reads one whole book in a year it is a lot. His work and conditions of life are not conducive to reading “heavy stuff.” The book must have a special interest for him and be popularly written. But even in this case the political education of the worker will be advanced by innumerable discussions rather than merely by reading. The reading serves as background and stimulation for the discussion.
Often on lunch hour a discussion develops about some topic related to understanding our world and why we must change it. This gives one the opportunity to talk about a book one has read dealing with the subject.
If one notes that a particular fellow worker is especially interested, one can go over to him later and say: “Say, Joe, about that book I was talking about. How would you like to read it? I can get it for you.” This may be a worker who has not even seen Labor Action yet. However, once he has read the book, even something so seemingly distant from socialist education as Van Paasen’s Days of Our Years, one has a common bond with the worker in discussing the book for days after.
In the course of the discussion one touches upon fascism, Spain, Palestine, imperialism, diplomacy, pacifism, war, and other subjects. Joe will soon reveal what struck him most about the book. Then one can suggest something else, say an anti-fascist novel like Fontamara or Jack London’s Iron Heel. Again a discussion follows and Joe’s education advances. Not only does he learn new ideas but he develops the invaluable habit of reading worthwhile material.
This method does not only work with fellow-workers in the shop. It is also a good means of educating subscribers to Labor Action who might be visited from time to time about their subscriptions.
 
Preparing for Marxist Study
The list I have compiled is not intended to be either complete or a selection of the best. Many of our friends will, no doubt, know of other similar and better books for this purpose. I have compiled my list on the basis of books I have had experience with in giving to workers to read or books I remember contributed much to my education when I first became a socialist.
Many of the books on the list will be hard to get. Some are out of print. Some are rather expensive if still available. Labor Action Book Service would greatly increase its commendable service to the labor movement by stocking those books that are still available. However, almost all of them will be found in any fairly good public library.
Lest someone gain the impression that I am trying to keep the American working class from reading Marx, let me hasten to add that my effort is directed solely toward paving the way to an understanding and study of Marxism.
It should also be added here that college students, intellectuals and others in the habit of studying will, of course, be approached differently. For their introduction into the ideas of socialism and for the worker who has begun to comprehend our theories, we need an additional list of Marxist works. I hope this will soon be forthcoming.
(Book List will appear next week.)
 



(The author of Plenty for All now writes a column for Labor Action)
Capitalists are the most class-conscious people in the world. The capitalist class of America is no exception in this respect. Despite their family quarrels over how to divide the wealth that is produced by labor and appropriated by capital, the capitalists all stand shoulder to shoulder when they sense any danger to their system of robbery.
Some capitalists call themselves Republicans, while others call themselves Democrats (though many of them contribute money to both capitalist parties).
Some are Protestants; others are Catholics or Jews. Some believe in no religion.
Most of them are of the white race, a few are colored.
They may represent many different opinions on a whole series of questions, even serious questions.
 
But They Are United
But one question finds all capitalists standing united, regardless of politics, race or creed. That is the defense of their “sacred” system of “private enterprise,” as they hypocritically call it – or; the system of capitalist exploitation, as honest men call it.
For the last year or so we have been witnessing a wonderful demonstration of class solidarity by the capitalists of this country. I refer to the flood of propaganda pouring out of the capitalist newspapers, magazines and radio stations in defense of the “private enterprise” system.
It was unloosed with the article on Your Stake in Capitalism by Eric Johnston, .president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which appeared in the Reader’s Digest a year and a half ago. Since then we hardly ever pick up the Saturday Evening post, Liberty, Collier’s or others of the slick-cover magazines, without finding an article devoted to the theme of “private enterprise.” Its virtues are sung by nine out of ten newspaper columnists and it has become the recurring theme for editorials in the capitalist press from the big metropolitan dailies to the small country weeklies.
 
Why All the Shouting?
What brought about this amazing unity of capitalist propaganda, this united front of big papers and little ones; of Roosevelt-haters and Roosevelt-supporters,, of the interventionist New York Times and the isolationist Chicago Tribune?
What has made it necessary that every politician – from reactionary Southern Democrats and reactionary Northern Republicans to liberals like Vice-President Wallace – somewhere in every speech cross himself and declare that he believes in the inviolability of “private enterprise”?
There is only one reason to, account for the present fears of the capitalist class. They realize that it is going to be tough going in this country after the war. They don’t believe a word of all the beautiful post-war promises which they and their hirelings are handing out to the working people. They only hope that they can succeed in hoodwinking enough people to trust capitalism to provide work for everybody after the war. They hope that the working class will be meek and submissive in the period after the war when our war jobs have folded up and nothing else has come into sight. They hope that they can convince enough workers to hunger in silence while waiting for the “private enterprise” paradise that has been promised us.
If they succeed, the capitalist class will be given a “breathing spell,” during which they can prepare to defend capitalism with much sterner stuff than newspaper propaganda.
 
They Smell Danger
This reveals not only remarkable class solidarity and class consciousness. It also reveals a remarkably acute sensitivity to any threatening dangers to their class interests.
They realize, perhaps even more than we socialists do, that capitalism will be put to the most severe test in its history during the post-war period, Europe will be in revolutionary turmoil. The colonial world will take a deep breath and try to rise to its feet. Millions of veterans will return to seek the jobs and security they were promised. They will be swallowed up in the ranks of the greater millions of unemployed home front workers. Wages will be cut. Farm prices will go down. And every solution that will be worth serious attention will tread upon the sacred toes of capital.
The capitalists realize this and are already showing how they can stand shoulder to shoulder when their ancient privilege to live by the toil of others stands in danger.
Will the workers learn in sufficient time also to stand shoulder to shoulder? Will they recover from the New Deal hangover in short enough time to close their ranks in a show of class solidarity? Will they learn the bitter lessons quickly enough to develop the class consciousness necessary to stop voting across class lines and build their own working class party?
 



Not long ago Nancy Nathan had an article in Labor Action on One Engine or Three? It revealed that the Big Three of the auto industry each supplied their own make of engine to the government to be used in the same type of tank.
Reading this over my breakfast and thinking about it, I heard the tinkle of bottles as the milkman made his long way up the stairs to our fourth floor apartment. On the way down he stopped to exchange greetings with the milkman who delivered milk on the second floor. A little later in the morning, I knew, I would hear a merry whistle as the milkman who delivered milk on the third floor arrived (he always whistles). Whether still a fourth milkman takes care of the family on the first floor I have never found out.
But with the Three Engines or One? article still fresh in my mind, I began thinking about the milk delivery situation.
 
“Bloody Murder,” Yell the Bosses
I want to propose a system of milk distribution that will REALLY be economical and efficient, but which would cause the milk companies to yell bloody murder.
Why do we have to have Company X deliver on the fourth floor, Company Y on the third floor, and Company Z on the second floor? Why do we have to see three different milk wagons in one block at the same time? Why does the Company X man deliver in one house, then skip three, and then deliver in the fourth house? And why does Company Y man come two blocks out of his way to make one delivery in the entire block, and that one perhaps on the third or fourth floor? Why are there trucks and wagons from five to a dozen different companies from different parts of the city which make their way to our neighborhood every morning to deliver milk?
Did someone say we should cut out waste? It could be done – if we also cut out profits. This is how we could go about it.
We could divide the city into districts of somewhat equal size. Each district would be small enough for one truck or wagon to cover. The milkman would serve his customers by going to every house and every floor. He could probably cover as many stops in half the time now required. In addition, he would save time now spent in driving around in a large area with customers scattered all over. If the milkman who whistles were assigned to my block, I would know that when he entered our building he would leave milk on floors one, two, three and four, and the building would be completely covered.
 
Some Good Questions
But wait! Someone says, how would we divide the city between the different companies, and how do you know I would get as good milk from the company given a monopoly in our neighborhood? And if there were no competition, wouldn’t the companies lose initiative and not give a damn about how they serve their customers? These are important questions and we won’t dodge them, because they lead right to the heart of the question.
Who said anything about “different companies”? What do we need different companies for? “Having different companies is just as wasteful and as much a duplication as three men delivering three quarts of milk in one house. Each company maintains its own fleet of trucks running in from the country. Each has its own plant, each its own set of books and accounts, each its own expensive advertising, etc.
But how would we get milk if kind-hearted capitalists didn’t go into business to supply it to us? (At a “reasonable” profit, just for their trouble, you know!) Well, how do we get water?
What if we had eight or ten water companies supplying New York City with water? Each would insist upon the right to lay its pipes in city streets wherever it had a customer. And when the customer moved tear them up again and lay them elsewhere!
Or perhaps a customer had read an advertisement by the Pure Hokum Water Co. that its water “contained Vitamin Q, enough in one glass to equal a beefsteak” – and was convinced and decided to change water companies. The pipes would be torn up all over again. This would be some mess.
Crazy? Not much more than three men delivering three quarts of milk in one building.
 
How It Should Be Done
Now to get back to distributing milk. We say, let the city take over the milk companies. What, says someone, and let a lot of politicians run it? But who said anything about politicians? They don’t bottle or deliver milk. So what do they know about it in the first place.
Let the men upon whom we depend for our daily supply of milk run it through their democratically elected committees. Yes, the bottlers, the sterilizers, the pasteurizers, the chemists, the truck drivers!
Don’t they know far more how it is done than either a gang of politicians in the City Hall or a gang, of idle rich getting Borden or Sheffield dividends mailed to them down in Florida?
But wouldn’t all the milk be the same? Yes, of course. That is what we want. Now we have good, bad, and indifferent milk. Under such a set-up we would have only good milk. We would have a board of chemists who would set certain standards for butter-fat content and other tests and all milk would be kept up to the required grade.
But wouldn’t the politicians conspire to get their hands on this set-up and use it to squeeze more graft out of the people? Yes, of course they would. They would be drawn to it like bees to honey. AND THAT IS WHY THERE IS LITTLE HOPE THAT SUCH A SYSTEM WOULD WORK IN THE MIDST OF CAPITALISM.
Socialism cannot be introduced piecemeal. All the experiences of the European socialists have proved this, not to speak of experiences in this country, as in Milwaukee. And that is why I won’t eat my heart out trying to devise a means ONLY of having one, instead of three, men deliver three bottles of milk, in our building. Because what is true about milk is just as true about almost everything else under capitalism.
I demonstrated this point in my little pamphlet, Plenty for All. However, the milk situation is an excellent example of how capitalism wastes and how socialism could plan. The real job today is to spread the ideas of socialism, organize the workers in their own political party, and establish a workers’ government that will wipe out capitalism with its waste and be able to plan production and PLENTY FOR ALL.
 



To grasp the depth of the change in world politics during the course of the present war we need but contrast Munich with the Teheran conference. From a seven-power world it had become a three-power world. From Hitler, with the aid of Mussolini, bullying Chamberlain and Daladier into agreement at Munich, we have Stalin, with the aid of Roosevelt, bullying Churchill into agreement at Teheran. From Russia excluded from a conference dealing with the fate of its ally Czechoslovakia at Munich, we have Stalin boldly insisting upon a Russian reorganization of Central Europe and the Balkans at Teheran. From the United States distantly exerting an influence upon Munich through Great Britain, we have the United States all but displacing Great Britain as the non-European arbiter of Europe’s destinies at Teheran. From the economic mobilization of the British Empire to hold its own with American world imperialism, we have the entire world, including the British Empire and its satellite empires (French, Dutch, Portuguese) placed upon American rations. From British efforts to keep its foot jammed in the door of Latin America (Argentina) to block Washington’s “closed door” policy, we have Britain thrown on the defensive by aggressive American imperialism both in the colonial world and its own Dominions.
France’s two-decade long masquerade as a first-rate power came to an end in 1940. The blast furnaces of the Ruhr and the chemical plants of Leuna and Oppau had outweighed, in the scales of war, the jerry-built structure of the French système continentale fashioned at Versailles. Krupp guns and I.G. Farben powder proved far more potent than French reliance upon the rotten regimes in Warsaw, Belgrade, and Bucharest. Political power, as always in the long run, reflected economic reality and Germany, the strongest economic power on the continent, became the strongest political power. In a few years, Germany established itself from the Pyrenees to the Caucasus, and from the oases of the Sahara to frozen Spitzbergen, harnessing a continent to a single military-economic program. But the Hitler empire now lies crumbled beneath the combined blows of the new colossus – Russia – seeking to establish itself as master of Europe and the super-colossus – the United States – seeking to establish itself as master of the world.
What kind of post-war world do the “victors” have in mind? What will be the nature of the post-war power alignments? The answer can now be seen by a study of the relations between the “big three” during the course of the war. For the conduct of the war will, as always, determine the post-war relationships.
The first meeting of the “triangle” took place in Washington a few weeks after Pearl Harbor. Churchill came over on his first war mission and Litvinov sat in for the Russians. The points of conflict at this first meeting are of the highest significance, for they immediately indicated the interests of the three powers and in what manner they clashed.
 
Two Basic Conflicts
The first meeting produced two basic conflicts: (1) the “de Gaulle question” and (2) the “second front.”
The real implications of the de Gaulle question were only to become apparent as time went by and the ramifications of the problem were to become entwined with the rest of the Anglo-American controversies. The immediate phase of the problem came under four heads:




General attitude toward the “Free French”;
 
U.S. policy on Vichy;
 
“Free French” signature on the United Nation’s charter;
 
De Gaulle’s seizure of St. Pierre and Miquelon.




These questions threw emery into the Anglo-American gears right at the outset because they involved a clash between the historical aims of American imperialism and the interests of the British Empire. American imperialism had emerged out of the first world war as the lusty young giant wrestling with British imperialism for world economic domination. The British had managed to hold their own for twenty trying years of “peace-time” competition. But less sensational and more responsible spokesmen for American imperialism than Henry Luce had already determined that the second world war should usher in the “American Century.” American imperialism has no interest in saving the British Empire from Germany and Japan in order to set it up in business again as a competitor on an equal footing. France permitted Britain to rescue her in the last war at the price of British domination for two decades after. American imperialists have no inclination to be more generous with the British after this war.
Ever since the last war, the British Empire had appended to it as sub-empires the other Western European colonial possessions (French, Dutch, and Portuguese empires), In the last analysis their final protection was the British fleet. Hong Kong was as much a bastion for French Indo-China as was Saigon, and Singapore was as much a bastion for the Dutch East Indies as was Batavia.
France and the Netherlands now lay prostrate, their richest colonial plums plucked by the Japanese or at the mercy of the Germans. The Dutch were guests in London, completely dependent upon the British. The “Free French” were seeking to rally what colonial resources were left in the stray corners of the French empire. Were American resources to be poured out in reconquering and reconstructing the French and Dutch empires only to hand them back to their erstwhile owners who had proved too weak to defend them? It is not necessary for the American empire-builders to be in the business as long as the British nor to develop an equal sense of “realism” to tell the difference between playing cricket and playing power politics. The latter is played with only one rule in the book: you do what you can get away with within the limits of military power and popular opinion at home.
However, it was the aim of the “Free (i.e. colonial) French” to keep as much of the French empire intact as possible as part of the British orbit and reconstitute it after the war upon the old basis. Far from having any quarrel with this the British were, of course, in hearty agreement and took de Gaulle’s committee under their wing from the outset. The defence of the French possessions was part of the defence of the British Empire. De Gaulle was their man.
 
Roosevelt and the “Free French”
Roosevelt aimed to treat de Gaulle exactly as that, i.e., a military adjunct of the British forces. This would mean denying the French a political voice until, as the Americans never wearied of repeating with “democratic” demogogy, the French people were free again and in a position freely to elect their own government. Until then Roosevelt sought to recognize Vichy as the legitimate government as long as possible and in the meantime seek for some French clique willing to play ball along American lines.
As a result of this conflict of interests, President Roosevelt and Churchill sparred around over the above listed “French” problems. The “Free French” had managed to get into Roosevelt’s hair on the very eve of the conference by sending an expedition to seize the French islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon, off the coast of Newfoundland. Secretary of State Hull issued a statement which, considering his even temper, sounded as if someone had pilfered one of the counties in his native Tennessee. To send an expedition into the North American waters without permission from Washington was bad enough, but to do it when Washington was conducting a policy of opposition to de Gaullist influence was rubbing salt into the wound. The fact that the French islands are off the Canadian coast and that General de Gaulle must have had British permission for his move – as without a doubt he did since the expedition set out from England – mattered little. For the Western Hemisphere had been declared under “our” jurisdiction by Roosevelt, including Canada (whose defense he had guaranteed without being asked), and even Iceland, which, Roosevelt said with a smile, was thought to belong to the Western Hemisphere by some geographers.
Roosevelt would very much have liked to “rescue” these islands from Vichy rule at the appropriate time and utilize them as part of the Atlantic chain of island defenses. In this case there would be slight chance that France could again establish complete sovereignty over the islands after the war. The best the French could hope for in this case was nominal political control with American right to maintain military installations. With de Gaulle in possession of the islands it would be quite impossible for the American “liberators” to simply move in on them against their wishes without rousing a terrific fuss, above all among liberal opinion in America and Britain.
(For the same considerations outlined above, the British-de Gaullist attack upon Dakar in 1940 was treated most unsympathetically by the American press.)
The other “French” differences Roosevelt and Churchill tried to compose involved the “Free French” signature to the United Nations charter. This involved the question of the status of the de Gaulle committee. No one accepted it as a government-in-exile or as a provisional government. But the British sought to grant it a semi-governmental status as an armed ally in the war. In this capacity the British maintained that the “Free French” had a right to place their signature to a declaration of general intentions such as the United Nations Charter, since the latter was no binding treaty and would play little role in diplomatic relations. The Americans conceded the point but continued their recognition of Vichy as the legitimate government of France.
(At the moment of writing, de Gaulle seems triumphantly installed in Paris and to have won despite all obstacles placed in his path by the Americans. However, the last chapter is still to be written. De Gaulle has Paris, but French possessions remain to be allocated in the struggle between America and Britain. The latter has already all but pushed France out of control of Lebanon and Syria, vital to British oil interests.)
 
14 Points of Controversy
The controversy over de Gaulle between Roosevelt and Churchill at their first Washington meeting became the first public manifestation of the British-American conflicts that were to bedevil relations at each stage of the war and remain, in the main, unsolved. Other points of controversy that come to the fore as American imperialism begins to squeeze its older rival are:

U.S. interests in Dutch empire (East India oil and Dutch Guiana bauxite).
 
U.S. interests in Saudi Arabian oil, developed as a wartime project but actually the first real entry of American capital into the British Near East oil preserve.
 
U.S. interests in the Red Sea, arising out of the need to safeguard new oil routes by maintaining present U.S. control of Eritrea.
 
U.S. Asiatic interests (a “free” India, Burma and Malay States to permit American economic penetration on an equal footing with Britain).
 
U.S. interests in the “internationalization” of Hong Kong, Singapore, Saigon, and other imperialist bases in the Pacific area.
 
U.S. desire to “close the door” in Latin America by driving Britain out of Argentina.
 
U.S. interests in French empire (Indo-China, Dakar, Martinique, St. Pierre, Miquelon and New Caledonia).
 
U.S. influence in Canada, Australia, and New Zealand.
 
U.S. interests in maintaining present bases in British Atlantic islands (Bermuda, etc.).
 
U.S. needs of a 5-ocean navy to secure its new world position (in contrast with old 5–5–3 ration).
 
U.S. displacement of Great Britain as the leading merchant marine power.
 
U.S. (Hull) policy of “free trade” versus British Empire restrictions.
 
U.S. “gold standard” policy as expressed at Breton Woods versus British “credit system” proposals (Keynes plan).
 
U.S. policy of “freedom of air” versus British policy of “spheres of influence” in post-war aviation.

(No matter what Churchill may say, he is presiding over the dissolution of the Empire.)

However, the politics involving the above questions became, of necessity, involved with politics concerning the third partner, Russia. These politics also had then: starting point in this first Washington meeting. At the conclusion of the Roosevelt-Churchill talks, Litvinov joined the pair at the White House (New Year’s Day 1942). He had only one axe to grind, the opening of a “second front” in Western Europe in the shortest possible time. Thus opened the second major question of “three power” relations. From then until the Teheran conference, the second front issue was to place the most severe strains upon United Nations relations. If the question of de Gaulle symbolized the nature of the long list of British-American differences, then the “second front” concentrated within itself all the many facets of British-Russian differences. [1]
 
Where to Invade Europe?
The question as to where to invade Europe involved almost automatically the question of the domination of Europe after the war. The defeat of Germany through an invasion of Western Europe meant certain Russian domination of Poland, the Balkans, Finland, and a strong voice throughout the Continent. The latter was made all the more certain by the role of the Communists in the underground movements of Europe. Such a termination of the war would leave Moscow the “boss” of Europe with the exception of the Atlantic fringe of British satellites. The British have made it a cornerstone of their diplomacy since the Middle Ages to prevent a “one-power” domination of the Continent. England, with its economic resources and control of the seas, depended for security upon a balance of power on the continent which would always permit an alliance with one of the continental powers. Every last Englishman felt the effects of a “one-power” Europe when Germany established continental hegemony from June 1940 to June 1941. With the “Blitz” raging over London and the island living in daily dread of invasion, the English realized their peril in the face of a Europe mobilized against them by an enemy power.
As a result, Churchill used every device and strategem known to the age-old ruling class of Britain to prevent the war from ending with Russian hegemony replacing German. He sought to block every “second front” move in Western Europe and push to the fore his pet alternative of the “soft under-belly” of Europe, specifically an invasion through the Balkans. All the wisdom of British statecraft proved unavailing in the end. The relationship of forces resolved it against British interests. But the two-year struggle of Churchill to save the British position in Europe makes an instructive chapter in the history of world power-politics.
It is not yet clear just what Litvinov was told at the White House. Reports have it that he received a blanket promise of a “second front” invasion of Europe in 1942 from Roosevelt, with Churchill making modifications and conditions. Thus began what the Russians have since referred to as the “January promise,” for Litvinov reported to Moscow that the stage was set for the 1942 invasion of Western Europe.
As the “second front” controversy developed, the roles between the three powers remained the same. Russia pressing hard, Britain resisting obstinately, and the United States supporting Russian views. A “Russian solution” at the expense of Britain’s role in Europe would weaken the British Empire all the more and confirm its role of vassal to American imperialism. With Russian hegemony threatening most of the Continent, Britain would have no choice but to cling to American protection, as France, in the face of the Hitler threat, had no choice but to cling to British protection.
This division of views on the “second front” became apparent during the spring of 1942. As the German armies began to push forward again in their great spring offensive in South Russia and the Russian position became critical, they pressed all the harder for the “second front.” Yet it was becoming obvious that no such move was in prospect on the part of the Anglo-Americans. The British general staff was resolute in its opposition.
Angry over what they considered the breach of the “January promise,” the Russians sent Molotov to Washington in May on a quick visit. Just what was discussed between Roosevelt and Stalin’s errand boy is not yet known. However, a public announcement at the conclusion of the conference stated: “In the course of these conversations full understanding was reached with regard to the urgent task of creating a second front in Europe in 1942.”
This seemed to put teeth into the “January promise” and Molotov went hurrying home. However, the announcement was made only in the name of the Americans and Russians. It is quite likely that the peculiar language of the announcement, “with regard to the urgent task,” was meant to convey that Roosevelt’s agreement with the need of a “second front” was still contingent upon British approval before it could be realized.
The announcement must have given Churchill one of his explosive moments. For, hardly two weeks after Molotov left with the glad tidings, Churchill flew into Washington to find out “what was up.” His answer to the “second front” this time was an abrupt “no.” According to Lyle C. Wilson, chief of the United Press Washington bureau, “Churchill argued that the point of attack should be from the south, against what he termed ‘the under-belly of Europe’ and he enlarged his ideas to propose that the major assault on Hitler’s fortress should include an Allied movement into the Balkans.” (U.P. dispatch, June 6, 1944.)
 
The North African Invasion
Stalin’s rejoinder from Moscow when he heard that the “second front” was off must have been written on asbestos paper. For it so thoroughly frightened Roosevelt that he sent Gen. Marshall, Admiral King, Harry Hopkins, and Stephen Early, his secretary, on an emergency trip to London in July. According to the above-quoted Wilson dispatch:
“Marshall, King, and the others had orders to attempt to win Churchill over to a 1942 European invasion. John Bull stood pat. Marshall and King had an alternative proposition. It was for the invasion of North Africa at Oran and Casablanca, and at London in July 1942, that plan was agreed upon.”
Stalin recognized the North African operation as poor “Ersatz” as far as the military need of drawing German divisions out of Russia was concerned. As for the political implications of the North African invasion, Stalin viewed this move in the Mediterranean basin with hostility. It seemed to indicate Roosevelt’s yielding to Churchill’s Balkan perspective. Stalin’s answer was to whip the “second front” campaign in the Russian and foreign Communist press to a frenzy. Above all did the British C.P. go into action. Demonstrations, petitions and resolutions descended upon 10 Downing Street and the Parliament like a storm. Meanwhile columns were rolling toward the Caucasus. An alleged offer by the British to move troops up from Iran to defend the Caucasian oil fields was reported rejected by Stalin with the advice that they be used in France. British-Russian relations seemed to have reached the breaking point.
The Russian tone began to worry Churchill seriously. He resolved that a face-to-face talk with Stalin would help matters. On August 12, the King’s first minister appeared at the Kremlin: anything to keep Russia fighting. Churchill is reported to have spent four unpleasant days in somewhat heated discussions with Stalin. Upon his return he was to refer to Stalin in a House of Commons speech as “a man direct and even blunt in speech.” The discussions evidently ended in an impasse. Stalin did not retreat from his insistence upon the “second front” and Churchill did not yield to his pressure.
Upon Churchill’s departure, Stalin pleasantly surprised Henry C. Cassidy, Associated Press correspondent, by replying to his routine written inquiry with a personal letter. It was Stalin’s method of revealing to the world that the Churchill visit had changed nothing. The central point of the letter was a demand that the Anglo-Americans make good their commitments “fully and on time.”
The Russian and German armies were locked in decisive battle at Stalingrad. The “second front” campaign was lashed to new heights. The British C.P. filled Trafalgar Square with demonstrators howling for the “second front” and 35,000 massed at Madison Square Park in New York City. Ominous was the appearance of banners attacking “British imperialism” and calling for the “immediate freedom of India.” Among other new demands was one calling for the immediate trial of Britain’s No. 1 prisoner, Rudolph Hess. The Russians raised the question in such a manner as to cast suspicion upon both the purpose of the Hess flight to England and the reason for Britain’s keeping him in such a shroud of mystery.
 
Churchill’s Demonstration at Dieppe
At this time, late in August 1942, Churchill decided to make a demonstration of his own. Some 10,000 troops, mainly Canadians, suddenly launched a night attack upon the French coast at Dieppe. After a night of indecisive fighting, the Allied forces withdrew, having suffered some 6,000 casualties. The announcement of the Dieppe casualties sent a chill through all “second fronters” but the most hardened Stalinists.
The true story of Dieppe is yet to be told. The official designation was that it was a “reconnaissance in force.” The explanation, that the Dieppe attack was a valuable rehearsal for invasion in force seems most unlikely. What did it demonstrate beyond that known fact that 10,000 men cannot storm a fortified beach without previous artillery or aerial saturation and expect to live to tell the tale? It did, however, serve as a gag in the mouth of many a glib-tongued “second fronter.”
The Russians, however, losing as many men every hour at Stalingrad as the total loss at Dieppe, were totally unimpressed. If anything, the Allied inaction during the nerve-straining test at Stalingrad made the “Vozhd of all the Russians” all the more vicious. A story is told about Stalin’s conduct at one of the state banquets for Willkie. Both the Russian attitude and Stalin’s character lend credence to it. The story has it that after the usual endless round of toasts, someone proposed a toast to “our gallant Allied airmen.” As the gathering arose to the toast, Stalin remained seated. In embarrassed surprise the others resumed their seats. Stalin then rose to propose a toast to “our gallant Soviet flyers going to their death in cast-off planes” sent by the Allies. He then continued to say that Churchill had “stolen” 150 new American fighters from a Russia-bound convoy while in a British port. The British later claimed that the planes had been removed on orders of Gen. Eisenhower in preparation for the North African landings. Churchill shortly after referred to “the very strong and stark assertions” made by the Russians. He could quite easily have had the banquet story in mind.
In December 1942 the Americans hit the beaches of French North Africa. The American and British press hailed the operation as the “second front.” This was to be the long-expected relief to the hard-pressed Russians. Stalin gave no more than a public grunt of approval, and stated merely that it “fulfilled the prerequisites for undertaking a second front.” A month later, as Roosevelt and Churchill met at Casablanca, Stalin was significantly absent. His reply to their invitation was a biting statement which said in effect, “You people have plenty of time for such things but I am too busy fighting a war to attend.” Nor did he bother to reply to their friendly message or give a hint as to where the Russians stood on the “unconditional surrender” formula of Casablanca. Stalin’s reply came a month later when, on the anniversary of the Red Army he said in an order of the day:
“In view of the absence of a second front in Europe, the Red Army alone is bearing the whole weight of the war.” [2]
The North African invasion raised anew a whole series of complicated questions of British-American relations arising out of the question of the French Empire. Roosevelt revealed the outlines of his anti-de Gaullist strategy (really anti-British in essence) by springing his own jack-out-of-the-box in the person of the reactionary militarist, General Giraud. Whether Darlan came into the picture by accident or previous plan cannot be said for certain. In any case, he immediately fitted into the American strategy of operating in the French possessions through pro-American Vichy contacts. The Darlan-Giraud-Peyrouton stench brought forth a feeling of revulsion throughout the democratic and liberal world. In Britain, and to a lesser extent in America, the North African situation was assailed with fury by an outraged public opinion that had been taken in by the Four Freedoms talk and the allegedly anti-fascist character of the war. Roosevelt felt obliged to duck out with a statement attributing it to General Eisenhower on grounds of “military expediency.” The American liberals, who can forgive almost anything but criticism of Roosevelt, discovered the guilty culprit in a State Department official “by the name of Murphy” (since designated as American gauleiter for Germany). However, Churchill arose in the House of Commons and stated with a broad smile and open-handed generosity that the entire “credit” for the North African venture goes to his “esteemed friend, President Roosevelt.”
Though Churchill was alleged to have said that of all the crosses he had to bear, the Cross of Lorraine was the heaviest, it proved the one cross which was so important to Britain that Churchill was willing to show exceptional patience under its load.
 
The Fear of a Separate Peace
Following Stalingrad, the Russian armies undertook their great winter offensive, which rolled the Germans back for hundreds of miles. This change in the military situation altered Russia’s role in relation to her Allies. It now became apparent that the Germans’ hopes of knocking Russia out of the war were over. The Germans had a choice of either putting up with the dreaded two-front war or making peace with one of their enemies. Whereas before Stalingrad the Russian question posed itself to Britain as a matter of staving off a Russian surrender, after Stalingrad it became a matter of convincing Russia not to make a separate peace. The latter situation left Russia in a vastly more powerful position in dealing with her allies. Stalin began to use it to the full.
All through the Spring of 1943 the Americans and British were given repeated cases of the jitters as the Russians unloosed a flood of “separate peace” rumors. The situation caused Churchill to undertake another trip to Washington in May. Following Churchill’s visit, Joseph E. Davies was dispatched on his so-called “Second Mission to Moscow.” According to Lyle C. Wilson, the mysterious letter to Stalin is said to have contained the following:



Dear Mr. Premier:
Winston and I want to see you at your earliest convenience. You can say where and when.
[Signed] F.D.R.



(Aside from Davies’ value as a symbol of Russo-American friendship, Roosevelt also based his choice, no doubt, on the need to preserve manpower and not use anyone of real mental stature to perform errand-boy missions.)
The next Roosevelt-Churchill meeting was delayed to the last minute awaiting word from the Kremlin. Finally they met without Stalin at Quebec in August 1943. The Russian military situation continued to improve. So did Stalin’s war of nerves against his allies. [3] The Quebec meeting took place in the midst of the most dire rumors about Russia’s intended course of action. In the very midst of the conference, Stalin suddenly recalled Litvinov from Washington. Churchill recognized that he was pressed against the wall. The question of Russia’s role in Europe could no longer be headed off by treating her as a poor cousin. The architect of the first cordon sanitaire against Russia realized that the cards were held by his opponents and a second cordon to keep the Russian bear in his native wilds was not realizable.
It was decided to send Hull and Eden to Moscow to confer with the Russians and let them know that the British were ready to talk terms. The Moscow conference of Foreign Ministers was the first taste of diplomatic victory for the Russians. It prepared the groundwork for the real showdown to come soon afterward when the three “big bosses” would get together. The Russians indicated that they were satisfied by the turn of events by setting their signature for the first time to a document that called for “unconditional surrender” of Germany.
It is significant that Eden stopped in at Ankara on his way back for a discussion with the Turks. The role of Turkey during a Balkan invasion would, of course, be a very important one. Were the Turks already setting things in motion for such an invasion, according to prior agreement with Great Britain? If so, Eden may have had the purpose of setting them straight on the latest turn of events. Did the British still hope for a compromise with Russia by which Russian troops would join the Allies for an invasion of the Balkans? In this case it would require Turkish agreement to permit Russian troops to use Turkish bases aside from the more general question of Turkey’s attitude to Russian influence in the Balkans.
 
The Results of the Teheran Conference
On December 1, 1943, the momentous gathering took place in Teheran that was to cast the new relationship of forces on a world scale. The exact story of what took place during the discussion is not yet officially released.
All accounts of the Teheran conference agree upon a violent conflict between Stalin and Churchill, with Roosevelt playing the role of “peacemaker.” A more accurate description of the role of Roosevelt would be to say he greased the skids under Churchill while Stalin was doing the pushing.
Professor Oscar Lange, who visited Stalin “on behalf of Polish-Americans,” reported to Drew Pearson that:
“When these plans for Poland had come up at Teheran, Stalin disclosed, President Roosevelt had been in complete agreement, but Prime Minister Churchill had hesitated.
“He asked me: Who is to guarantee the security of this new Polish state? I answered simply: The armed might of the Soviet Union.”
Forrest Davis states the same relationship between the three principals in his articles in the Saturday Evening Post of May 13 and 27, 1944. Davis is usually regarded as directly inspired by the White House. Together with Ernest Lindley, Roosevelt biographer and New Deal historian, he was commissioned to write the official White Book on how we got into the war. Davis also makes the point that Churchill and Stalin were at sword’s point during most of the conference and that Roosevelt exerted his influence to “appease” Stalin because of the President’s “tough-minded determination to enroll the Soviet Union as a sincere and willing collaborator in post-war settlements.”
The outlines of the Russian victory at Teheran are now becoming quite clear. They include:

The “second front” invasion of Western Europe, as the indispensable military key to Russian aims.
 
A free hand for Russia in Poland. The Lublin government of Stalin is already acting as the provisional regime. The London exile government is confronted with the threat of civil war if it seeks to interfere in Poland.
 
Russian hegemony over the Balkans. Whether this includes Greece, traditional British sphere, is not yet certain.
 
Russian occupation of eastern Germany.
 
Russian domination of Finland.
 
Russian annexation of the Baltic states.

The full magnitude of this Russian triumph will only fully impress itself upon us as we witness its unfolding. It far surpasses the most ambitious dreams of Pan-Russian statesmen under Czarism. It means, in actuality, nothing less than a Russian Europe. It means domination of the continent, except for the nations on its western fringe. Even these will feel its full effects through Russian pressure from without and Communist activity from within.
 
Roosevelt and the Russians
Roosevelt’s aims in aiding this Russian triumph are to be seen from the previous description of the Anglo-American differences. The American domination of the British Empire (i.e., in essence, the colonial world) requires a Britain placed in a position of complete dependence upon the United States. Russian domination of Europe leaves Britain so little with which to maneuver between her two opponents that her chances of escaping vassalage to America are exceedingly small. Even the rumored plans of a “West European bloc,” to include Great Britain, the Netherlands, the Scandinavian countries, France, Spain, Italy and Belgium cannot help Britain avoid dependence upon America, even if contradictions within the bloc were ironed out. The boasts of some British editors that such a bloc would represent two-fifths of the land area of the world is meaningless. The “land area” referred to is composed in the main of the colonial world. Given Russian pressure upon Europe and American (“liberation”) pressure upon the colonial world, this land area will reveal itself more as a volcano of seething discontent than a bastion of empire defense.
There is, of course, to offset this tendency, the matter of Russo-American differences. These include possible conflicts in China, in the Near East, and in Europe itself. However, in contrast to the immediacy of the conflicts with British interests, American conflicts with Russian interests are of a more historical character. In the immediate period they are more than offset by the many factors that make for mutually profitable collaboration between Russia and the United States. Russia is not a competitor in the world market, Russia is not a naval power, Russia’s main interests are not colonial (i.e., in the traditional colonial spheres), and Russia will need American capital to rebuild after the war and thus prove a considerable market for American goods. The extension of collectivized economy into eastern Europe and sections of the Balkans would be opposed by America, as by the entire capitalist community of interests. But this too is a conflict of historical scope and more than offset in the immediate period by Russia’s role as the most effective counter-revolutionary force in Europe. The defeat of the German revolution by Russian agents and Russian arms would certainly be worth the extension of Russian collectivism into Poland and Romania. American imperialism hopes to deal with the latter in its next chapter. However, the Central European proletariat must be dealt with in this one.
If the outline of new Russian and American spheres of domination was drawn at Teheran, we can say that the machinery for this maintenance is being constructed at Dumbarton. The League of Nations was the vehicle of Anglo-French domination of the continent and partnership with America in domination of the world. Dumbarton is to be the vehicle of an American-dominated Russo-British balance of power in Europe and an undisputed American domination of the entire world.
But the final word in the realization of these designs of the great powers will rest, not upon the strength of their arms or the ability of their statesmen, but rather upon the working classes and the exploited colonial peoples. The globe which the gentlemen at Dumbarton are wrangling over may well prove to be not a globe at all but a bomb with lighted fuses in Europe, in India, in the Arab world, in Africa, and, in the last analysis, the home countries of the principals themselves. As with the League of Nations during the post-war revolutionary wave, Dumbarton may prove of greatest service to its architects and builders as an instrument against the social revolution. For the architects of the new world of socialism, on the other hand, it is of great importance to note these tremendous changes of power relations resulting from the war in order the more realistically to cast our own perspectives in the struggle to tear the destinies of humanity from the hands of the capitalists and their statesmen and place them in the hands of the working people.
Sept. 18, 1944

Footnotes
1. In an article in the July 1943 New International on The Coming Invasion of Europe, the author emphasized the primarily political nature of the “second front” question. It was pointed out that the locale of the invasion would determine in large measure the control of post-war Europe. The entire struggle over the “second front” has since proved the complete validity of this approach. The prediction of an invasion through the Balkans proved in error because of a miscalculation of the relationship of forces. The analysis failed to take into account the American role in the problem as pro-Russian, rather than pro-British. What was attributed to Anglo-American policy on the “second front” turned out to be solely British policy.
2. “The question of full coalition warfare has become, for the Soviet Union, a question of shortening the war. For Britain and the United States It Is still a question of winning the war.” – Earl Browder, Teheran – Our Path in War and Peace, page 19. [Note by ETOL: In the printed version there is no anchor for this note. We have positioned the anchor where it seems most appropriate.]
3. Stalin’s war of nerves during 1943 included many sudden and seemingly contradictory moves. Almost every one of them was open to two seemingly opposite explanations. They included: 1. The dissolution of the Comintern, explained as a peace gesture to the anti-Komintern Axis and as a step to placate the Allies. 2. Restoration of the freedom of the Greek Orthodox Church, explained as a sop to American opinion and as a weapon for the penetration of the Balkan Slavic community. 3. Organization of the National Committee of Free Germany and the Union of German Officers in Moscow, explained as a means of liaison for a separate peace and as a vehicle of revolution within Germany. 4. Recognition of Badoglio at a time the Allies were hesitant, explained as a gesture to the conservative elements of Italy and Europe and as a support to the popular movement in Italy to undermine the Allied Military Government.
 



The other day some seven thousand Italians dragged a fascist police official out of a courtroom in Rome and killed him. Their action was clearly a demonstration against the failure of the Allied Military Government and the weak-kneed Italian cabinet to rid the country of the fascist scum.
After one year of the AMG, fascist officials and jobholders still swarm throughout the occupied area. With the exception of the most notorious of Fascist Party bosses and outright criminals, there has been little action taken against them.
On the contrary, the AMG has taken steps to curb the anti-fascist actions of the working people and protect the fascists. The AMG declares the bulk of the fascists to be indispensable to their posts. They say that everything would be turned topsy-turvy if these people were cleaned out.
Why is this?
Because such action against the fascists would involve ninety-nine per cent of the capitalist class of Italy. It would involve the bankers, the industrialists, the newspaper publishers, the big landowners, the army officers and the politicians.
If you got rid of these, who would be left to run the capitalist system in Italy? In this sense the AMG tells the truth when it says that the fascist scum is “indispensable” – i.e., indispensable to Italian capitalism.
 
AMG Playing the Game
The Russian Revolution proved that such people are not indispensable. Committees of workers, peasants and soldiers proved that the people could get along without the capitalist class and its hangers-on. But that is exactly what AMG wants to prevent in Italy. In the last analysis, the American government would prefer to have fascism in Italy rather than a workers’ government.
The AMG is supposed to weed out the Italian fascists and leave Italian capitalism undisturbed. That’s like trying to pick pepper out of a sugar bowl while wearing boxing gloves.
Having been a fascist is no crime, in the eyes of the AMG. The “very best people” in Italy were fascists. Even in this country the “Very best people” praised Mussolini for “saving” Mussolini from socialism. It must be proved that a fascist committed “specific crimes” before he can be punished.
Was it a crime if the owners of the Fiat Motor Works put up the money with which Mussolini organized his Blackshirt gangs and got into power? Was it a crime if these capitalists used the Blackshirt thugs to smash labor unions and terrorize the workers?
No, says AMG. This was merely political activity, No one can be punished for his political actions.
 
Who Suffered Under Fascism?
By this means the entire top scum of, society will be declared innocent. But from among the bottom dregs of society – the degenerates, the thugs, the thieves, the pimps who, joined the Fascist Party for money and jobs – there will be a few hundred prosecuted for their crimes.
The prosecution of some former “Black Hand” gangster who turned fascist police official is considered by the AMG a sufficient blow against fascism.
The capitalist press dares not tell us the truth about .fascism. It tries to make it appear, that capital and labor suffered equally under fascism. But eyeryone who studies Italian fascism knows that this is a lie. Big business in Italy was almost one hundred per cent FOR Mussolini while the working class was almost one hundred per cent AGAINST Mussolini.
Gino Olivetti, of the Manufacturers Association (Confederazione Generate dell’Industria), was appointed to the Grand Council of the Fascist Party while Giacomo Matteotti, socialist spokesman of the working class in Parliament, was murdered by the fascists.
The banks and big trusts piled up a mountain of profits under fascism while the trade unions were smashed and workers had their wages reduced to the lowest in Europe.
Fascism was a weapon of Italian capitalism in the class war against Italian labor. Fascism is one of the political forms of capitalist rule. Fascist dictatorship is a means of saying capitalism when the working class begins to understand how to organize for power. To be effective, the war against fascism must be a CLASS WAR.
Will American capitalists sponsor a class war of the Italian workers against the fascist capitalists of Italy? Of course not!
 
Protecting Capitalism
On the contrary, the AMG will protect the capitalists from the wrath of the working people. That is one of the most important reasons for having an AMG.
Then who will purge Italy of the fascists?
This will only be done by the real enemies of fascism – the Italian workers and peasants.
But won’t this mean “mob rule” and “lynch law,” as the papers describe the killing of the fascist police official?
No. Such scenes only take place when the people are not permitted to deal with the fascists in an organized fashion. What Italy needs are independent committees of workers in the factories and soldiers in the army and peasants in the villages. An organized workers’ militia would seek out and arrest the fascists. Special tribunals, elected by the committees, would give them a trial and pass proper sentence.
Is there a chance that this will be permitted by the AMG? No. There is no such chance. But the working people of Italy who revolted against Mussolini and who today are fighting against the Germans in northern Italy will not stop fighting until Italy is free of all “occupiers” and “liberators.”
The history of the last twenty-five years proves that there is, only one path open to the Italian people – a government elected from out of the shops, the regiments and the villages. Such a workers’ government will not only clean out the fascist scum, but will also pull up the roots of fascism – the capitalist system.
Fascism was born out of the economic impasse of Italy after the First World War. The Italian workers, together with their brethren of Europe, will solve this economic impasse through a Socialist United States of Europe.
 







(Last week’s edition of Labor Action carried Ernest Lund’s news report on the CIO Shipbuilding Workers convention at Atlantic City. The following is his analysis of the meaning of what took place. – Editor)





Part I
The recent convention of the Industrial Union of Marine & Shipbuilding Workers of America, CIO, marked a definite turning point in the history of the union. It marks a turning point for the following two reasons:

The control of the union passed, in large measure, into the bands of the Communist bloc, leaving: President John Green with only nominal authority.
 
The widespread discontent in the ranks was, for the first time, expressed in a convention of the IUMSWA by the appearance of a firm and fighting opposition based upon progressive policies.

These two factors foreshadow the nature of the struggle within the uni0n for the coming year. It will be a race between the rising strength of the progressive opposition forces and the attempts of the Communist-manipulated General Executive Board to clamp down on locals and individuals who threaten their control.
 
What Commie Victory Means
Both the victory of the Communist bloc and the appearance of a fighting progressive group set off this convention in sharp contrast to the 1943 convention. At the convention of last year the Communists were thought to have suffered a disastrous defeat.
Last year’s convention was entirely empty as far as any serious discussion of policy was concerned, above all, any discussion which gave voice to the progressive demands raised in many locals.
The 1943 convention had as its central issue the case of Irving Velson, who had been suspended from the GEB on charges of membership in the Communist Party in violation of the reactionary clause in the union constitution which forbids Communists to hold office. The Communist bloc suffered a defeat on this issue When the convention upheld the ousting of Velson. However, the fight ended in a compromise when Phillip Vangelder, secretary-treasurer of the union, who had played the role of “front” man for the Communist bloc, was re-elected to office in a deal with John Green. This deal placed a key post in the hands of the Communist bloc. How well they used it in the past year was seen in the results of the recent convention. From the persecuted, defeated minority of a year ago, the Communist forces reappeared at the convention this year with decisive control of the majority of the convention and in a position to exercise their power in electing a new GEB that suited them.
In analyzing how it was possible for the defeated group to stage such a comeback, serious trade unionists in the IUMSWA will learn many a valuable lesson about politics in general and trade union politics in particular.
The first lesson that this demonstrates is that it is reactionary and, in the end, futile to fight the Communists simply on the ground that they are Communists. This is the method of the red-baiter. It is simply an attempt to capitalize upon the prejudices and fears created in the minds of workers by Hearst and the capitalist press generally. It teaches the workers nothing. Instead of an attempt to examine intelligently what a man is proposing, the red-baiter shrieks: “That man is a Communist.” This is no better than to say: “That man is a Catholic,” or “That man is a Jew” or “That man was born in Lithuania.”
Not only is such a fight against Communists reactionary, but it is, in the end, futile. This is proved by the case of Velson. After much spying upon Velson, with the assistance of the FBI, a case was made out for his membership in the Communist Party. So Velson was removed from the GEB and was prevented from holding office in his own local. But this year Velson sat in the convention hall and pulled the strings which ran the show. Today Green is more at the mercy of Velson than Velson was at the mercy of Green a year ago.
 
How to Fight Stalinism
Then how is one to fight Communist domination of the union? By opposing the specific policies they advocate.
But that is where the rub comes in for such self-proclaimed anti-Communists as Green. There was not a single important issue before the convention upon which Green differed from the Communists. Whether Green likes it or not, he is in a political bloc with the Communists. Basically, blocs are determined by what one stands for. Not only do the Communists have the same policies in the union as Green, but the Communists are more active, more ruthless and more fanatical in carrying them out.
What is Green’s policy on the no-strike pledge? He is 100 per cent for it. The Communists are 101 per cent for it.
What is Green’s policy on labor support to the War Labor Board? Green is in favor of keeping labor members on the board despite the kicking around which the WLB gives to labor. The Communists are just as willing to have labor take a kicking around to keep the WLB going.
What is Green’s policy on support of Roosevelt and the line of the Political Action Committee? Green is 100 per cent behind the policy of complete faith in Roosevelt and tying labor to the Democratic political machine through the PAC. The Communists support this same policy 100 per cent.
The three points summed up here are not chosen at random. They are the three main questions that came up before the recent convention. They occupied, all together, perhaps 75 per cent of the time of the convention. Each question found Green seeing eye to eye with the Communist line.
Does this mean that Green is a Communist or that he supports the Communists? Of course not.
All it means is that Green and the Communists each represent within the labor movement outside powers which today are allied in their immediate aims.
Green represents in the labor movement (as does the entire officialdom of the CIO) the Roosevelt Administration. Green supports the policies of the Administration 100 per cent. He supports the Administration in its war aims, in its conduct of the war, in its wage and price policies, and its general line on the home front. He carries out this Administration policy within the union by supporting the no-strike pledge, the War Labor Board and the PAC campaign to re-elect the Democratic Party politicians.
The Communists represent the Russian government. Before Russia became involved in the war the Communists fought Roosevelt tooth and nail. They called him a “warmonger.” They wore buttons which said “The Yanks Aren’t Coming.” And Roosevelt fought back. He had Browder clamped into jail on a trumped-up charge. The FBI began persecuting the Communists in various ways. However, after June 1941, when Russia was invaded, the Russian and American governments began to see eye to eye on world politics. After Pearl Harbor they became active military allies and after the Teheran conference they became active political allies.
As a result, the Communists have supported their boss’s (i.e., Stalin’s) ally 100 per cent. Today they stand 100 per cent for support to the Administration and its policies. Roosevelt’s man, John Green, and Stalin’s man, Irving Velson, have no quarrel over policy nor could they have under the circumstances. As a result their fight is a dirty, unprincipled, undercover fight for posts and power with no policies involved.
Green thought he had scored a victory when he licked Velson in the 1943 convention. But he had done nothing of the kind. In any case, it was meaningless. For their policies remained the same. In fact, the Communist elements did a better, a more energetic, a more efficient job in carrying out the line of the Roosevelt Administration (no-strike pledge, WLB, PAC, etc.) than Green himself. More than that. Both Green and the Communists saw their real enemy in the progressive rank and file groups that were conducting a fight against the policy of appeasement to the government boards and Corporations.
(Part II next week)
 



Hundreds of IUMSWA convention delegates who see this issue of Labor Action will recognize an old and familiar friend. They have received it many times before at shipyard gates and union halls, if they are not yet among the growing army of subscribers.
However, there will be other hundreds from various parts of the country who will see Labor Action for the first time. It is mainly to introduce ourselves to them that these lines are written. For Labor Action has nothing to hide. Quite the contrary, we are most anxious that everyone know all about us. It is for this purpose that we will try to say who we are, what we stand for, and what we hope to accomplish.
Labor Action is not the publication of any particular trade union, though it supports all unions that are legitimately engaged in a fight for the interests of labor. Labor Action depends entirely upon the support of the loyal and devoted trade union activists engaged in the fight for a basic solution to labor’s problems. It is their self-sacrificing contributions that make Labor Action possible. It is their paper in the fullest sense of the word.
Labor Action is, therefore, part and parcel of the organized labor movement. The problems of labor are our problems and the future of labor is our future. We, therefore, discuss the problems of the various unions, not as “outsiders” giving unsolicited advice, but rather as part of our constant fight for a progressive union movement.
Labor Action has as its chief aim the education of workers to an understanding of the economic and political reasons for the present condition of labor and to help establish an economic system in which the working people will, for the first time, enjoy the full fruits of their labor.
Labor Action maintains that the ills that beset the working class arise from the capitalist system of production for the profit of a few. It further maintains that it should be the aim of the labor movement to establish a system of planned production for use, which will guarantee plenty of the good things of life for all.
We say that the fight for such a system of socialist production is primarily a political fight, for it requires that the power of government be lodged in the hands of the working people, who form the overwhelming majority of the population. That is why Labor Action is more than just a “labor paper.” It is a labor-political paper with a definite political and economic program, expressed in the platform of the Workers Party, printed in these pages from time to time.
This platform sums up our basic beliefs that capital and labor have no interests in common; that since the beginning of modern industry there has been a constant struggle between the working class, seeking a better living, and the capitalist class, seeking greater profits; that labor has made gains only when it was prepared to wage a fight for them; that the advancement of the working people depends entirely upon their own organized efforts, rather than upon generous employers or so-called friends of labor in government; that labor must stand united, regardless of race, creed or color; that labor needs trade unions that are industrial in form, progressive in policy, democratic in procedure, and based upon an enlightened, well informed and active membership; that labor must organize itself on the political as well as on the economic field; and that labor needs a political party of its own, independent of all capitalist parties and their candidates – a Labor Party.
In line with this basic approach to the problems of the labor movement, Labor Action has consistently opposed the policy of surrendering collective bargaining by giving up the right to strike and placing the welfare of labor in the hands of the War Labor Board. The no-strike pledge has been one of the greatest follies in the history of the labor movement. Labor Action has campaigned consistently, from the day the pledge was given by labor’s leaders, for its repeal.
 
The No-Strike Pledge
No one knows better the harm the no-strike pledge has been to the trade union movement than the active union men of the CIO Shipbuilders Union. There has been little real collective bargaining in the shipbuilding industry since “the pledge” was given. The results of negotiations are almost always that the minor points are agreed upon by the company and wages and other important clauses are submitted to the WLB. Everyone knows what happens to labor’s demands once they reach the files of the WLB. It has become known as “the graveyard of labor’s hopes.”
Why should the WLB want to give labor what it rightly deserves? Why should the corporations want to honor the terms of a contract in grievance procedure and upgrading? Don’t they know that labor lies helpless, without weapons, once it gives up the right to strike? Little wonder that President John Green has traveled so often between Camden and Washington that he knows every telephone post along the railroad line and still has not got anything worthwhile for the ship workers.
We say that capital and labor have no interests in common. Neither do they have interests in common on the WLB. That is why we say to the labor leaders: “Get oft the WLB. Go back to the shops and shipyards and restore real collective bargaining.”
 
What Is Labor Politics?
But today it is becoming obvious to an increasing number of workers that economic action alone will not do the job. The interests of both capital and labor are closely tied in with the machinery of govetnment. Every step on the economic field today involves some agency or board of government. It becomes a question of who will control the machinery of government – capital or labor?
It is a fact known to every experienced union man that the forces of government are, in the last analysis, on the side of capital. This is true whether a Democratic or a Republican Administration is in control. If they vary in their treatment of labor it is a matter of method and not it is a matter of expediency and not of principle. That is why Labor Action has been consistently campaigning for the labor movement to take the machinery of government into its own hands and use is for the vast majority of the people and not for the select few.
Is there anything wrong with this idea? Are not the working people the vast majority of the population? Do they not create the vast wealth of the country? Are they not its most useful citizens? Then why must we go, hat in hand, to beg some political appointees of capital on some government board or other for a few cents so that our families will be adequately provided for?
Labor Action has been consistently campaigning to win the labor movement to the idea of organizing its own Labor Party, independent of the capitalist parties. This is the necessary first step toward placing the power of government in the hands of the working people through establishing a workers government.
Of all workers in the country today, shipbuilding workers should be interested in labor’s political role. The war is drawing to a close. The ship industry will once more shrink to its pre-war employment levels. If one out of ten ship workers is still employed in the industry after the war it will surpass all expectations. What will happen to the other nine ship workers?
 
Reconversion Issue
In other industries there is some hope for reconversion from wartime to peacetime production: The assembly lines in Detroit that have been turning out tanks may again turn out trucks or cars. But what can one turn out on the ship ways except more ships? With the present surplus there will be little need for shipbuilding for another ten or fifteen years.
The future of nine-tenths of the ship workers depends directly upon what happens to this country after the war. If we permit the capitalist system to continue to limit production for the sake of profits, the army of the unemployed will exceed that of the Hoover days. Yet the capacity of America to produce and provide work for everyone has been fully demonstrated during the course of the war. It is far more possible in time of peace. We can all enjoy a guaranteed annual wage, job security, decent home, and good education for our children. But it is not possible under the present system where all production is limited to what will pass through the bottle-neck called “guaranteed profits.” It requires a system of planned production for use, possible only with government ownership of industry and working class ownership of government.
These are the ideas of Labor Action. We are sure that few workers will disagree with them once they are understood. We hope that this issue of our paper will become the first introduction to a lasting friendship. Subscribe to it. Carry it back to your local and get others to subscribe. Join in the fight for a progressive labor movement and an independent Labor Party.
 



The recent convention of the CIO shipyard workers (officially known as the Industrial Union of Marine & Shipbuilding Workers of America) opened a new chapter in the history of that organization. The convention marked (1) the appearance of a small but fighting progressive bloc as spokesmen for the widespread discontentment of the rank and file, and (2) the emergence of the Communists as the controlling factor in the national leadership of the union. In order to understand the significance of the recent developments, it is necessary to understand a little of the history of the union.
The IUMSWA has a history that is unique when compared to that of the average CIO union. Unlike the steel workers, the packinghouse workers or the textile workers, the IUMSWA never went through a period of CIO “organizing committee” control. As a matter of fact, the IUMSWA was organized as an industrial union in competition with the American Federation of Labor even before the Committee for Industrial Organization was set up.
The IUMSWA was organized in 1934 as the outgrowth of several years of intensive agitation and organization among Camden workers by the local branch of the Socialist Party. This branch was quite unlike the average SP branch and was usually referred to, by Old Guard and militants alike as the “Camden SLP crack-pots.” The contemptuous references sought to belittle the efforts of the Camden Socialists who were not only fanatically convinced industrial unionists, but were also convinced that the AFL was worse than useless. The Camden Socialists, however, took their views seriously and set to work to do something practical about them. The Camden branch was also quite unlike the average SP branch in that it was composed in the main of industrial workers and any number of experienced trade unionists. Without money, without connections, in the depths of the depression when the number of organized workers was shrinking to a new low, the Camden Socialists, driven by a firm faith in the gospel of industrial organization, started a feverish campaign to organize a “dual” industrial union with a socialist outlook. Despite their small numbers and meager resources, they paid scant attention to the “small potatoes” of Camden industry and went out to tackle such industrial giants as New York Shipbuilding Corporation, Campbell Soup Co., and RCA. Though most of their efforts brought little immediate results, their pioneering work was to bear real fruit in the period of 1935–37, when Camden rode high on the national wave of industrial organization.
However, their efforts did bear immediate fruit among the workers of the Camden shipyards. Here their “dual” industrial union took real root. In large measure the success was due to the indefatigable efforts of two members of the Camden branch of the Socialist Party – John Green, sheet metal worker and an old union fighter from the Clydeside, and Phillip Van Gelder, one of the thousands of depression-ridden college students who joined the Socialist Party. (Green had been one of the leaders of the apprentice boys’ strike on the Clyde in the First World War, along with William Gallacher, now Stalin’s personal spokesman in the British Parliament.)
After several hard-fought strike struggles, the New York Shipbuilding Corporation was unionized and the organization won its first great victory. Soon other locals were organized in the yards along the Delaware and in the New York area. The IUMSWA became one of the largest and most important of the independent unions. Its firm industrial union principles were written into the preamble of the union constitution and when read as a regular ritual at union meetings it serves as a reminder of the pioneer days of the union, when it really acted in accord with its preamble.
Its ability to survive as an isolated industrial union would have been in doubt had not John L. Lewis opened up the fight for industrial unionism at the 1935 convention of the AFL and given encouragement to the industrial union trend. Lewis did more for the IUMSWA than merely give encouragement. During one of its crucial strikes at New York Shipbuilding Corp. the United Mine Workers sent a check of some $20,000, which looked like a fortune to this struggling independent union locked in combat with one of the Wall Street mammoths. John Green was to repay the miners for their solidarity by joining with Murray and other CIO leaders in stabbing the miners in the back during their 1943 strikes.
 
Resources of the Union
When the Committee for Industrial Organization left the AFL and organized itself independently, the IUMSWA affiliated with it. This path to the CIO set it off from the run of new CIO unions and explains much in the course of its later development. On the one hand it enjoyed an exceptional independence from the CIO officialdom and the large dominating influence of the miners and clothing workers’ leaders in the early CIO. But on the other hand it also suffered from the lack of experienced local organizers and officers which these older unions supplied to most of the new CIO organizations. This was further accentuated by the lack of trade union traditions in the shipbuilding industry. Aside from a brief period of “back-door” AFL organization during the First World War, the shipbuilding industry was as open-shop as the steel industry, which, by and large, controls it. Other factors, such as irregular employment in peacetime and low wages for hard and dirty work, attracted many floaters and workers suffering seasonal unemployment in some other line. Aside from a few crafts, like ship-fitting, most of the work is similar enough to that in other industries to permit workers to come and go in the industry without learning a new trade (welders, machinists, pipefitters, electricians, boilermakers, riveters, painters, sheet metal men, etc.).
All these factors hindered the development of an experienced and stable union membership which could produce from its ranks first-class union leaders. Though the leadership of Green and Van Gelder compared well with other progressive leaders in the early CIO, the IUMSWA stood in marked contrast to a union like the United Automobile Workers in the development of its rank and file. The IUMSWA had none of those attributes of a really progressive union like a broad educational program, well edited national and local papers, a research department, ladies auxiliaries, social and athletic activities on a large scale, and other activities that make the members union-conscious and aware that they belong to something more than a dues-collection agency. As a result the IUMSWA rank and file was perhaps one of the least union-educated in the CIO. The low level of its national convention discussions and their rowdy character have always attested to this.
With this the situation in the union, the war suddenly inflated the industry to more than ten times its size and with it the union grew from some 50,000 members to close to 500,000. Perhaps no other union experienced quite as large an influx of new members. But even worse, from the standpoint of assimilating these new thousands, was the fact that most of them were not only new to unionism, but they were members of new locals. In unions where the influx of a wartime membership expanded the existing locals, it meant that the new membership was being gathered around local groups of experienced unionists. In the IUMSWA this was not the case. The bulk of the shipyard workers were employed in yards that had been shut down since 1918 or in yards that were built since 1940.
This situation made the locals of the IUMSWA a happy hunting ground for all sorts of fakers and scoundrels. Locals were constantly plagued with dishonest officers who embezzled the funds or in some other manner abused their office to make personal gains. In one local an unknown suddenly appeared as a candidate for president on a program of one-half hour business meetings, free beer for everybody, and a reduction in dues. He was elected by a landslide.
 
Development of Bureaucracy
This situation required close supervision of locals by the national officers. However, instead of acting as advisers, Green and Van Gelder soon acquired the habit of acting as dictators. They lifted charters, they kicked out this group from the leadership and sent “administrators” to install some other group. They committed crimes against union democracy and local autonomy that rivalled those of the most hidebound AFL bureaucrats.
Meanwhile the national officers were having their hands full with “wildcat” strikes. Though the workers who had streamed into the yards with the outbreak of the war were unfamiliar with union procedure, they recognized injustice when they experienced it and were ready to react at the drop of a hat. Green rushed about frantically pleading and threatening amid boos from assembled strikers. (Green, the union president, was seeing things differently from Green, the apprentice boy on the Clyde.) But just as frequently as he rushed from strike situation to strike situation, he rushed to Washington to deal with Knox, Forrestal, Bard and Admiral Land. The sheet metal worker could now pick up the phone and say: “Give me the Secretary of the Navy.” He became anxious to please his new “connections.” Tea with the Roose-velts left a much greater impression upon him than the innumerable union discussions over open lunch boxes with his fellow workers of the sheet metal department at New York Shipbuilding Corp. His denunciations of loyal union men who had been driven into striking in the interests of the union were filled with fire and brimstone. Following his speech at the 1942 convention of the union, the New York World-Telegram, owned by the union-hating Scripps-Howard chain, praised him and held him forth as a model labor leader. (At the same convention, Green kept quiet while the Communists pushed through a resolution calling for the suppression of Labor Action.) Green, former left wing socialist, member of the Revolutionary Policy Committee, had come far in this world.
As an old union man and a socialist, Green had learned to distrust the communists long ago. He has never changed this attitude. But being a man who never took principles too seriously when opportunity beckoned, Green was not at all averse to “playing ball” with the Stalinist forces in the union whenever it suited his purpose. During the period of the Hitler-Stalin pact, when the communists were opposing the Roosevelt Administration, Green had a clause added to the constitution of the union which barred communists from holding office. After the invasion of Russia, however, Green found much use for the communists. They proved the most reliable people in the union when it came to breaking strikes, ramming WLB decisions down the throats of workers, and rounding up votes for Democratic Party politicians. More than that, the communists in the union were, by and large, able organizers and local officers. With the great dearth of the latter during the big influx of new locals and new members, Green was more than willing to overlook the clause barring communists from office and appoint a number of them to jobs on the national union payroll, mostly as field organizers.
The old political truth that it is policy in the end and not the color of a man’s necktie that counts, was once more verified. When Green’s chief, Roosevelt, became an ally of Velson’s chief, Stalin, political logic compelled Green and Velson to play ball. However, Green was still somewhat illogical. Memories of Stalinist treachery caused him to hold them at arm’s length. Not so his partner Van Gelder. After being secretary-treasurer of the IUMSWA for nearly ten years, the one-time socialist college student was being consumed with ambitions for bigger things in life. Green’s job as president was one of them. Van Gelder was willing to go whole hog with the communists – above all if it landed him in a better berth.
 
Danger of Stalinism
The 1943 convention of the union was preceded by months of underground maneuvering, knifing, and double-crossing. The communists were greasing the skids for Green and grooming Van Gelder. Green was taking counter-measures. Whether by design or accident, the fight began to center around the fate of Irving Velson, member of the General Executive Board accused of membership in the Communist Party. A group of anti-communists on the GEB were out for Velson’s skin on the basis of the union constitution forbidding communists to hold office. Green was willing to remain in the background while they “did a job” on Velson. Van Gelder saw the importance of the case and became Velson’s defender. The convention upheld the GEB majority in removing Velson. As a result of this, Van Gelder received a setback. Green, having achieved his purpose of stopping Van Gelder’s campaign, now made a deal with Van Gelder and secured his reelection to his old post. In doing this he broke with those who had led the fight against Velson. As a result, Green helped decimate the very forces he had relied upon to stop Van Gelder. From now on Green became to play a delicate game of maneuvering between the Van Gelder-Velson bloc on one side and the anti-communist forces on the other.
In the midst of all this back-stabbing, throat-slitting, double-crossing, Stalinist intriguing, red-baiting and witch-hunting, nowhere was there to be found the voice of a progressive group, standing upon principles and fighting for a restoration of the union to its early pioneer spirit of militant industrial unionism. However, between the 1943 and the 1944 conventions, such voices were being raised ever louder in the locals. As the ranks became fed up with Green’s dictatorial lifting of charters his appeasing the Washington politicians and admirals, and his vicious denunciations of members who went on strike, the opposition movement began to grow. In his old Local 1 of Camden, in Local 42 of Philadelphia, in Local 9 of San Pedro, in Local 16 of Kearny and elsewhere, progressive groups were either elected to local administrations or were threatening election. The old anti-communist group in the union bestirred itself and seeing the rising tide of rank and file opposition quickly fell in line on a program of repealing the no-strike pledge and other progressive demands.
Green became thoroughly alarmed. Rather than “lose face” in Washington by having his union be the first to repeal the no-strike pledge, Green was willing to lift the bars to the communists and give them a free hand to round up a convention majority guaranteed to give a majority for Roosevelt, the no-strike pledge and the War Labor Board. The communists did better than Green expected. They could have controlled the convention even without the Local 16 delegation which the communists secured by violating the union constitution and appointing the delegation without a regular convention election. That Green agreed to this was indication that his fears had carried away his common sense. He became not only a partner in policy with them, but also a partner in crime.
 
Growth of Progressive Movement
The communists were not yet ready to “take over” the union this year. They used their convention majority to grease the skids for next year. Innocent-appearing changes in the constitution, resolutions on red-baiting, etc., plus the election of’a GEB that they can handle were considered sufficient as the first step. Toward the close of the convention Green became fully alarmed over his peril. In his closing speech he lashed out at the “intolerance” displayed by the “majority.”
If he chooses to fight, he can more than hold his own. Most of the communist stooges on the GEB would cave in under a real fight, if Green chooses to make it. However, finding himself tied to Washington, which is tied to Moscow, which is tied to his union opponents, Green has few issues upon which to fight. He is experienced enough to know that red-baiting more often than not acts as a boomerang.
The only local to send a delegation pledged to a fighting program was Local 42. It found scattered support among several other delegations. However, the fight waged by the progressives opened a new chapter in the history of IUMSWA conventions. It was the first really principled fight over issues and policies instead of personalities and intrigues. It went far to educate the union activists both those at the convention and those who had to consider the question in their locals. As the opening gun it did all that was to be expected of it.
The coming year will see the cards beginning to fall for the progressives. Their uphill fight in the locals and at the convention will begin to bear fruit. Disappointment with Roosevelt policies after the election, continued wage controls, cutbacks, declining hours, increasing strikes, growing militancy among the rank and file will all drive home the lessons that the progressives have been preaching. If the communists think they can put the IUMSWA “in the bag” along with the UERMWA the NMU and other of their hog-tied outfits without a real fight, they will be sadly disillusioned. The progressive winds are blowing these days – and the old IUMSWA spirit of 1934 is bestirring itself.
 



Atlantic City – Spearheaded by the fifty-five-man delegation of Local 42, Philadelphia, progressive delegates to the tenth annual convention of the Industrial Union of Marine & Shipbuilding Workers of America, CIO, in session here from September 28 to October 3, waged a stiff battle for a fighting union.
Their fight was highlighted by an attempt to free the union from the restrictions imposed upon it by the no-strike pledge. This fight was continued when the progressives asked for the recall of labor’s members on the War Labor Board on the grounds of the anti-labor record of the board. The fight of the progressives culminated in their support of the opposition ticket in the election of national officers.
The hopeful sign of the emergence of a progressive bloc was, however, offset by the fact that the union leadership came completely under the domination of the Communist Party forces. Though John Green was re-elected as national president, the Communist bloc completely controls the majority of the new General Executive Board.
The no-strike pledge was reaffirmed lay a show of hands vote in which some 100 delegates voted in opposition out of a convention of some 750. Local 42 was the only large delegation voting solidly for repeal of the pledge. It was joined by groups from Camden Local 1 and Chester Local 2.
The fight over the no-strike pledge was featured by a “red herring” speech by Delegate Goodwin from San Pedro Local 9 in which he charged that the fight for repeal was inspired by Labor Action. He went on to cite the widespread distribution of the paper at defense plants and shipyards throughout the country as being the cause of the current drive in the labor movement to end the pledge. Goodwin claimed that the first place a resolution for the repeal of the no-strike pledge was printed was in Labor Action and boasted that he owned a copy of that issue.
(On the following day, Delegate Goodwin stood up and cheered as the Communist bloc introduced and carried a resolution which condemned “red baiting.”)
The same line-up of forces that crossed swords over the no-strike pledge again squared off in the debate over the WLB. The convention adopted the majority position which enumerates at great length all the abuse that labor has received from the WLB and then concludes that the CIO ought to send a committee to tell the WLB to change its conduct.
 
Election Fight
The incumbent administration of Green and Phillip Vangelder was opposed by Tom Saul and Herbert Moyer, running for the offices of president and secretary-treasurer respectively. Green was elected over Saul by a vote of 793 to 131. Vangelder was elected over Moyer by a vote of 796 to 133.
Both Saul and Moyer confined their election fight to a “corridor” campaign. Neither of them took the floor of the convention upon a single important question of policy. Their campaign became an unprincipled attempt to line up delegates on the basis of personal grudges and deals. Neither candidate put out a declaration of policy or a program upon which to base his candidacy. Saul’s only attempt at explaining the basis of his campaign was an article published in one of the Atlantic City tabloids and distributed at the convention. The article does not mention a single real issue facing the labor movement.
The totalitarian methods of the Communist bloc were rapidly demonstrated when they stubbornly refused to permit a single representative of the opposition to sit on the new General Executive Board. With a firm majority that gave them mechanical control of the elections, the Communists were in a position to freeze out all opposition candidates. As a result, Local 42, one of the largest and best organized locals in the union, was not given a seat on the new GEB.
 
Communist Danger
President Green launched into a terribly heated speech following, his election, during which he denounced the “majority group” tor their intolerance of any opposition point of view. He expressed his disapproval of the course taken by the opposition but went on to say that he felt they were honest union men who spoke “from their hearts” and deserved to be treated with respect.
Green’s speech was without doubt called forth by his increasing fear of the results of complete Communist domination of the GEB. Green spent some busy months before the convention whipping up sentiment against the progressive opposition and making plans with the Communist elements to insure himself against a convention with a majority of progressives. The Communists co-operated most willingly. As a result, Green has insured the defeat of the progressive forces, but finds that he is no longer master in his own house.
However, if the progressive forces continue their present fight and carry it to the members, the next convention may see a totally different line-up. The fight conducted by the Local 42 delegation was a demonstration of how to stand and fight for principles. All the developments of the coming year in the shipbuilding industry are bound to justify these principles. A few big locals following this lead of Local 42 can put the IUMSWA on the road to progressive trade unionism.
 



Part II
While Green and the Communists carried on underhanded maneuvers against each other, their real open fight was against the rank and file of Local 16, for instance. Green relied upon the Communists in No. 16 because they proved to be the only force capable of carrying out Green’s policies of appeasement. Green even went so far as to endorse the raw action by the Local 16 administration when they appointed a delegation to the convention instead of facing the rank and file in a regular election as provided for by the constitution. Both Green and the Communist bloc jammed this through the convention and seated this illegal delegation. Green kept Pollard in power as administrator of Local 9 despite Pollard’s support of Velson at the 1943 convention. Green had to rely on Pollard and the Communist elements in Local 9 to keep the progressive group out of power. Green never failed to to get the applause and wholehearted support of the Communist elements whenever Green set out to denounce a local that went out on strike. Green may like it or not, but his policies put him in the same bed with the Communists and as he is learning, to his dismay, that is not a good place to be when the Communists begin edging one out of power.
For one year, President Green of the Shipyard Workers ran around the country calling off strikes and denouncing locals that acted in self-defense in the only way workers have to defend themselves. For one year Green fought the specter of “Trotskyism” in the union. He did a good job – for the Communists. They rubbed their hands in glee and pitched right in to help him. Above all, the field organizers who supported the Communist bloc were active in carrying out Green’s policy. And they came to the recent convention with the biggest delegations in their pocket. John Green stood up on the platform and wielded the gavel but Velson and Kaplan ran the convention. And behind them, pulling the strings, was Roy Hudson, trade union director of the Communist Political Association, as Stalin’s outfit in this country is now called.
Green began to realize the extent of the Communist domination of the convention with each passing day. Once Green had safely gotten over the hurdle of the no-strike pledge debate with the big Communist-dominated majority carrying the ball for him, he began to worry about their influence in the union. This caused him to unleash a fierce speech toward the end of the convention in which he denounced those who showed such “intolerance” and specifically referred to the “majority group” of the convention.
Whatever one may say about Green and his policies, he, like most of the products of a free trade union movement, finds it difficult to accept lightly the perverted and degenerate morals of the Stalinists. However bureaucratic Green may be in the conduct of his office, the Stalinist spirit of ruthlessness toward opponents, of viciousness and character assassination, of “rule or ruin,” of “purge the opposition,” and their constant drive toward totalitarian and monolithic control, do not sit well with him. In part Green’s speech was, of course, a desperate outcry against the forces he saw crowding in on him. But, without a doubt, it was also largely an honest protest against the lynch spirit which the Communists were whipping up against those who had opposed them in the union.
 
Issues Before Convention
In contrast to the 1943 convention, the recent convention had several interesting and instructive debates upon policy. The bloc of progressive delegates consisted in the main of the fifty-five man delegation from Local 42 (Cramp Shipyard, Philadelphia) with a scattering of . support from minorities of other delegations. The progressives waged sharp fights for the repeal of the no-strike pledge and the withdrawal of labor members from the WLB.
In the elections of national officers and the GEB, the progressives found themselves lined up with many elements who have no particular claim to being called progressives. Among them were many reactionaries and red-baiters who opposed the Communists because they consider them to be “subversive” and oppose Green because they feel he appeases the Communists. They really compose the conservative or right wing of the union. Many are purely opportunists and union politicians at present on the outs with the Green administration and willing to bloc up with anyone fighting Green.
The two candidates of the opposition, Tom Saul, of Local 1, running for president, and Herbert Mover, of Local 42, running for secretary-treasurer, proved to be disappointments on the floor of the convention. Neither of them took the floor on the vital issues facing the convention. Their fear of taking a stand on controversial issues for fear it would antagonize votes is unworthy, to say the least, of men who would lead a progressive opposition. Had they gone, down fighting for principles, they would at least have emerged with the respect of the convention.
The coming year will see a race between the rising strength of the progressives in the ranks of the union and the efforts of the Communist-dominated GEB to take steps to clamp down on opponents and choke off the rising tide of rank and file opposition to appeasement policies.
 
Tasks for Progressives
The chances of the progressive forces winning the race and appearing at the next convention with a decisive majority are very good. This estimate is based upon the following considerations:

While the Communist bloc was in complete control at the convention, their convention strength was far beyond the proportion of strength they command in the ranks.
 
While the Communist bloc elected a GEB composed in the majority of people they can manipulate, the non-Communists in the administration, most of them personally loyal to John Green, will resist Communist infiltration into the important posts and committees. In other words, the union is not “in the bag” for the Communist inner group as is, let us say, the United Electrical, Radio & Machine Workers or the National .Maritime Union.
 
The progressive forces will be favored during the coming year by the trend of economic and political events. These events will prove the policy of the opposition to be correct. The prospect for the coming period is one of layoffs, less hours, and increasing strikes. Many a delegate who voted to reaffirm the no-strike pledge will remember what he heard at the convention from the speakers who favored repeal of the pledge. Likewise, many a delegate who listened to the pep talks by Sidney Hillman, Senator Pepper and Vice-President Wallace about re-electing Roosevelt will think back after the election, when the Roosevelt Administration continues its policy of appeasing big business at the expense of labor and provides no practical plan for reconversion that will avoid mass unemployment. Such a delegate will think back to what the progressives said at the convention about pulling the labor members off the War Labor Board and about the need of labor creating its own Labor Party, independent of the old parties.
 
The coming period will see the union officers and the GEB having more and more difficulty in trying to get the rank and file of the union to follow an appeasement line to the corporations and the government boards. The more the officers and the GEB are forced to club the ranks into line, the more will the rank and file understand the fight that was waged at the convention by the progressive opposition.
 

Break Communist Control

The progressive forces, are still rather new and inexperienced in the politics of the national union. The maneuvers before the convention and, the fight at the convention should have taught them much and seasoned them for the coming fight.

These considerations all indicate that the IUMSWA is far from being written off as “another Commie outfit.” The Communist bloc will, of course, try to lift charters of opposition locals and try to frame up individuals who fight them. But it is unlikely that they can put the union into a “totalitarian” straight-jacket without a real fight on their hands. If the progressives fight every inch of the way, if they block the attempts to lift charters and frame up individuals, the Communist plans for turning the union into another UE or NMC can be tripped up.
 




The Shipbuilding Workers Convention

Future Prospects for Progressive Group
 



For over two months the foremost statesmen of the big and little nations of the world have conferred and connived at San Francisco at the task of setting up a world organization to maintain peace. They have now ended their labors. Delegates from the giant powers, the medium powers and the midget powers have all marched up to the table amid the grinding of newsreel cameras and the flashing of photo-bulbs to affix their signatures to the document, which the entire capitalist press assures us will be historic, epoch-making, etc.
But the common people of the world can do well to remember the words of the ancient prophet, “Peace, peace – but there is no peace.” And we can add – nor any prospects of peace. On the contrary, the world is full of war and the rumors of war.
How could it be otherwise? Did the San Francisco Conference settle a SINGLE one of the causes of war? Did it even mention, much less seriously discuss, the causes of war? Was a single session devoted to analyzing the factors that gave rise to World War I? Was a single sub-committee appointed to investigate the causes of World War II? Perhaps these questions are quite unfair to the gentlemen who worked so hard in San Francisco. They hardly had time for such studies of past wars. They were much too busy jockeying their nation into the best possible position for World War III.
Labor Action has devoted any number of articles to the maneuvers among the powers at San Francisco. But we Marxists do not rest our case against the new world organization upon a criticism of this or that feature. We are not primarily concerned with its framework, its rules and procedures, and its allotment of votes. We attach no fundamental importance to whether the Big Three have veto powers, whether the Argentine fascists are invited; or whether Molotov blew his nose during a speech by Stettinius. When the signatures were affixed to the Versailles Treaty and the League of Nations was born, Lenin, hundreds of miles away in Moscow, stated in his matter-of-fact way to a foreign correspondent who was interviewing him that “the gentlemen in Paris have just underwritten the next world war.” We judge the San Francisco Conference from the same point of view as Lenin judged the Versailles Conference.
 
What Causes War?
Like Lenin viewing the League of Nations in 1919, it is necessary that we also sweep aside the heavy smokescreen of lies and hypocrisy with which the statesmen cover their actions. We must deal with the heart of the matter. We begin from these fundamental propositions:

Modern wars are part and parcel of the capitalist system.
  
Capitalist economy must continually expand or the nation suffers from depression, unemployment and internal revolt.
  
Each capitalist nation is continually driven to seek new markets, new sources of raw materials and new areas for investment.
  
The capitalist need to expand continually makes of each industrially developed power an imperialist aggressor – whether it is Japan or Britain, Germany or the United States.
  
There can be no end to imperialist war without an end to capitalism.
  
Permanent peace is only possible when planned production for use has taken the place of competitive production for profits. Planned production for use on an international scale means a World Socialist Federation.

It is on the basis of these fundamental propositions that we Marxists state that the new world organization is as hopeless and helpless as a means of preserving peace as was the old League of Nations.
But we Marxists are not the only ones who realize this. The diplomats, statesmen, politicians, admirals, generals, industrialists and bankers who comprise the ruling classes of the world know it just as well, None of them took the San Francisco show too seriously. It was just so much eyewash for the people. It is supposed ta “prove” to the maimed veteran, the bombed-out family, the conscript in the Pacific and the widow at home that “their” governments have done all that is possible to make this the last war. And if another war does come, “Well, you see, our government at least tried to prevent it. Therefore, we must support our government against the new aggressor.”
 
Preparations for Next War
If the rulers of the world took the new organization seriously, then why all the frantic preparations for future wars? Why is it necessary that the United States establish peacetime conscription and have a large standing army? Why do our admirals want to hold all the Pacific islands that have been taken and fortify them? Why does Britain grimly hang on to every last bit of its empire and prepare to defend it against movements for colonial independence? Why does Russia make new demands upon Turkey in the name of “national defense”?
The rulers of the world do not place their trust in the “historic” document they signed at San Francisco. They place their trust in armies and navies, strategic frontiers and fortified islands.
Let the working class be equally realistic. Let it likewise trust only its own organized power. The international solidarity of labor is the only world organization that can block the preparations of a new world war.
The establishment of a World Socialist Federation is the only guarantee of lasting peace.
 



The insulting counter-proposal of General Motors that workers should work forty-five hours a week at straight time in order to earn a living take-home wage has already been answered on two counts in previous articles of this series.
This article is devoted to the argument of GM’s president, Charles Wilson, that more hours of work mean more production. More production, says Wilson, means more goods and a higher standard of living for everyone.
This, thinks Wilson, is a smashing argument – for dolts and idiots who cannot count beyond three.
 
How Does It Operate?
If our economic system worked as simply as the family farm, Wilson’s proposal would make sense. Down on the farm, the whole family pitches in to do the work. When there is more work, everyone works more. When there is less work, everyone works less. During the late summer and early autumn the crops are harvested, the corn is husked, the silo is filled with fodder for winter, the fruits and vegetables are “put up” by the women folk for the long winter ahead, and, around Thanksgiving Day, the family sighs a “well done” and prepares to take things a little easier.
If everyone worked hard and if the crops were good, there will be checks in the mail and food to eat. The whole family will enjoy some of the fruits of their labor. The fact that the “work’s all done” is something to regard with pleasure.
But how does it operate in the capitalist system under which we live? Because labor works harder and longer does not necessarily mean that it will share in the increased production. Quite the contrary. We already showed why longer hours result in lower wages. Increased production will usually result in layoffs because the market becomes glutted. Instead of everyone relaxing and working less and eating more, the capitalist shuts down his plant and goes to Florida for a vacation while the worker goes to the relief station to ask for a hand-out. He has produced himself out of a job.
The essential difference between the family farm and GM is that the farm is owned by the same people who work it while those who own GM do not work in it, and those who work in it do not own it.
 
What Is Capitalism?
Capitalism, as Karl Marx pointed out long ago, separated the producer from his tools. The owner of the tools (plants, machinery, railroads, etc.) buys labor power (or hires workers, as we would say) to operate them. The more they produce, the higher his profit. When it is not profitable to produce, he lays off the workers.
Capitalism has made of labor power a commodity to be bought on the labor market. As with any other commodity, the cost of labor power (wages) is determined by the cost of production. The cost of production of labor power is in the main what it takes to maintain the worker at his accustomed standard of living. It is, therefore, the cost of living which determines wages under capitalism. (For a more exact description of this process, see Wage Labor and Capital, by Karl Marx.)
Increased production can lead to a surplus of goods on the market unless labor has sufficient buying power to buy back the product of industry. Under capitalism, labor is never paid enough to buy back all that is produced. If it were, the capitalist would not retain a margin of profit, since it is the difference between what is paid to labor and what the capitalist receives for his products that determines his profit. Increased production without increasing wage rates will only create a surplus that leads to unemployment and wage cuts.
Production levels were very high in 1929, the peak year of the so-called prosperity period. However, it did not result in “more for everybody.” It resulted in one of the worst depressions in history.
 
Labor and Socialism
Labor is in favor of increased production. A high productive level is necessary if we are to achieve a high standard of living. Even with the best fighting unions, the workers of a country like China could not achieve a much higher standard of living. However, a high productive level is not the result of long hours. Chinese coolies work twelve to fourteen hours a day and still their country is poverty-stricken. A high productive level is the result of modern mass production methods. This is the secret of American output.
This is the basis of the standard of living in this country. However, American workers have not been GIVEN a higher standard merely because the level of production has increased. It has not been GIVEN to them at all. They organized and FOUGHT for it. Part and parcel of that fight has been the fight for shorter hours.
General Motors can never sell its idea of longer hours and more production to any worker who is willing to use his head for something more than a place to keep his hat. Labor’s first concern is higher wage rates and a shorter work week.
Once the workers have organized to take over political power in this country and introduce a socialist system of production, then more production will mean more for everybody. The more we produce, the more we would eat. The more backlog of products we would have, the less we would work until we had used them up. This will be so because socialism will wipe out the distinction between the owners of the machine and the users of the machine. The working class will become the owners AND operators. The separation between the worker and the means of production introduced by capitalism will be ended by socialism.
Until such a socialist system prevails, wage labor will remain a commodity to be bought on the market by capital. The wages of labor will continue to be determined by the cost of living. It must therefore be the aim of labor to fight for higher wage rates and a shorter work week and let the capitalists worry about production.
*

CORRECTION – In my article of November 19 headed Long Hours Depress Wages, the following sentence appeared: “We pointed out that Karl Marx had long ago shown that under capitalism the wage level is regulated but not determined, in the main, by the cost of living.” The emphasized words “regulated” and “not” were inserted by the editor without my knowledge. The original sentence was correct. Marx stated that the cost of living did determine wages, in the main. Wages are regulated by the competition of workers for jobs in the labor market, i.e., by the law of supply and demand. This is stated simply and precisely in Wage Labor and Capital.
 



I – The Inner Contradictions of Burnham’s Article
James Burnham’s article on Lenin’s Heir (Partisan Review, Winter 1945) seeks to establish two major conclusions:

that Stalin is, after all, a “great man,” and
 
that Stalin is “Lenin’s heir,” in the sense that Stalinism is the legitimate, consistent, and logical continuation of Bolshevism.

What is the relationship of these two questions?
An examination of these two questions reveals that they are not inter-dependent. The answer to the one does not follow from the answer to the other. The materials examined and the criteria established to answer the one question is not necessarily the same as used to answer the other.
Burnham holds that Stalin is a “great man” and that Stalinism is Bolshevism. He counterposes this to Trotsky’s position that Stalin is a mediocrity and that Stalinism betrayed Bolshevism. From this, Burnham seeks to imply that you have to agree with one or the other. However, precisely because these two questions have no necessary interdependence, it is possible to hold views that agree with neither. It can be stated that Stalin is a mediocrity and that Stalinism is Bolshevism. This view is held by most of the Mensheviks, Kerensky, and others. It can also be stated that Stalin is a “great man” and that Stalinism is a betrayal of Bolshevism. This view, given the proper definition of “great man” – i.e., in the sense that Genghis Khan and Napoleon were great men – is held by the author of this article.
Why and how, then, did Burnham come to interrelate these two questions and seek to solve them as an interdependent whole? It is here that the curious logic of Burnham’s argument first reveals itself. The connection is made in the following manner:
So long as we believe that Stalin is a dwarf, it is hard to think that he can be the heir of Lenin, who was certainly a giant. The events of these war years help us to correct the one and the other error. As Stalin expands in size before us, we can more readily grant his legitimate succession. The truth – so weighty with consequences for our age – becomes more plausible: that, under Stalin, the communist revolution has been, not betrayed, but fulfilled.
Having satisfied himself by various miscellaneous data (including Stalin’s sumptuous banquets and vodka toasts) that Stalin really is a great man, Burnham concludes that he is truly Lenin’s heir and that Stalinism is nothing but the logical continuation of Bolshevism. For Burnham then, the relationship of Stalinism to Bolshevism must be sought in a correct appraisal of whether Stalin is a giant, like Lenin, or a dwarf. The statement of Burnham’s method in this bald form reveals it to be so patently illogical as to suggest perhaps a bad misreading or misunderstanding of the article. But the most careful and critical re-reading will yield no other result. How can the discovery that Stalin is a “great man” shed light on the true nature of the present Russian regime and its historical relationship to Bolshevism? How can a true estimate even be made of Stalin’s stature as an individual without first establishing the historical criteria with which to measure? And is not an understanding of the relationship of Stalinism to Bolshevism an essential ingredient of such criteria? A true estimate of Stalin’s stature does not automatically flow from a correct understanding of the historical transition from Lenin’s regime to that of Stalin. However, the latter does supply a necessary basis from which to judge Stalin’s stature as a personality.
We conclude from this that the question of Stalin’s stature is subordinate to the question of the historical role of the regime. Burnham, however, solves the subordinate question to his own satisfaction (Stalin is a great man) and then proceeds from this conclusion to solve the basic question (Stalinism is really Bolshevism).
But he is. not satisfied with this illogical construction. It leaves the basic conclusion open to an interpretation which Burnham is unwilling to accept. The interpretation could be established in this way: What if Stalin had turned out to be a mediocrity? What if he had been killed in the Civil War? What if he had died as a child? If the greatness of Stalin proves that the present regime is a continuation of Bolshevism, would Russian events have inevitably followed the same course in the absence of a “great man”? Perhaps, if Bolshevism in other countries can have the good fortune to avoid producing great men it will not follow the same path as in Russia?
Such an interpretation is a logical extension of Burnham’s method of reasoning in this article. But Burnham cannot accept such an interpretation. He cannot accept it because he has, long before writing the article in question, established for himself the conclusion that Stalinism is Bolshevism by following an entirely different set of reasons, none of which had anything to do with whether Stalin was a “great man” or a mediocrity. This brings us to the real enigma that Burnham’s article presents. The “entirely different set of reasons” has reference to Burnham’s theory of the managerial revolution which created such a sensation four years ago. The mystery of the present article is that it contains not a single reference to the managerial theory – neither direct nor by implication – despite the fact that the subject matter forms an important link in the theory of the managerial revolution. However, the quiet retirement of the theory from any role in the argument over the relationship of Stalinism to Bolshevism cannot go unnoticed. It leaves gaping holes in the author’s logic. This is accentuated by the attempt to substitute for the missing theory an illogical construction based upon the newly-discovered greatness of Stalin. However, the latter construction establishes the conclusion in such a way as to permit the interpretation suggested above. Burnham must plug up this hole, also. After spending the greater part of the article proving that Stalin is Lenin’s heir because Stalin, too, is a great man, Burnham now kicks aside this painfully constructed argumentation with these words:
Stalin’s triumph was not “inevitable” – the revolutionary regime might never have taken power, might have been defeated in the Civil War or by the Allied intervention, might have marched into Germany in 1932-33; and another individual than Stalin might not have killed quite so many, lied quite so much, or caused quite such measureless suffering. But there is not any longer the slightest reason to believe that the development of communism in power could be expected to take any course differing except in lesser details from that it has in fact taken in Russia.
The greatness of Stalin establishes him as Lenin’s heir and confirms the identity of Stalinism and Bolshevism. But had Stalin not been great or had he never existed, Stalinism and Bolshevism would still be identical! Then why all this elaborate argumentation about the greatness of Stalin? It is apparent that, in the end, these two questions are separate questions for Burnham also. Nowhere does he establish any logical connection.
 
II – How Burnham Really Establishes the Identity of Stalinism and Bolshevism
What is the content of Bolshevism and Stalinism that makes them identical? Burnham essays to supply the answer in the following definition:
Bolshevism (communism), described in terms of its operations in real life from its start, is a conspiratorial movement for the conquest of a monopoly of power in the era of capitalist disintegration.
That is the beginning and end of Burnham’s attempt to define the inner identity of Stalinism and Bolshevism in an article written to prove Stalin to be Lenin’s heir! One single sentence! And upon this sentence rests, in actuality, the entire case which Burnham makes for his thesis of the identity of two. (We have already shown that the “greatness” of Stalin is not the real proof which Burnham offers since he ends by saying that it is a dispensable factor.)
Of what value is Burnham’s definition of Bolshevism? It would likewise fit fascism, though Burnham is silent about this in the article. (Again the conclusions of the managerial theory speak out while the theory itself is not even hinted at.)
That Bolshevism was a “conspiratorial movement” in the sense of the European underground during German occupation does not tell us much about Bolshevism. All anti-monarchist parties were “conspiratorial movements” in Russia With the exception of the United States and the British Commonwealths, opposition parties in most nations of the world to a greater or lesser degree are “conspiratorial movements.” Used in this sense, the “conspiratorial” nature of a movement is not determined by that movement, but by the denial o£ legality to its activities by the powers that be. This is all fundamental and obvious as long as we accept the meaning of “conspiratorial movement” in this sense.
Does Burnham mean that a “monopoly of political power” was the avowed aim of the Bolsheviks since 1903? There is no evidence that the Bolsheviks had any “one-party dictatorship” ideas prior to the middle of 1918. Lenin for a long time contended that the Russian Revolution would establish a “democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry” in which the Bolsheviks were ready to share power with peasant parties. As late as 1916 Lenin denounced the view that the proletarian party could assume sole responsibility for the revolutionary government as a “Trotskyist” notion. [1] Shortly after the seizure of power by the Soviets, the Left Social Revolutionary Party joined the government and remained part of it until the spring of 1918. Their exit from the government was not prompted by any Bolshevik theories of a monopoly of political power. It simply turned out that the Bolsheviks were a peace party and the Left S.R. a war party on the question of the government’s negotiations at Brest-Litovsk. (Documents relevant to this question may be found in Intervention, Civil War and Communism in Russia, by James Bunyan, based on the Hoover War Library materials.)
However, it may be argued that Burnham is not concerned with the conscious aims or intentions of the Bolsheviks, but rather that the very theories of Bolshevism, regardless of aims, carried within them the inevitable consequence of Stalinism as the next stage in their development.
In this case, we proceed from the viewpoint that Lenin’s intentions (classless society and peace) betrayed their exponent in the process of application. But Burnham states: “It is of course true that Stalin, in practice, has acted counter to almost all of the expressed formal principles of communism.” If Lenin’s aims were dependent for their realization upon the application of his principles and these were not carried out by Stalin, was not Lenin betrayed? If the Russian Revolution was made to realize Lenin’s aims and Stalin substituted other aims for them, was not the Revolution betrayed?
It may be argued that the principles of Lenin were impractical and unworkable in real life and that Stalin was forced to discard them and find his own workable solution. But could Stalin be called Lenin’s heir on this basis? The lawyer who could not distinguish between an heir and a receiver-in-bankruptcy would be thrown out of court. Further, if Stalin was forced to act “counter to almost all of the expressed formal principles of communism” to find his own workable solutions what did these solutions have in common with Leninism (viewed as bankrupt in this argument)? If the ideas of Lenin ended in futility and Stalin worked out new solutions, how can Burnham say that Bolshevism has been a continuous and logical consistency from 1903 to date and that Bolshevism and Stalinism are identical?
It may be argued that Stalin did not substitute his own solutions but merely carried those of Lenin to their logical conclusion. In other words, the principles did not suffer shipwreck in real life but that Lenin used them to found institutions and practices which logically and inevitably flowered into the tyrannical rule of the bureaucracy. Burnham implies as much when he states that there is nothing basic in Stalinism, from the institution of terror as the primary foundation of the state to the assertion of a political monopoly, the seeds and even the shoots of which were not planted and flourishing under Lenin. Stalin, says Burnham, has acted “counter to almost all of the expressed formal principles of communism.” And Lenin, who planted the “seed and even the shoots,” who built the party organization and presided over the state institutions in their formative period, did he too act counter to the principles of communism? If he did not, why was it necessary for Stalin to do so when he took over the institutions and practices developed by Lenin? If the “seeds and even the shoots” were planted by Lenin in violation of the principles of communism, we must conclude that the principles are related to the practice only as a clever facade to fool the masses.
We have exhausted all arguments based upon accepting Burnham’s definition of Bolshevism in the sense that the germs of Stalinism were concealed in the original principles and emerged contrary to the aims of Leninism. These arguments all lead to the conclusion that either the Revolution was betrayed or that the Revolution became bankrupt and Stalin took over to steer in a different direction. But in neither case could he conclude that Stalin is Lenin’s heir or that Stalinism is identical with, or a logical and consistent continuation of, Bolshevism. In the above sense, Burnham’s definition is meaningless.
However, if Burnham uses “conspiratorial movement” and “monopoly of political power” in another sense, the definition takes on real meaning. Perhaps Burnham means that Bolshevism is in itself a great conspiracy by which the “inside group” have avowed aims for the “monopoly of political power” by themselves? Perhaps Lenin spoke of a classless society and peace and plenty in order to gain support to promote the real aims of the inner group, or, as Burnham would say, the Bolshevik “elite”? Perhaps the real “inner aim” of Lenin had nothing at all to do with the establishment of socialism? Perhaps the Bolsheviks did not at all represent the interests of the workers but merely used the workers’ struggle to establish themselves in power to achieve their own aims?
Some readers will, no doubt, consider it insulting to the intelligence of a “scientific” thinker like Burnham to even suggest this possibility on so little evidence as is afforded in his article. It is not, however, necessary for us to try to wring this “conspiracy” theory out of the logic of Burnham’s article, because the definition of Bolshevism is not based upon any evidence submitted in the article. It sums up, however, Burnham’s conclusions on the question as given in his Managerial Revolution. His position on the Russian Revolution can be summed up in the following quotations from The Managerial Revolution:
The Marxist movement separated along the lines of the great division of our time, capitalist society and managerial society. Both wings of Marxism retained, as often happens, the language of Marx, though more and more modifying it under new pressures. In practice, the reformist wing lined up with the capitalists and capitalist society, and demonstrated this in all social crises. The Leninist wing became one of the organized movements toward and expressed one of the ideologies of, managerial society. (p. 195)
One pattern of development is illustrated in surprisingly schematic fashion by the events in Russia since 1917. What has happened in Russia is the following: The first part of the triple problem was solved quickly and drastically. The capitalists were not merely reduced to impotence but, most of them, physically eliminated either by killing or emigrating.
The second part of the managerial problem – the curbing of the masses – was left suspended until this solution, or partial solution, of the first part was achieved. Or, rather, the masses were used to accomplish the solution of the first part just as the capitalists in their early days used the masses to break the power of the feudal lords. In a new stage, the beginning of which merged with the first, the solution of the second part of the problem was carried through. The masses were curbed. Their obscurely felt aspirations toward equalitarianism and a classless society were diverted into the new structure of class rule, and organized in terms of the ideologies and the institutions of the new social order. (pp. 209–10)
Lenin and Trotsky, both, in the early years of the revolution, wrote pamphlets and speeches arguing the case of the specialists, the technicians, the managers. Lenin, in his forceful way, used to declare that the manager had to be a dictator in the factory. ‘Workers democracy’ in the state, Lenin said in effect, was to be founded upon a managerial dictatorship in the factory. (p. 214)
The class of managers that steadily rose was not altogether a new creation; it was the development and extension of the class which, as we have seen, already exists, and is already extending its power and influence, under capitalism, especially during the latter days of capitalism. (p. 215)
Leninist doctrine expresses in terms of the managerial ideology the lessons of the Russian and similar experiences from the point of view of the interests of the managers. (p. 217)
Thus Burnham’s explanation of the Russian Revolution in terms of his managerial theory. The alleged identity of Stalinism and Bolshevism, which from a reading of his article, Lenin’s Heir, it would appear he has only now discovered, was set forth four years ago. We quote:
Lenin died, and Stalin headed the managerial wing ... So far as historical development goes, there really cannot be much question: Stalinism is what Leninism developed into – and, moreover, without any sharp break in the process of development. Stalinism is different from Leninism, and so is a youth from a child; the difference is to be accounted for by the change in the background against which development took place. Nazism is much more different from Italian fascism than Stalinism is from Leninism, as might be expected from the differences in origin and conditions of development. But it is clear enough that Nazism and fascism are closely related as general social movements and as social ideologies. (pp. 195f.)
There may be some who, even after a presentation of these views of Burnham, will doubt that this means that Burnham holds Bolshevism to be historically a “great conspiracy” to establish managerial rule. They may contend that Burnham is extremely objective, “super-scientific” in his writing and not at all, therefore, concerned with Lenin’s conscious aims. Burnham is, accordingly, neither interested in establishing that Lenin really aimed at achieving a classless society nor, on the other hand, in contending that Lenin led a “great conspiracy” of the “managers.” If Burnham seems to imply the latter in the above-quoted statements, the argument may continue, it only seems that way because of his objective approach.
We do not have space to devote to the question of scientific method in historical analysis. Suffice it to say that it is childish posing about “scientific method” and not at all scientific to declare that the conscious aims and beliefs of men are of no concern. What men do is, of course, basic. But an understanding of history requires that we investigate men’s conscious aims, what produced them, how they affected events and were in turn affected by events, etc., regardless of whether those aims are contradicted in action or not. This is so necessary to historical writing that Burnham frequently resorts to it despite his pose to the contrary. [2] It is only when dealing with a question like the relationship of Leninism to Stalinism that he remembers how terribly “scientific” and cold-blooded he is in dismissing what men’s aims are.
The argument that Burnham is merely being scientific and does not impute a “conspiracy” to Lenin brings us back to the area of argument previously traversed. We repeat: If Lenin consciously aimed at a classless society, if he acted in accord with his avowed principles, if it was under Stalin that these principles were discarded, then Stalinism is not Bolshevism and Stalin is not “Lenin’s heir.”
However, we will introduce two telling statements from Managerial Revolution which most definitively indicate that Burnham does view Bolshevism as a “great conspiracy of the managers.”
We must not make the mistake of supposing that the Russian changes were dependent merely on the presence of one or another individual, on the personal wickedness or nobility (depending on our point of view) of, for example, Stalin. If Lenin himself had lived, there is no reason to think that the process would have differed greatly. After all, there is more than passing significance in the fact that, for many years, probably the most intimate colleague of Lenin’s, the man with whom he exercised hidden control over the Bolshevik Party underneath the party’s formal apparatus, was the brilliant and successful engineer – the manager – Krassin. (p. 211)
What meaning does this have for Burnham except to say that “there is more than passing significance in the fact” that Lenin, the “master conspirator” of the managerial revolution, was linked up with a “manager”? But, of course, this clever conspirator Lenin knew better than to make a public display of this “intimate colleague” of his. As a result they “exercised hidden control over the Bolshevik Party underneath the party’s formal apparatus.” How much Burnham knows about Krassin is difficult to say. If he knows even the salient facts about Leonid Krassin [3], so much the more definitely does it establish the “conspiracy theory” as Burnham’s real explanation of Bolshevism. For the fact is that the closest collaboration between Lenin and Krassin took place from 1903 to 1906 – during the very infancy of Bolshevism! Does this not further establish that Burnham believes that Bolshevism was a managerial “conspiracy” from its birth?
The second statement we introduce further underlines our contention. Burnham writes on the decline of the workers’ committees in the factories and the passing of control to the managers:
These experiences have, as a matter of fact, received recognition in Leninist doctrine (both the Stalinist and Trotskyist variants), not so much in public writings as in the theories elaborated primarily for party members. [My emphasis – E.L.] “Workers’ control,” the doctrine now reads, is a “transition slogan,” but loses its relevance once the revolution is successful and the new state established.
Here Burnham again seeks to reveal a “conspiracy.” There exists an inner line – “primarily for party members” – and an outer line – for the gullible workers. The workers will swallow the bait about workers’ control and make a revolution. But the smart insiders, who really aim at managerial rule, will then proceed to take over.
But if Burnham believes that Bolshevism is a “great conspiracy” which aims at establishing a managerial society, why does he not openly and clearly state this, the reader may ask. Why does he not elaborate in detail the design of this “conspiracy”? Why should he permit any ambiguity about it (particularly since he is such a “lucid” writer)? The fact is that Burnham knows better than to believe in anything as nonsensical as the “conspiracy” theory. Yet the entire logic of his identity of Stalinism and Bolshevism on the basis of a managerial revolution in Russia in 1917 leaves no other alternative than to fall back upon explanations in terms of “conspiracy” – Krassin! – “primarily for party members” (1) – Bolshevik duplicity as seen in variance of actions from principles, etc. However, the “conspiracy” is only darkly hinted at (”there is more than passing significance in the fact that ... the manager ... Krassin”), it is implied, it is permitted a shadowy existence in the background. But permitted it is – because without it the managerial explanation of the Russian Revolution would have too many gaping holes in its logic. The implications as to “conspiracy” are therefore borrowed to fill the holes. Borrowed is correct, for the conspiracy lunacy is anything but original with Burnham. It exists in various schools – from Alexander Kerensky (Kaiser’s gold) to Alfred Rosenberg (Protocols of the Elders of Zion). Burnham “scientifically” borrows to bolster an untenable theory but is smart enough not to openly identify himself with such a ludicrous (detective story) method of historical explanation. We must conclude, therefore, that the ambiguity of Burnham’s definition of Bolshevism – “a conspiratorial movement for the conquest of a monopoly of power” – is not accidental. The ambiguity of the definition affords Burnham a cloak under which he can simultaneously deal in various intellectual wares: (1) the “great man” argument about Stalin, (2) the managerial theory, or (3) the “great conspiracy” of Bolshevism. Having probed the contention that Bolshevism is identical with Stalinism on the basis of all three of these approaches, we conclude that Burn-ham has failed badly with all of them.
 
III – How Burnham Converts Stalin into a Revolutionist (And Trotsky into a Counter-Revolutionist)
Burnham carries his theory of the identity of Stalinism and Bolshevism to its logical conclusion. Stalin is the defender of the Bolshevik Revolution and Trotsky is its enemy. Writes Burnham in his article:
But did he [Stalin] not, it might be replied, “betray” the proletariat, the masses, and the “principles” of the revolution? It is of course true that Stalin, in practice, has acted counter to almost all of the expressed formal principles of communism, and that in practice the masses who have followed the Bolsheviks with such heroism and sacrifice and hope ... have been rewarded with slavery and terror and suffering. This, however, is not a betrayal of the revolution but an instance of a general law of revolutions; and in particular, not a. violation of Bolshevism, properly comprehended, but a triumphant application. We cannot understand the nature of revolutionary or any other social movements by their “principles,” by their avowed and verbalized programs, but only by what they disclose themselves to be in action. Revolutionary movements are defined not by what they say but by what they do ...
If anyone betrayed Bolshevism, it was not Stalin but Trotsky. Stalin was the best Bolshevik just for the reason that he did not try to impose on history an a priori conception of the nature of the revolution, but was ready to accept the revolution, with all its historic consequences, as it revealed itself to be in real life.
If we accept Burnham’s premise that Bolshevism was from the start a “great conspiracy” of the managers, then, of course, Trotsky betrayed the managerial revolution in the interests of the proletarian revolution. Necessarily then, Stalin is both the heir to Lenin and the defender of the (managerial) revolution.
But even Burnham, in his weirdest moments, does not claim that the masses themselves aimed at a managerial society when they made their revolution. On the contrary, one gathers from passages in Managerial Revolution that Burnham sees the Russian Revolution as a mass socialist revolution. If it was the latter, it was the outgrowth of the class struggle in Russia. (In his The Machiavellians, Burnham quotes his teacher, Pareto, to the effect that Marx’s views on the class struggle were “profoundly true.”) If the proletariat made the revolution to achieve a socialist goal, if Trotsky fought to continue the struggle toward that goal, if Stalin substituted for the socialist goal a bureaucratic slavery, how can one in his right mind write that Trotsky betrayed the revolution while Stalin proved its defender?
But someone may argue that Burnham did not quite say that. He stated that Trotsky betrayed Bolshevism and that Stalin was the best Bolshevik, In this case we must make a distinction between the mass, socialist revolution in Russia and the Bolshevik movement which was its general staff. The socialist revolution can be explained in terms of the objective situation and the class struggle. But if Bolshevism was something that arose and existed outside of the class struggle, it can only be explained, once more, on the basis of Burnham’s “great conspiracy” theory. A group of clever conspirators (aiming at a monopoly of political power) rode the socialist revolution to power like a surfboard riding the waves.
Perhaps Burnham denies that Trotsky’s fight against Stalinism had any connection with the proletarian revolution, since he speaks of Trotskyism and Stalinism as being variants of Leninism which, according to Burnham, is a managerial doctrine. In this case the struggle between the Stalin machine and the Left Opposition was merely a struggle for control between two managerial “Elites.” How then explain the fact that the consolidation of the Stalin elite required the physical annihilation of almost the entire generation of Bolsheviks associated with Lenin and the Revolution? The victory of Stalin did not merely eliminate a few dissidents. It wiped out tens of thousands. These did not only include former Trotskyists, Zinovievists or Bukharinists. They likewise included practically the entire early generation of Stalinists. The purgers of 1929–36 were purged from 1936 to 1938. Yagoda engineered the first mass trial and was a victim in the third. Yezhov took his place to engineer the third and then disappeared from the scene. Mass murders unknown to history since Attila and Genghis Khan were required to stamp out the last vestiges of 1917 and establish the new bureaucratic class in power.
Were these mass murders the normal transition by which an heir comes to power? Or were they rather the bloody deeds by which the impostor has always sought to legitimize himself? Were these merely shifts in personnel and adjustment in the course of the “consistent and logical development of Bolshevism” under Stalin? Or were they rather the bloody civil war (even if entirely one-sided) by which the new ruling class wiped out the last shadows of the old?
Since only Stalin survived from the Old Guard of Lenin (to exclude here the errand boys – Kalinin, Molotov and Litvinov) is it perhaps possible that only he inherited the secret Protocols of the managerial conspiracy from Lenin? Perhaps all the others too, like the great mass of the people, were taken in by Lenin’s clever conspiracy? (Poor Krassin! Intimate collaborator and “hidden controller” in the conspiracy since 1903, he never did live to see its greatest triumphs under “Lenin’s Heir.”) Of course it is all possible. All that is missing is Mr. O’Malley and Henry the Ghost. And with a copy of Burnham’s volumes under each arm, we are all set for a flight to the land of the jabberwack and the jub-jub bird.
 
IV – What Is Burnham Groping For?
After analyzing Lenin’s Heir, one begins to wonder what the author’s purpose was in writing it. None of his conclusions are new. His discovery that Stalin is a “great man” has, in the end, no significance for Burnham either, as he himself establishes with the argument that Bolshevism would have followed the same course regardless of the stature of its leader. The main conclusion he arrives at in the article, the identity of Bolshevism and Stalinism, was put forward by Burnham long ago in his book, on the basis of his managerial theory. Why does Burnham suddenly attach such vast importance to Stalin’s “greatness” as the clue to the connection between Bolshevism and Stalinism?
There is only one explanation that is plausible. Burnham feels that Stalin tricked him! Burnham wrote an imposing volume on the coming managerial world in which Stalin and Hitler were jointly to knock out capitalism and then – the two “managers” are at each other’s throats. But this is not the worst. This can still be “explained” by a footnote that their war was a premature conflict between the coming managerial super-states.
Much worse, however, is the fate of Burnham’s geopolitical exposition based on his managerial theory. According to this prediction, the future world will group itself into superstates based upon three great industrial areas – the United States, Japan and northwestern Europe. The latter will come under the domination of the German super-state. Russia just doesn’t count. Its huge land mass will gravitate toward the two poles – the German and the Japanese. Russia will, in short, be divided between the German managers and the Japanese managers.
This is where Stalin really tricked Burnham. Not only has Russia survived the war, but has emerged as the Number Two power. The German and Japanese super-states go up in flames lighted by bombs manufactured in “old-fashioned” capitalist democracies. There is something radically wrong here, says Burnham. Evidently a miscalculation somewhere. Aha! We have overlook the “greatness of Stalin”! We thought him a dwarf, and he emerges a giant! But it is not Stalin who tricked us, not really. It is Trotsky! Trotsky with his nonsense that Stalin is a mediocrity. This is what threw us off. This is why we consigned Russia to be partitioned, instead of to become a great world power. Had we but not had so much faith in Trotsky and his faulty biography of Stalin, our managerial theory would have survived the war in much better shape. We now must examine where this leaves us. Aha! New phenomena! Multi-national Bolshevism! Communism is a world conspiracy! (We have discovered this “terrible truth” a bit late, but the more profoundly.) We will “retire” the managerial theory for a while and occupy ourselves with the threat of world communism.
The article marks a further decline in Burnham. Armed with the tools of Marxism, Burnham proved himself a cogent thinker and lucid writer. With his break from the intellectual discipline of Marxism, Burnham began groping and floundering. His Managerial Revolution marked an attempt to substitute a new total concept of societal development for that of Marxism. In this he still showed the effects of the Marxist approach in feeling compelled to erect a Bounded theoretical system in explanation of his thesis. He still dealt with classes, class ideologies, the economic bases of classes and class struggles for political power. He sought to round out the previous efforts at a bureaucratic state theory by showing, in accordance
with the Marxist concept, the need for a class as the bearer of the new society and pointing to the “managers” as the answer; The theoretical structure erected in the book, however, was badly wanting in supporting evidence and, still worse, in giving convincing answers to a whole series of assumptions (like that stating that the working people could not rule themselves). This led him into a new excursion – The Machiavellians. Even compared with Managerial Revolution, the latter showed the disintegration of Burnham as a “theoretician.” Instead of completing a theoretical system, he only succeeded in opening new questions, developing new contradictions, and leaving himself as rudderless, anchorless and compassless as the article “Lenin’s Heir,” finally reveals him. Gone is the managerial theory, gone any reference to Machiavelli and “scientific politics,” gone any attempt at internal consistency or cogency in argument. Beginning with the discovery that the managerial society is inevitably (how he once shuddered when that word was used in reference to socialism) the next stage of social development, he ends up by discovering Stalin to be a great man (because of, among other things, immense vodka orgies in the midst of misery) and, as becomes a giant, the legitimate heir to Lenin.
(The question of Stalin’s stature as an individual will be left to a future article.)

Notes
1. Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution, therefore, aimed at a greater “monopoly of political power” than did Lenin. This, according to Burnham’s definition, would make Trotsky a greater Bolshevik than Lenin. Burnham, however, says that “If anyone betrayed Bolshevism, it was not Stalin but Trotsky.”
2. An example is Burnham’s explanation of why the managers in the United States today still consciously believe in capitalism while the public exponents of the managerial ideologies are not managers but intellectuals. Further, Burnham points out that the intellectuals are not usually conscious (”aware”) of what they are doing. Some, however, like the Technocrats, are. (See page 194, ibid.)
3. It is our primary interest at this point to establish the existence of a “conspiracy” theory about Bolshevism on Burnham’s part. However, it is interesting to note that the use made of Krassin in this connection is based either on ignorance or distortion. The collaboration of Lenin with Krassin in the leadership of the Bolshevik Party was not “for many years,” but only from 1903 to 1906. Krassin was associated with Lenin within – and not underneath – the party’s formal apparatus. Both were members of the Central Committee. Krassin’s main activity in the party was not political, nor, in the broad sense of the term, organizational. He was mainly known for his brilliant technical direction of the underground printing establishments in Russia, for which purpose his experience and connections as an engineer served him well. Following the collapse of the 1905 revolution, Krassin, like thousands of others, lapsed into inactivity and dropped out of the political movement. He worked as an engineer for Siemens-Shuckert in St. Petersburg from 1908 to 1918. During 1917, when Burnham’s managers were “using the masses” to depose the capitalists, Krassin viewed the July events through the eyes of the frightened, yet smug, bourgeoisie and wrote in a letter:
“The so-called ‘masses,’ principally soldiers and a number of hooligans, loafed aimlessly about the streets for two days, firing at each other, often out of sheer fright, running away at the slightest alarm or fresh rumor, and without the slightest idea of what it was all about.” (Quoted by Bunyan and Fisher in The Bolshevik Revolution, Hoover War Library, from Leonid Krassim His Life and Work, by Lubov Krassin, London 1929)
In 1918 Krassin once more assumed a role in political affairs, but devoted himself primarily to technical and commercial affairs of the new Soviet enterprises.
 



General Motors, through its president, Charles E. Wilson, has proposed that labor work a forty-five hour week at straight time with a slight hourly increase in order to earn as much per week as it did during the war on overtime wages.
Two weeks ago we discussed the peculiar reasoning behind this proposition. We pointed out that it was designed to appeal to the worker’s desire to earn living weekly wages and try, thereby, to induce the worker to forget how many hours he must work to get them.
We pointed out that Karl Marx had long ago shown that under capitalism the wage level is regulated but not determined, in the main, by the cost of living. [1] That is, the capitalist buys (i.e., hires) labor power in a market at a price whose value is based upon what it takes to produce and maintain the laborer.
However, there is another side to it. Wages are also affected by the competition among workers for the available jobs. This is really the law of supply and demand as it operates in the labor market. When there are many workers available and few jobs to be had, the bargaining power is all on the side of the capitalist. Those workers who are unemployed for a long time will be inclined to accept less in order to get a job and earn a living for themselves and families.
 
Industrial Reserve Army
Marx pointed out that it is the normal and necessary condition for capitalism to have this backlog of unemployed workers or the industrial reserve army, as he called it. It is the existence of this reserve army that acts as the great weight that Constantly tends to press wages down to and below the cost of living.
We saw what happened during the war when industry, absorbed the unemployed and the industrial reserve army vanished. Labor was placed in a very strong position to bargain for higher wages. If a worker did not get what he asked for on one job he could always go out and get another one for more money. “But wait,” you say, “what about the job freeze and the wage freeze?” Of course, we have not forgotten them. But they just prove our point. Capitalism could not operate during the war without an industrial reserve army to drive down wages to and below the cost of living. It was therefore necessary that in the place of this industrial reserve there was set up a government power to hold down wages and freeze workers to their jobs.
It is one of the economic laws of capitalism that the greater the number of unemployed workers, the greater is the pressure upon wage levels. Conversely, the fewer the number of unemployed workers, the more easily the employed workers are able to increase their wages.
While always seeking to make workers work longer hours, the capitalists, especially in times of depression, seek to lengthen the hours of work. By doing this they achieve two aims. In the first place, they find it easier to reduce the hourly rate of a worker who is, let us say, working forty-five hours a week than of a worker who is working thirty hours. The forty-five-hour man feels that even with a cut in hourly rates he is still able to earn a living by the long week he works. The thirty-hour man, however, will be inclined to resist an hourly cut all the more because his short week already leaves him with a slimmer weekly income. We see therefore, that even though a worker is paid by the hour and not by the week, longer hours tend to result in more work for less money.
The second aim that the capitalist achieves with longer hours is that the number of unemployed is greater. If fifty per cent of the workers are employed sixty hours a week and the other fifty per cent are not working at all, those not working will prove such a pressure upon wages that those working may in the end earn in sixty hours what they formerly earned in forty.
 
Hours and Wages
If, however, the workers were 100 per cent employed at thirty hours each, the absence of any army of unemployed to beat down wages would mean that all the bargaining power would be in labor’s hands and they could strike to increase hourly rates.
We see, therefore, that there is a relationship between long hours and low wages and between short hours and high wages. The longer the hours, the lower the hourly rate in the end. The shorter the hours, the higher the hourly rate in the end.
This, of course, is not merely theory any longer. The long years of experience of the trade union movement have proved it to the hilt. It is a lesson that every worker must remember. It is because of this that the auto workers must fight against the scheme of General Motors to dangle a long work week in front, of them as an inducement to get a big weekly wage. The long work week will only mean more unemployed auto workers. This in turn will only mean more men driven to desperation by want and used as a pressure to batter down the wage rates of the employed.
The auto workers, together with the workers in steel, rubber, radio and machinery – in short, the working class as a whole – should today stand for a thirty-hour week and an increase in hourly rates sufficient to maintain the wartime take-home pay. This is the road to more jobs, shorter hours and higher wages. The scheme of General Motors is the road to fewer jobs, longer hours and lower wages.
Next week we will consider Mr. Wilson’s arguments in behalf of longer hours as a means to increase production.
*
Footnote by ETOL
1. In the original version this sentence was: “We pointed out that Karl Marx had long ago shown that under capitalism the wage level is regulated but not determined, in the main, by the cost of living.” In the next installment in Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 50, 10 December 1945, p. 2, the author added a correction pointing out that the words “regulated” and “not” had not been in the original text but had been added by the editor at some stage during the production of the paper.
 

  The way to increase your weekly take-home pay is to work longer hours at straight time. This is the answer of Charles E. Wilson, president of the billion-dollar General Motors Corporation, to the demand of the United Automobile Workers that hourly wages be increased by thirty per cent to maintain the workers’ weekly take-home pay. The scheme which this clever capitalist shark has cooked up is designed to meet the demand of the workers that the weekly take-home pay enjoyed during the war on the basis of forty-eight hours, with time and a half over forty hours, be maintained. The GM scheme is that workers maintain their wartime, take-home pay by accepting only a five to eight per cent increase in hourly rates but work forty-five hours a week at straight time. This scheme is designed to divide the ranks of the workers by appealing to the more backward of them, who understand only one thing – how much they carry home at the end of the week. These worked are the same ones who could never get enough overtime during the war and were always ready to. ruin the piecework rates by turning out maximum production in an attempt to, make as much as possible without a single thought about next week and next month. These are, of course, the same types who only join a union when they are driven to it, who, when they join, complain about, paying dues, and who never show up at union meetings or cooperate in building the organization. Because there still are many such workers and because this new scheme will probably become the latest propaganda weapon of big business in a nationwide campaign against a living wage, it is well that we immediately analyse the GM scheme and know the answers from labor’s angle.  What GM Wants Mr. Wilson argues as follows: “You say that you need $45 a week take-home pay in order to live decently? Well, we agree to permit you to earn $45 a week.” The worker, however, asks: “But how many hours am I expected to work for this amount?” “Hours?” says Mr. Wilson, “what are you worried about hours for? Did yon not say you need $45 a week to get along on? Are we not permitting you to earn this? What difference does it make whether you work a few hours more or less?” Mr. Wilson’s argument may sound ridiculous to union conscious workers. But it does not sound ridiculous to the capitalist class. It is based upon the economic laws that govern capitalist production, which always have stacked and as long as capitalism remains always will stack the cards for capital and against labor. In the early period of capitalism, before the existence of a powerful trade union movement, the capitalists were able to enforce their own terms upon the workers. And they did it in accordance with the point of view from which Mr. Wilson, proceeds; i.e., pay the worker enough to live on and try to stretch out the hours as long as we can. Basically, capitalism regards the worker as a machine with which to produce wealth and not as a human being. The worker is merely the motive power behind the screwdriver on a GM assembly line. If an automatic machine can be invented to tighten the same screw thousands of times a day as the worker does now, the machine will take the place of the worker. The machine would work forty-five hours or sixty hours or ninety hours without complaining. It would simply work until it wore out or broke down.  What Is Labor However, workers have the crazy idea that they are not machines. They think that they are human beings and entitled to the same right to live and enjoy life as the capitalist. Because of this, the workers have fought, not only for higher wages but for shorter hours. Since the birth of the labor movement the hours have, through countless strikes and struggles, been reduced from 16 a day to 14 to 12 to 10 and now to 8. Long experience has taught the worker that shorter hours are the gateway to a higher standard of living and a more dignified human existence. As long as capitalism exists, the capitalist and the worker will never see eye to eye on this question. Regardless of what the capitalist may want to do, the laws of capitalist economy drive him to regard the worker as a wealth-producing machine. As long as workers are not slaves they will fight to live as human beings. Capitalists do not deal with any other commodity on the same basis as they deal with the commodity called labor time or labor power. When GM contracts to. use electric power, it is understood that the cost of production of electric power is so much per kilowatt hour and that they must pay for it on the basis of the number of kilowatt hours used. GM does not say to the owners of the public utility company: “We will pay you enough weekly to live on. Why worry about how many kilowatt hours we will use?” Let us assume that someone went to GM and asked: “At what price do you sell a car?” GM would, answer: “That all depends upon how large a car you want. Obviously, we ask more for a Buick than for a Chevrolet.” Suppose the buyer answered: “If you sell a Chevrolet for so and so much, why can you not sell a Buick for the same price? After all, the Buick is only a little larger than a Chevrolet. And then I really don’t see what the size of the car has to do with it. After all, a car is a car.” A man who reasoned in this manner would be regarded as a candidate for a padded cell.  Capital-Labor Conflict But is not Mr. Wilson’s proposition about the same? Does he not say in effect the following: “If you are willing to work forty hours for $45, there is no logical reason, why you cannot work forty-five hours for $45. I do not really understand what the length of the work week has to do with it. We are permitting you to earn enough to live on, are we not? What have you to lose by working the extra five hours?” No one nominates Mr. Wilson for, a padded cell. On the contrary, the editors of the capitalist press and the professors of economics. in the colleges will write and lecture about Mr. Wilson’s brilliant grasp of economic problems. We, also, do not nominate Mr. Wilson for a padded cell. We understand thoroughly the capitalist basis upon which he reasons. This concept of labor power as a commodity to be bought (i.e., hired) at its market value (determined mainly by the cost of living) and then worked for as long as the organized resistance of the workers permits, was long ago analyzed and explained by Karl Marx, the founder of scientific socialism. In next week’s issue we will continue the analysis of the GM scheme with particular regard to these questions: Mr. Wilson’s argument for long hours and increased production as a means to raise the standard of living; the relationship between long hours and low wages and short hours and, high wages; and why labor power is the only commodity that is purchased at its value (i.e., its market value as determined, roughly, by the cost of living) but from which the purchaser extracts surplus value to the degree that he is able to exploit labor power.   


PHILADELPHIA – May Day, 1945, finds workers in this area thinking more of the security of their jobs than of any other one question. The news from Europe that the war is drawing to a close, in that part of the world at least, is cause for joy to the hundreds of thousands who have brothers, husbands, friends and fellow workers in the armed services. But at the same time it causes grave concern about cutbacks in war contracts and layoffs.
Few realize that Philadelphia is the No. 2 war production center of the country. It ranks second only to the Detroit region in size of war contracts. The war production is mainly centered in the heavy industries that will not immediately, if ever, find a stimulus from consumer purchases to take up the slack.
The prospects of post-war operation of the shipyards, which represent the biggest single war industry in the area, are very slim. Though the Navy Yard, Sun Ship and New York Ship will probably remain in operation as they did since the last War, their employment rolls will probably be cut to around ten per cent of the present peak.
 
Industry Will Cut Back
Heavy industries like Baldwin Locomotive, General Electric, Westinghouse, Brill (railroad cars), Budd (automobile bodies), the Army Arsenal, the steel mills, etc., will at best go back to 1939 production figures, resulting in hundreds of thousands of workers being thrown out of jobs. The radio industry, represented mainly by RCA, Philco and Atwater Kent, have been working at top production on war orders. The most optimistic estimates for peacetime demand for new radios and televisions could not come near maintaining this production schedule.
The machine tool industry, SKF ball bearings, and the airplane plants will take a tremendous drop in production. Many will shut down completely. The ordnance and fine instrument industry which appeared out of nowhere since 1940 will likewise disappear.
The hosiery and textile industry, one of Philadelphia’s old mainstays, has been working at top speed to fill war contracts and a limited consumer quota. The end of the war will certainly not see an increase in employment. Likewise with industrial giants which produce for the consumer trade, like Campbell Soup.
Employment on the waterfront and on the railroads, two great sources of wartime employment, will again return to pre-war figures. The special use of the Port of Philadelphia for war purposes will end and the waterfront will again become dead.
 
Unemployment Looms
With declining payrolls in local heavy industries, the present employment shortages in department stores, Sears, cafeterias, PTC (trolley and bus transportation) and other commercial and service industries will change into surpluses of help.
All this will be the tendency even before any great number of the several hundred thousand men and women from Philadelphia, Camden, and the surrounding area now in the armed forces return home to again seek civilian employment.
Despite what they may read daily in the Inquirer and Bulletin about “free enterprise” solving all job problems, and despite what they may read in the Record about the employment plans of the Administration and the New Deal tinkerers, the workers refuse to feel reassured about the post-war employment situation. The facts are too plain and too plentiful.
Meanwhile the same corrupt gang of Republican politicians sit in the City Hall and siphon off the wage tax from the workers’ pay envelopes (or what is left of it after federal income tax deductions.) Meanwhile the Democratic politicians, who can only carry the city in a national election when they have the support of organized labor, sit in their appointed jobs in the federal bureaus and figure out their chances of staying on after 1948.
 
For Labor Political Action
Meanwhile the labor leaders do. nothing except look around among the capitalist politicians for some “good friend of labor” they can support in 1946. The 1944 crop of “good friends of labor” have already gone the way of all such people in the ruling parties. Most of the New Deal congressmen from here voted for the labor draft.
Philadelphia, Camden and Delaware counties have, one of the greatest concentrations of industry in the United States. The overwhelming majority of the people who live here are wage workers. The majority of them are members of the CIO, the AFL, and the Railroad Brotherhoods. With a working class political party of their own they could sweep into power in city and state and send a solid bloc of labor congressmen to Washington.
This is what the labor movement should be doing instead of chasing, hat in hand, after Senator Myers, Congressman Bradley, Mayor Samuels and Governor Martin, and begging for a few favors.
 

  The truth about how the United States got into the war is now beginning to be officially revealed. The Army and Navy reports on Pearl Harbor issued last week have definitely contradicted the war propaganda upon which the public was fed for the last four years. In the place of this propaganda there is presented a picture of the negotiations and maneuvers between the Japanese and American governments which confirms the position of the Workers Party that the war was the result of imperialist rivalry for domination of the Far East. For the duration of the war every agency of public information in the United States was mobilized to sell the people the idea that the United States government had no interest in the Pacific except to defend itself and its possessions. We were told that like a bolt out of the blue, while negotiations were peacefully proceeding in Washington, the Japanese treacherously struck from behind in the “sneak attack” of that “day of infamy,” December 7, 1941. So went the official propaganda. The 130,000 word report of the Army and Navy boards is full of quotations that establish that the American government was steering a course toward war as deliberate and calculating as that of the Japanese government. The crisis in these maneuvers was reached between October 16th and December 7th. During this time the only question at stake was which side would strike first.  Preparing for War It was the strategy of the Army and Navy authorities to delay the outbreak of the war until they were more adequately prepared. The Army’s report states: “The advice of the Army and Navy to delay matters and get more time for defense preparations and not precipitate the issue evidently did not reach the President or the Secretary of State in time to be considered before the memorandum of the 26th was delivered to the Japanese.” What was the nature of this memorandum? The report states that when Secretary of War Stimson saw this memorandum of Secretary of State Hull to the Japanese, he considered it so drastic that he immediately rushed to confer with the Army Chiefs of Staff to warn them to prepare. The report states: “Thus the Secretary of War felt the situation that was to be precipitated by the action of the Secretary of State, Hull, necessitated his informing the Chief of Staff immediately of the threatened difficulty.”  More Ultimatums At still another place the report speaks of this memorandum as an “ultimatum” to the Japanese. The Army and Navy reports both accuse the State Department of sending the ultimatum despite their having warned the State Department against it on grounds that the American forces were not yet adequately prepared for war. On November 5, 1941, the Chief of Naval Operations and the Chief of Staff, United States Army, submitted a joint memorandum to the President, recommending that no ultimatum be delivered to Japanat that time and giving, as one of the basic reasons, “the existing numerical superiority of the Japanese Fleet over the United States Pacific Fleet.” Hull determined to have a showdown with the Japanese despite the warnings of the Army and Navy. For the report states: “Apparently on the 26th in the morning, Mr. Hull had made up his mind not to go through with the proposals shown the day before to the Secretary of War containing the plan for the ‘Three Months Truce’. “Evidently the action ‘to kick the whole thing over’ was accomplished by presenting to the Japanese the counter proposal of the ‘Ten Points’ which they took as an ultimatum. “It was the document that touched the button that started the war, as Ambassador Grew so aptly expressed it.”  Who Is Guilty? There arises from this report a picture quite different from the “sudden, sneak attack” version peddled by official propaganda. The truth was, as the report established, that both sides were carefully sparring for position in what had become for them an inevitable showdown. As the report states so ably: “It was not a question of fact; it was only a question of time. The next few days would see the end of peace and the beginning of war.” The endorsement added to the Navy Report by Admiral E.J. King even complains of the fact that due to the constitutional requirement that Congress officially declare war before our armed forces are permitted to strike, the American military and naval commanders were at a disadvantage. Says King: “This requirement made it impossible for Admiral Kimmel and General Short to employ the offensive as a means of defense, and, therefore, was a definite handicap.” Thus we see from these official documents the true face of history. Two great nations are speedily being carried to war. Both are feverishly making last minute preparations. And both are proceeding under a heavy smoke screen of peace propaganda. Each wants to place the other in a position where the enemy takes the blame before public opinion for starting the war. The Japanese finally decided that the military advantage of striking the first blow would outweigh the political advantage of waiting until the United States struck first. The Army report even states professional admiration for the way in which the Japanese calculated their chances and executed their decision to attack. They call it a “bold and considered venture.” What was the driving force that made war inevitable between the United States and Japan? For a full understanding of this question we must go back into history, back even before the last World War when, after defeating Russia in 1905, Japan emerged as a first class power in the Pacific. From then on the economic interests of American imperialism and those of Japanese imperialism crossed each other. By chance both the United States and Japan were on the same side in World War I. However, at the end of the war the tension between the two nations led to a sharp war fever in both countries. The 1922 Washington Naval agreement brought a temporary relief. But the factor of economic conflict was again sharpened with the worldwide economic crisis. Japanese capitalism launched the attack upon Manchuria in 1931. From then on it was only a matter of time, as the report states in another connection, before the inevitable conflict between the imperialist rivals. Basing itself upon this long-range understanding of imperialism and its history, the Workers Party was not in the least taken in by the patriotic hysteria about a “sneak attack” at Pearl Harbor. On the contrary, the Workers Party answered the outbreak of the war with a manifesto to the working people of the United States and of the world, stating clearly that this war, like the last, hadits roots in the economic rivalry of capitalism.  Workers Party Right! On these grounds, regardless of who happened to strike first, the working class had no interest in supporting either imperialist aggressor. The Workers Party, therefore, continued to make its chief concern the struggle of the working class, against capital; the struggle in behalf of Labor’s economic and political rights and against all no-strike pledges, all wage and job freezes, all war-time dictatorial acts by government, all war agencies to ensnare labor to give up its rights in the name of “equality of sacrifice” like the War Labor Board. The Workers Party understood the true nature of the war because it had based its program and principles upon the tested teachings and experiences of the Socialist and labor movement in the past. The Workers Party holds fast to these principles. It believes that as long as we permit capitalism to exist, imperialist wars will be inevitable. It states that the workers have nothing to gain from imperialist war and everything to lose. The Workers Party therefore teaches that the workers of all nations must regard each other as brothers and stand together in behalf of the interests of world labor. These interests demand that in order to gain a world of plenty for all, freedom, and a permanent peace, the capitalist system must be abolished and replaced with a Socialist system of planned production for use through a nationalized economy operated by a Workers Government.   


It staggers the imagination.
Having said this, the power of language proves hopelessly wanting for a full statement of the effect of atomic power upon Man and hisworld.
The bomb that burst upon Hiroshima has simultaneously burst upon the powers of understandings and comprehension of the human brain.
What does it mean?
What is the future of man?
Do we stand upon the threshold of death and destruction for the whole of mankind?
Or do we stand upon the threshold of a new age of unparalleled peace and plenty, the brotherhood of man?
Who dare venture an answer?
Who dare say more than pose the alternatives that have unmistakably risen before us.
 
Marx and the Future
But of all past thought upon social, economic and political problems, it is only the understanding given us by Scientific Socialism that survives as a bed-rock foundation from which to analyse what has happened and to trace out the paths along which society will move.
The very question mark which the invention of atomic energy control places over virtually every aspect of Man’s future is a brilliant and dramatic verification of the principles upon which Karl Marx constructed his theories of Scientific Socialism.
Marx was answered with everything from “scientific” argument to scoffing and derision on the part of the learned minds of capitalism when he first pointed out that the changes in the mode of production determined the changes in society as a whole. The shelves of our libraries contain entire books by various and sundry professors who sought to refute this theory. But today, as we stand on the threshold of the atomic age, every last newspaper hack asks what the introduction of atomic power will do to society, to our economic system, to our political structures, to religion, to morals, to laws, to world organization, to class conflict, to conditions of labor, to virtually every other aspect of human activity. That which Marx perceived nearly a hundred years ago is today so obvious as to force its acceptance everywhere.
It was not the chance idea of a great mind that unlocked the secret of the atom. The secret was being systematically unlocked in a dozen countries by hundreds of scientists, becoming in its last stages a mad race to be the first to succeed. Here too we see verified the contention by Marx that inventions are not, in the historical sense, accidents. They are the result of a certain level of technological knowledge achieved by society.
 
Profits and Scarcity
But do the writings of Marx supply us with a basis to answer the question of the future of Man in the atomic age?
Just as the unlocking of atomic energy was only possible on the basis of our previous scientific knowledge, so were the theories of Marx only possible when science and technology had introduced the machine age and transformed our civilization in accordance with it. The steam engine, electricity, and the internal combustion motor combined to produce the machine age. In their wake came electronics and electro-machinery. Each of these discoveries made a world of plenty for all a greater possibility. But capitalism can exist only on the basis of a system of scarcity. Each new invention was a new threat to the life of capitalism. Marx based his prediction of a socialist future upon the argument that the age of science would make the existence of capitalism impossible.
The control of atomic energy is not just another new invention. It is that, but far more. Its potential influence is so colossal as to make all previous scientific discoveries seem as but preludes to its appearance. If capitalism could not absorb the shock of labor-saving, mass production based upon the consumption of coal, water power and oil without permanent depression and recurring war, what will the coming of atomic energy do to it?
Who even dares suggest that this awesome, new power be turned over to “free enterprise” to develop? (We omit, of course, such feeble-minded simpletons as Ira Mosher of the National Manufacturers Association who has already, in his blissful ignorance, made this proposal.) If capitalism promises us some 20 million unemployed after the war on the basis of present labor-saving technology, how can any sane and sober person conceive of capitalism coping with the atomic age?
 
For a Socialist Society
Atomic power in the hands of a Workers’ Government dedicated to a program of planned production for the use of the people rather than for the profits of the owners of industry would truly usher in an age of peace, plenty, and contentment that would make all previous human history appear as a dark, barbarous age. This age of plenty for all was already possible on the basis of productive powers of the last several decades.
Today, however, it is no longer a matter of it being possible. Today it is unpostponable. Mankind dare not wait. Capitalism is already laying the basis for the next war. When it comes, it may all be over in three or four days, not only the war but the civilization we have known.
What is the future of man?
That is for man to decide.
It must not be decided by those in power, the bankers, the industrialists, the politicians, all those who have taken mankind through its worst period of economic decline to end only in the recent six years long bloodbath.
It must be decided by the great mass of the working people. They must organize and speak out with one voice: We demand life under socialism before death under capitalism overtakes us all!
Men and women of labor! Act! Act now! Join the ranks in the fight for Socialism. Only here is there a bedrock upon which to stand as all the values of a passing epoch crumble. The fight for socialism has become the fight for the very existence of mankind.
 

  As peace “broke out” last week, it found those who had planned war production schedules to the minutest detail without all-around plans for full peacetime production and employment. The winning of the war was considered essential enough to have central planning and control over production, materials, contracts, etc. The providing of full employment, however, is being left to the profit incentive of “free enterprise” corporations. It seems to be the consensus of opinion on the part of government, business and labor economists that the reconversion period will last for the next six to eight months. During this period, retooling, shortage of certain materials, relocation of workers and similar problems will continue to make for an unstable economic situation. Estimates vary on the number of unemployed duringthis period from five to seven million. This figure will, of course, be vitally affected by the number of men released from the armed forces during these months. The editorial spokesmen for big business see this reconversion period being followed by a “boom,” based on stabilizing unemployment around the six million mark and drawing upon the accumulated savings of the war period for purchasing power. This “official” outlook, however, errs in two important respects:  It does not allow for the rapid absorption of some eight million servicemen who may be released at the peak rate of one million a month next spring. This number will have to be released if the armed forces are to be reduced to four and a half million within a year.   This outlook banks far too heavily upon the inclinations of workers to make ready and steady expenditures on the basis of bank accounts and bonds. It fails to note that the degree to which workers will draw upon their savings to invest in cars, radios, washing machines, furniture and other articles of consumption will depend directly upon their own prospects for staying on the job. The purchasing power will be tapped only when the people have a feeling of economic security based upon a regular and dependable pay check.  The New York Times of August 19 presents a graph which predicts eight million unemployed next spring. These eight million, together with some five million still in the armed forces at that time, will total thirteen million men and women outside of the market as consumers of the things that make industry run. These thirteen million unemployed and misemployed compare with the official figure of 10.2 million unemployed in 1939. (In 1939 the armed services contained considerably less than a million.) If we had a continuing depression in 1939 with 10.2 unemployed, can we expect a “boom” on the basis of eight million unemployed and five million service men remaining removed from direct consumption? It begins to appear that all those factors which the capitalist spokesmen point to as the basis of the boom, like great consumer needs, accumulated savings, etc., will serve merely to cushion the worst blows for a year or so. These factors will stave off during 1946 the full effect of capitalist crisis with its mounting unemployment figures that may reach over the twenty million mark two years from now. Capitalism is still capitalism. The ten long years of depression from 1929 to 1939 were no mere accident. They were the death throes of a sick and dying economic system. The war has not cured the economic ills of capitalism. It merely cured the paralysis of depression with the fever of mass destruction. But more, the wartime production has speeded up the development of labor-saving devices so that each worker produces more today than he did before the war. When the chill of depression again settles over capitalism, it will prove more deathly than in the past. That “free enterprise” will not give us sixty million jobs most every worker understands. However, sober reflection will reveal that “free enterprise” cannot operate for any length of time on “stabilized” unemployed of eight million. Perhaps for a year it will succeed in warding off the worst. But then the deluge. Just as the invention of the atomic bomb makes socialism the imperative necessity if mankind is to survive, so the economic catastrophe that threatens us makes socialism likewise imperative if we are not to become a nation of twenty-five million employed, twenty million unemployed and five million soldiers and sailors, that is, a nation where half work long hours at miserable pay in order to pay the taxes for keeping the other half on the dole and in the armed forces. The Workers Party, proposes its own program for reconversion which appears elsewhere in this issue. But readers of Labor Action must know that these can only be the first necessary steps. They can serve as the bridge toward what must become the final solution – planned production for use on the basis of a socialized economy. The working class must take over political power through a workers’ government. The workers’ government must take over and operate industry through the workers committees and trade unions. ”Let the workers own the government and let the government own the industries.” That is the heart of socialism. No worker who understands this issue has the right to stand aside. Into the ranks of the Workers Party! Into the fight for socialism!   
  Ever since the returns revealed that Churchill and the Tory government had been swept out of office by the avalanche of Labor votes, the capitalist, press in this country has concerned itself with the question of what meaning the Labor government has for the future of British capitalism and the Empire. The great concern of American and world capitalism in this question stems from quite obvious reasons. They want to know what will happen to the banks and industries under a Labor government. They want to know how it will affect Britain’s role as a world power. They want to know what bearing it has upon the future of India, the Arab world, and other British imperial possessions. And last, but not least, they want to know, what repercussions socialistic measures in England will have upon the politics of other countries, not excluding, the United States. However, these questions are no less important for the working class of this country. We, too, must be able to clearly understand what is taking place in England. While we share with our British fellow-workers in the exultation of their great victory, it is necessary that we also soberly analyze and comprehend the actual situation in England and attempt to foresee the most likely trend of events. Otherwise we may experience rude shocks and cruel disappointments as the British political events begin to unravel.  Meaning of L.P. Program It would, for instance, be folly to assume that just because the Labor Party set forth its program on paper and just because it received a clear-cut majority to carry it out that the program is just as good as achieved. Nothing could be further from the truth. Because between the proclamation of the program and its final realization will occur tremendous battles, that will rock the British Isles, The success of the English working class in these battles will depend upon how rapidly it learns its lessons and adopts methods of struggle that will insure success. The program of the British Labor Party called for the nationalization of the Bank of England, the railways, the electric power utilities, the coal mines, and the iron and steel industry, i.e., the nerve center and sinews of British capitalism. This program of nationalization was the foundation for Labor’s program of post-war employment and a vast housing program. It was this program which found such a tremendous response among the workers and soldiers. It promised to solve the two problem sabout which they were most concerned – homes and jobs. As an R.A.F. guard corporal stationed at Potsdam said to a correspondent: “Labor will build homes faster than the Conservatives, we believe. We also believe, Labor will find employment for returned soldiers quicker and won’t keep us hanging about doing one full day’s work in nine.” But the same program of nationalization which produced the outpouring of Labor votes, has not gone unheeded by the British ruling class. Their fear of this program was at the bottom of Churchill’s frenzied attacks upon Labor during the campaign. Yet Labor’s victory has not produced any outward signs of panic among British capitalists. Their calm is not born of a disregard for the peril which Labor’s vote constitutes for them. It is rather born of a feeling of self-confidence based upon their century-old experience and wisdom as rulers of the Empire and in a realization that their basic strength remains untouched by Labor’s victory. A Labor majority in Parliament and a Cabinet composed of those who but yesterday sat cheek by jowl with Churchill in a war dedicated to the defense of the Empire has not changed the basic class relations in England. Capitalists still own and workers still work. Capitalists still make profits and workers still work for wages. The capitalist class is still the ruling class and the working class is still the ruled class. Their overwhelming defeat in the elections has been a serious blow to the capitalist class, but they have only been defeated in a battle. The war still remains to be fought.  A Capitalist State Power British capitalism can still marshall tremendous forces in its defense in this class war. Its first line of defense will be the capitalist press. For the single daily paper of the Labor Party there are hundreds of capitalist dailies to wage a war of propaganda, prejudice, and poison against the demands of Labor. Their role will be to lay down a smokescreen of misinformation and confusion. Directed by such able campaigners as Churchill, Beaverbrook, and Bracken, British capitalism will mobilize every channel of public information which it controls in defense of private property and the ancient privileges of the profit-bund. Its next line of defense will be the apparatus of state. The election of a Labor Cabinet has not changed the character of the capitalist state in Britain, This remains in the vast and powerful state bureaucracy, the career statesmen, the civil servants, the officer castes of the Army, Navy, and R.A.F., the judiciary, the colonial administration, the Church of England hierarchy, the educational system, etc. Educated in its exclusive schools, steeped in its traditions, married to its daughters, the state bureaucracy is tied to the ruling class by a thousand and one ties of social position, education, money, and ingrained political sentiment. They, together with the Labor Ministers, are the real administrators of the state power, British government is cabinet government and British cabinet governments have enormous powers. They fuse with the permanent state bureaucracy to form the total state power. Ministers may come and go but this vast apparatus remains as the flesh and blood embodiment of capitalist class political authority. They are and remain the state power. Nothing could be further from the truth than to picture the state apparatus as consisting of devoted governmental servants who are unconcerned with political policy and merely carry out orders, regardless of who sits in the Cabinet. This state machine is as much a capitalist institution as the Board of Directors of the Bank of England. It is designed to serve one basic purpose – the preservation of British capitalism at home and abroad. Within the state apparatus the final backbone of capitalist defense consists of the officer castes of the armed services. These are composed of the most able sons of the British ruling class. Their political influence in behalf of reaction in critical periods will be tremendous. The British workers would do well to remember the lessons of Spain in 1936 in this connection. Nor should anyone delude himself with the thought that the alleged Anglo-Saxon spirit of democracy and fair play preclude such a “Spanish” solution on the part of the British ruling class. The final bulwark of capitalist defense is, of course, their economic power. It is upon this, in the long run, that all their other power rests. Until all important capitalist industrial, financial, and commercial enterprises have been nationalized, the capitalist class will remain the ruling class. They will never rest until they have restored private ownership in the decisive branches which Labor proposes to nationalize.  What Labor Must Do If Labor is to achieve its program, it will have to act boldly and decisively against capitalist obstruction and sabotage. This means in the first place to break up the old state machine and replace it with administrators elected by councils of workers. This means to free the colonies and withdraw the British troops. This means to break the hold of the reactionary officer castes over the armed forces and replace them with elected commanders chosen by soldiers’ councils. This means to use the great British Broadcasting Corporation for a widespread program of socialist education. This means to utilize the tremendous power of the British trade union movement to establish workers’ control of production and workers’ control of distribution and rationing. This means to round up Mosley and all other agents of fascist violence and keep them out of harm’s way. The election of a Labor majority has only been the first blow to achieve Labor’s program. The struggle has only begun. Its further success depends upon Labor acting along the lines indicated above. But there is no likelihood that we will see the day when men like Attlee, Morrison, Bevin, et al., act in this manner. This smacks of social revolution, even if revolution by clear-cut majority vote, and Labor’s leadership fears nothing more. Like Green and Murray in this country, they have a long record of timidity and appeasement to capital. They will find a hundred and one excuses for not acting decisively to break capitalist obstruction and carry out the program of nationalization. The Labor Party as a whole has been cradled in the theory of “the inevitability of gradualness.” Its rank and file will have to re-learn quickly if its present great victory is to avoid shipwreck. They will hardly tolerate what happened in the first two Labor governments (1923 and 1929). Then the Labor leadership had the excuse that they did not have a majority in Parliament. This does not hold today. Messrs. Attlee, Bevin, et al., will have behind them the terrific pressure of a working class that wants results, not excuses. The results will come when the ranks take organized steps to achieve them. It was they, not Attlee, who won the great election victory. It will be they, in the last analysis, who will have to provide the forces to achieve Labor’s program.   
  In the past several years an increasing number of trade union activists have become accustomed to hearing the word “Trotskyist” used in the labor movement. Many of the best of them have themselves been called “Trotskyists” because of the ideas they stood for. According to the reactionary union officials and Stalin’sstooges in the labor movement, “Trotskyism” has come to mean any bold policy of action on behalf of the working class. “Trotskyist” has come to mean anyone who is against the no-strike pledge and in favor of restoring genuine collective bargaining. “Trotskyist” has come to mean anyone against a policy of appeasement to corporations and in favor of a militant defense of labor’s rights. “Trotskyist’ has come to mean anyone against a policy of kowtowing to government agencies and for the withdrawal of labor’s members from the War Labor Board. “Trotskyist” has come to mean anyone against making the trade union movement a tail to the Democratic Party kite and in favor of organizing an independent Labor Party. “Trotskyist” has come to mean anyone against post-war unemployment and hunger under capitalism and in favor of jobs and plenty for all through a socialist system of planned production foruse.  Who Was Trotsky? Leon Trotsky would have been proud to have had his name associated with these ideas. And those thousands of trade unionists who have been fighting for these ideas would do well on this, the fifth commemoration of his tragic death, to resolve to acquaint themselves with the whole of Trotsky’s ideas – his real ideas and not lies and distortions which his enemies have peddled about. Trotsky was one of the great intellectual giants of the working-class movement. Beginning as a youth, he devoted himself unsparingly and unflinchingly to the cause of socialism. His part in leading the Russian working class in the revolutions of 1905 and 1917 has become an imperishable page in history. But that which will live longest as a contribution to the liberation of humanity is Trotsky’s monumental labor to preserve, extend and apply the scientific theory of Marxism, without which the struggle for a socialist world would flounder like a mariner without charts and compass. Trotsky carried on where Marx, Engels and Lenin left off. He took their theories and, together with the experience of the working class, developed the strategy and tactics that could lead to victory. The strategy of the working class in the struggle for power became his special sphere. He devoted himself to this question because he saw in it the bottleneck which would prove the undoing of all previous triumphs. History has proved him right in this estimate. Trotsky viewed the Russian Revolution as the beginning of a world-wide struggle which would determine whether socialism or capitalist barbarism would prevail. He kept repeating that socialism was on the order of the day ever since the First World War and that mankind would suffer cruelly for postponing its achievement. The price it would pay, Trotsky foretold, would be new and more devastating wars; worldwide economic crisis and the bloody tyranny of fascism. Trotsky held that the working class, particularly in Europe, was ready and able to fight successfully for power and socialism. The paralysis that gripped the working class in the post-war years was not a paralysis of the ranks. Trotsky kept repeating: “The crisis of the working class is a crisis of leadership.”  Trotsky’s Great Struggle The leadership of the old pre-war socialist movement (Second International) had led the workers into the morass of the war and the blind alley of capitalist democracy at the end of the war. It had revealed itself incapable and unwilling in the fight for socialism. With the Russian Revolution rose the new revolutionary Marxist leadership of the Communist International. Trotsky stood in its leadership alongside of Lenin during its first five years. With the triumph of the Stalinist counter-revolution in Russia, the Communist Parties of the world ceased being Marxist organizations and became fifth columns for the new Russian rulers. Trotsky was exiled from Russia. His books were burned, his followers imprisoned or shot, his name blackened. But Trotsky determined to start all over again. He gathered the few revolutionary Marxists in various corners of the world who had survived the corruption and confusion of Stalinism and again organized a world organization committed to carrying on in the theories and traditions of Marx and Lenin. Trotsky devoted the declining years of his life to this great labor. It bore fruit. His work exists today in the parties that are popularly associated with his name and in their Marxist programs. But for the brilliant light of his intellect which illuminated world politics during the eleven years of his last exile the flame of Marxism would have survived as a feeble flicker indeed. The Workers Party was formed in 1940 as a result of a sharp political struggle against the position held by Trotsky on Russia’s rule in the war. It was our position that Marxists could no longer pledge unconditional defense to the Soviet Union. Trotsky continued to adhere to this view. Though we separated ourselves organizationally from Trotsky, the Workers Party has carried on in his tradition and has made the essence of his ideas the foundation of its program. Those who boast that they are the “orthodox Trotskyists” with the “unsullied banner” have continued to cling desperately to the great teacher’s last words but have forgotten the scientific spirit of his method of political analysis. The Workers Party is determined to teach and train a new generation of young Marxists in the theories of Trotsky. And through our party and its adherents we will continue to carry the fighting spirit which characterized Trotsky as a man and a thinker, into the great struggles that loom before the American working class. In the course of these struggles, increasing thousands of American workers will come to know of Trotsky, not as a foreigner with a little beard and violent notions, but as the great teacher of the international working class movement for socialism.   



“Free Press” in Germany
One of the “Four Freedoms” to which American editors have attached great importance is freedom of the press. At present the American military commanders in Germany are hard at work teaching this great “freedom” to the Germans. And as usual it turns out to be “freedom of the press” in the grand old American tradition.
The American Army authorities have authorized the publication of only some twenty-four large dailies in their zone of occupation. The result has been that each of them enjoys circulations that are stupendous by pre-Hitler standards. They run from 400,000 to 1,500,000 each. German journalists claim that these papers between them service a population that once supported several hundred papers in the Weimar Republic.
This sort of “freedom of the press” is, of course, the development on German soil of a monopoly of the press by a few millionaire publishers that has long prevailed in the United States. Instead of reconstituting an independent political press, as prevailed before Hitler, the Army is concentrating the manufacture of public opinion in the hands of a small group of German Hearsts, McCormicks. Scripps-Howards, Reeds, Sulzbergers and Marshall Fields
*

Italian Socialist Struggle
The struggle for the control of the Italian Socialist Party is becoming clarified with the emergence of more clearly defined Stalinist and anti-Stalinist tendencies. At the Rome Conference held on July 29th to August 1st, an open opposition to the pro-Stalinist orientation of Pietro Nenni emerged and received the support of some thirty per cent of the delegates.
The opposition is led by Giuseppe Modigliani, Ignazio Silone and Giuseppe Favarelli. Modigliani is one of the old right-wing leaders of the party who shared the leadership with Matteotti, Turati and Serrati when the hesitant and contradictory policies of the socialists resulted in the final triumph of Mussolini.
 
Silone’s Role
Silone is the well known anti-fascist novelist who wrote Fontamara, Bread and Wine, School for Dictators and other novels which have shown a consistent trend away from Marxism and toward some sort of libertarian, humanistic, mystical brand of socialism. Silone has made a name for himself as the avowed enemy of all forms of totalitarianism, including Stalinism, for which he coined the phrase “Red fascism.”
However, upon his return to Italy from exile he became a close associate and supporter of Nenni, the leader of the pro-Stalinist orientation in the party. It now appears that he is once more linked with the anti-Stalinist forces. Favarelli is a legendary figure who emerged to prominence in the pre-war underground in Italy. Little is known of his politics at present. He was arrested by the Vichy police and turned over to the fascists early in the war. A fascist court sentenced him to thirty years’ imprisonment, from which he was liberated with the fall of Mussolini.
Nenni is driving hard for the fusion of the Socialist and Communist Parties. He has secured much support for this proposal among socialist workers with the argument that it was the division of the working class into two parties that permitted fascism to conquer in 1921–24. The bulk of the Italian workers, having lived for twenty years under the fascist blackout, still think of the Communists as a working class organization dedicated to socialism; what is more, to the ideas of Lenin and the Russian Revolution.
In the face of the opposition of the Modigliani forces at the Rome conference, Nenni chose to delay the question and moved to postpone to “a more appropriate time.” The opposition opposed this on the ground that they were opposed to fusion with the Communists on principle and substituted a proposal for unity of action on specific questions. The opposition has drawn much strength from the Labor Party victory in Britain, hoping that the Labor government will be a counterweight to Russian influence in Italy.
 
Socialist Party Role
The fusion of the Socialists with the Communist Party would be a catastrophe for Italian labor. As everywhere else, the Stalinists will corrupt, disintegrate and terrorize all opposition in the united party and transform it into an enlarged apparatus for the carrying out of Russian aims. Those who remain intransigent in their opposition will finally be framed up, slandered and driven from the ranks. Stalinism is bureaucratic tyranny, monolithism, totalitarianism.
Whatever the policies and practices of the Italian Socialists and the trade unions they lead, they still remain a product of the Italian working class, they are still part of the free labor movement which needs democratic rights in order to exist.
The leadership of Modigliani and Silone, the one an old hand at compromise, the other a brilliant writer but unstable politician and theorist, will not defeat the Stalinist menace to the Italian working class. This task requires a revolutionary Marxist party, founded upon the program that made the Russian Revolution possible and united in firm and disciplined ranks that will prove more than a match for Togliatti’s bureaucratized machine. Such a party will find numerous adherents in the present ranks of the Socialist Party. But its ideas, its leading cadres, and the initial steps in the building must come from our comrades of the Italian section of the Fourth International. In the last analysis, it will be they who will prove the decisive force.
 



Socialist Clarity, organ of the Zam-Tyler (“Fight-Left-and-Right-Danger”) group, has reprinted under my by-line an outline I wrote on the labor party question two years ago when I favored the incorrect position of having Socialists help create a reformist party.
While one may grant that it is permissible to reprint a political article without the knowledge and consent of the author, it was distinctly unethical to reprint this particular article of mine without indicating the date of its writing and without adding some note to the effect that I no longer adhere to the views expressed therein, a fact of which I am sure the editors of Socialist Clarity are fully aware.
I am however gratified to know that the comrades of the Clarity group have arrived at my position of two years ago; this promises well for the future, especially for the younger members of the group, who benefiting by the increased tempo of political life today will pass much more quickly through the labor-party state of their development. As for myself, I now hold a position on this question in common with the other comrades in the Editorial staff of the Socialist Appeal.
 



Our Ninth National Convention brought us victory in our long battle to convert our organization into a revolutionary youth movement. The decisiveness of the victory is attested to by the pitifully small number of right wing and centrist delegates who walked out of the convention.
The left wing began the struggle in 1932. The Socialist Youth learned much under the terrific impact of the events in Germany, Austria, and Spain, as well as the growing class struggles in which they themselves participated on the industrial front in America. The program of the left wing continually moved in the direction of greater clarity and became ever more firmly based upon the principles of Marx and Lenin.
The personnel of the group changed in conformity with political development. Only a small core of the leading comrades of 1932 remain at the head of the left wing today. People like Altman, Larks, Smerken, Levenstein, and Gomberg have long-since passed over to Stalinism, either during its “third period” insanity or its “fourth period” degeneration, or have found their berth in the American Labor Party or the job of a trade union bureaucrat. Others like Fischer, Fish, Friedman, and others have ended up in the camp of Clarity-Altman.
But as some members of the left wing became stultified in their development and dropped into the various opportunist and centrist channels, new blood was being added from several sources. In 1936, several hundred young revolutionists of the Spartacus Youth League joined the ranks of the left wing. To them goes a great deal of credit for the final stages in the training and development of the young Socialists fighting for a revolutionary program. Other hundreds came to the left wing directly from the struggles led by left wing members of the YPSL, on the industrial and student fields.
The thereotical clarity and organizational experience achieved by the membership during this struggle for a revolutionary organization was seen in the delegates who attended the convention and the high political level upon which discussion took place. Those who had attended several conventions and national conferences of the Y.P.S.L. could not help commenting again and again, as they scanned the assembled delegates, that this easily marked the most competent and best trained group of young Socialists who had ever gathered in a national meeting. This not only speaks well of work done to develop the membership but, of much greater importance, it indicates the work which such a membership can accomplish in the coming period of mass work.
As one of the group whose record includes participation in every national convention since 1932 and service in various capacities and upon various bodies, I cannot help repeating to the membership of the League what I said to the convention upon accepting re-nomination for National Chairman. I have never yet accepted a post in the movement with such confidence in those who go to make up the leading cadres and membership of the organization. We have come together through a severe struggle that has steeled us and taught us to work together. We now face confidently the task of building and guiding a movement that must establish its place at the head of the working and student youth of this country, to rally them around the banner of the revolutionary movement we are building, to struggle for workers’ power and Socialism.
 



The Ninth National Convention of the Y.P.S.L. is convening to decide the fate of our organization. Those of us who have struggled for the last six years to convert the League into a revolutionary organization can look back upon our efforts with a feeling of satisfaction. Every recent convention, Cleveland in 1932, Reading in 1933, Pittsburgh in 1935, was a demonstration of the rising tide of Revolutionary Marxism in the Y.P.S.L. We assemble at Philadelphia with the knowledge that our struggle has finally succeeded, that at least 70 per cent of the membership supports our program.
Not only our great support in the ranks of the members should make Philadelphia a field day for the left wing, but the fact that the convention itself will even in its outward aspects attest to the work the left wing has been carrying on. For the first in the history of the league we will have in our midst the young workers from the California agricultural districts, the sailors from the Pacific, the young workers from the Akron rubber center, the Chicago and Youngstown steel centers, from a score of miscellaneous industries that have been the scene of recent strike struggles, and from the fighting ranks of the unemployed movement.
 
Growth of Left Wing
The largest left wing delegations will come from those sections which have been the only ones to show consistent growth and activity in the class struggle – noteworthy examples are Chicago, California, Upstate New York, Newark. The presence of these delegations will testify to the ability of the left wing to build the League and will be harbingers of the Socialist youth movement of tomorrow.
The political level of the delegations coming to the convention will mark a new high for the Y.P.S.L., another indication of the work of the left wing in developing the membership. No matter what aspect of the convention we look at, it should give the comrades of the revolutionary wing the feeling of a job well done and of tremendous opportunities before us.
Yet despite all this progress in building a revolutionary movement and all these gains by the left wing, or, to be more accurate, because of them, the Y.P.S.L. will enter the 1937 convention in the throes of a desperate crisis. The crisis arises from the fact that while the ideas af revolutionary Marxism have swept aside all centrist ideologies in the ranks of the membership and gained a majority, the Bourbons of the centrist leadership refuse to surrender control of the apparatus.
 
Robbing the Left Wing
After their first attempts to guarantee themselves a majority by means of gerrymander and election irregularities had failed to take away our majority, they resorted to a campaign of expulsions of our leading New York comrades to complete the job and to insure the presence of the Altmanite delegates who refused to come if a purge of “Trotskyites” was not carried out first.
The centrists of the Clarity group have followed with a boring monotony the same beaten path of futility traveled by every ill-fated centrist grouping in history. Even to the bitter end they imitate their historical prototypes, the Menshevik-Internationalists of Martov, the Independent Socialists of Kautsky and Haase, the Socialist Workers Party of Germany. Their struggle against the left becomes ever more vicious, more shameless, more unscrupulous, as their defeat becomes more apparent. Their “struggle” against the right becomes reduced to the remark inserted in their speeches and articles in the form of a footnote, parenthetical statement, or appendage, “and we also disagree with the policy of the right.” But in political acts they become indistinguishable from the right, and their blood with it becomes ever more open and direct.
 
Bankrupt Centrists
Like all defeated centrist groups, the Clarityites, rather than learn the lesson of their defeat, become embittered and enraged by it and refuse to recognize their loss. Their final futile, wild and desperate attempts to turn a defeat into a “victory” lead them into progressively more degenerate methods of struggle. From the underhanded and surreptitious methods of gossip, chicanery, and fraud which failed to stave off the inglorious defeat, they strive to learn from the left and carry on the fight in the open, but merely succeed in transferring into broad daylight and on an exaggerated scale the methods of the previous stage. From silently excluding our comrades from leading posts they now pass on to removing them, from backstairs gossip they now pass on to open slander, from apologetically “dropping” the left wing members from the books at Altman’s request they now pass on to wholesale expulsions, from being in a more or less accidental bloc with the right wing they now pass on to an open political agreement for joint struggle against the left.
History presents us with pictures of centrists in all kinds of compromising and ludicrous positions, but none more preposterous than the attempt of Clarity to conceal their political nudity behind a sheet of dues stamps. History has taught us that the capture of the outward forms of an organization by centrist maneuverers and combinationists who have been repudiated by the overwhelming majority of the membership can only leave them with a shell that crumbles at first touch. We can well afford to let the Clarityites capture the dues stamps, the desks, the typewriters, the falsified records; we will have what no one can steal from us, the Young People’s Socialist League, with a membership educated in Marxist theory and trained in the class struggle.
 



New York City
August 15, 1937
To all Circle Secretaries;
(To be read at next Circle meeting)
Dear Comrades:
This letter is an appeal to the membership to take immediate steps to secure the election of a fair and representative convention and thereby defeat the conspiracy of the centrist leaders to steal the convention from the majority and split the League.
The centrist leaders began their mad attempts to secure a majority at the convention some six months ago by systematically placing factional organizers in the field under the guise of League organizers. Three months ago, with bureaucratic disregard for the wishes of the membership, they deliberately changed the location of the convention from Akron to Philadelphia in order to increase the difficulties of the western left wing section in sending delegations while easing the task for their two eastern strongholds, New York City and Philadelphia. As the convention approaches and it becomes apparent to them that even these shoddy maneuvers leave them far from having a majority, they now embark upon a frenzied campaign of gerrymandering, dues stamp record juggling, illegal transfers, and other corrupt practices.
 
Brazen Fraud
I receive reports virtually daily from Cleveland, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Chicago, Ithaca, N.Y., and other places, telling of the brazen attempts on the part of the national office or the local centrist leaders to fraudulently defeat the left wing nominees. When all of these reports will have been collected with irrefutable evidence to verify them, they will constitute a veritable “black book” of the crimes of the centrist leaders against the revolutionary majority of the League as well as against those of the centrist minority who are opposed to the introduction of chicanery and fakery into the Y.P.S.L.
The practices engaged in by those in control of the League machinery have created a situation where it is no longer possible to adhere to the legal forms of the NEC when this crooked “legality” of the centrist leaders is designed to defeat the left wing by corrupt methods. The controlling bodies have abdicated their right to legislate on questions of representation by the methods they have stooped to.
Their methods of representation has given New York City, with only twice the membership of California or Chicago, three times as many delegates, while Philadelphia, with less than half the membership of California or Chicago, has been given two-thirds the number of delegates. They have had members vote in Columbus and transferred them to vote again in Cleveland. They have nullified the election of a left wing delegate in Ithaca because a centrist member was absent. They have sold dues stamps on credit so that circles like Baltimore will meet with three members present to elect two delegates. They give Chicago 120 members when a census last May showed 193. They engaged in practices of the type exposed in the notorious Barshop letter.
Since these practices have destroyed all possibility of holding a convention that really represents the membership, it is necessary that the circles take matters into their own hands to enable the League to meet in a representative convention and prevent the centrist leadership of the youth from carrying through the orders of the Clarityite group in the Party to split the Y.P.S.L. rather than permit the left wing to gain control. There is only one fair method for the election of delegates remaining to the circles. This is to:

Have your circle examine its records and the books of the members to determine the number in good standing.
 
Elect delegates to the convention on the basis of the ratio decided upon by the national office despite the obvious injustice of their system (1 for 5, 2 for 8, 3 for 23, and an additional delegate for every fifteen members or major fraction thereof).
 
Supply your delegates with indubitable proof of the membership of your circle, either by means of the treasurers records or the membership cards.

Only this procedure can save the League from the disrepute into which the revolting methods of the centrist leaders are plunging it. Let the membership teach the cynical politicians in control of the apparatus that the capture of the majority of the dues stamps leaves one far from capturing the majority of a national convention of the Young People’s Socialist League.



 


With Socialist greetings,
Ernest Erber
National Chairman,
Young People’s Socialist League



 



The Polish question is today the acid test for the two opposing
concepts that have struggled for supremacy in the Fourth
Internationalist movement since the American party split over the
issue of defensism in Russia in 1940.
The importance of the Polish question does not stem from the
possibility of the Fourth International effecting the situation one
way or the other in that unhappy country in the foreseeable future.
Unfortunately, few Polish Trotskyists have survived the ravages of
the Gestapo and the GPU. The task of rebuilding the revolutionary
movement in Poland is, of course, related to the theoretical and
political dispute represented by the Polish question. But the
immediate and over-all importance of the Polish question exists in
the fact that the political line taken on Poland will indicate
whether the Fourth International will pass yet deeper into the shadow
of Stalinism or whether it will resolve its political crisis by
cutting itself free from the Russian axis, around which its politics
have revolved, and emerge as a revolutionary, proletarian force,
truly independent of the two great imperialist power combinations
that dominate world politics.
The reason why Poland provides such an exceptional test is that
the Polish situation combines the two main theoretical questions that
divide the international Marxist movement today. These are (a) the
Russian question and (b) the national question.
The Russian question is involved in the form of (a) Russian
occupation, (b) Stalinist domination of the legal labor movement and
the native Polish regime and (c) the nationalization of the decisive
part of Polish economy.
The national question (which is for Europe but a concrete
manifestation of the broader theoretical problem of retrogression) is
present in the form of (a) a nationally-oppressed country with a
movement for national liberation and(b) a brutal police dictatorship
with a mass struggle for political democracy.
Realizing the key importance of the Polish question to the
programmatic struggle in the international movement, the Workers
Party established its position nearly a year ago. It appeared in the
form of an editorial in our issue of August, 1946. Since then we have
had many occasions to elaborate upon aspects of the Polish question,
mainly through the excellent contributions of our collaborator, A.
Rudzienski. However, we have not had occasion to re-state our
fundamental analysis and basic conclusions. In the absence of such a
restatement, our factional opponents, with a woeful lack of
intellectual integrity in polemics, have so distorted our position in
their desperate efforts to refute it, that we find it necessary to
re-state (and even in part reprint) our position to clarify the
atmosphere before making a polemical reply to these attacks.
 
The Workers Party Analysis
Our analysis of the Polish situation can be summed up in the
following points:

Russian control of Poland is basic to Russia’s position
in Eastern Europe as well as important to Russian economic needs;
 
it is to Russia’s advantage to rule Poland through a
“native” Quisling regime, dominated by a Polish Stalinist
apparatus, rather than by direct Russian military control;
 
due to international power relations and to efforts to
placate public opinion in the West, as well as resistance in Poland
itself, Russia is forced temporarily to tolerate a legal opposition
in the form of Mikolajczyk’s Peasant Party;
 
due to the police regime which throttles a free political
life, a vast underground opposition exists;
 
this opposition is composed of heterogeneous and
antagonistic elements, as was the wartime anti-German resistance
movement, both in Poland and in Western Europe;
 
the only political aim held in common by the entire
opposition is that of national liberation;
 
the predominant character of the opposition is that of a
bourgeois-democratic movement, mainly composed of peasants,
reflecting in the underground the political views of the Peasant Party;
 
this underground has a strong proletarian wing, with its
main center apparently being the industrial city of Cracow, composed
of old PPS and trade union cadres which refused to submit to the
Stalinist rape of the official labor movement;
 
the underground also has a reactionary,
bourgeois-feudal-clerical wing, composed of old Pilsudski elements,
organized in the NSZ;
 
the reactionary wing of the underground is increasingly
less important as a political factor as a consequence of its loss of
an economic base through the nationalization of economy and the
breaking-up of large estates and as a consequence of desertions to
the Stalinist state apparatus;
 
the actual state power in Poland is Russian imperialist rule;
 
the latter seeks to consolidate its rule through the
crystallization of a new bureaucratic class, composed of the
Stalinist political apparatus, the state job-holders, the
Russian-trained officer caste, a section of the old reformist labor
bureaucracy, and the technical personnel of the new nationalized
economy – a bureaucratic class in the image of the Russian ruling
class but subservient to and dependent upon the latter;
 
the ultimate aim of the Stalinists in Poland is to proceed
by stages to eliminate all opposition and all “unassimilable”
elements and achieve a totalitarian state resting upon a
nationalized economy, identical with, and incorporated into, the
Russian political and economic structure.
 

The Political Conclusions
On the basis of this analysis, our original statement offered the following political conclusions:
The new political pattern of Poland consists, therefore,
of a crystallizing bureaucratic class basing itself upon a
nationalized economy and ruling the country by police terror,
accompanied by demagogic gestures to win some proletarian and peasant
support. It is opposed by a broad popular movement of peasants who
rally around the banner of democracy and receive support from such
divergent elements as the reactionary and fascistic former rulers, on
the one hand, and the best socialist elements of the proletariat on
the other.
This political pattern is no phenomenon peculiar to
Poland, but extends to all the occupied territories. This poses for
the revolutionary Marxists a most critical situation. It gives flesh
and blood to the theoretical question which the movement posed when
it considered Trotsky’s slogan of self-determination for the
Ukraine. The question is: what is the revolutionary Marxist attitude
toward a broad opposition that rallies under democratic slogans
against a totalitarian regime that bases itself upon nationalized
economy?
How do the actual forces in conflict pose this
theoretical question? In its crudest form it seems to be the
question of the relative weight of nationalization of economy
against the relative weight of political democracy. This is
becoming one of the touchstone questions of our times. Woe to the
movement that chooses wrongly or seeks to ignore it.
The revolutionary socialists, of course, want BOTH,
nationalization AND democracy. That is the socialist solution
everywhere. In Russia the struggle for the revolutionary overthrow of
the regime will begin as a struggle for political democracy as the
instrument by which the rudder can again be placed in the hands of
the ‘masses. In the United States the struggle for nationalization
of economy is the struggle for the indispensable framework for a
democratic social, economic and political existence for the masses.
But the essence of politics is not merely what we want.
A political line must proceed from the reality of the existing
struggle. The main battle lines are not drawn up between a socialist
proletarian movement and the Stalinist regime, nor between a
socialist proletarian movement and a Mickolajczyk regime. The main
battle lines find the Stalinist dictatorship confronted by a popular
opposition movement headed by Mickolajczyk. Our problem is to create
a Third Camp which will fight both against Stalinist totalitarianism
and the bourgeois reaction inherent in the petty bourgeois peasant
movement. But the question is: where are the elements today
out of which such a Third Camp can be constructed? Are they in the
GPU-staffed, misnamed “Workers Party” and the GPU-staffed
government unions? Or are they in the opposition elements grouped
around Mickolajczyk? It is precisely in such a posing of the question
that the difference between the French situation and the Polish
situation comes to the fore. In France the decisive sections of the
proletariat are in the Stalinist and social democratic camp. The
power, however, remains in the hands of the capitalist class. The
class interests of the Stalinist workers require that they engage in
a class struggle with the bourgeoisie and aim toward a proletarian
solution. The Marxists seek to drive this struggle to its ultimate
revolutionary conclusions as a means of breaking the workers from the
Stalinist straightjacket, bound in France as elsewhere by the limits
imposed by Russian needs. In France, therefore, the elements for a
Third Camp are today in the Stalinist and Socialist parties. Without
them there will be no socialist revolution in France.
In Poland the case is radically different. The
bourgeoisie has, for all practical purposes, been expropriated. The
workers do not engage in a class struggle in industry against a
capitalist owner. Those workers who support the Stalinist regime do
so under the illusion that socialism is being constructed or out of
purely opportunist motives, like jobs or food rations. Those workers,
on the other hand, who wage a class struggle today, do it precisely
against the Stalinist overlords of government and industry. In
order to wage that struggle effectively they must fight for the
democratic rights of existence as a labor movement, the right to free
speech, to organization, to a free press, to assembly, etc., all
finding their final expression in the slogan, “Out with the
Russians!” and “Long live a Free Poland!” These are rights for
which the vast majority of the Polish population yearns today and
which finds its distorted expression in the Mickolajczyk opposition.
It is here that the revolutionary Marxists will find the decisive
elements for the Third Camp, i.e., a revolutionary, proletarian,
socialist opposition to the Stalinist dictatorship. The political
line of the Marxists must, therefore, be one of critical support to
the Mickolajczyk camp.
What is meant by “critical support”? It means first
of all complete political independence from the Mickolajczyk
movement. It means political criticism of that movement. It means
independent proletarian organizations in the shops and proletarian
methods of struggle, all aimed at wresting the leadership from
Mickolajczyk and making the proletariat the leader of the broad
people’s movement against the Stalinist regime. The proletariat
cannot remain on the side lines when two sections of the nation stand
locked in deadly struggle.
If barricades arise between the two camps, on which side
do the Marxists seek to rally the proletariat? In Poland today the
civil war smoulders underground and we must take a position. Do
Polish Marxists condone the GPU arrests of Peasant Party leaders as
being the liquidation of capitalist restorationist elements? Or do
they actively fight alongside of the Peasant Party leaders to defend
them against GPU persecution? For the Marxists, the revolutionary
socialist struggle is the only decisive one in a historic sense.
However, where they cannot determine the nature of the struggle, they
must lead the proletariat, as an independent force, into that camp
which represents the best possibility of socialist advancement.
We ask our reader’s indulgence for the necessity of reprinting
this key section of our statement. We are sure, however, that our
readexs, regardless of their political judgment of our position, will
agree that there is a need for such a restatement when our opponents
have chosen to restate our position for us in the following piece of skullduggery:
Shachtman’s position can be summarized as follows: “I
consider as primary my right to be able to express my own opinions. I
abandon in advance the attempt to conquer this right within the
framework of the defense, of the expansion, and of the
consummation of expropriation measures against the old possessing
classes. I refuse to get mixed up with those opportunistic workers
who choose their camp solely on the basis of questions of food
rations and of jobs. I am ready to return the factories to the
bourgeois and the land to the landlords on condition that I have
freedom to smear as much paper every week as I desire.”
The above appeared in a polemic against us in the Fourth
International of February 1947 under the title of The Conflict in Poland with the sub-title, From Abstentionism to Active Intervention – In the Camp of the Class Enemy. The author of
this particularly ignorant and vicious piece is one Ernest Germain,
of late, unfortunately, regarded as the leading theoretician of the
Fourth International. We can only list this sad fact as further
evidence of the extent to which Marxian thinking has been lowered in
the world workers’ movement, including its vanguard, the Fourth
International. Yet, since we must assume that Germain’s article is
the official reply of the leadership of the Fourth International, the
further development of the discussion on this question requires that
we come to grips with this article rather than ignore it and permit
it to pass into the oblivion it deserves.
 
On the Nature of State Power
Basic to any discussion of whether one should support the state
power or the opposition that seeks its overthrow is the question of
the nature of the state power. We are, therefore, considerably
pleased to note, early in Germain’s article, a section boldly
entitled, The Class Nature of the Polish State. After telling
us that Shachtman [1] will not succeed in
confounding the “militants of the Fourth International” by posing
questions about the nature of the Polish state, and after reminding
us that the question of the nature of a state is not “a subject for
cheap jokes,” and that Trotsky devoted twenty pages of The Revolution Betrayed to explaining the nature of the Russian state plus forty (!) additional lines for summary, Germain finally launches
into his explanation of the Polish state. He begins by
formulating a broad theoretical precept as to the nature of state
power, the first sentence of which reads:
The nature of the state is dependent in the last analysis
on the class structure of society.
We take this to mean that the state is the political expression of
the class that is economically dominant. However, as Germain states,
this is true only in the last analysis, i.e., only in the
historical sense and not in every given instance. If it were true in
every given instance there could never be a proletarian revolution.
For the proletariat seizes the state power at a time when the
bourgeoisie is still the dominant class in the economy. “In the
last analysis” means, therefore, in so-called normal periods and
above all not in times of revolution and counter-revolution.
Consequently, in the latter periods one cannot determine the class
nature of the state power by examining the economic structure of
society. How then can one determine the class character of a state in
time of revolution and counter-revolution? We shall answer this
question presently, since it contains the powder that blows apart
Germain’s laborious theoretical structure, which we have not yet
finished examining. Germain continues:
But this structure [the class structure of society] is in
turn reflected in the structure of the state itself and can impose
forms upon it which are in contradiction with the class
interests of the ruling class. (Italics in original – E.E.)
If this is not gibberish, then we must take it to mean that the
state does not correspond at all times and in every
respect to the class needs of the dominant class. The state is
subject to the stresses and strains of the class struggle and can
yield to the measure exercised against it from below. This is, of
course, a daily feature in the political life of bourgeois
democracies, especially in those where the direct administrator of
the state is the labor bureaucracy, such as the British Labour
government. In dictatorial regimes, the state, as with all
institutions in the superstructure of society, develops interests of
its own and often imposes these upon the dominant class. The latter
phenomenon Marxists. have long ago given the name of Bonapartism.
Often the political heads of the state, the ideologists of the ruling
class, follow policies in keeping with the historic interests
of the ruling class at the expense of its immediate interests
and a sharp political struggle ensues between the majority of the
ruling class and its state apparatus. The regime of Roosevelt and the
New Deal was an example of the latter.
However, whereas the policies of the state in all of the above
instances “are in contradiction with the class interests of the
ruling class” (Germain) they never upset the social order which
gives to the ruling class its dominance. If the policies of the
state systematically destroy the social order of the dominant class,
these policies are part of a social revolution (or
counter-revolution). We do not know what Germain understands by
forms, which he italicizes. If he means political forms
like monarchy, directorate, republic, fascist dictatorship, etc.,
this is quite in keeping with what we have outlined above. What other
possible forms could there be imposed upon “the structure of the
state”? Since the state is a political instrument, its forms
can only be political forms. If Germain knows of any other, we wait
to be enlightened.
 
Germain Sees ... a Bourgeois State
What is the purpose of this theoretical introduction to Germain’s
conclusions about the class nature of the Polish state? Its purpose
is an attempt to prove that the nationalization of economy is
a state form imposed upon the Polish bourgeoisie by its own state.
Or, to put it differently: the fact that the state renders the
bourgeoisie propertyless does not alter the fact that the state is
still a bourgeois state!
We are willing to grant that all manner of contradictions may make
their appearance between the interests of the bourgeoisie and the
policy of the bourgeois state but the one that we shall never see is
precisely the one Germain would have us believe is taking place in
Poland – a bourgeois state carrying out an economic policy that
removes the bourgeoisie from its dominant place in the economy by
taking away from it the ownership of the means of production, i.e.,
passes the death sentence upon it.
”But we cannot, in any degree, equate the nationalizations to an
‘expropriation of the bourgeoisie: or to the destruction of
capitalism, which Shachtman seems seriously to imply,” protests
Germain. Why? Germain tells us why in the very next sentence: “The
former proprietors are to be indemnified up to the end of ....”
Take a guess! 1996 perhaps? No! “... up to the end of 1946!” And
Germain wrote his article on November 15, 1946, when the Polish
bourgeoisie had a life expectancy, as rentiers of the state, of
exactly six weeks!
But there are additional reasons adduced by Germain. We read on:
A part of these indemnities can be invested in new
private industrial and commercial enterprises, explicitly
authorized by the law. A system of special credit is functioning for
the “private sector” of industry and commerce, and is designed to
favor the development of medium and large commercial
enterprises, as well as medium industrial enterprises of
certain sectors (the only ones which can at this time be created by
the Polish bourgeoisie with the capital at its disposal). (Our
italics – E.E.)
What does this add up to? To the fact that a part of the
money received from the state may be re-invested. (We do not know
what happens to the other part, but taxes probably account for much
of it.) Where may this part be invested? In commercial enterprises of
both medium and large size. What does this mean? The former
proprietor of a manufacturing plant may open a store, even a big one.
Where else may this remnant of his capital be invested? In industrial
enterprises. In any the capitalist may choose? No. Only in “certain
sectors” as “explicitly authorized by law.” May he open as
large a plant as he chooses? No, only a medium industrial enterprise.
This is the best he could have done in any case, Germain assures us,
since the Polish capitalist has little capital left. With such a
“capitalist state” to look after his welfare, little wonder[ But
then, you see, that is one of the contradictions of which we were
warned in advance. And life is so full of contradictions. Most
anything can happen – especially in these days, and above all, in Poland.
Of course, capitalism has not been abolished root and branch in
Poland. Who is Germain polemizing against to prove this point?
Certainly not anyone who has written in these pages. Capitalism was
not “abolished” in Russia until the first Five Year Plan, and
then not entirely. A well-known expert on Russian affairs recently
wrote in the press of the Fourth International that he had located a
kulak in Novisimbirsk who owned his own cow. And it recently came to
light that there are private watch-repair shops in Moscow itself,
thinly disguised as artisans’ collectives.
What was the NEP in Russia during 1922–28 but permission for
small and medium capitalist enterprise, particularly in commercial
undertakings, to operate subject to strict regulation by the
government? Nor do we contend that capital in Poland today has been
restricted to channels as narrow as those of the NEP. But the
difference is one of degree and direction and not one
of type. A proletarian state in Poland would not necessarily go
beyond the scope and tempo of nationalization as carried out to date
by the Stalinist regime. The Civil War in Russia necessitated wide
and sweeping measures of expropriation; measures from which the NEP
marked a retreat in the interests of economic rehabilitation. A
workers’ state which is in a position to set its own pace of
nationalization will take proper care not to throw the country into
economic chaos by nationalizing a lot of medium and small industry
and commerce before the economic institutions of the state are in a
position to utilize them properly.
 
The Economy in Poland
What then is the nature of the economy in Poland today? Is it
private capitalism? Is it “state capitalism”? Is it bureaucratic
collectivism? The nature of the economy is not uniformly anyone of
these. As with every economy in transition from one social
order to another, the Polish economy has a mixed character.
But the real question cannot be answered by determining just how
much is privately owned and just how much is state owned.
Such figures are not without interest, but they cannot answer the key
question: toward what social order is the economy in transition?
How can one determine this? In a bourgeois economy which operates
free of hostile state interference, the basic trends are the result
of the inner laws of motion of the economy itself. In this case it
suffices to study the economic trends and generalize upon them. But
where the direction of economic development is not automatic but
state-directed by an anti-bourgeois force, the “laws of motion”
arising from the blind working of economic laws can be cancelled
out by the planned intervention of the state.
During the 1920’s in Russia, the accumulation of kulak and
Nepman capital began to outstrip the accumulation of capital in the
state-owned economy. On the basis of an analysis of economic trends
alone, one would have to say that the further development of the
economy on the basis of these laws of motion could only result in the
complete triumph of capitalism over the nationalized economy. Trotsky
predicted this and proposed a program to prevent it. The essence of
this program was to use the state power over the economy to cancel
out the blind working of “laws of motion.” The means by which
this was to be done were two-fold: (a) a planned program of
accumulation of capital for the expansion of the nationalized sector
of the economy and (b) state measures directed against the kulaks and
Nepmen, especially tax measures, which would halt their growth and,
finally, systematically reduce them. Unfortunately, Trotsky believed
that the Stalin bureaucracy was a pro-bourgeois force and incapable
of maintaining the nationalized economy against capitalist pressure.
Trotsky, consequently, failed to foresee that the bureaucracy, also,
could use the state power as an economic force against the capitalist
trends, in the interests of its own special position, without thereby
strengthening the proletariat or moving toward socialism. In line
with his mistaken analysis, Trotsky was forced to regard the Five
Year Plan as a temporary “left zig” – i.e., a pro-Stalinist and
pro-proletarian measure taken under the pressure of the workers –
on what was otherwise a “zig-zag” course toward capitalist
restoration. The sad fact, however, was that while there was less
capitalism than ever in Russia at the end of the Five Year Plan,
there was also less socialism than ever, despite the vast expansion
of the nationalized economy.
If a study of the economic trends alone cannot tell us toward what
the economy is in transition, how can we discover the answer to this
latter question? By analyzing the class nature of the state power
which is determining the direction of economic development.
This brings us back to the question we posed earlier but postponed
answering; namely, how does one determine the class nature of state
power in periods of revolution (or counter-revolution) when the state
does not necessarily represent the economically dominant class? One
determines it on the basis of state policy toward the
different classes composing the social order. How did we know that a
workers’ state was at the head of Russian society despite the NEP
concessions to small capital? Because the state policy was
predominantly a pro~proletarian policy. How did we know that the
workers’ state was degenerating? Because its policy increasingly
favored the special interests of the bureaucracy at the expense of
the proletariat.
We must therefore ask: If Germain states that Poland is ruled by
“a bourgeois Polish State apparatus” and that “the structure of
this state remains unchanged” from that of the pre-war state, why
has the Polish bourgeoisie fared so badly at the hands of its own state?
 
Which Class Holds Power?
The next question which immediately suggests itself is this: which
class has been favored by the state policies in Poland? Before
answering this question, we will first examine another aspect of the
nature of state power to determine in whose hands the Polish state rests.
Germain belligerently asks us:
How were you able to write an editorial of close to 4,000
words on Polish policy without telling us explicitly what is the
class nature of the state and of the society in that country?
Four pages later in his article, Germain himself quotes our answer:
According to the editorial writer of the NI, “the
Stalinist regime is seeking [!] to compose [!] the new bureaucratic
class from the state apparatus. [The exclamations were inserted by Germain.]
”Ah-ha!” Germain wants to say. “You see, they are only seeking and want to compose but the editorial writer does not explicitly tell us who holds the state power today.”
Who holds the state power today? In Poland? Of course, we did not explicitly set
down the answer to this. Because we don’t know? No! Quite the
contrary, because we were sure that every
schoolboy knew the answer to this question. When we said the “Stalinist regime
is seeking, etc.,” whom did Germain think we had in mind? Lest we not be sufficiently
explicit, we will answer at greater length the question of who holds
the state power in Poland today.
What is the state in the last analysis? As Engels was at such
pains to make clear, it is “an armed power.” Lest one think this
too narrow a concept, Engels adds that “it consists not merely of
armed men, but of material appendages, prisons and repressive
institutions of all kinds ...” And Lenin comments on Engels’
definition and says somewhat categorically:: CIA standing army and
police are the chief instruments of state power.”
What standing army is the backbone of state power in Poland? The
Russian army. What police rules the country? The GPU. What
repressive institutions exist? Special courts and concentration
camps for the opponents of Russian rule.
We hope that Germain will not quibble about the fact that in
addition to the Russian army of occupation there is also a “Polish”
army that wears Polish uniforms and even has officers who speak
Polish without Russian accents. Their arms, however, are Russian,
both in origin and in point of control. We are even willing to grant
that many of the chiefs of the Polish GPU speak Polish. Here,
however, we are not ready to guaran tee that they speak without a
Russian accent.
What is the nature of the state power in Poland today? The
nature of state power is Russian imperialist rule, i.e. occupation,
domination, oppression and exploitation of the country by the
bureaucratic collectivist state power of Russia.
This is the bald fact which it seems everybody in the world knows
(whether they call Russia bureaucratic collectivist or not) but
which, it would appear, everybody has carefully withheld from Germain
out of regard for his tender sensibilities.
What is the state power in Japan today? Everyone knows that the
real state power rests upon the American imperialist forces of
occupation. The United States being a capitalist power, it leaves
undisturbed the basic class relations in capitalist Japan. Here there
is no contradiction between the regime of MacArthur and Japanese
capitalism, insofar as their common desire to maintain capitalism is concerned.
 
How Is Conflict Being Resolved?
But we know that where a contradiction does exist between the
basic social aims of the state (i.e., the armed power) and the
economically dominant class, this contradiction cannot continue
indefinitely. If it did, then the entire Marxist theory that the
state is an instrument of force in the hands of the economically
dominant class would be invalidated. Germain correctly notes, in
connection with another point, that the workers’ state in Russia
ruled for some six to eight months with only few nationalizations.
But this situation could not continue. Either the capitalist owners
of industry would overthrow the Soviet state and again take the state
power or the Soviet state would remove the capitalists from their
economically dominant position by expropriations. If there is a
contradiction between the class aims of the state power in Poland and
those of the bourgeoisie [whom Germain considers still the
economically~dominant class], how is it being resolved? We submit
that all evidence proves that it is being resolved by systematically
removing the bourgeoisie from its role as the “dominant class” in
the economy.
“The character of the state which appears in its structure must
rest, however, on a well defined social base,” we are told by
Germain. The real state power in Poland, the Russian imperialist
occupant and the native Stalinist~Quisling apparatus through which it
rules, certainly intend to give their state power “a well defined
social base.” But other than Germain thinks, it will not be
bourgeois. This latter illusion rests upon yet another theory of the
majority which is basic to their analysis of Poland. This is the
theory that the Russian bureaucracy seeks to restore capitalism in
Russia, and, consequently, to maintain it where it already exists.
For you see, when all is said and done, Germain proceeds not from the
nature of the economy in Poland but from the class aims of the
Russian bureaucracy!
But the political intervention of the Soviet bureaucracy was
primarily counter-revolutionary. The Soviet Army was used to
“restore order,” re-establish the authority of employers and to
rapidly rebuild a bourgeois Polish state apparatus.
Here we can clearly see that the Polish question is
indistinguishable from the Russian question. How can it be otherwise
when the real state in Poland is the Russian military power plus its
native apparatus? The analysis of the Polish situation, therefore,
cannot be the same for those who see a workers’ state in Russia as
for those who see bureaucratic collectivism or state capitalism in Russia.
The above quotation reveals that those who hold the view that
Russia is a workers’ state and that the only alternative is the
restoration of private capitalism can only equate counterrevolution
to bourgeois counter-revolution. If the “Red Army” enters
Poland to suppress in incipient proletarian revolution, Germain can
only conclude that it does this in order to place the bourgeoisie in
power. That the Russian army may smash a proletarian revolution and
simultaneously move to eliminate the bourgeoisie is ruled out as
“Shachtmanite” revisionism (and in more truculent moods as Burnhamism).
According to the majority theory the Russian bureaucracy plays a
dual role: reactionary and progressive, i.e., pro-capitalist
and pro-socialist. It is either one or the other. If it suppresses a
proletarian revolution, it must be pro-capitalist. If it divides the
land and nationalizes economy, it must be pro-socialist. Accepting
this mode of reasoning for the moment, we ask Germain this question:
If one casts up a balance sheet of the Russian record in Poland,
placing all the “progressive” acts in one column and the
reactionary ones in another, which reveals itself as the decisive
class policy, the pro-capitalist or the “pro-socialist” measures?
What have been the pro-capitalist measures in Poland cited by
Germain? The Russians (a) saved the Polish bourgeoisie from a
proletarian revolution and (b) generously permitted the bourgeoisie
to keep its small and, to an extent, medium enterprises.
What have been the “pro-socialist” measures according to
Germain? The Russians (a) nationalized banking and the key industries
and (b) broke up the remaining landed estates. In the words of
Germain, “the total expropriation of the bourgeoisie after an
eventual conquest of power by the proletariat presents itself as
infinitely easier and requiring less expense than in 1939” and
therefore “economically, socially and technically the reforms of
1945–46 facilitate the realization of the socialist revolution.”
Can one assume anything else from this balance sheet than that the
decisive class policy in Poland has been anything but
pro-bourgeois? Germain could conceivably conclude that the policy has
been “pro-socialist,” but hardly pro-bourgeois.
 
Russia’s Aim of Structural Assimilation
We cite one more item of evidence from Germain to bolster this
conclusion. In explaining the reasons for the nationalization policy,
he sums them up as: “... workers’ pressure; the tendency toward
statism inherent in Polish capitalist industry; the tendency
toward structural assimilation inherent in the policy of the Soviet
bureaucracy in the ‘buffer’ countries.” (Our italics – E.E.)
We ask: if it is the aim of the Russian bureaucracy to assimilate
the Polish economy “into the structure of the USSR,” will this be
done on the basis of a Polish bourgeois economy? How could a
bourgeois economy be grafted onto the collectivized economy of
Russia? Or does Germain see in this, as did Oehler a few years ago,
the secret design of the Kremlin to bring capitalism back into
Russia? “Structural assimilation” to Russia! This is a most
gloomy perspective which the Polish bourgeois state has outlined for
the Polish bourgeoisie! Never has the “executive committee of the
bourgeoisie as a whole shown such disregard for the most basic
interests of its constituents, including their very lives!
 
Comparison of Poland and Spain
But Germain cites us an historical precedent for what is taking
place in Poland. What is the precedent? The Loyalist government in
Spain during the Civil War. Here, he says was a bourgeois state which
fought the bourgeois as a class, the vast majority of the latter
having been in the camp of Franco. Germain, however, omits one item
from his analogy between Poland and Spain of 1936–39. The entire
activity of the Republican government after July 18, 1936, was not
merely to oust the workers from the control they had established in
industry, but to conduct a consistent policy of restoring the
property to the bourgeoisie. This latter policy was most ardently
pursued by the Spanish Stalinists, under the direct orders of the
Russian Ambassador in Madrid. Those bourgeois who had fled abroad but
had not taken an active part in the Franco rebellion were even
invited to return and resume their bourgeois functions.
Why did the Spanish bourgeoisie encourage the Franco uprising? Was
it because the People’s Front regime was going to expropriate them?
No. It was because they viewed the Republican government as too weak
to prevent a proletarian revolution. They viewed Azana as the Russian
bourgeoisie viewed Kerensky and, like the Russian bourgeoisie, the
Spanish sought its own “Kornilov,” unfortunately, a victorious
one. Does any Polish bourgeois oppose the present Warsaw government
because it is weak in the face of a threatening proletarian and
peasant upheaval? They could find no stronger counter-revolutionary
regime than the one now in power. However, a regime that saves the
bourgeoisie from the proletariat only in order to expropriate the
bourgeoisie itself is of little consolation to the latter. The
Stalinist course in Spain was anti-proletarian and pro-bourgeois. The
Stalinist course in Poland is anti-proletarian and
anti-bourgeois and pro-bureaucratic collectivist. They find
themselves able to achieve in Poland today what was out of the
question in Spain – namely to recast Polish society in the image of Russia.
 
Russia’s “Children”
As a consequence, Shachtman asserts that the “unique”
Russian bureaucratic class can produce children – “intentionally,”
of course, in order to insist on the determinist and historical
character of this strange “sociology,” which continues out of
laziness of thought to call itself “Marxist”! We have the right
to ask him: And the French Stalinists, wouldn’t they, too, like to
form a “new bureaucratic class,” if God furnishes the occasion?
Yes, Germain may as well know the worst; the Russian
bureaucratic-collectivist class can “produce children.” Not only
“intentionally” but also “necessarily.” [2]
What is at the root of the Russian expansion into the
“buffer-states,” according to the position which Germain holds?
At the root is the bureaucracy’s concept of how to defend the
“Soviet Union.” The very term “buffer” indicates this. But
what is a more reliable buffer-territory, one with a bourgeois
economy or one with a nationalized economy? Obviously, the latter.
Yugoslavia is certainly more reliable than Finland in case of anÂ·
American attack upon Russia. If the antagonism between Russia and the
capitalist world rests upon two mutually hostile social systems, why
should Russia desire to have the enemy social system
behind its first line of defense (the iron curtain) and extending
right up to the frontiers of Russia itself? We speak of “desire”
here for it is Germain’s contention that Russia seeks to
restore and maintain capitalism in Poland. We credit the Kremlin, if
solely from an aim of self-preservation, with enough foresight to
have the “intentions” of extending its social system throughout
the buffer territory.
However, more than that, Russia finds it necessary to
expand imperialistically due to her own economic needs. We dealt with
this at length in an editorial in the April 1946 issue of this
publication. The same point is made in different terminology in the
Fourth International (March 1946) where we read on page 103 as
follows: “The regime [in Russia] sees no way out in the economic
field save through the realization of the fourth Five-Year Plan,
which cannot be achieved by the devastated country without the
resources of the ‘buffer zones’.” Most certainly “the
resources of the buffer zones” cannot be exploited by continual
looting. They must be geared into the economy of Russia. This is what
Germain speaks of when he refers to the Russian aim of “structural
assimilation.” What will these “assimilated” states be other
than “children” of the Russian bureaucratic collectivist system?
E.R. Frank, in his study of the buffer-states, admits that
Yugoslavia looks terribly much like Russia already, though he also
gags at calling it one of the “children.”
If capitalism is everywhere in decline, it is at its most feeble
stage precisely in this buffer zone of Russia. Short of a war, this
territory is lost to capitalism. The latter system no longer has the
dynamism to make a comeback here. Certainly, Germain would be one of
the last to predict an economic resurgence of world capitalism that
would sweep over into these states. The only capitalist resurgence
that is possible lies along the path indicated by Truman’s
intervention in the Eastern Mediterranean – military might. Unless
the proletarian revolution intervenes with its solution to the
desperate situation of these nations, the vacuum will be filled by
Russian policy – ending in bureaucratic-totalitarian rule by a new
exploiting class that basis itself upon a nationalized economy.
But in France, too? mockingly asks Germain. Yes, the French
Stalinists, too, seek to develop bureaucratic class rule, and “if
God furnishes the occasion,” they will. This occasion, however, we
do not see in France today nor for a long time to come. If it
materializes, it will not only denote a crushing defeat of the
European proletariat at the hands of Stalinism but it will also be
the signal for the outbreak of the Russo-American war for world
supremacy.
Why should the fact that the French Stalinists seek bureaucratic
class rule of their own strike Germain as extremely preposterous? He
should be well acquainted with the following quotation:
The predominating type among the present “Communist”
bureaucrats is the political careerist, and in consequence the polar
opposite of the revolutionist. Their ideal is to attain in their own
country the same position that the Kremlin oligarchy gained in the
USSR. They are not the revolutionary leaders of the proletariat but
aspirants to totalitarian rule. They dream of gaining success with
the aid of this same Soviet bureaucracy and its GPU. They view with
admiration and envy the invasion of Poland, Finland, the Baltic
states, Bessarabia by the Red Army because these invasions
immediately bring about the transfer of power into the hands of the
local Stalinist candidates for totalitarian rule. (Leon Trotsky, [The Comintern and the GPU], The
Fourth International, November 1940)
You see, this “strange ‘sociology: which continues out of
laziness of thought to call itself ‘Marxist’” did not even
originate with us! We deem it far less “strange” than that
sociology which sees the class aim of the bureaucracy of the
“workers’ state” to be the rebuilding of the “bourgeois
Polish State apparatus” by means of nationalizing the economy and
partitioning the land. We cannot refrain from noting that the Russian
bureaucracy, no doubt, does this “intentionally” to help poor
Germain resolve the many theoretical contradictions he finds himself in.
 
Shachtman’s View in 1941
But Shachtman did not say that the Russian state could produce
children when he first developed his theory of bureaucratic
collectivism in 1941, complains Germain. This is not entirely true.
For the Russian state already had produced several children by that
time. Esthonia, Latvia and Lithuania were small nations but they were
nations nevertheless and as capitalist as many another. Russian
occupation, however, did not “rapidly rebuild a bourgeois
[Esthonian, Latvian or Lithuanian] state apparatus.” It recast
these nations in its own image of bureaucratic collectivism, or as
Germain would have it, it “structurally assimilated” them. The
assimilation has been so thorough that these nations have almost
passed out of the memory of mankind.
Shachtman would have flown in the face of well-known facts (and
facts which helped his case rather than weakened it) to deny that
bureaucratic collectivism in Russia could have offspring. What our
resolution on Russia in 1941 did say was that the Second World War
would be decisive in the great contest between the proletariat and
the bourgeoisie and that regardless of which won, the bureaucratic
collectivist class would have an equally limited future. History has
proven that we were one-sided and therefore wrong on this score. We
were wrong not because we believed in the theory of bureaucratic
collectivism, but because we did not fully comprehend and develop all
the ramifications of this theory and continued to operate on many of
the false concepts laid down by Trotsky on the Russian question. The
result of the war was (a) the failure of t!le proletarian
revolutionary wave to reach even the heights of 1917–23, (b) the
terrible disorganization and disintegration of capitalism in Europe
and (c) the emergence of Russia as the second greatest world power,
supported in Europe by mass Stalinist parties. Rather than a limited
future, bureaucratic collectivism today enters the lists as a
powerful contender against both capitalism and the proletarian
revolution. We took note of this changed relationship in the
International Resolution of our party convention of May 1946 and stated that the future of bureaucratic collectivism was not
absolutely decided but would be resolved in struggle. We seek to
effect the outcome of this struggle by being active participants.
That is why we remain unrattled when Germain, after noting that we
see Poland as the pattern for the other states of the buffer zone,
asks: “Does he [Shachtman] perhaps think that King Michael finds
himself at the head of – a bureaucratic state?” A pattern
according to the dictionary is “anything cut out or formed into
shape to be copied.” Stalin works with the easiest material
first, i.e., Poland and Yugoslavia. Rumania, together with King
Michael, will have their turn in being cut to the pattern. Meanwhile
Stalin has use for King Michael – who has about as much power in
Rumanian affairs as Kalinin had in Russia, a good deal less, in fact.
Stalin has use for all kinds of conscious and unconscious
collaborators – from the Metropolitan of the Holy Synod in Moscow
to those who call upon the Polish masses to defend the Stalinist
police regime against the bourgeois democratic peasant movement. As
to the number of countries in which, and the extent to which, the
“pattern” will be used, this – we repeat – will be decided
iIn struggle.

(The concluding portion of this article will appear in our next issue. It will deal with the struggle for democratic rights, the
relative value of nationalization, the national question, the
question of class criteria, the two lines in practice and the
international power relations involved in the Polish situation.)

Footnotes
1. Throughout the article, Germain
chooses to speak of “Shachtman” rather than the Workers Party.
thus giving the impression of a polemic directed against an
individual rather than a party which represents a counter-position to
that of the majority in the international movement; e.g., “The
Shachtmanite thesis and the thesis of the Fourth International.” We
suspect that Germain is unconsciously expressing a view found in some
quarters of the movement that parties are merely appendages to
“leaders.” Though Shachtman has not had occasion to write on the
Polish question, he is in full accord with the party position, which,
of course, flows from its basic views on the Russian and national questions.
2. Since we are dealing with Poland,
one of the “buffer” states we will refrain from dealing with the
question of the nature of Stalinism in the capitalist world in this article.
 



The editors of The New International seek to edit it in the
spirit of free scientific inquiry within the general framework of
Marxist thought. As a result, there is no effort to counterpose “an
official” view in reply to every aspect of a subject dealt with in
a signed article. This is above all true where the subject matter is
not directly related to current political questions as in the fields
of history, philosophy, anthropology, literature, psychoanalysis,
economic theory, etc. Where the general line of an article is in
direct conflict with the view represented by the magazine, it is
published under the heading of “discussion article.” The general
line of the articles by A. Rudzienski on the problems of the Polish
labor movement is in accord with the views we have expressed
editorially (September 1946), as well as with the views expressed regularly in Labor Action. The specific criticisms made in the
above letter by Edward Findley will, no doubt, be dealt with directly
by the author of the articles in question. However, in view of the
seriousness of the charges, we will express our views on several of
the questions which deal with matters of known fact or of general
political concepts.
The real facts of the Kielce pogrom are not yet established in
detail. This can only be done by an international commission of
investigation representing various tendencies of the labor movement
and having authority to conduct an inquiry on the spot, including
access to all pertinent documents relating to the incident. What is
known about Kielce is what Findley himself records in his letter. The
central fact which refers to the question of the Stalinists’ guilt
is contained in Findley’s parenthetical insertion, “... tortured
to death several dozen Jews (who had been disarmed and turned over to
the mob by the Stalinist militia).” The responsibility of providing
protection to persecuted citizens rests in the first place upon the
authorities. If the Stalinist militia, the main armed force for the
preservation of “law and order,” turned the Jews over to the mob,
the guilt of the Stalinist regime should be considered established
beyond a doubt. Their participation in the pogrom must be considered
to have been explicit. To the extent that the political opposition,
mainly the Peasant Party, was in a position to intervene against the
pogromists and did not, they too bear the guilt for the barbarous
spectacle. However, it is exceedingly difficult to establish the
facts about the role of the Peasant Party. Here above all we have no
facts, only surmises, like Findley’s about the influence of the
Mikalyczyk movement in the area. The guilt of the Stalinist militia,
however, is established.
The fact that the workers struck in protest against the execution
of the “nine lynch mob leaders” cannot be accepted as evidence of
anti-Semitism. It must first be established that the persons executed
were the guilty ones. We would be most foolish to accept the word of
the Warsaw regime for this. If the local Stalinist militia was guilty
of turning the victims over to the mob, why should we believe that
their Warsaw chiefs dealt even-handed justice in seeking out the
pogromists? Is there not extreme plausibility on the side of
Rudzienski’s charge that the Stalinist agent provocateurs stir up
the pogroms and that the Stalinist police utilize them as an occasion
to frame up and liquidate political oppositionists? Is it not
possible that the strikes were on behalf of victims of Beirut’s GPU
and not in defense of pogromists?
We know from all experiences with pogroms and lynchings throughout
history that the actual participation in the mob actions usually
embraces an infinitesimal percentage of the population. That the
actual participants also usually have the sympathy of wider circles
goes without saying. But even these wider circles need not represent
more than a minority of the population.
Rudzienski has never denied the prevalence of anti-Semitism in
Poland. On the contrary, his articles have sought to trace this
characteristic of Polish life to its historic sources. What he did
contend was that the anti-Semitism of the Polish people as a whole,
and of the Polish working class especially, was greatly exaggerated
in the minds of people in Western Europe and America. The role which
Polish anti-Semitism has played in active political life is related,
as in other countries, to the amount of encouragement or tolerance it
receives from the authorities. In this sense, Rudzienski’s view
that the revival of active anti-Semitism is the result of artificial
stimulation through Stalinist channels does not deny the prior
existence of anti-Semitism among the people, especially the petty
bourgeoisie.
Nor does existence of Jews in prominent posts of the Stalinist
regime preclude an anti-Semitic role on the part of the latter. We
need but read the record of the Nazi occupation in Poland to realize
that among the Jews, as among all peoples, were found those elements
who faithfully served as Gestapo agents even though they knew that
they were assisting in the extermination of their own people. The
Jewish police of the Ghetto continued to carry out the task of
rounding up the deportees for the death camps even when their own
families were no longer immune, according to Marek Edelman in The
Ghetto Fights. Why should we expect protests from Jews in the
Warsaw regime who are either old-time Stalinist hacks, devoid of any
moral concepts other than those of the Kremlin machine, or
broken-down and exhausted ex-reformists who want nothing but the
peace and security they hope for in a government post? Trotsky has
had occasion to refer to the fact that Stalin was not above utilizing
undercover anti-Semitism in his fight against the Opposition,
especially where the continual reference to the Jewish names of
prominent Oppositionists and their alleged anti-peasant program would
line up support for Stalin in the countryside. The following
quotation is of interest in this regard:
“On February 27th in Jerusalem the Jewish daily,
Hadashot Haerew, denounced the growth of anti-Semitism in the
USSR. The Soviet authorities appear to ‘object’ to this
anti-Semitism, but in reality the Jews see themselves passed over in
a thousand ways. For instance, entry to the schools which train
Soviet diplomats is practically barred to Jews, as only persons
originating from the National Republics are admitted. In practice,
people have to be of Russian origin to be considered as originating
from a National Republic. In the domain of literature and the cinema,
frequently subjects are chosen which are likely to evoke the old
anti-Semitic prejudices. For instance, it has become a popular theme
to extol Bohdan Chmielnicki on the screen and in books. It is well
known that Bohdan Chmielnicki, who lived in the 16th century in the
Ukraine, ardently persecuted the Jews.
“That anti-Semitism survived in Russians who have known
the old regime is a phenomenon by itself; but the fact that it also
exists among the younger generation is even more astonishing. It is
true that the awakening of a certain anti-Semitism seems called forth
by recent press and film propaganda.
“‘Naturally this novel form of anti-Semitism provokes
reactions among the Jews of the USSR. That is why, for instance, no
more mixed marriages are being contracted.’” (East Europe,
March 12, 1947, London.)
Without knowing the political tendency of Hadashot Haerew nor
the accuracy of their reference to mixed marriages, we know from the
whole trend of Russian nationalism and Great Russian chauvinism that
Stalinism is not at all immune to the practices referred to. Who
would deny that in a period of crisis the Kremlin would not resort to
pogrom as a means of diverting mass discontent that would threaten
the regime, even as the Czars did? The last thing that would stand in
the way of those who have the blood of millions of innocent people on
their hands would be moral scruples. Then why is it not likely that
the Stalinist machine in Poland, where it confronts a mass
opposition, engineers events like the Kielce pogroms for its own
political purposes? To determine the role of NSZ bands from the
forests or to analyze the extent of anti-Semitism among people is
important. But it must not obscure the fact that the prime guilt is
upon the heads of the Warsaw regime.
Findley’s challenge to Rudzienski “to cite specific acts of
material aid to the Warsaw ghetto fighters” on the part of the
Polish underground reveals an astounding lack of information about
the Ghetto uprising on the part of one whose contributions in the
pages of our press have been so rich in factual material on Jewish
political problems. All accounts of the Ghetto battle establish that
the Ghetto fighters were armed entirely from the outside. Their chief
supplies of arms, as well as military instructors and advisers, came
from the underground Polish Socialist Party.
Mary Berg’s Warsaw Ghetto, written as a diary of her
experiences as an inhabitant of the Ghetto and an internee in a
Ghetto prison, speaks bitterly about the failure of the Polish
population to give more aid to the Jewish victims of their common
oppressor. Her bitterness seems restrained when one considers the
circumstances under which she wrote it. Yet one must weigh the
failure of more Poles to conceal Jews in their homes at the risk of
their own lives (and the hiding of someone in a city apartment for
years is not easy) against the operation of this same instinct of
self-preservation among the Jews themselves, above all the hostility
of the Jewish community during its first two years against those in
its midst who carried on a counter-terror against the Gestapo. Their
hostility was born of a fear of Gestapo reprisals against the
community as a whole. But even Mary Berg’s account, that of a
young, unpolitical observer, repeatedly exonerates the Polish working
class movement from her accusations against the Polish population at large.
 






This is the third in a series of articles by Ernest Erber in reply to Charles E. Wilson, president of General Motors, on the arguments made by him in behalf of capitalism in his article, You’ve Got to Make a Profit, which first appeared in Collier’s and has since been reprinted in many corporation house organs for the “benefit” of their employees. – Editor



*
“The capitalist type of economy is the one best fitted to function in a democracy, because capitalism, like democracy, is a system which places great value on the individual.”
This argument of Wilson’s has become the ace-in-the-hole in the current crop of capitalist apologetics. It adds up to saying that the preservation of democracy requires the preservation of capitalism, or that freedom is only possible under capitalism.
It is quite obvious why this became a favorite argument in behalf of capitalism in recent years. Ever since Stalinist despotism arose in Russia and fascism conquered in most of the rest of Europe, the defenders of capitalism have sought to create the illusion that political democracy has survived in the United States due to the existence of the capitalist economic system.
That capitalism was overthrown by the Russian Revolution and that it has not been restored by the victory of the Stalinist counter-revolution is quite obvious. That is why the apologists of capitalism are so anxious to point to Russia and say, “Look! That is what results from tampering with capitalism.” (We will deal with this argument under a separate heading.)
But this argument would fall flat on the ground if one were to realize that equally brutal dictatorships have arisen in capitalist countries and have flourished on the basis of capitalism. This is, of course, what happened in Germany, Italy, Spain and other countries of Europe. It is therefore necessary for the apologists of capitalism to create the concept that regimes like Hitler’s and Mussolini’s were “anti-capitalist.”
That is why capitalist propaganda in this country sought to disown Hitler and Mussolini, especially when it became evident in the late 30’s that the United States would be lined up against Germany and Italy in the coming war. That is why the American press sought to picture Hitler as some sort of a “socialist” who was at swords’ points with the German capitalists. They eagerly accepted Hitler at his word and helped spread the illusion he sought to create by calling himself a “National Socialist” and by denouncing the “international bankers.” This was, of course, intended to make himself popular with the German masses.
The real Socialists of Germany were either killed or kept in concentration camps and the big bankers of Germany cooperated profitably with the Nazi regime. Only Jewish bankers or industrialists were expropriated, their wealth going to Nazi favorites and the elimination of Jewish capitalists helping their Gentile competitors.
 
Hitler And Capitalism Got Along Well
The truth is that Hitler and capitalism got along well. Far from being an enemy of the capitalists, Hitler was financed by the biggest industrial and banking combines in Germany. They viewed him as the savior of German capitalism from a communist revolution. His regime did nothing that basically affected the operation of capitalism. On the contrary, he made Germany a capitalist’s paradise by dissolving the unions and workers’ political organizations and creating the Labor Front, a huge “company union” to which every worker was forced to belong.
The strict government controls which the Nazi regime established over industry were not much different from those which existed in this country under the war economy. German capitalists, like their American cousins, grumbled about shortages, priorities, manpower controls, etc., but German capitalists, like their American cousins, made billions in profits out of the war. If the German controls were stricter and more far-reaching, it was only because the strains of the war upon German economy were much greater than in the United States. The right of German capitalists to own productive property and to exploit the workers was neither abolished nor curbed. Fascism was a different political system than had prevailed previously in Germany and Italy, when these nations operated under parliamentary democracies. But fascism was not a different economic system; it was still capitalism.
We can therefore see that, contrary to Wilson’s assertion about capitalism being the type of economy that is “best fitted to function in a democracy,” the capitalists of Germany and Italy preferred fascist tyranny as the political system best suited for capitalism.
Does it therefore follow that all capitalists prefer fascism? No, such is not the case. Capitalists prefer political democracy – as long as it suits THEIR interests. But when capitalism breaks down in an economic crisis and when the political situation threatens to undermine capitalist institutions, the capitalists eagerly look for a Hitler or a Mussolini who will save their system by “putting labor in its place.”
But since economic crises are inescapable under capitalism and since they bring anti-capitalist political movements in their wake and since these cause the capitalists to see their salvation in fascism, it becomes evident that sooner or later capitalism and democracy prove to be incompatible.
Contrary to Wilson’s argument that only capitalism can give us freedom and democracy, we can see from the history of the last twenty-five years that the continued existence of capitalism is guaranteed to give us the barbarian and bestial rule of fascism.
 
Capitalism and Democracy Clash
Though the contradiction between capitalism and democracy is fundamental, only time and events, however, bring it to the surface where it becomes obvious to everyone. When we live under a mixture of capitalism and democracy, as we do in the United States today, the effects of this contradiction remain latent. Compared to past social orders and to other countries of the world, we enjoy a considerable range of political freedom. Yet the possibility of using this political freedom to affect the course of politics in this country steadily diminishes. When the population of this country was composed overwhelmingly of farmers who owned their land, of small business men, and of craftsmen who worked with their own tools, political democracy was an effective means by which the mass of the people could influence the course of government. Today, however, the great concentration of wealth at one pole and the huge mass of wage earners at the other, has confronted the nation with fundamental economic questions as the primary problem.
These economic questions cannot be solved within the framework of capitalism. If political democracy is to have any meaning today, it must take its meaning in the struggle to overthrow capitalism. If it does not, capitalism will overthrow political democracy. The two cannot live side by side forever. The worker cannot remain a free citizen with freedom to read what he pleases, speak his mind as he pleases and vote as he pleases during part of the day, while being a wage slave whose every minute is ordered by an autocratic hierarchy of corporation officials from the moment he punches his time clock.
Eugene V. Debs, tireless tribune of the early Socialist movement in this country, was fond of paraphrasing Lincoln and saying that this country would not remain half free and half slave; either the workers will utilize their political democracy to overthrow capitalism and carry democracy into economic life, or the capitalists will overthrow political democracy and carry their industrial dictatorship into political life.
 
Capitalism and the Individual
“Capitalism ... is a system which places great value on the individual,” says Wilson. This would be a great joke if it were not at the expense of the workers. An article entitled Labor Isn’t Striking for Money in a recent issue of Magazine Digest makes a point that has rarely appeared in the capitalist press. The article points out that capitalism (it does not, of course, use that term) has robbed the worker of his dignity as a human being and made him into little more than an adjunct of the machine. It quotes from another source to say the following:
“The worker hates to feel himself the prisoner of a timecard. Over his name, in the timecard, in much larger numerals, is his factory number. Nobody know’s Joe Worker’s last name, except the fellow in Department No. 6 who bowls with him Friday nights. Even his pay is handed to him in an envelope addressed by number only.”
The article goes on to describe how workers are bullied by foremen unless they have the protection of a strong union. It then describes the piecework and quota system and says: “There is not much incentive to beating the quota for so many pieces a day, except that if he’s low man he’ll probably be fired.” It then continues to point out the effects of monotony resulting from doing the same operation over and over again, the fear of unemployment due to labor saving devices, advancing age or depressions, etc.
The above true picture of the worker’s real life under capitalism should be sufficient to indicate how great a value capitalism places upon the individual. (If Mr. Wilson meant the individual capitalist, we are of course on the wrong track and have to grant that he has a point.)
Capitalism means neither democracy nor individualism. It dehumanizes a man on the job and turns him into an automaton of production. In order to protect its right to thus exploit labor, capitalists will eagerly abolish democracy and make of man also an automaton of a fascist state.
 



Part 1

Part 2

Part 3
 



You’ve Got to Make a Profit is the breezy title of an article that appears under the by-line of C.E. Wilson, president of General Motors Corporation, that first appeared in the November 9, 1946 issue of Colliers and has since been reprinted in various corporation house organs for distribution to their employees. The widespread popularity of the article with corporation heads is well merited. It is one of the slickest pieces of sophistry in defense of capitalism to come down the pike in a long time. Its real author, G. Edward Pendray, reveals exceptional talent as a pen-prostitute of Big Business. But it is slick only on a quick reading. Above all, if you don’t stop to think about a question or two while skimming through it.
It is interesting to note at the outset that this article carries to its peak the seemingly hard-headed, practical, dollars-and-cents argument. Like many other recent apologies for capitalism, it is a far cry from the old days when capitalism was defended solely by allegedly moral arguments about the “rights” of the owner of capital. The new approach, pioneered I believe by Johnston, former head of the United States Chamber of Commerce, takes the line that a private property, profit economy is the only way in which industry can be operated without a tremendous government bureaucracy which causes blunders and waste and suppresses all criticism, thereby stifling all freedom and democracy. Profits, we are told, are all that stand between us and a wasteful, despotic rule by bureaucracy.
 
Why the New Approach?
It is interesting to analyze what has caused this shift in approach on the part of the hired brains of capitalism. The shift can be traced to these two principle factors: (1) the breakdown of capitalism on a world scale which has placed its defenders on the defensive and (2) the living example of Stalinist Russia as a system where a governmental bureaucracy has taken the place of capitalist exploiters.
The worldwide breakdown of capitalism, beginning with the world crisis of 1929–39 and continuing through the destructiveness of World War II, has changed the argument of Socialism vs. Capitalism from an academic one into a problem of every-day politics. The economic breakdown everywhere brought in its wake varying degrees of governmental intervention to prevent complete paralysis and revolutionary upheavals. Capitalists in the United States were glad to submit to the early New Deal measures to bring stability into the rapidly disintegrating economy. In Germany, the capitalists found it necessary to tolerate the assumption to power of Hitler and bow their necks to his regimentation of finance and industry in order to save the system as a whole.
 
The Effects of Stalinism
World War II left such economic dislocation in its wake in Europe that the prospects of rehabilitation under private capital were not believed in by anyone, not even the capitalists themselves. Not only in Eastern Europe, under Russian domination, but in Western Europe as well, nationalization of various enterprises has been a feature of political life in nearly every country. This tendency has even effected the colonial and semi-colonial countries of the world such as Indonesia, Indo-China, China, Argentina and Mexico. The result of this world trend, together with the effects of the New Deal and the war economy, have made American capitalists very uneasy about the future of “free enterprise” in this country.
The existence of Stalinist totalitarianism in Russia has permitted the capitalist apologists to take the propaganda line that nationalised economy and despotism go together. (In this they have been supported by many erstwhile Socialists who, like Max Eastman, make the same point or who, like many leaders of the Socialist Party, seek salvation in a “mixed economy,” that is, one with enough capitalism left to save our liberties from a state bureaucracy.) Workers who were unimpressed by the earlier propaganda attacks upon Russia which featured “free love,” “dividing up,” the religious question, etc., are greatly impressed by the growing realization that the dictatorial regime of the Kremlin is not lessening but, rather, perpetuating itself and spreading to the occupied countries. The defenders of capitalism in the U.S., therefore, do not compare their system with Socialism but rather with the bureaucratic collectivist regime of Russia today. Their argument is: “Look at Russia. That’s what comes of tampering with the profit-system.”
The article reveals the consciousness of being on the defensive in its very opening sentence. It begins, “Admittedly this is an article about an unpopular subject. But in my experience Americans will always give attention to a subject, however unpopular, if it effects them deeply.” Today one can speak of capitalist apologists in the most literal sense!
We want to make one more general observation about the general approach now current. The stupendous wartime profits of Big Business have left their mark on public thought despite the efforts of capitalists to conceal them. Profits and profiteering appear in the public mind as unsavory subjects. They are also linked to the question of high prices, and all the propaganda to the effect that wage increases are the impetus to inflation has not absolved profits. This public attitude toward profits is another reason why the defenders of capitalism have dropped the “moral” arguments and shifted to posing, profits as a necessary evil – but a lesser evil than bureaucratic despotism.
In next week’s article we will proceed to a direct refutation of the slick arguments which Wilson-Pendray serve up for the unsuspecting reader.
 



In last week’s article, devoted to answering the slick defense of capitalism contained in Charles E. Wilson’s You’ve Got to Make a Profit, we discussed the change in approach used by recent apologists for capitalism. We pointed out that the article by the president of General Motors Corporation followed the current line of avoiding pleas based on the “moral rights” of a capitalist to make a profit and based itself upon the contention that a high standard of living and freedom from governmental despotism were assured only by the profit system.
Today we wish to take up the specific arguments adduced by Wilson in support of his contention. We will seek to list them and discuss them, one by one.
 
Argument Number One
Capitalism has developed this country and given the people the highest standard of living in the world.
The facts in this statement cannot be argued with. It is true that (1) capitalism is the economic system under which the United States developed and (2) the standard of living of the people in this country is, today, the highest in the world. But what follows from citing these facts? For the defenders of capitalism, the mere citing of these facts seems tantamount to saying that: therefore, it follows that capitalism is the best economic system for the American people.
But why does this follow? If the capitalists had used the same logic when discussing technical improvements, they would never have shown any progress. For instance, when the dynamo was developed and proposed as an improvement over the steam engine, why did not the capitalist say: “The steam engine has built the economy of this country, it has given us the greatest profits in the world, we refuse to consider any other method of supplying power to our factories”? Or when the automobile came along, why did it not make just as much sense to point out that the country had made great strides with the ox-cart, the covered wagon and the buggy?
To say that capitalism has developed this country does not constitute proof that (1) another system might not have developed it more, or (2) that at a certain point in the country ‘s development a more efficient system might not have become possible, or (3) that though capitalism developed the country in the past, it is capable of further development.
It is the same with the argument about the “highest standard of living in the world.” To say that we have the highest standard of living in the world does not constitute proof that (1) it could not be higher, or (2) that it is not abysmally low when compared with our economic potential, or (3) that the reason for its being high might be found in the fact that the rest of the world’s standard of living is low as a result of American exploitation.
No doubt, in ancient-times when slaves complained, about hard work and poor food they were reminded that slavery was the best system man had yet devised. After all, great cities were built and the land was brought under cultivation by the slave system. Before man had developed slavery, captives went into the stew for Sunday dinner (or the pagan equivalent). Now they were permitted to live and to work in building up the country. And no one could deny that the wretched quarters of the slave and his meager fare were better than living in a cave and going hungry much of the time. We are sure that some day archeologists will unearth a stone tablet of the Egyptian Chamber of Commerce which makes precisely this argument. As a matter of fact, the Old Testament tells how, after the Hebrews had left Egypt for the freedom of the desert and suffered hungry days and nights, some of them began to long for the “flesh-pots” of Egypt, even as slaves.
 
The Nature of Progress
When Europe stabilized itself on the basis of feudalism, following the breakdown of the Roman Empire and the dissolution of the slave economy, the philosophers of the time pointed to the virtues of the feudal system and considered it the perfect social order for mankind. If the lot of the serf was a hard one, it was most certainly a more tolerable one than that of the slave in ancient times. If some agitators preached liberation of the serfs, as many did in Germany during the sixteenth century, and insisted that it was possible to till the soil without either serfdom or slavery, they were denounced as dreamers and dangerous persons, whose proposals would lead to the destruction of civilization.
We can see, therefore, that the arguments of the capitalist apologists are merely a repetition of the false logic of every previous ruling class. The privileged strata in society shrinks from the thought that, perhaps, like previous social systems, theirs too will pass away and be replaced by another. To accept capitalism as another transitory stage in the development of social institutions is to accept the idea that their privileges will some day end. The acceptance of this notion is, therefore, tantamount to accepting their defeat as inevitable. That is why not only every means of popular propaganda but also every phase of social science must be moulded to the purpose of teaching the perfection and permanence of capitalism. This theme is to be found in all the social sciences from political economy to anthropology, as well as in jurisprudence, philosophy and the arts.
We want to make one more observation on the argument about capitalism having built up this country and given the people a high standard of living. This is to observe that the capitalist apologists take a personal pride in this achievement. Why they should is a mystery. They do not maintain that the economy of this country was developed because the capitalists had that aim in mind. There was nothing purposeful about it. All that happened, they say, is that every capitalist kept his nose in his own business and sought to build it up as big as possible in order to make more profit. If he could, he bankrupted his competitor, cheated the government and robbed the consumer—not to speak here about the treatment accorded to his workers. If the economy developed blindly as a by-product of this mad pursuit for profit, why should anyone take pride in it? It is as if the bees who flit from flower to flower were to insist that the purpose of their flitting was not to extract the nectar but to carry the pollen from plant to plant as a disinterested service to horticulture.
 
Relative Nature of Perfection
It is also necessary to consider that the United States is today the only nation in the world where capitalism continues in a somewhat working order. If the capitalist system is so perfect, why have not other nations continued to prosper under it? Or is there something in the American climate or soil or blood stream that makes this country an exception? It is our contention that capitalism has a firmer foundation in the United States than elsewhere for a whole series of historical reasons. However, historical reasons, mean that the factors which have given stability to capitalism in this country are not permanent, have undergone change and continue to undergo change. These changes are steadily undermining the foundations of American capitalism as they did those of capitalism in Europe, its original stronghold. Witness the crisis of 1929–39. That is why we say that the condition of capitalism in Europe today shows us the face of American capitalism tomorrow.
A last word on the much publicized “American standard of living.” It would be folly to deny that the bulk of the American workers live better than those of Europe, even if we use the pre-war period as the basis of comparison. But this does not mean that there are not millions of American workers who live on a European standard of living. When the fact that American workers own automobiles is pointed out, it must also be remembered that a majority of them do not own automobiles. Thousands of coal miners, even with their recently increased income, are forced to live in clapboard shacks owned by the coal companies. The low standard of living of sharecroppers and fruitpickers is well known. It is an illusion of the worst kind to take Detroit automobile workers, who stand near the top of the wage scale, and think of them as TYPICAL of the American workers’ standard of living.
And even if all workers in this country earned what the upper third of them do today, what follows? “High” and “low” are only relative concepts. Pacific islanders who happened to live on an island with exceptionally fertile yam patches thought they enjoyed a “high” standard of living. They did, in comparison with their poorer neighbors. But when the American troops came and permitted them to pick through the garbage from the mess hall, they considered it a feast.
It is our contention that the planned economy of socialism, based on production for use and not for a profit, will make the highly-touted “American standard of living” of today seem primitive by comparison.
(We will take up Wilson’s second argument next week.)
 



Irving Howe’s article, Reviewing the New Course (The New International, September 1946), sets itself the task of an historical criticism of Trotsky’s role during the 1920–23 period in Russia “in order to learn certain lessons for the future ...” The investigation of this crucial period of the Revolution in the light of subsequent historical development is long overdue and any student of Marxism who applies himself to this problem is to be commended for that fact alone. Unfortunately, in the case of Howe’s article our commendations cannot go beyond this, for its results, as we shall seek to demonstrate, add little or nothing to our understanding of the problems involved.
This is all the more regrettable because of the vast importance which the 1920–23 period of Russian history has retrospectively assumed for all thinking Marxists and because, so little has been produced in the way of solid research and serious analysis, though there has been no lack of superficial and impressionistic comment.
The significance of this period arises from the fact that it covers the transitional years between the end of the Civil War and the beginning of Stalin’s real domination, thus composing the critical period of the Revolution. The tendency toward limiting democracy in the party and the Soviets before 1920 can be traced to the necessity of an overriding centralism and an iron discipline without which the military victory would have been impossible. The continued limitations of democracy after 1923 can be traced to the bureaucratic straight jacket imposed upon the party by the Stalin apparatus. The question that remains to be answered definitively is: what took place in Russia between 1920 and 1923 that prevented a relaxation of the exceptional discipline and extraordinary centralism which, as we now know, served the bureaucracy as points of support in the consolidation of power?
This appraisal of the 1920–23 period is not altered by the fact that the failure of the proletariat to take power in the advanced countries doomed the Russian Revolution regardless of its internal development. The only perspective for the Russian Revolution after 1920 was to maintain itself intact until such a time as a favorable situation would permit a successful revolution elsewhere. However, the very chances of a successful revolution in the West were dependent upon a revolutionary policy and leadership in the Communist International. The latter, in turn, was only possible if the leading party of the CI, the Russian, did not degenerate and deflect the international movement from its revolutionary course. We need but point to the effect which the newly created Stalin-Zinoviev leadership in the Russian party had upon the fatal course pursued by the German Communists during the 1923 crisis.
Compared to the Russian Revolution, the Paris Commune of 1871 had even less possibility of maintaining itself. However, this did not detract from its immense value to Marxist theory as the first “laboratory case” of proletarian state power. The analysis of the Commune by several generations of Marxist thinkers richly fructified revolutionary theory and, in the case of the Bolsheviks, revolutionary practice.
The great value of the Commune for Marxist theory was not that it proved that the workers’ power could not survive under the given economic and political conditions of Paris, of France, and of the international situation. It was, rather, that the experience of the Commune revealed what in the methods and policy of the Commune had facilitated its downfall. The pointed relevance of the 1920–23 period in Russia for our times consists in the fact that it, more than any other period of the Russian experience, has most to teach us about those aspects of the methods and policies of the Revolution which facilitated its strangulation at the hands of the bureaucracy. These are the “lessons for the future” of which Howe speaks. But the realization of this aim requires as a pre-requisite a serious analysis of the Russian experience, concentrating upon 1920–23. Our investigations to date can be said to have only scratched the surface when compared with the work done on the much more limited experience of the Commune.
One of the prime causes for the meager results obtained from the Russian events in the way of contributions to our understanding of the relationship of democracy to central authority in a workers’ state is the methodology of most of the investigators. Seemingly so simple, the problem of learning lessons for the future is really a complicated pursuit, fraught with pitfalls for the unwary investigator. We need but refer to the fact that much of what the Bolsheviks did in Russia which is now under scrutiny was based on lessons they had learned from the Commune.
Howe begins and ends his article with a discussion of the methodology of historical investigation. He begins by stating that there are two approaches which can be used. One is to consider the subject (in this case, Trotsky’s The New Course) in the context in which it was written. The other is a “projection out of the specific historical context; it can be a movement forward in time, away from the context of the book’s creation and toward whatever relevance it has for new situations different from the original context.” Howe then states that he proposes to use both methods and that “the two methods will yield slightly variant results.” Just what is meant by the latter is not made clear. Nor are we told whether the use of both methods is incumbent upon every investigator or whether he can choose one or the other. Even if he uses both methods, he would have to choose between the “slightly variant results.” Or is there some way in which these results can be synthesized? We venture to guess that the reason why the text gives no explanation of either how the results vary or of their relationship to each other was because the author was confused by the question of method and did not think it through to clarify his confusion.
In his concluding paragraphs, Howe once more returns to explaining his method. Though he now mentions that “it is necessary to understand both in and out of context,” [1] he seeks to explain only why an “out of context” method is permissible. This is not accidental for nowhere in the body of his article does Howe use any other method – nowhere does he deal with Trotsky’s role within the historical context.
After having employed the “out of context” approach throughout the article and after having defended its use, Howe makes the following amazing admission: “In that sense, we try – never successfully, for the effort is self-contradictory – to move backwards in time and imagine ourselves in a situation of the past.” (our emphasis – E.E.) But if it cannot be done successfully and if the effort is self-contradictory, of what value is it? Does, not this sentence knock over Howe’s entire construction of an “out of context” method and, consequently, prejudice the results obtained by this method?
Aware of this, but obviously very confused, Howe beats a hasty – but only momentary – retreat. In the very next sentence he writes:
Even in that limited sense, I believe what I have written is valid for the following reasons: 1) There were Bolsheviks [2] even then who had this – what I consider – superior political conception; in that sense, the previous criticisms are not merely second guessing.
We do not know what “limited sense” Howe has in mind. If the method is “never successful” and if it is “self-contradictory,” how can it even have use in a “limited sense”? The reference to the alleged Bolsheviks who had a “superior political conception” is not a use of the “out of context” approach, not even in a limited sense. To speak of Bolshevik contemporaries of Trotsky who had a more correct political line is not to speak “out of context” but decidedly within it. (It is interesting to note that having failed to deal with Trotsky’s role in its historical context throughout the body of the article, Howe gives his sole argument related to the context of 1920–23 in the course of defending his methodology! If what he alleges is true, it would constitute a real contribution to the question. Aside from the question of whether the point is valid or not – upon which we will comment later, Howe’s method in this instance, however, is correct.) If these Bolsheviks had a superior political conception to that of Trotsky, why did not Howe review The New Course by counter-posing their political conceptions to those of Trotsky? Obviously, Howe does not know enough about them to permit this. But then how does he know that their conceptions were superior? It is far easier to counterpose Howe’s conceptions of 1946 (many of which are officially held by the Workers Party and some of which were accepted by Trotsky after 1923) to those of Trotsky of 1923.
 
Howe’s Carlylian Approach
But Howe is not satisfied in giving up so easily the “out of context” approach which he has used throughout the article. He, therefore, makes one last stab at justifying it. This last effort, however, proves his complete undoing, as we will demonstrate. Continuing to prove that the method has validity in a “limited sense,” Howe makes his next point:
2) We are writing about one of the titans of modern history, Leon Trotsky, a man of consummate and universal genius from whom we expect and have a right to expect insight superior to that of most people. It does not seem absurd to ask why Trotsky didn’t see what took ordinary mortals twenty additional years to see. The canons of criticism can be infinitely more severe in relation to a man of Trotsky’s stature than toward some one else.
We submit that within the above quoted sentences is contained the whole of Howe’s error in methodology, or, to put it differently, the above quotation carries to its logical absurdity the false approach used, throughout the article. From his object of “learn(ing) certain lessons for the future,” Howe becomes sidetracked into an appraisal of how much Trotsky should have foreseen. Or is Trotsky’s lack of foresight a “lesson tor the future”? What does it teach us? Certainly not that genius is unreliable. No one, least of all Trotsky, ever asked that men accept his genius as proof of his political views. If Trotsky should have foreseen twenty years (!) and failed to, what was obviously at fault? The answer is inescapable: his political theories. But Howe makes no investigation of these. [3] He takes refuge in what is a sheer Carlylian theory of the man of genius.
But why does Howe insist upon the genius of Trotsky? If Trotsky could see no further than ordinary mortals and less far than the alleged, but anonymous, contemporaries cited by Howe, is not his genius suspect? Does this not require that Howe be consistent in his Carlylianism and approach the question, not by arguing “since he was a genius he should have” but rather “if he were a genius he would have”?
Howe’s attempt to learn lessons for the future by being more severe with the genius Trotsky than with ordinary mortals gets us nowhere. It is not merely ineffective; it is also dangerous. Why cannot the same approach be used in the case of Lenin? He most certainly was also a “man of consummate and universal genius.” He should then have also foreseen. If Trotsky was expected to foresee the imminent possibility of unprecedented social development, should we not expect that Lenin should have at least foreseen that the Russian Revolution was doomed to isolation and defeat before he led the fight for power? To use Howe’s “out of context” method, why not ask: “Should Lenin have led the Revolution if he foresaw its imminent possibility of defeat with such dire consequences for the world?” The method is either nonsense or it leads to the inescapable conclusion that the Russian Revolution was a vast mistake.
But how can a writer as familiar with the Marxist theory of historical materialism have ended up as an historical idealist in practice? In our opinion, Howe fell victim to the methodological error of seeking to give an interpretation to the historic period in question by means of an analysis of Trotsky’s alleged mistakes rather than to consider Trotsky’s role within the context previously established through an historical materialist interpretation of the period. Historical criticism – which Howe says is the purpose of his article – can have no status independent of and unrelated to an historical materialist analysis of the period. This is the source of Howe’s confusion over the “in context” and “out of context” problem.
 
Question of Realistic Alternatives
To prove that a certain course followed by Trotsky, or certain specific decisions he made, played into the hands of the bureaucracy does not at all establish that we will not follow that course or make those decisions under similar circumstances. For it ay turn out that Trotsky had no realistic alternative that would have given better results. By the same token, we may have none. A certain course cannot be judged incorrect, therefore, merely because the results were bad. It can only be judged incorrect when it was chosen instead of a given, realistic alternative, which, in our opinion, would have given better results.
Let us, for example, take the case of the abolition of factions in 1920. Most certainly this proved a tremendous weapon in the hands of Stalin in his efforts to gain dominance over the party machine. But this result alone cannot be the basis of judging the abolition of factions as incorrect. What if it could be proven that the maintenance of the right of factions would have destroyed the unity of the party and made possible the victory of the bourgeois counter-revolution? It is my opinion that this cannot be proven. Yet, this is only an opinion until established by an analysis of the total situation at the time. Only if it can be proven on the basis of such an analysis that the maintenance of factions was the superior alternative can we proceed to consider Trotsky’s role in relation to it. Howe, however, proceeds from the assumption that since the abolition of factions strengthened Stalin, this alone proves that Trotsky should have waged a fight against it.
The danger of Howe’s approach is that it leads the revolutionist to see every problem solely from the point of view of the danger of Stalinist degeneration. Howe’s method leads to an indiscriminate rejection of everything that proved of value to Stalin in his fight for power. Implicit in this is the danger that the indiscriminate attempt to avoid the risk of bureaucratic degeneration can lead to disarming the revolution in the face of the bourgeoisie. The result would be that we would learn the lessons of bureaucratic domination so well that we would unlearn the lessons of internal weakness taught us at such cost by the Commune. That is why we must first make an analysis of the total situation at the time and then proceed to examine Trotsky’s role on the basis of realistic alternatives.
But at this point another factor enters into consideration: the factor of “knowability.” We cannot determine whether an alternative was realistic unless we consider what was “knowable” at the time. [4] To construct an alternative course on the basis of what we know today but could not have been known in the given instance is not to counterpose a realistic alternative but to consider the situation “out of context” in the manner of Howe and with the same dire consequences.
If one were to discard the question of “knowability,” the student of the Napoleonic campaigns could project himself backwards and, considering his subject out of context, could say: “If I had been in command at Waterloo, I would have sent an armored column to attack the flank.” Howe will, no doubt, object that it is not valid to make this example analogous to his “out of context” criticism of Trotsky on the ground that tanks are the product of a given historical period and cannot enter into the consideration of another one. But are ideas any the less the product of their times? Since the ideas which Trotsky.proceeded from in his battle against bureaucratism are at stake in this discussion, can we contribute to our understanding by criticizing the Trotsky of 1923 for not using the ideas of 1946 (or 1948, if we use Howe’s standard of measure for genius)?
Is Howe not demanding that Trotsky use “tanks at Waterloo” when he asks that Trotsky in 1923 foresee bureaucratic collectivism?
There is a tremendous difference between identifying the early roots of a familiar phenomenon and identifying the roots of something that has not yet been definitely catalogued (in the case of bureaucratic collectivism, not even today, some twenty-three years later). Now that history has demonstrated the possibility of bureaucratic developments leading to a Stalinist growth, our task of identifying the Stalinist incubus is far easier. But even for us, the task is still extremely difficult. We certainly cannot fight every bureaucratic manifestation as if it were full-blown Stalinism, nor as we have pointed out, can we shy away from every policy or method which proved of assistance to Stalin in gaining power. Howe would certainly not demand that Trotsky, even with the knowledge that bureaucratic collectivism was in the cards, have given critical support to Mikolajczyk against “Stalinism” in 1923. Thus even historical foresight would not have resolved the problem of what tactics to use in the fight against the Stalinism of 1923 (which, by the way, had not yet even formulated the theory of “socialism in one country”).
Even if we definitely establish that Trotsky erred by choosing the inferior alternative in several specific situations, this knowledge alone would not forearm us in the least against a repetition of these errors. It does us little good to say “when we will be confronted by such a situation we will choose the other alternative,” for how will we know that it is the same situation?
 
Historic Experience as Check Upon Theory
What then is the value of studying historical experience at all, it may be asked. It has value only insofar as it leads to correcting our theories. That is why it is not enough to establish that Trotsky erred. It is necessary to discover why he erred. A political decision is not isolated from the ideological development that preceded it. Trotsky’s decisions during 1920–23 were based upon theories which were moulded and shaped by preceding historical experience. The errors must, therefore, be traced back to flaws in Trotsky’s theoretical conceptions. If we decide that Trotsky erred by underestimating the danger of prohibiting factions in 1920 and a further analysis reveals that this error flowed from his concept of the relationship of democracy to centralism, we must proceed to rectify our conception of this problem in line with historical experience.
For us to observe that the prohibition of factions in 1920 led to dire results and conclude that we must “pass a law” that we will never in the future prohibit factions is nonsense. Our future actions will not be guided by such a “law” or resolve, but only by our general comprehension of the relationship of factions to party democracy and by our evaluation of the latter in the scheme of things as a whole. That is why our cardinal aim in learning lessons for the future must be not to sit in judgment upon what people did, but rather upon the ideas which led them to do it.
It may be objected that this approach to history leads to a completely fatalistic interpretation which says that men act on the basis of their ideas which in turn merely reflect the historical background in which they were formed. There is nothing fatalistic in this approach unless we leave out of consideration the fact that history is fashioned by struggle, the highest form of which is the political one; i.e., the ideological expression of the conflict between tendencies, groups, factions, parties, blocs and classes. The role of Scheidemann-Ebert-Noske in 1918 is not to be explained by the blackness of their hearts. It can only be explained as a logical extension of the ideas of reformism. [5] While it was inevitable that those who based themselves upon the theories of reformism play the role they did in 1918, it was not inevitable that the reformists triumph. Revolutionary ideas entered the process also, as did conservative, fascist and other ideas, each representing different social forces. History is made in the struggle and revolutionists take part in making it through all their activities, including historical criticism.
Howe’s “out of context” approach, does, however, lead to a fatalistic interpretation of history. Though he speaks of Trotsky foreseeing the “possibility” of bureaucratic collectivism, the tactics which he thinks Trotsky should have used would make sense only it the emergence of a bureaucratic collectivist society were inevitable. We now know that the struggle in Russia during the 20’s was between three tendencies: proletarian socialism, capitalist restoration, bureaucratic collectivism. It was not until the Kremlin safely passed over the terrible test of the first Five-Year Plan, including the liquidation of the kulaks, that the new bureaucratic class and its social system achieved firm dominance. What then is the meaning of Howe’s view that Trotsky should have formed a bloc with the Right Opposition against Stalin? If it is granted that the Right Opposition represented a capitalist restorationist tendency (i.e., through the maintenance of the NEP at all costs), Howe’s course would make sense only from the point of view that restoration could never be realized and that bureaucratic collectivism was inevitable. (To talk of a Trotskyist-Right bloc is, of course, fantastic as a realistic alternative. The Rights were in a firm bloc with Stalin from 1924 to 1929 and were the most rabid anti-Trotskyists in the party, along with all the illicit bourgeois tendencies outside of the party.)
One last point remains to be clarified before leaving the question of method. It may be argued that to rule out an “out of context” approach is the equivalent of saying that we should not utilize the accumulated evidence o£ history in its study. This follows only if we seek to subject a given policy to historical criticism without establishing a prior historical interpretation of the period (i.e., the context) in question. Obviously, our understanding of what took place during 1920–23 is vastly superior (and needs must be so) to that of any participant (even the men of genius). Having seen the end-product of Stalinism in the form of bureaucratic collectivist totalitarianism, we can now more accurately chart the stages of its development. But in probing the alternatives which confronted Trotsky and in relating his decisions to his theoretical views, we can only proceed on the basis of what he could have known.
 
Trotsky’s Contemporaries
We now wish to consider the one point of criticism against Trotsky which Howe bases upon a “within the context” approach. In Ciliga’s The Russian Enigma he refers to Bolsheviks who, in the opinion of Howe, had a “superior political conception” to that of Trotsky. Howe’s footnote refers us to the internal discussions among the Left Oppositionists who were in Stalin’s prisons. In rereading this section o£ the book, one nowhere finds a program worked out which is superior to that of Trotsky’s at the time. (That some oppositionists began to question the workers’ state theory of Trotsky is true. However, this was during the early 1930’s when the bureaucracy, which had triumphed over the proletarian opposition, began to direct its heavy blows against the capitalist elements and, thereby, to reveal that it could maintain itself upon its own economic base.) A “superior political conception” cannot be based merely upon a better policy upon one or several questions. What value does it have when the program as a whole is so inferior as to lead one astray? The system of ideas by which one arrives at an answer to a specific problem may prove more important for the political tendency than the answer itself. If the question of democracy was “the one burning problem,” as Howe asserts (but does not prove), were not anarchists, Left Social Revolutionaries, and Mensheviks correct on this question as against Trotsky? But where would their alternative courses have led to? This is the nub of the question. Even if we assume that their programs would not have led to Stalinism, was it preferable to risk a bourgeois counter-revolution? Would a Russian Gallifet (a Russian Himmler was more likely) have been preferable to a Yagoda?
It is my view that the specific questions which Howe deals with can only be examined profitably as part of a study devoted to the period of 1920–23. It is not possible to give them worthwhile treatment in a polemical answer to Howe’s article for this would require answering upon the same (incorrect) grounds that Howe stands upon in raising them. I will demonstrate this contention in the following analysis:
Howe makes the following criticisms of Trotsky’s role:

Trotsky proceeded within the framework of the bureaucracy in his fight;
 
Trotsky should have launched a fight for the right of all loyal factions and parties to exist legally;
 
Trotsky had a “negative” attitude toward the Workers Opposition of 1920 and similar groups;
 
Trotsky should not have feared to split in the early stages of the fight;
 
Trotsky should have made the question of democracy the “one burning problem” rather than subordinate it to economic questions;
 
Trotsky should have approached the Right Opposition for a bloc against Stalin on the question of democracy;
 
Trotsky should have formed a bloc of all opposition groups on the issue of democracy;
 
Trotsky should have understood that the question of progress was no longer dependent upon the factor of productivity; and
 
Trotsky should have foreseen “the possibility of a new kind of society arising in Russia, what we have called bureaucratic collectivism ...” (our emphasis – E.E.)

The last point is the pivot around which all others turn. This is recognized by Howe himself when he calls the last point the “root of his (Trotsky’s) subsequent difficulties on the Russian question.” Then does not Howe’s whole approach rest upon his contention that Trotsky, as a genius, should have foreseen bureaucratic collectivism? If Howe could be convinced that it is absurd to judge Trotsky’s role on the basis of his inability to foresee bureaucratic collectivism, would Howe still make the same preceding eight specific criticisms? He might, but certainly from a different method of reasoning. It is because of this that the question of methodology is so pertinent to this discussion.
A serious interpretation of what took place in Russia during 1920–23 remains one of the pressing problems for the Marxist movement. The Workers Party, as one of the few currents of international Marxism interested in living theory rather than in recitation of formulae, has concerned itself deeply with many questions that are relevant to the 1920–23 disputes. The very publication of Trotsky’s The New Course and Max Shachtman’s essay on it was not accidental. It arose out of the great interest of our party in the question of bureaucracy and party democracy. Our party has done much to demolish the dogma that took root in the movement which viewed everything done by the Bolsheviks up until 1923 and everything done by the Trotskyist Opposition after as a model to be followed. Historical Bolshevism has never been a closed book in our party. In this sense we have restored to historical inquiry the spirit of Rosa Luxemburg’s remarks upon the Russian Revolution when she wrote:
The danger begins only when they make a virtue of necessity and want to freeze into a complete theoretical system all the tactics forced upon them by these fatal circumstances, and want to recommend them to the international proletariat as a model of socialist tactics... What is in order is to distinguish the essential from the non-essential, the kernel from the accidental excrescences in the policies of the Bolsheviks. (The Russian Revolution)
It is precisely because Howe’s method makes it impossible to “distinguish the essential from the non-essential” that it permits the most arbitrary and limitless revisions which endanger our basic revolutionary theory. That is why it is his method that-is at stake, in the first place, rather than his conclusions.

Footnotes
1. Why Howe decides at this point to enclose “out of” in quotation marks is not indicated. Is it, perhaps, that he began to doubt the validity or existence of an “out of context” method?
2. See the discussions of the internal differences in the Left opposition contained in Ciliga’s The Russian Enigma. (Footnote in original.)
3. Howe’s point that “Trotsky was in the grip of a more or less mechanical conception of progress as measured primarily by economic productivity” may be true but is unrelated to Trotsky’s estimate of the importance of productivity in Russia in 1920–23.
4. By “knowable” we do not mean only what could have been definitely established but that which can be reasonably expected to have entered into a calculation or prognosis of the future.
5. Such an interpretation in no way exonerates either individuals, parties or classes from historical responsibility for the consequences of their role. Quite the contrary, it is only through such an approach that responsibility is made meaningful through relating it to ideologies and theories rather than the caprice of the individual. (Moral responsibility is another question and is not germane to our present discussion.)
 






This installment completes Comrade Erber’s reply to Ernest Germain’s criticism of the position of the Workers Party and the New International on Poland. The first part of this article appeared in the July issue.



*
The political crisis which has gripped the Fourth International
since the outbreak of World War II is rooted in its false position on
the nature of the Russian state. However, as has been demonstrated so
many times in the history of political movements, a false position on
a key question disorients the entire program of a movement and
renders it incapable of answering other questions, even those that
appear to be unrelated to the key question. It was, therefore, not
long after the split in the movement over Russia’s role in the war
that the Fourth International committed its error on the national
question, the consequences of which all but equal those of the
Russian question.
The disastrous policy advocated by the Fourth International for
Poland and the rest of Eastern Europe under Russian rule is the
bitter fruit of both of these major errors, because the
political situation of these countries is dominated by national
oppression imposed by Russia. The result is that the political line
of the Fourth International, which tends everywhere to subvert
the revolutionary movement into a left opposition to Stalinism,
emerges in these Russian-occupied countries, as a result of the
direct effect of both major errors, in the role of open
defenders of the Stalinist police regime and of national oppression
against the popular democratic movement of national liberation.
The connection between the Russian question and the national
question is far more intimate than appears from superficial
examination. The link between these two questions is formed by the
fact that both are integrally related to an evaluation of the nature
of the epoch, one as a determinant of it and the other as an
extraction from it. Whether or not one recognizes that the national
question has reappeared in Europe as one of the main political
questions depends upon one’s analysis of the main trends of
development during the last twenty-five years of European history.
Without making the latter analysis the framework for one’s
investigation of the national question, it is impossible to establish
the relationship of national liberation struggles to the socialist
revolution. However, a historical analysis of this period of history
that proceeds, as must that of the Fourth International, from the
view that the Russian Revolution still lives and that Stalinism, no
matter how degenerate, represents its continuity, cannot possibly
come to the same conclusions about the nature of the epoch as a
historical analysis which proceeds, as ours does, from the view that
the Russian Revolution is dead and that Stalinism represents one of
the beginnings of barbarism.
Proceeding from the perspective that the social, economic and
political conditions of Europe, including the revolutionary
consciousness of the proletariat, had undergone no basic change since
the period of the early Comintem and that the prospects for the end
of World War II were for a repetition of the post-war revolutionary
waves of 1917–19, one could not possibly conclude that the national
question had returned after seven decades to dominate European
politics. The strategy of the proletarian revolution, as
formulated by the early Comintem and defended by the Left Opposition,
would then continue as the central political axis with the struggle
for proletarian state power as the main political slogan. The
occupation of the continent by Germany would, in this event, be but a
passing phase of the war which would be resolved by the rising tide
of proletarian revolution as was the less extensive German occupation
during the First World War. Under these conditions, the emergence of
national resistance movements with influence among the masses would
be correctly viewed as solely of tactical importance for the
revolutionary movement.
The Fourth International, of course, proceeded from the above
analysis. Its theoreticians could not understand that the events of
the last quarter century required that the strategy of world
revolution be altered precisely in order to achieve the aim of
world revolution. Being epigones, these theoreticians had learned the
strategy by rote and had come to assume that any changes in “the”
strategy must mean changes in the revolutionary goal. A strategy of
world revolution that took into account the events of history and
sought to find new points of support for the proletarian revolution
in the mass national and democratic movements appeared to them as an
attempt, not to make necessary revisions in strategy, but. to
substitute some other kind of “revolution” for the
proletarian revolution.
 
Taking Note of Some Changes
Our struggle against this sterility based itself, in large
measure, upon an analysis in which our views on the nature of the
Russian state and on Stalinism played a major role. This analysis was
composed of the following decisive factors that had shaped world
history since the early 1920s:

The first workers’ state had been destroyed and replaced by
a totalitarian rule that based itself upon the state-owned economy;
 
The organized mass revolutionary movement, product of
decades of struggle that crystallized in the Comintern, had been
destroyed and replaced by a ruthless and efficient agency of
counter-revolution in the form of Stalinism;
 
The working class, deprived of a revolutionary leadership,
had fallen victim to fascism in Central Europe;
 
The combined effects of reformism, Stalinism and fascism
had hurled back the proletariat in terms of political consciousness
and revolutionary organization;
 
The continued decline of capitalist economy was bringing
about a decay and disintegration. in social institutions and in
culture that marked the undoing of several centuries of civilized progress;
 
The emergence of the outlines of organized barbarism
(Germany, Russia) as the alternative to a socialist reorganization
of society;
 
The outbreak of a Second World War with its threat to
complete the destruction begun by fascism.

The correct reading of these changes revealed that Europe, in the
absence of the proletarian revolution, was rapidly slipping backward
and that long outlived political problems were once more reappearing
on its agenda. This is the essence of what we have referred to as
“retrogression,” a concept which has been so badly
misunderstood or misrepresented by our opponents. One of the products
of this retrogression is the undoing of a great part of the progress
achieved in an entire historical period (the bourgeois revolution) in
the solution of the national problem. State frontiers, having
outlived their usefulness, had become fetters on the economic and
political progress of Europe by the beginning of the Twentieth
Century. Europe could not progress without the abolition of state
frontiers through the unification of European economy as a whole. But
this unification would mark progress only if it were brought about by
the democratic process of the socialist revolution. The unification
of Europe through imperialist conquest and oppression could mark, not
a step forward, but only a step backward. Leaving aside the fact that
the imperialist unification would not necessarily raise the level of
production, it would constitute a retrograde process because its
political effect would not be, as some falsely believe, the transfer
of the proletarian struggle for power from a national to a
continental basis, but, rather, the transfer of the struggle in the
oppressed nations from directly proletarian socialist goals to
national liberation.
All modern history teaches us that national oppression has the
general effect of blurring class consciousness and heightening
national consciousness. The proletariat of the oppressed nation
quickly discovers that every struggle which it wages in behalf of its
class interests finds its first and most formidable obstacle in the
troops and police of the state power, i.e., the foreign oppressor.
The proletariat’s struggle for national liberation is, therefore, not
the result of some vague feeling without material basis, born of
bourgeois patriotic propaganda, as some sectarians believe. It arises
from the logic of the class struggle itself. The course pursued by
the proletariat in the struggle for national liberation – whether it
submerges its class interests in the struggle of the nation for
liberation or whether it wages its class struggle as a struggle on
behalf of the nation as a whole through leading the struggle for
national liberation – depends entirely upon the correct strategic
orientation of the proletariat, that is to say, of its organized,
political vanguard. The struggle for national liberation, therefore,
can become the lever by which the proletariat achieves the leadership
of its nation and by which the successful liberation of the nation
becomes merged with the socialist revolution as a consequence of the
proletariat taking state power in the process of liberation. It is
this aspect of the problem that gives the national question its
crucial importance wherever the national question emerges as the
dominant political problem. It is because of this that a movement
which is incapable of understanding the national question is totally
impotent as a revolutionary leadership wherever the national question
predominates. That is why the bankruptcy of the Fourth International
on the national question during the occupation of Europe by the Nazis
meant its bankruptcy as a revolutionary leadership, no matter how
loudly it called for “soviets” and the Socialist United
States of Europe. Or rather, one can say, the louder they called for
these as substitutes for the struggle of national liberation, upon
which they had turned their backs, the more bankrupt they declared
themselves in the real struggle for the proletarian revolution.
No graver error, nor a more revealing one, can be made than to
assume that the national question was a problem limited to wartime
Europe. Those who hold this view cannot possibly understand the
Marxist-Leninist concept of the national question, in general, nor
the essence of the national question in its reappearance under new
world conditions in particular. Every wartime military occupation of
foreign soil does not give rise to a national question, even if it
does give rise to movements of national resistance. Such movements
in the course of the First World War were correctly denounced by the
revolutionary Marxists as social patriotic movements that could only
divert the proletariat from its revolutionary goals. It is, as we
have said previously, a problem of the epoch.
The liberation of the continent from the Nazis did not do away
with the national question. It merely shifted national oppression
from Western Europe to Germany, leaving Eastern Europe unchanged in
this respect except for a change from German to Russian oppression.
The national question has reappeared in Europe to remain until the
socialist revolution. This assertion is true because the solution of
the national question on the plane of 1871–1939 would require a
degree of progress under capitalism which it is utterly incapable of
achieving, above all, when the real prospect for Europe under
capitalism is for no progress whatsoever.
 
The National Question Remains
The unification of Europe through imperialist conquest, which we
referred to previously, was not a necessity that was peculiar to
German capitalism alone. It is part of the whole drive of modern
imperialism which has resulted on a world scale in the trend toward
fewer and ever greater powers just as within each capitalist nation
the trend is toward fewer and greater units of monopoly capital. The
division of the world into a Russian and an American sphere has not
yet exhausted this process. The two giants stand poised to grapple
for final world supremacy.
The corollary of this process is the reduction of the rest of the
nations of the world to one of varying degrees of subserviency to the
two great powers This does not mean that every n.ation has a national
question as a result of domination by Russia or the United States.
The great economic power of the latter permits it to dominate other
nations through a variety of forms that enable it to gain its ends
without direct military occupation. Russia likewise dominates some
countries (Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia) without direct occupation,
through the agency of the native Stalinist apparatus. Wherever the
foreign domination is exercised without a direct use of military
power by the oppressing nation, the national question tends to recede
in importance because the direct state power is exercised by the
native ruling class, however subservient it may be to the foreign
power. As a result, the national question remains as the dominant
political question in those nations of Central Europe (Germany,
Austria) and of Eastern Europe directly occupied by the forces of
Anglo-American or Russian imperialism.
We see, therefore, that the national question is not a matter of
wartime military occupation. It is, as would have also been the case
in the event of a German victory, a matter of national oppression for
an indefinite period. This means that we face a period in which the
revolutionary strategy of large sections of the European proletariat
will revolve around the national question. By the same token, we face
a period in which a revolutionary movement that persists in
misreading history and misunderstanding the national question can
have no prospect of success.
The ability of the Fourth International to free itself from the
sectarian impasse in which it has landed on the national question is
severely restricted by the role of its Russian position as an
obstacle to a clear comprehension of the extent to which Europe has
been “hurled back.” How can one comprehend the reality of
retrogression if one believes that half of Europe is dominated by the
armies of a workers’ state, which introduce “reforms” which
“facilitate the realization of the socialist revolution”?
No matter how much such a position laments the fact that the
socialist revolution is brought closer through the agency of the
Russian bureaucracy itself instead of by the proletariat itself, such
a position must still contend that socialism is being brought closer.
This latter process does not constitute retrogression. It constitutes
progress. If Russia, vis-à-vis capitalism, represents
progress and Russian might, assisted by the Stalinist mass movements?
pas grown, all talk of retrogression and the reappearance of the
national question becomes objectively counter-revolutionary. That is
why two basic currents that struggle for supremacy in the
international movement divide on both questions, the Russian question
and the national question.
An attempt to establish a position which believes that Russia
remains a ‘Workers’ state but that retrogression has carried Europe
to the point where the national question dominates the politics of
half the continent is an attempt to make an illogical,
internal1y-contradictory construction. [1] It would fall apart
immediately if tested in a real political situation, such as Poland
represents today. Likewise, an attempt to establish a position that
holds that Russia has retrogressed to capitalism (which means
fascism), but that Europe as a whole has not retrogressed to the
point where the national question reappears on its agenda, is to make
an eclectic construction which is absurd on the face of it. [2] The
absurdity of this latter theoretical construction is that it
recognizes the complete retrogression of the Russian Revolution into
its extreme opposite, fascist barbarism, but fails to understand the
simple fact that the retrogression of the Russian Revolution, both in Russia and as a
world movement, is the starting point from which all other aspects of
retrogression get their impetus. This position also would find its
total debacle in Poland. To make the call for “soviets” and
the “Socialist United States of Europe” the central
political slogans in Poland today would expose this position as
totally sterile and without the possibility of finding a point of
political contact with either camp-the Warsaw Quisling regime or the
national liberation movement. A position that denies retrogression
and preaches the imminent proletarian revolution but finds itself
reduced to neutrality between two mass forces that periodically
threaten to erupt into civil war becomes a laughable incongruity.
 
Germain Does Violence to Facts
In our previous article on Poland, dealing with the nature of
state power in that country, we pointed out how the false position on
the Russian question held by the Fourth International forces it to
maintain that Russia is interested in saving capitalism in Poland and
that it erects a police dictatorship for that purpose, but concludes
that the Polish workers must defend this regime against the bourgeois
democratic opposition. This unfortunate position leads its unhappy
exponent, Ernest Germain [3], to do further violence to fact and
reason whenever he touches upon the national question in Poland. The
result is a repetition of all the traditional errors on the national
question which have been the stock-in-trade of every sectarian
opponent of Leninism on this question, plus a few new ones tailored
to fit the exceptional situation in which the official policy of the
Fourth finds itself in Poland.
We say “touch upon” advisedly, because Germain is careful to skirt around the national
question in Poland in order to avoid the necessity of making an
analysis of Russia’s role in Poland. Germain’s article abounds with
indications of what he believes Russia’s role not to be. From our
foregoing analysis of the relationship between the Russian question
and the national question, it is easy to see why Germain should be so discreet.
Germain, for instance, finds it necessary to place quotation marks
around the words “exploit” and “oppress” when
referring to our view of Russia’s role in Poland. The purpose of
these quotation marks is to make sure that the reader under”
stands that these characterizations of Russia’s role are those of The
New International and not of Germain. A few lines later, Germain
makes reference to the views of our collaborator, A. Rudzienski, on
the nature of the revolution which Poland faces and, in quoting,
finds it necessary to include in his quotation a sentence which
expresses Rudzienski’s view that Russia subjects Poland to colonial
exploitation. Lest someone be given the impression that Germain
accepts this part of the quotation, he hastens to introduce his
comments by saying, “Let us disregard the question of whether or
not Poland is at present subject to ’colonial exploitation’.”
In the absence of a forthright statement on the question, we are
entitled to assume, at least, that Germain is not prepared to commit
himself as to whether Poland is oppressed and exploited by Russia,
either in a colonial or any other manner. The facts of Russia’s role
in Poland are not in dispute. Almost everyone, with the exception of
the Stalinists and their apologists among the liberals, accepts the
view that Russia subjects Poland to political dependence and forces
upon her such trade relations as are Ito the advantage of
Russia. This has been amply demonstrated in the studies of
Russia’s role in Poland by Rudzienski, which have appeared in these pages and in Labor Action. We very much doubt that Germain will rest
his argument on a refutation of our factual material. To do this, he
would have to paint the Kremlin in such altruistic colors that they
would be unacceptable to anyone in the Fourth International.
If Germain agrees with us that the Polish regime is politically
subservient to the will of Moscow and that the laUer seeks to use
Polish economy and resources for purposes of rebuilding Russian
economy, why should he refuse to tenn this relationship as oppression
and exploitation? The answer rests on the fact tlIat what is at stake
is an interpretation of more or less commonly accepted facts about
Russiaos role. Germain admits the facts of Russian political and
economic policy in Poland but is forced to support Russia against the
bourgeois democratic movement of national liberation on the basis of
his view that Russia is a workers’ state and Poland a bourgeois
state. One may condemn and criticize the methods by which the Kremlin
carries out its policy in Poland (which Germain does) and keep within
the Russian position of the Fourth, but how can one denounce the
role of a workers’ state, no matter how degenerate, and support its
bourgeois democratic, peasant opponents or its reformist (really,
Menshevik) proletarian opponents? If one proceeds from the view that
Russia and Poland rest upon antagonistic class foundations, the
former working class and the latter bourgeois, then support to a
national liberation movement in Poland would constitute aid to the
bourgeoisie against the workers’ state, i.e., aid to the
counter-revolution.
The only political conclusion possible in Poland on the basis of
Germain’s reasoning is the conclusion he arrives at support the
imperialist oppressor and denounce his victims. This is the sum and
substance of Germain’s political line in the context of the actual
political relations in Poland today.
”Not true!” say the partisans of the official policy.
”We call for an independent Soviet Poland!” Yes, we are
aware of this slogan. More than that, we note that Germain labels
this the central slogan in Poland today. But this knowledge does not
affect by a hair’s breadth our characterization of Germain’s line as
being support to the Quislings and opposition to the fighters for liberation.
 
Poland Is Not China, You Say
What does it mean to say that one is for an independent Soviet
Poland? Are we not also for an independent Soviet India? Or an
independent Soviet Indo-China? Or an independent Soviet Indonesia?
The aim of our struggle in these latter countries is certainly not
the replacement of British, French or Dutch imperialism by native
exploiters. Yet we never lose sight of who the main enemy is in
these oppressed nations. Today the main enemy is foreign imperblism.
Our central slogan is, therefore, “Drive out the imperialist
oppressor.” Our struggle against the bourgeois nationalists in
the nationally oppressed countries remains on the level of political
criticism, denunciation, clarification, etc., in an effort to wrest
the national liberation movement from their domination. But if we
permitted our struggle against the bourgeois wing of the national
liberation movement to become our main struggle before the
imperialist enemy has been driven out, we would be guilty of playing
a counter-revolutionary role. Trotsky’s criticism of the Comintern
line in the Chinese Revolution was not that it failed to make the
Kuomintang the main enemy in the period before the fall of Shanghai.
Trotsky’s criticism was directed at the policy of political and
military subordination of the Communists to the bourgeois nationalist
leaders and the failure to organize the masses independently of the
Kuomintang movement.
“But Poland is not China,” our opponents will protest.
“Poland is a European nation that has
gone through many national liberation struggles in its history and
cannot succeed any more today than in the past in achieving its
independence short of a socialist revolution.”
That Poland is not China, we are willing to grant. Yet the two
nations, today, have more in common than the fact that they both
excel in the quality of their pork products. One such common feature
is that neither enjoys national independence, Poland less than China.
A second common feature is that the main tasks of the revolutionary
partya re the same in both countries. These tasks can be described
in the following manner:
The task of the revolutionary party is ... to formulate its
program and its slogans in such a way as to rally around
itself all the exploited masses in the struggle against all
their exploiters. It bases itself on the dynamics of the class
struggIe and not upon the depth of chauvinist feelings, because
it knows that in the last analysis the struggle of the masses for
their national democratic aspirations can be victorious only by
colliding with bourgeois nationalism, can be victorious only through
the realization of the socialist revolution, which will require the
expulsion of the “occupier” as well as the destruction of
the “native” reactionary classes.
This description of the tasks of a revolutionary party which I
hold, apply in both Poland and China is a quotation from the article
by Germain. No Marxist who stands upon the theory of the permanent
revolution could reject its formulation wilhout becoming a petty
bourgeois nationalist. Germain, who wrote these words, is under the
impression, however, that they constitute a refutation of the
possibility of supporting the national liberation struggle in Poland!
If he believes that adhering to the above tasks means that the
Marxists cannot support the national liberation struggle, he must
believe that in those countries where Marxists do support the
national liberation struggle there is no need to adhere to these
tasks! Here we see revealed the fact that Germain knows nothing of
the Marxist concept of the national question and the Marxist strategy
in the struggle for national liberation. What he clearly implies is
that in a country like China the task of the revolutionary party is
something other than he describes above. What other policy does he
have in mind? Namely, one in which the revolutionary party does not
carry on the struggle for national liberation on the basis of its
own slogans, its own class organizations, etc., but
subordinates itself to the bourgeois nationalist movement. This
does not follow? This is an unfounded accusation and, therefore, a
slander? We shall demonstrate otherwise.
The “liberty” which Shachtman demands for “Poland”
has its very different meaning for the different social classes. The
”free Poland” of General Anders and Cardinal Hlond,
that is the Poland where the gentry and colonels are free to exploit
the peasants, assassinate strikers, and organize pogroms. The
”freedom” which the workers and landless peasants
require, is the freedom to drive out the land-owning clergy, the
capitalists, and the “managers” forced on them by the
State; it is the freedom to manage industry and the land themselves.
Petty-bourgeois politicians think that they can for the
moment disregard this difference in content, remaining 
satisfied with the similarity in formulation of the slogan. But to
drag the bourgeoisie and the proletarians, landless peasants and
exploiting peasants behind one and the same banner, means, in
the Twentieth Century, to fill an empty form with bourgeois content!
The above sentences of Germain precede immediately the previous
quotation on the tasks of the revolutionary party. These latter tasks
we have described as being an adequate description of the role of the
revolutionary party in the national liberation struggle. But to
Germain these tasks are counterposed to support for the liberation
struggle. But what role would the revolutionary party play if it did
support the national liberation movement according to Germain? The
role of joining with General Anders and Cardinal Hlond and dragging
all the conflicting classes behind the same banner, a bourgeois
banner, and of refraining from fighting for the kind of “freedom”
(i.e., freedom from exploitation) which the worker and peasant masses desire.
 
What Is a Bolshevik Policy?
We ask, is this the role of the Fourth International in those
countries, like India, where it supports the national liberation
struggle? Was this the role of the Fourth International when it
supported China in the war against Japan, even after China became
openly a tool of American imperialism after Pearl Harbor? According
to Germain, supporting the national liberation struggle in India and
China requires the revolutionary party to drag the masses along
behind Chiang Kai-shek and Gandhi and to deny the right of the masses
to struggle for their own class interests.
If Germain still wishes to contend that this policy is falsely
imputed to him, let him describe the tasks of the revolutionary party
in India and China and show wherein they differ from the tasks which
he outlines for Poland as being the alternative to supporting the
liberation struggle. But let him not say that he implies no support
to the Chinese and Indian General Anders and Cardinal Hlonds, but
that in Poland “Shachtman” (i.e., the Workers Party) does
imply such support. For this requires citing chapter and verse from
our voluminous writings on the Polish question. He will not succeed,
either in reading such support out of our writings or into them.
It is not enough, therefore, to say that one is opposed to Russian
domination of Poland by virtue of raising the slogan of an
”independent Soviet Poland.” This slogan states our final
aim in every country. The problem of Marxist politics is not to state
the final aim (this is already stated by our program, if not by the
entire content of revolutionary Marxism), but to state at every
period what stage the struggle is in and what to do next. The
Mensheviks and Bolsheviks had complete agreement on the final aim of
the Russian Revolution. They adopted a common program in 1903,
largely written by Plekhanov. This sufficed for both factions until
1918, a year after the revolution! But each separate stage of the
revolutionary process found Mensheviks and Bolsheviks giving
different and opposing political answers to the problems of the day.
We can readily accept the slogan of an “independent Soviet
Poland” [4] put forward by Germain. Yet we would find ourselves
looking across barricades at Germain in Poland today were the
national liberation movement to erupt into civil war against the
Russian oppressor and its Warsaw Quisling regime. To call for an
”independent Soviet Poland” as the final goal and then to
proclaim the need to support the Russian puppet regime today, reveals
that this central slogan, whatever its propaganda value may be, gives
no automatic political line in the actual struggle of contending
forces today. The political line of Germain is adduced from other considerations.
Germain, who, presumably, unlike us, prefers an “independent
Soviet Poland” to one ruled by Gen. Anders and Cardinal Hlond,
cannot resist falling into the same sectarian channel which has been
worn deep but never wide, by successive generations of anti-Leninists
on the national question. Says Germain, in the section we have
quoted, “... in the last analysis the struggle of the masses
for their national democratic aspirations can be victorious only
through the realization of the socialist revolution.” This gem
of a thought has been the “crushing” argument of every
sectarian on the national question since Rosa Luxemburg [5] first
formulated it. Why should a mind allegedly sharpened with a study of
the Marxist method find it so difficult to distinguish between the
struggle for national liberation and the solution of the national
question? Why should it seem a contradiction people like Germain to
declare the national liberation struggle progressive and
simultaneously state that the national problem cannot be resolved
under capitalism?
Lenin’s polemics on the national question has already filled a
heavy volume. But were one to subtract his expositions on the
compatibility of the national struggle with the struggle for the
socialist solution of all social problems, the heavy volume would be
a mighty thin brochure indeed. For the concept of the relationship
between these two struggles composes practically the whole of Lenin
on the national question. Yet here we hear, in the middle of the
twentieth century and from the theoretical representative of the
Fourth International, the old bromide about the fallacy of the
national liberation struggle because socialism is the only solution.
The source of the errors of Luxemburg, Gorter, Bukharin, Ryatokov,
etc., on the national question in the period before the Russian
Revolution can be readily understood. They could at least argue (1)
that the proletarian revolution was an imminent probability and with
it the solution of the national questions and (2) that the national
liberation movements in countries like Poland succeeded in achieving
mass support only through advanced programs of economic and social
radicalism, like that of the Polish Socialist Society. Germain,
however, is forced to admit that the two main camps in Poland
represent the regime of oppression and the movement for national
liberation respectively, neither of them on the verge of erupting as
proletarian revolutionary movements. As a consequence, Germain is
reduced to resting his case solely upon the well-worn misconception
that since socialism is the only solution to the national question
today, all struggles for solutions under capitalism are utopian and reactionary.
 
The “Independent Soviet Poland”
“But Germain does more than call for an independent Soviet
Poland,” his partisans will protest, “Germain also demands
the immediate departure of the Soviet occupation troops.” Good!
We heartily approve of this demand. Even more important, the vast
majority of the Polish people approve of this demand. But what if the
Russian troops refuse to heed our demand? If the Fourth International
intends that its demand for the “departure” (what a
delicate and considerate term!) be more than platonic advice, it must
implement it with a program of action. The following is suggested by
Germain. He states that the Fourth International will link the slogan
for “departure” with that of “fraternization between
the Polish workers and the Russian soldiers.” Again we say,
good! Again, we heartily endorse it. But we endorse it because we
comprehend the full revolutionary significance of fraternization and
do not accept it as a substitute for revolutionary struggle against
the imperialist oppressor. Fraternization is a weapon of the
revolution with which to disorganize and disrupt the organization and
discipline of the armed forces of the class enemy, with which to
weaken him militarily in preparation for the final struggle.
Fraternization was encouraged by the Bolsheviks on the fronts of the
First World War as a means of breaking up the imperialist armies. The
tactic of a national liberation movement in Western Europe during the
Nazi occupation would have been that of fraternization with the
German troops if the movement would have had a proletarian
revolutionary approach to the struggle. The fraternization with the
German troops would have had as its purpose the disruption of the
German army as a means of facilitating the process of driving out the
German occupant, not the hope of fraternally convincing them to
depart. If, however, Germain sees the tactic of fraternization with
the Russian troops in Poland in this light, much else that he sets
forth must go by the board.
If Germain agrees that the Polish masses are to mobilize around
the slogan of “drive out the Russian oppressors,” he must
proceed from the view that the Russians constitute the main enemy. In
this case, however, he will be in essential agreement with us on the
national question and the nature of the national liberation struggle.
For the slogan of “drive out the Russians” is not merely a
proletarian revolutionary slogan. It will set in motion wide masses
of people from various classes on a national basis. But it is
precisely because Germain understands the consequences of the slogan
of “drive out the Russians” that he balks at its acceptance
and takes refuge in the weasel-worded formula of calling for the
”departure” of the Russians and seeks to give to
fraternization a non-revolutionary, a “friendly” content.
The call for the “departure” of the Russian troops within
the context of the position of the Fourth is a cowardly concession to
the overwhelming national sentiment in Poland. It is a crumb thrown
in the direction of reality, a crumb that will be immediately taken
back by the Fourth International if the Polish masses undertake any
measures to hasten the “departure” of the Russian troops.
Germain seeks to give the demand for the departure of the Russian
troops a reason other than the national sentiments of the Poles. He states:
It [the Fourth International] demands the departure of the
occupation troops precisely because their presence is a brake upon
the struggle for the realization of the socialist revolution in
Poland, is even a brake upon the struggle for the defense of the nationalizations.
How explain the fact that the presence of the Russian troops is a
brake upon the realization of the socialist revolution? Is it not
precisely because the Polish masses are taken up with a national
problem as the number one political problem? Is not this fact which
Germain adduces only further verification of the validity of our
position on the national question?
The reference of Germain to the Russian troops constituting a
brake “upon the struggle for the defense of the
nationalizations” just makes no sense at all. If the aim of the
Russians is toward the “structural absorption” of Poland,
why should the presence of the Russian troops undermine the defense
of the nationalized economy which they seek to absorb into Russian
economy? It may make sense if Germain were willing to explain this
statement in terms of the increasing hatred of the Polish masses for
the Russians being also directed against the nationalized economy and
the consequent increase of the possibility that an overturn of the
Russian power would see the anti~Russian feelings vented against the
nationalizations introduced by the Russians. We are quite sure that
Germain does not have this possibility in mind.
What Germain really does is to (1) call the Warsaw regime a
bourgeois state, (2) call Russia a workers’ state and (3) call upon
the workers’ army to liberate the soil of the bourgeois state. This
is some going for a man who insists that the class criterion is basic.
 
What Is the Social Character?
Germain asks us, with his usual sneer, what our attitude was
toward the resistance movements in Europe during the German
occupation. He writes:
Shachtman obstinately refused to answer the question: “What
is the social character of the various organizations toward which it
is necessary to take a position? Is it necessary, on the basis of a
distinction between mass organizations led by petty-bourgeois leaders
and bourgeois organizations directed by White Guards, to have a
different tactic toward these different organizations?” He waxed
indignant, however, when he was shown that under these conditions his
slogan of “Unconditional support of the resistance movement”
(in general? of all organizations?) implied by its lack of precision,
a support of bourgeois organizations.
The impertinence which Germain displays here is matched only by
his polemical dishonesty. (We will retract the characterization of
Germain as being dishonest in polemic, only if Germain insists that
he never read our resolution on the national resistance movements
which appeared in these columns in the issues of January and February
of 1943. In this case, however, Germain would be guilty of wanton
irresponsibility for engaging in a polemic based on hearsay evidence
of his opponent’s views.)
The confines of this article do not permit us to quote our resol
uti on of 1943 on the national question and the resistance movements.
But to date no opponent who has read our material has made the
accusation which Germain does. They have not made it because the
resolution deals at length with the heterogeneous character of the
resistance movements and the necessity to separate out the
proletarian elements and organize them in their own class
organizations. In the actual military operations against the Germans,
there is no alternative but to shoot in the same direction as do
reactionary bourgeois nationalists, while subordinating all other
struggles to the main struggle against the Nazis as a step toward
dominating the resistance movement and imbuing it with a
revolutionary proletarian perspective.
To recognize that the national question has reappeared in Europe
today does not mean that Europe is literally back in the period of
1793–1870. Only especially ignorant or especially malicious people
could read this out of or into our writings. The national question
reappears in an entirely different world situation and must be dealt
with along entirely different strategical lines. We can illustrate
this with the example of the views of Lenin and the Mensheviks on the
character of the Russian Revolution. Both proceeded from the view
that the Russian Revolution was a bourgeois revolution. For the
Mensheviks this meant that Russia would literally live through
another 1793. The roles of classes and parties were to be assigned
accordingly. Since the bourgeoisie led the 1793 revolution in France,
it would have to be the same in Russia. History, according to the
Mcnsheviks, demanded that Milyukov play the role of Robespierre.
Lenin, on the contrary, saw the bourgeois revolution against the
background of his time and the actual character of the Russian
bourgeoisie. He sought that strategical orientation that
realistically took into account the character of the revolution but
just as realistically proceeded from the conditions that prevailed in
the world of the twentieth century and their effect upon Russia.
Likewise, to recognize realistically the dominant position which
the national question has again assumed in much of Europe does not
mean to apply the strategy that was valid in Italy and Germany in the
period of 1848–71 when Marx and Engels wrote about it. Why do
opponents of the type of Germain then find it necessary to attribute
to us the view that recognition of the nationa1 question and support
to national liberation movements means a search for a Garibaldi among
the Polish colonels? We proceed from the view that (1) socialism is
on the order of the day, not a nascent bourgeois democracy, (2) only
the proletariat can lead progressive struggles to their final goal
and (3) a proletariat at the head of the national liberation movement
means a proletariat in power if the liberation is achieved, i.e., the
solution of the national question merges with the socialist solution
of the social, political and economic problem as a whole.
We repeat. Germain can only accuse us of fighting to restore the
Poland of 1939 because for him national liberation consists of
placing the native bourgeoisie in power. Because he does not see a
need for the latter in Poland today (confining it – wrongly – to
”backward” countries like India), he opposes the struggle
for national liberation. Is it for this that Trotsky labored to
clarify his concept of the permanent revolution against Stalinist
misrepresentation? One can truly state that we, thc open opponents of
Trotsky on the Russian question, remain the only people who can
consistently defend his great revolutionary contributions and
preserve them for the new generation of revolutionists. Our defense
of his views must be directed in the first place against those who so
zealously yearn for his mantle.

Footnotes
1. Trotsky’s views on the eve of the war were of this general
character. Trotsky not only recognized the retrogressive process and
the key role of Stalinism within it, hut made this recognition an
important consideration in his calculations. As a result, he was
acutely aware of the growing contradiction between his views on the
working class nature of the Russian state and the implications of his
analysis of retrogression. He resolved this dilemma by postponing any
further theoretical conclusions until the second world war would be
concluded and its political repercussions were known. His brilliant
article. U.S.S.R. and the War, written a few weeks after the war began, was his final rounded presentation on the subject of
retrogression and the nature of the Russian state. In this article he
poses the entire question from the point of view that either the
war will ’conclude with a revolution, in which case both the problem
of the class character of the Stalinist state and the problem
of retrogression will he automatically resolved, or the proletariat
will fail to take power and require a complete re-analysis of
Marxist fundamentals, including the possibility of a world of
bureaucratic slave states. The actual results of World War 
II are somewhere between the two alternatives which Trotsky
posed. The failure of the proletariat to make a revolution in
post-war Rurope does not demonstrate its historic incapacity to
play the role which Marx assigned to it. Yet the continued and
accelerated retrogressive process places a question mark over
the abilitv of the proletariat to reassemble a revolutionary
leadership and take power before it is overtaken and destroyed by the
disintegrative tendency of capitalist civilization, of which the
threatening atomic war is the most potent force.
2. This absurd position is actually held by the tendency led by
J.R. Johnson. In the course of the debates on the national question,
he added a further absurdity to it. This consisted of denying
the retrogressive development of Europe but of “recognizing-”
the reappearance of the national question! According to Johnson
Europe did not retrogress but moved forward – from the
proletarian revolutions of 1917–23 to the national liberation
movements of 1941–45! That is to say, from millions rallying to the
banner of Lenin to millions rallying to the banner of de Gaulle! This
utterly contradictory position could be encommpassed by the same
mind only because it was devoid of any understanding of what the
national question means in the Marxist-Leninist concept. For Johnson,
the beginning and end of the problem was to advise the French
proletariat that in process of making the proletarian revolution
they should also “throw out” the Germans, except, as
Johnson carefully added, those German soldiers who wanted to marry
French women and settle down to live in a Socialist France!
3. Ernest Germain: The Conflict in Poland, Fourth International, February 1947.
4. The use of the word “Soviet” in a popular description
of a workers’ state is the height of folly in this period when the
word is everywhere related to Russian and Stalinist rule. This is
above all true in Poland.
5. The great Rosa has had the singular misfortune of having more
exponents of her theoretical errors than of her genuine
contributions. No mistaken view of hers has proven more popular with
mechanical students of Marxism than that on the national question.
The adherents of the latter even outnumber the latter day disciples
of “self-mobilization” and the mass strike.
 



The great merit of our Workers Party is that it recognized that the political world of 1923–1939, which gave birth to the Trotskyist movement, died during the course of World War II. Unfortunately, we have not always realized how much of the old Trotskyist program has been outlived as a result. Our thinking, consequently, has a tendency to proceed on two levels, that of convention resolutions, where we bring our views abreast of the times, and that of everyday reactions to new events, where we instinctively follow old, deep-worn grooves which, often, have no relation to the real world of today. I fear that the reaction of Comrades Draper and Hall to the Marshall Plan suffers from this defect.
Fundamental to the politics of the Workers Party has been our view that we live in a three-power world – (1) the capitalist world, mainly American imperialism, (2) the bureaucratic collectivist world, which coincides with the Russian imperialist sphere, and (3) the proletariat. The latter, however, we have recognized as a power in a different sense than the other two. While capitalism and Stalinism are real powers, the proletariat, today, is only a potential,power. Catastrophic defeats, at the hands of Stalinism and fascism, have reduced the army of the proletariatf rom its status of 1917–23, when it was a real power that contended with capitalism for the mastery of the world, to disoriented, divided and largely demoralized battalions that are physically and/or ideologically captives in either the camp of Stalinism or the camp of capitalism. The proletariat is far less a subjective force in the world today than an objective factor, taken into account by the two forces that dominate the struggle.
 
The Third Camp
The central strategic aim of our epoch is to re-establish the proletariat as a real power, able to attack, independently, both Stalinism and capitalism and best them in the struggle for world domination. This is the Third Camp and the meaning of the slogan of “Neither Washington nor Moscow.” We must never forget, however, that the Third Camp is an AIM, not a present reality. If we delude ourselves into thinking that the Third Camp exists as a real power, in the sense of the revolutionary battalions led by the Comintern in its early years, the slogan “Neither Washington nor Moscow” will become a sectarian trap that effectively seals us off from contact with the real struggle.
It goes without saying that mere propaganda will never suffice to translate our aim into achievement. We can effect the liberation of the proletariat from the camps of capitalism and Stalinism and place it on the road of independent class action only through participation in the existing political struggle in order to advance at each stage those proposals which will facilitate the process. But the existing political struggle is primarily the struggle between the Stalinist and capitalist camps. It is they who determine the shape and form of this struggle (witness the Mikolajczyk movement in Poland and the Stalinist strike wave in France.) If we seek only the kind of political struggle we would initiate, we will never enter the arena. It is relatively simple to establish the Stalinist or capitalist motivation behind this or that action initiated by one or the other enemy camp. But it is utterly futile to consider our duty done with such an exposé. Participation in political life, today, requires that we seize upon every issue that affords us the opportunity to steer toward our aim, whatever may have been the aims sought by the imperialist camp which initiate the issue.
The struggle between capitalism and Stalinism is a struggle between two social orders, each seeking to remake the world in its own image. Marxist principles that have served as a sound guide in struggles between blocs of capitalist powers for world domination cannot always apply in this situation. The effect of our policies upon the struggle between capitalism and Stalinism is not irrelevant to us. We cannot any longer simply say that the main enemy is at home and direct unilateral demands to one side. The absence of a demand in our press for the withdrawal of American troops from Germany without regard to what the Russians do is, of course, no oversight. As long as Stalinism, rather than an independent proletariat, would fill the vacuum, such a unilateral withdrawal would be a setback to our aims, not an advance.
 
Foreign Policy
It has been a traditional policy of the Marxist movement that in the realm of foreign policy, as distinct from domestic policy, we have never advanced immediate or transitional proposals. In this sphere we have confined ourselves to an uncompromising demand to end imperialism and all its works, an aim that could only be realized by a workers’ government. Hall’s contention that imperialism cannot be reformed is essentially correct. There is no basis for changing this view. However, in the past our attitude toward the foreign policy of American imperialism was 100 per cent “anti” every one of its proposals. We followed a completely negative and obstructionist tactic. The concept that “The worse for American imperialism, the better for world socialism” is true only when an independent proletarian movement or a colonial people is in a position to profit. If, as is the casein many key questions today, it is only Stalinism that can profit, we must weigh our tactics in the light of this fact.
The Marshall Plan is the current form of American foreign policy for Europe, much like the Monroe Doctrine for Latin America and the Open Door for China. It is NOT our policy and we can never assume responsibility for it. The ERP establishes the means of achieving the first aim of the Marshall policy, the economic reconstruction of Western Europe as a bulwark against Russia. Our aims also demand the economic reconstruction of Europe. As is almost unavoidable in a three-cornered fight, the aims of two contenders momentarily coincide. We are clear as to the motivations of American imperialism in this matter – they are imperialist. But American imperialism is not the main danger in Western Europe today. The main danger is economic chaos and Stalinism. We need a breathing space in Europe to reassemble the proletarian forces to liberate Europe from both American imperialism and Stalinism. Should we, by a doctrinaire clinging to outlived formulae, take an obstructionist attitude toward ERP, which, to the extent we had power, to block it, can only benefit Stalinism and harm the chances of a proletarian socialist revival in Europe? The new world situation demands that we veer and tack in such a manner as to draw the maximum benefits from ERP for OUR aims, without taking responsibility for something which is beyond our control and administered by one enemy camp in its struggle against the other enemy camp. If, in that hypothetical situation adduced by our critics, viz., that we had a vote in Congress, we would use it to declare “No confidence” in the imperialist regime that sponsors the ERP, unless, in the even more hypothetical situation which has been posed, viz., that our vote was decisive, we may either abstain or vote for it with a clarifying statement. How we would vote in a parliamentary body on this question is, of course, a tenth-rate question, entirely subject to tactical considerations.
 



The bulk of both the Cominform attack upon Tito and Tito’s
 reply is composed of demagogical charges aimed at securing support in
 the ranks of the Yugoslavian Communist Party and among Stalinists in
 the rest of the world. However, buried between the lines of both
 documents are enough clues to compose a fairly comprehensive picture
 of what is at stake. A knowledge of Stalinism and its internal
 structure should cause any competent observer to dismiss all the
 charges of “Trotskyism,” “Bukharinism,”
 ideological deviations on the role of the party, lack of internal
 party democracy, “Turkish rule,” tactical errors in
 nationalization, etc., and seek the basic causes of Stalin’s
 concern over Tito’s role and the latter’s intransigent
 defiance of the Kremlin.
Stalin’s main concern is over Tito’s independence
 of Moscow dictation, regardless of whether this exerts itself in
 questions of major or of minor importance to Russia. It is part of
 the very essence of Stalinism that it cannot tolerate 99 per cent
 loyalty. A totalitarian structure demands TOTAL acceptance. Anything
 less than this is dangerous and must be overcome. If it cannot be
 corrected through pressure, it must be fought and “destroyed”.
The identification of “rule or ruin” as the basic
 operational principle of Stalinism may be an over-simplification, but
 basically it describes the only final alternatives before Stalinism
 in its relations with any other force, including those that are 99
 per cent Stalinist. 
Cannot Be an Equal
This factor works with special importance in the Kremlin’s
 relations with its satellite states. Russia can only tolerate a
 nation as a “sphere of influence” while in the process of
 reducing it to a complete puppet. It cannot achieve a status quo in
 its relations with another state on the basis of a division of power,
 such as capitalist imperialists have done historically.
The capitalist imperialists have succeeded in maintaining
 certain nations as their “sphere of influence,” like the
 United States in Latin America, for long periods of history because
 the domination of capitalist imperialism is basically an ECONOMIC
 one. Russian imperialism can only dominate through its military and
 political power, the latter exercised through its control of the
 international Stalinist apparatus which is essentially a secret
 police network. Every evidence of independence on the part of the
 satellite state, consequently, is tantamount to rebellion.
Were Tito to succeed in establishing even a measure of
 independence, every puppet leadership in the Russian empire would
 seek to do the same. To permit Tito to “become an equal,”
 as he insists, would mean the beginning of the disintegration of the
 entire web of Stalinist control. A comprehension of this fact
 explains what has puzzled so many commentators, namely, why Stalin
 acted so precipitously and so brutally against Tito. Stalin, like
 every authoritarian, knows that a system that rests upon authority
 dares not temporize with those who defy it. Disaffection in the ranks
 must be wiped out, quickly and decisively, lest it spread and become
 unmanageable. Stalin’s relation to the Yugoslavian assertion of
 rights to independence is the same as that of a military commander to
 mutiny in the ranks. To temporize with it, to negotiate with it, to
 compromise with it, can only destroy the system as such.
For Stalin to permit Tito any degree of autonomy is to permit
 Tito to influence the other Communist parties in his own right and in
 possible opposition to Russia. Stalinism cannot survive under these
 circumstances. It must remain monolithic or not exist. Stalinist
 parties cannot be confronted with a choice between a Stalin policy
 and a Tito policy. Such a situation requires party democracy,
 discussion and a democratic vote—all of them tantamount to a
 death sentence to Stalinism.
As a nation on the border between the Russian empire and the West
 and as a nation that is not occupied by Russian troops, Yugoslavia’s
 assertion of independent rights is especially dangerous, since it
 raises the specter of Belgrade seeking to play a diplomatic role of
 its own between Russia and the Anglo-American bloc. The Kremlin can
 tolerate a nation seeking to play such a role if that nation is not
 yet fully under Stalinist control but in the process of being
 coordinated, as was the case with Czechoslovakia. Russia permitted
 Prague to make gestures of diplomatic independence, because Moscow
 knew that such gestures would be made on a decreasing, not an
 increasing, scale. Stalin could afford to wait patiently, because he
 knew that Czechoslovakia would soon be “in the bag.”
 However, the reverse process was taking place with Yugoslavia. It was
 escaping “the bag.” Patience and toleration could only
 facilitate its escape. What was required was swift and drastic
 action. The Cominform resolution was the result. 
Self-Interests Endangered
In seeking to understand what motivated Tito, one must begin from
 the premise that no ruling class willingly submits to dictation from
 another power when it receives nothing in return. The compradore
 classes in colonial countries have traditionally accepted imperialist
 domination of their foreign policy and; in less measure, their
 domestic policy, because the dominant imperialist power provided them
 with economic advantages by permitting them to share in the
 exploitation of the material and human resources of the country.
Russia had nothing to offer to Yugoslavia in this sphere. It
 could only take from it and give nothing in return. Furthermore,
 Yugoslavia was forced to deny herself the economic advantages of
 unrestricted trade with the capitalist world, not to speak of the
 possibility of Marshall Plan aid, solely in the interests of Russia’s
 strategy against the western imperialists. The new bureaucratic
 ruling class of Yugoslavia would tolerate this situation only as long
 as it was forced to tolerate it. As soon as Tito felt safe in doing
 so, he began to cast loose from his Russian moorings and seek means
 of resolving his problems at home without regard for Russian
 interests.
Aside from the fact that no ruling class plays an altruistic role
 and pursues its own interests whenever possible, Tito found himself
 in a position where adherence to Russia’s interests at the
 expense of those of Yugoslavia endangered his own regime. The
 deep-seated national sentiments of the Yugoslav peoples, fired by
 their liberation struggle against Germany, were not conducive to
 acceptance of subordination to the interests of Russia.
The references in the Cominform document to “a hateful
 policy toward the Soviet Union” on the part of the Tito
 leadership have their origins in this attitude. Tito came to power as
 a Yugoslavian hero and exploited nationalism in the most shameless
 manner to consolidate his regime. Much of his mass support and a
 large section of the officialdom is heavily saturated with such
 Yugoslavian nationalism, only slightly varnished over with devotion
 to Stalin’s version of internationalism. A policy that ran
 counter to these sentiments would find mounting dissatisfaction in
 the ranks of Tito’s supporters and undermine his position. 
Economic Crisis
Another factor that forced Tito’s hand was the economic
 crisis in the country, related in the minds of a large section of the
 population to the economic measures forced upon Yugoslavia as part of
 the Molotov Plan for Eastern Europe and to Tito’s program of
 “Sovietization” of the country. Though Tito carried
 through further measures of extreme nationalization of small shops
 and trade as late as April 27, measures which practically wiped out
 any enterprise employing labor, he has followed an extremely moderate
 policy in reference to the peasants, who form the overwhelming
 majority of the population and furnish the regime with a large part
 of its mass support. An active policy of collectivization on the
 Russian pattern would jeopardize this base. The accusation of the
 Cominform that the Yugoslavian CP is a “pro-kulak” party
 stems from this situation.
The possibility of a breakaway by one of the satellites was not
 ignored by Moscow. However, their means of preventing it were
 limited, in the main, to infiltration of the Yugoslavian party and
 state apparatus with secret agents, directly under Moscow direction.
 Tito was fully aware of this technique of Moscow control and took
 steps to offset it by pitting his own secret police, the OZNA,
 against the GPU operatives. The Cominform document’s charge
 that Cominform representatives in Yugoslavia, including its head
 representative, Judin, together with Russian military and technical
 specialists, were kept under constant surveillance by Yugoslavian
 police agents, is rooted in this situation.
The reply of Tito to this charge confirms the fact that the secret
 police played a decisive role in Moscow’s efforts to control
 the Tito regime. Tito’s reply states that the GPU sought to
 recruit agents from among Communists and other citizens of Yugoslavia
 for purposes of espionage upon the regime. Tito’s break,
 successful as of this writing, indicates that secret police controls
 are exceedingly difficult to maintain against a regime that is itself
 a police slate.
 



Tito’s main aim in his opposition to Moscow emerged more
 clearly in the past week in the form of a series of moves designed to
 force Stalin to permit Yugoslavia an independent role within the
 Russian bloc, with the opportunity of building a Balkan federation.
It has become apparent that Tito is banking heavily upon the
 strategic position occupied by Yugoslavia in the Russian defense
 system to force Stalin to accept Tito’s terms and keep
 Yugoslavia as an ally, rather than lose her to the Western powers.
This supposition assumes that Stalin will consider the military
 loss entailed by Yugoslavia’s going over to the Western camp to
 be more dangerous than the political loss entailed by granting Tito
 an independent role within the bloc.
The military effects of a complete break with Yugoslavia would be
 exceedingly serious for Russia. Yugoslavia protects the southwestern
 flank of the Russian empire. In actuality, Yugoslavia protects more.
 It is the key to the Balkans and the Danube valley. Were Yugoslavia,
 together with Albania, to become a base for the American bloc, the
 Hungarian, Rumanian and Bulgarian plains would be difficult to defend
 in time of war. A successful thrust to the east would place Russia’s
 enemies on the shores of the Black Sea. A successful thrust to the
 north would place Russia in danger of losing the rich industrial
 regions in western Czechoslovakia. The immediate effect of losing
 Yugoslavia to the West would be the virtual liquidation of the civil
 war in Greece, for which Yugoslavia is the main base of operations on
 the Stalinist side.
In a counterblast addressed to the Czech, Bulgarian and Hungarian
 Stalinist leaders, Milovan Djilas, Tito’s propaganda chief,
 said:
“We do not feel isolated. This conclusion may
 seem funny to you. But we do not feel isolated, because we arc
 convinced that the Soviet Union will not and cannot abandon
 Yugoslavia in her relations with the imperialists.
“This arises from the Soviet Union’s
 anti-imperialist policy. Besides this, the Soviet Union is an
 existing reality and not an abstraction and is the leading
 peace-loving power. Yugoslavia takes that into account as a realistic
 factor in today’s relations and has no reason to feel that she
 is being abandoned to the imperialists.”
Djilas sought to underscore his view that Russia has no
 alternative but to maintain the alliance by comparing it to a
 marriage that brings a couple together “for better or for
 worse.” 
Tito’s Immediate Aims
Djilas’ reference to Russia as “the leading
 peace-loving power” and such similar remarks are, of course,
 mere observance of the ritual of the Stalinist faith. The essence of
 his argument is the remark that Russia “will not and cannot”
 permit Yugoslavia to join the West.
It is of the highest significance that Tito’s statements
 have been addressed, mainly, to the Bulgarian, Hungarian and Czech
 Stalinist leaders. He is saying to them, in effect, that they too can
 assert themselves against Russia without fear that Russia will
 abandon them to the Western powers.
This approach links up with Tito’s program for a Balkan
 federation, a proposal severely condemned by Moscow when it was
 advanced by Dimitrov in Bulgaria last year. Tito’s Balkan
 federation can only be realized, therefore, against the will of
 Moscow and as a result of Bulgaria, at least, following in the
 footsteps of Yugoslavia in asserting its freedom of action against
 Russia.
Tito’s immediate aims are for a federation of Yugoslavia,
 Bulgaria and Albania. However, Stalin is well aware that such a
 federation would only be a stepping-stone toward the inclusion of
 Hungary, Czechoslovakia and, ultimately, Rumania. A federation of
 such dimensions, which Tito, of course, hopes to boss, would
 represent a considerable concentration of economic and military
 power. Though its industrial base would be relatively weak, it would
 certainly not be less, and probably would be more, than Russia
 possessed at the start of the first Five Year Plan. Tito may dream of
 several five-year plans establishing an extensive industrial base for
 such a Balkan-Danubian federation.
It is interesting to note in this connection that Djilas stated
 that he would leave unanswered the question of whether Yugoslavia had
 sufficient strength to build socialism without the help of the other
 “socialist nations,” but stated that it would be strange
 if the others were to force Yugoslavia to prove that she can or
 cannot build socialism herself. The underlying thought in Djilas’
 reference to other countries is not about whether Russia helps
 Yugoslavia, but whether the Balkan and Danubian countries do. Djilas
 is here appealing to the widely known resentment, which even the
 Stalinist leaders of the Russian puppet states feel, against Russia’s
 draining the economies of its satellites for her own needs. Tito
 seeks to hold out the prospect of the Balkan and Danubian countries
 pooling their resources to build up the economy of the proposed
 federation, and carrying on economic relations with Russia as equals.
 Such a relationship would almost nullify the great economic potential
 Russian imperialism established for itself in Southeastern Europe.
It is, above all, the far-reaching implications of Tito’s
 fight for an independent role that may cause Stalin to consider
 seriously the alternative of an all-out struggle to force Tito’s
 capitulation, even risking the loss of Yugoslavia to the West. Stalin
 thoroughly realizes, as does Tito also and all others who know the
 inner mechanism of the Stalinist state and party system, that the
 latter would receive their death blow if two totalitarian power
 centers existed in the Iron Curtain world.
As we explained last week, the existence of two centers means
 two policies and a struggle for domination in the world Stalinist
 movement. Yet such a struggle would shatter one of the indispensable
 pillars of the Stalinist’ system – monolithism. Tito’s
 defiance of the Cominform has already given evidence of this result.
 A fierce internal struggle has broken out in the Communist Party of
 Trieste, between a Stalin majority and a Tito minority. Without a
 doubt, pro-Tito wings will take form in the CPs of the neighboring
 countries, just as a pro-Stalin wing will oppose itself to Tito in
 the Yugoslavian CP.
These deep-going threats, which Tito’s program represents,
 may yet cause Stalin to choose the loss of Yugoslavia to the West as
 the lesser of two evils. Though such a course would mean an
 immeasurable weakening of Russia’s military situation, it would
 permit the Kremlin to consolidate what remains and integrate it even
 more closely into the Russian political and economic order.
 



The captured German archives bearing on German-Russian relations during the period of the Hitler-Stalin pact, published by the U.S. State Department, are of special interest to our movement. The infamous pact and the train of political and military events it set in motion were the immediate cause of the sharp political struggle that split the American Trotskyist movement in 1940 and led to the formation of the Workers Party. The documentary material released by the State Department now permits an instructive re-examination of the two points of view that struggled for dominance in the then united Socialist Workers Party.
The signing of the pact on August 24, 1939, did not catch our movement entirely unawares. Trotsky had already indicated the strong possibility that Stalin would seek an understanding with Hitler after the “collective security” policy had suffered shipwreck at Munich. [1]
Yet the actual news that a German-Russian pact had been consummated, breaking suddenly and without warning, came as a distinct shock to the party. The party’s reaction revealed that despite Trotsky’s reference to the possibility and many similar references in the party press, neither Trotsky nor the party leadership in this country had given any serious thought to the possible consequences of such a major realignment of Kremlin strategy.
The view prevailed, somewhat vaguely, that a German-Russian pact would not be different in essentials from the Franco-Russian pact of 1935 and that its consequences would be similar. The party was especially concerned to combat any concessions to bourgeois-democratic sentiments which might open the way to favoring the democratic imperialist powers against the fascist imperialist powers. As a consequence, the thoughts of the party were directed toward the similarities between the Franco-Russian pact and a possible German-Russian pact rather than toward the differences. The thought of the party confined itself to the concept that capitalism is capitalism, whether in bourgeois-democratic France or in Nazi Germany; that a pact is a pact; therefore, a pact with Germany in place of a pact with France could not possibly change anything essentially.
The shock which the party experienced by the announcement of the Hitler-Stalin pact was born of the fact that the pact was signed at a time when Hitler was making overt preparations for an attack upon Poland and the pact was obviously part of the diplomatic preparation for the impending military operation. However, it was not clear, during the first days following the pact, just how Russia figured in the deal. The emphasis in our analysis of the pact was upon Stalin’s fear of war. Stalin’s part in the pact was described as a capitulation to Hitler’s demands in a cowardly effort to buy neutrality in the impending war.
This was in line with the traditional views of the Trotskyist movement: that the main antagonism in the world was between Russia, the workers’ state (however degenerated), and the common interests of the capitalist powers; that the bureaucracy was seeking to restore capitalism within Russia; and that, consequently, the bureaucracy was capable of playing only a capitulatory role in world affairs, unless Russia was directly and militarily attacked, in which case the bureaucracy would fight in defense of its own survival.
The movement had come to think of the bureaucracy solely in terms of “socialism in one country,” of Stalin’s timidity and conservatism; and to think of Stalin’s statement, “not one inch of foreign territory, not one inch of ours,” as really inviolable Kremlin doctrine. Such a concept precluded even giving thought to the possibility that the bureaucracy could conduct an aggressive foreign policy for purposes of expanding Russia at the expense of the capitalist world.
 
Stunned by Polish Invasion
The false overemphasis upon Stalin’s fear of war and his “capitulation” to Hitler did not impede the party in making a vigorous campaign against the Stalinists on the issue of the pact. The party’s weekly organ, the Socialist Appeal, spread itself over pages with a loud note of “we told you so.” Issue after issue was filled with lengthy analyses of Kremlin treachery, exhortations to the Stalinist rank and file and the unequivocal slogan of “Down with the Hitler-Stalin pact!” That the latter slogan had no counterpart in our campaign on the Franco-Russian pact in 1935 went unnoticed in these first weeks. The entire party and its press bristled with hostility toward the Kremlin’s latest move and mobilized itself with political confidence and aggressiveness to make the most of it among the thousands of pro-Stalinists who were repelled by the pact.
Yet some four weeks later the party and its press reacted to the Russian invasion of Poland in an entirely different manner. Far from spreading itself over pages with “we told you so,” the party press was all but struck dumb. For the next months it was to express itself in a mumbling, stumbling fashion that was in stark contrast to the ringing self-confidence, almost cockiness, that had traditionally been the hallmark of the Trotskyist press.
The fact is that the Russian invasion of Poland threw the party leadership into utter confusion and divided it into a minority which sought to face the new events and work out a revolutionary policy and a majority that persisted in remaining confused about what Russia was up to.
Baffled by the unexpected turn of events, the majority fled the world of actuality and took refuge in what it reverently referred to as “the party’s fundamental analysis of the character of the Soviet state.” [2] The editors of the press were instructed to deal with the new events from this “fundamental” position. Should the revolutionary movement declare itself a partisan of the Russian army in the invasion of Poland? All efforts to pry loose from the majority an answer to this question – really the only question that shrieked for an answer – were frustrated by the intransigent determination of the majority not to commit themselves to anything until they heard from Trotsky. Efforts by the minority to commit the party to a condemnation of the invasion were defeated. Even a reference to Stalin’s move as “sinister” was rejected.
The unwillingness of the majority to take a position on the events in Poland was due to the fact that the “fundamental position,” specifically the slogan of “unconditional defense of the Soviet Union,” seemed to demand of them a role which their past training as revolutionists and their spontaneous revolutionary reactions caused them to shy away from – namely, the role of Stalin’s helpers (no matter with what curses for Stalin) in picking bare the broken body of the Polish nation and (no matter how reluctantly) giving objective aid to the counter-revolutionary blows which the Russian army would strike against the revolutionary movement of the Polish workers and peasants. Does the slogan of “unconditional defense of the Soviet Union” really demand this of us? the majority asked itself. While they wondered and marked time waiting for Trotsky’s answer, the minority answered, “Yes, it does, if you really adhere to that slogan. That is why the old position must be revised. Given the evidence of the new stages of degeneration of the bureaucracy as seen in the Hitler-Stalin pact and the division of Poland, we must give up ‘unconditional defense’ and defend the Russian state only under those conditions which are consistent with the needs of the world revolution.”
 
Outlived Diagnosis
Trotsky’s views arrived in the form of his well-known article, The USSR in War.
Reduced to their bare essentials, Trotsky’s views in The USSR in War were already presented in his letter to Cannon dated September 12, 1939 (In Defense of Marxism, by Leon Trotsky, p. 1). A reading of the bare points of his argument in this letter, unprotected by his literary and polemical skill, makes it far easier to see the chinks in his structure. It was Trotsky’s concept that the workers’ state in Russia could only be replaced by the restoration of capitalism, either from within or from without. The proof that capitalism had been restored would be the dissolution of the nationalized property. Therefore, as long as the latter remained, Russia remained a workers’ state. As long as Russia remained a workers’ state it had to be unconditionally defended in any military conflict with a capitalist state. To conceive of the end of the workers’ state, according to Trotsky, with the continuation of nationalized property meant to conceive of a new social order that was neither working-class nor capitalist, i.e., bureaucratic-collectivist. The latter, Trotsky claimed, meant the overturn of the whole Marxist concept of historical development in our epoch. Trotsky’s reasoning could be summarized in the formula: nationalized economy equals workers’ state equals unconditional defense.
But what if Russia emerged from the war with its social relations unaltered? What if the existing situation was continued into the post-war period? This was inconceivable to Trotsky. The rule by the bureaucracy on the basis of nationalized economy would soon come to an end. Therefore, why meddle with our “fundamental analysis” on the eve of the great war that will resolve everything? [3] So what if Stalin expands the territory of the Soviet Union and nationalizes property in the occupied areas? Even if we did not foresee this, it is of secondary importance. It is a mere episode in the war and not the beginning of a new role of expansionism for the bureaucracy.
Given these views of Trotsky, the majority felt released from the need of making detailed analyses of the Hitler-Stalin pact and the concrete events in Poland. The latter questions were sidestepped by Trotsky through the device of saying that once the Polish territories were added to the Soviet Union our political role in such areas becomes the same as in Russia itself. What our attitude should have been in the minor war which the Russian army waged in invading Poland was not even hinted at.
The minority, on the contrary, occupied themselves closely with the concrete events. Their then position of “defense of the Soviet Union only under certain conditions” made mandatory a constant and detailed analysis of what was taking place. As a result, the polemics between the majority and the minority took a peculiar course. The majority chose to be what they called “fundamental.” The minority chose to be concrete.
The actual course of debate revealed, however, how artificial the “fundamentalist” approach was. The party could not dodge the concrete events. It was forced to answer. Likewise, the majority spokesmen in the inner-party debates were forced to descend from the lofty heights of sociological abstractions from time to time and express an opinion on what was going on in the world of everyday affairs. It is only the somewhat sparse record of these latter reluctant excursions into daily events that affords us now the possibility of probing the majority’s analysis of the Hitler-Stalin moves in the light of the new documentary evidence.
The majority found it difficult to accept the view that the Russian invasion of Poland was prearranged with Hitler. Though they were equally skeptical of the Stalinist claim that the Russian army was invading Eastern Poland to save the population from the Nazis, they leaned toward the explanation that the invasion had the purpose of defending the Soviet Union against Germany.
Cannon, in his first speech to the party membership on the Polish events, mainly skittered around giving any explanation [4] but expressed this concept more or less clearly:
For a week or so we had quite a flurry in the party about the invasion of Poland, and demands to change our line on Russia because of it. In this, for the first time, we saw unmistakable signs of the powerful pressure of bourgeois-democratic public opinion on our party. We had to ask ourselves many times: Don’t they know that Western Ukraine and White Russia never rightfully belonged to Poland? Don’t they know that this territory was forcibly taken from the Soviet Union by Pilsudski with French aid in 1920? [Internal Bulletin of SWP, Vol. II No. 3, November 14, 1939, p. 10.]
At a later point in the same speech he emphasized his view of the Russian invasion of Poland as a defense against Germany with the following analogy:
“Defense” in war also means attack. Do you think we will respect frontiers when we make our revolution? If an enemy army lands troops at Quebec, for example, do you think we will wait placidly at the Canadian border for their attack? [Ibid.]
This aura of revolutionary defense of the Soviet Union was being thrown about the Kremlin’s invasion of Poland more than a month after Molotov, we now learn, had telephoned the following message to the German Ambassador at Moscow:
I have received your communication regarding the entry of German troops into Warsaw. Please convey my congratulations and greetings to the German Reich government. Molotov.
 
New Pattern of Imperialism
In reply to Cannon’s speech from which we have quoted, Max Shachtman put forth the following views for the minority:
Stalin crushed Poland jointly with Hitler. The spoils of their victories are being jointly divided throughout Eastern Europe. But also, in another sense, he is pursuing an “independent” imperialist policy of his own ... Like every bureaucracy, the Stalinist is interested in increasing the national income not in order to raise the standard of living of the masses but in order to increase its own power, its own wealth, its own privileges ... A policy of expansion, which under Lenin and Trotsky would mean extending the basis of the socialist revolution, means under the Stalinist bureaucracy, degenerated and reactionary to the core, a policy of imperialism. That is, it has an imperialist policy peculiar to the Soviet regime in its present stage of decay. [Ibid., p. 14A.]
How accurately this summary of the Kremlin’s motivations was we now learn from the projected Four-Power pact, which was to divide what Hitler called the British bankrupt estate between Germany, Russia, Japan and Italy. Secret protocol No. 1 in the draft of the pact read:
(4) The Soviet Union declares that its territorial aspirations center south of the national territory of the Soviet Union in the direction of the Indian Ocean.
This slice of booty proved unsatisfactory to the Kremlin and it drafted a counter-demand which provided for additional territories. The latter was submitted to the German government on November 26, 1940. On December 18, Hitler ordered his army to begin preparations for an invasion of Russia. He had concluded that the imperialist appetite of the Kremlin was such as to endanger German imperialist ambitions, especially if Germany tackled England first.
The dispute was still raging around the Polish events when items began appearing in the press that indicated a possible Russian move into the Baltic countries. The minority immediately seized upon these new developments to strengthen their thesis that the Russian expansion into Poland was not merely an “accidental” departure from its role of capitulation to the world of capitalism, but part of a new pattern of Russian imperialism. The majority answered with denunciations of the “irresponsible speculations” which the minority were introducing into the discussion. The charges of “speculation” were hardly out of the mouth of the majority when, to their dismay, Stalin forced the Baltic states to grant Russia military and naval bases, thereby surrendering their sovereignty. The majority immediately interpreted the Kremlin’s moves as directed against the German advance into Poland. The Socialist Appeal of December 1, 1939, wrote editorially:
At the same time, however, the Kremlin lives in deadly fear of the possibility that despite all its courting of German imperialism, the latter will make peace with Britain and turn on Russia. It is against that dread day that the Kremlin’s moves in the Baltic are calculated. The military and naval outposts secured from the other Baltic countries, plus similar outposts from Finland, would close the defensive circle of the Baltic against Germany.
When, six months later, the Russians dissolved the Baltic governments completely and added their territories to the Soviet Union, the German Foreign Office gave its view in a circular telegram to all German missions abroad which read:
The unresisted reinforcement of Russian, troops in Lithuania, Latvia and Esthonia and the reorganization of the governments of the Baltic states, sought by the Russian government to bring about more reliable cooperation with the Soviet Union, are the concern of Russia and the Baltic states. Therefore, in view of our unaltered friendly relations with the Soviet Union, there is no reason for nervousness on our part, which some of the foreign press has tried to impute to us in only too transparent a manner.
Not having learned their lesson from the events in Poland, the majority continued to see the Kremlin’s moves in the Baltic states and Finland in terms of defense against Germany. The same issue of the Socialist Appeal which we quoted above commented on the Russian moves against Finland along the traditional lines. “This unmistakable bid [by Chamberlain] to Germany came at a time when Stalin seemed to be readying his grab of Finland, a move that Germany cannot possibly relish, for it would put Soviet Russia astride Germany’s vital northern trade routes.”
As usual, this interpretation, flowing from Trotsky’s “fundamental analysis,” ran counter to the facts. The new documentary evidence is unnecessary to establish this, since the majority was forced to eat crow and write the following in the February 1940 issue of The New International:
That Hitler was highly gratified by Stalin’s becoming involved in war with Finland was clearly shown at the time of the invasion by the Berlin press which congratulated Stalin! Stalin’s involvement in the war strengthens Hitler’s western front, gives him greater bargaining power with the Allies, more thoroughly entangles Stalin in the pact, opens wider channels to the resources of the USSR ...
 
Sidestepping Comes to End
The majority found it possible to say the most contradictory things when dealing with the concrete events, but the “fundamental analysis” remained unquestioned. Why should it be questioned? The “fundamental analysis” was constructed out of materials that had no relationship to daily events. That the latter should serve as a test of the basic theories was denounced as “empiricism.”
The kind of sidestepping which Trotsky did on the question of what tactics the revolutionists should pursue vis-à-vis the Russian troops fighting their way into Poland was impossible in Finland. Here it was necessary to descend completely from the clouds of sociological abstractions and speak in terms of revolutionary tactics. The majority was finally forced to carry the logic of its “unconditional defensism” to its full dimensions by calling upon the Finnish workers to become “Soviet partisans,” i.e., work for the defeat of the Finnish army and the victory of the Russian army. [5]
Trotsky tried to place this unpalatable solution in the best possible light by stating: “The Soviet-Finnish war is apparently beginning to be supplemented by a civil war in which the Red Army finds itself at the given stage in the same camp as the Finnish petty peasants and the workers, while the Finnish army enjoys the support of the owning classes, the conservative labor bureaucracy and the Anglo-Saxon imperialists.” (In Defense of Marxism, by Leon Trotsky, p. 57.) Trotsky’s reference to it was the first and last news the world was to hear about the “civil war” in Finland. At a later date, information became available that the Finnish population, almost to a man, fled before the advancing Russian army as before a scourge. It was a far cry from Georgia in 1920!
The new documents explode another favorite line of reasoning used by the “fundamentalists.” This was to the effect that the “nub of the strategy” of all the imperialist powers was for a joint attack upon Russia for the purpose of dividing it among themselves. Since the “fundamental”antagonism was between the Soviet Union and the world of capitalism, they reasoned, the war was bound to conform sooner or later to such a line-up.
 
Wide of the Mark Again
As a consequence, the party press saw evidence of an imminent peace between Germany and England nearly every week. The hysteria on this theme reached its high point with the Russian invasion of Finland. One issue of the Socialist Appeal headlined the Finnish resistance as the beginning of the joint imperialist attack upon Russia. But only the popular press repeated this theme. Typical of their train of thought was the following:
The real military and financial aid of imperialism to Finland, the international political and ideological crusade against the USSR, the diplomatic jockeying, particularly of Britain in relation to Germany, all testify to the incontrovertible fact that the USSR stands face to face with the danger of a fully developed war of imperialist intervention. That war is already in its first stage. [Marxist Criteria and the Character of the War, by Murry Weiss, Internal Bulletin, Vol. II No. 12, emphasis in original.]
The new documentary material reveals how really wide of the mark the majority was shooting. It is now to be read that Sir Stafford Cripps was sent to Moscow as the British ambassador to win the Kremlin away from Hitler, that Stalin’s rejection of this British wooing was blunt in its defense of Germany and that the whole course of German diplomacy, as revealed in these documents, was directed against a rapprochement with England.
Hitler’s letter to Mussolini now reveals that the decision to attack Russia was born of a distrust of the Kremlin, especially of a fear that Stalin would attack the Germans’ rear if they launched an invasion of England. Yet the party press often dealt with the war during its first year as if it were a “phony war” or a mock war between Franco-British imperialism and German imperialism, the real aim of which was to mobilize their forces for a joint attack upon Russia.
Abstract reasoning from a so-called fundamental analysis and self-imposed blindness to the concrete events never carried a political tendency further afield from the truth than in the case of Trotsky and the majority on this question.
In 1940 one of the minority documents (The Judgment of Events) concluded its attack upon blind adherence to the “fundamental analysis” in the following words:
We have examined herein seven instances of the application of the majority views to the events of the Finnish war. The result in each instance is the same: the theories refuted by the facts. Our selection has not been arbitrary. So far as we can discover, we have included every important case of specific application of the theories to the war – that is, every important case where what was said can be checked by what happened.
We confess that it is hard for us to see how there could be a more conclusive demonstration of the falsity of the theories in question. And this demonstration retains its full force if everything that the majority has written about the social and psychological nature of the opposition, about dialectics and sociology and the auto crisis, is completely true.
At Zion City the followers of Glenn Voliva continue to believe that the earth is flat. They prove their theory, moreover, by ample reference to the Bible, and by the condemnation of all dissenters as heretics; nor has any assemblage of facts ever been able to shake them in their belief.
Are Voliva’s methods to serve as model for the science of Marxism?
This flashback into the disputes of 1939–40 has importance for the discussion of the Russian question now being carried on in the ranks of the Fourth International not merely to vindicate our point of view but also to vindicate the Marxist method of dealing with the concreteness of events as a test of political theory.

Footnotes
1. The October 8, 1938, issue of the Socialist Appeal headlined: Trotsky Predicts Stalin Will Seek an Understanding With Hitler. Trotsky’s article said: “The collapse of Czechoslovakia is the collapse of Stalin’s international policy of the last five years. Moscow’s idea of ‘an alliance of democracies’ for a struggle against fascism is a lifeless fiction ... We may now expect with certainty Soviet diplomacy to attempt rapprochement with Hitler at the cost of new retreats and capitulations which In their turn can only bring nearer the collapse of the Stalinist oligarchy.”
2. A special meeting of the Political Committee, called to work out a line on the Polish events, was presented with the following motion by James P. Cannon, the national secretary, which was adopted by the majority: “The party press in its handling of Russia’s participation in the war in Poland shall do so from the point of view of the party’s fundamental analysis of the character of the Soviet state and the role of Stalinism as laid down in the fundamental resolutions of the party’s foundation convention and the foundation congress of the Fourth International. The slogan of an Independent Soviet Ukraine shall be defended as a policy wholly consistent with the fundamental line of defending the Soviet Union.” That was all.
3. “Such an adventuristic jump would be doubly criminal now in view of the world war when the perspective of the socialist revolution becomes an imminent reality and when the case of the USSR will appear to everybody as a transitorial episode in the process of world socialist revolution.” (In Defense of Marxism, by Leon Trotsky, p. 2.)
4. The only leader of the SWP who showed any concern for publicly defending the majority line in terms of the actual events was Albert Goldman, who tried to apply the “fundamental position” In his articles on the later invasion of Finland. For example, in the Socialist Appeal of March 23, 1940, Comrade Goldman wrote down what all the majority leaders had been saying: “... anyone who is not blinded by hatred of Stalin can easily see that what he is after primarily is to obtain defensive footholds. It is well-nigh impossible to explain what he has done thus far on the basis of the theory that he has entered into a partnership with Hitler to divide the British Empire or even (some have said it!) the whole world. Of course people do not have to consider facts; they can let their desires and imaginations run away with them. But then these people are not Marxists.” We quote Goldman because his remarks have the merit of being a forthright presentation of the SWP line, as well as because be was the only one who sought to defend it regularly and consistently. In this connection, it is significant to us that with the progress of later events it was Comrade Goldman who broke with Cannon and the Cannon line and is now a prominent member of the Workers Party. In a recent article setting forth his present views on Russia and defensism he has written that the position of the minority in 1940 “in the light of events, has proven to be the correct approach.” (NI, September 1947, p. 213)
5. The Socialist Appeal of December 9, 1939, carried a Statement of Policy by the Cannonite Political Committee which proclaimed their line to be “Soviet patriotism ... Unceasing criticism and exposure of the Stalinist methods of starting and conducting the war, but not the slightest relaxation of material and military support. The Fourth Internationalists in the Soviet Union will be the best soldiers in the Red Army and inspire it to victory over the imperialist bandits and the Stalinist betrayers.” This frank statement of their position was pried out of them by our insistence on an end to pussyfooting: on their part; but actual propaganda for the “defense of the Soviet Union” in the Socialist Appeal continued to play an insignificant role in its pages – after all, it was so unpopular! Even their May Day manifesto in 1941 had barely a scant word on the task of defending Stalinist Russia. In contrast, when Hitler invaded Russia and Stalin switched over to the Allied side, the very next issue of their paper bore the screaming headline “Defend the Soviet Union!” and an appeal to CP members told them: “You set the defense of the Soviet Union as your first task. We do likewise.” Cannon himself sent a telegram to Joseph Stalin calling for the release of Trotskyists from the GPU jails so that they might “take their proper place In the front ranks of the defenders of the Soviet Union.” He never explained why this telegram was not sent at the outbreak of the Russian-Finnish war, but only after American capitalism and bourgeois public opinion also became “defenders of the Soviet Union.”
 



History’s most colossal lie, the Moscow Trials, is afoot again. In Winston Churchill’s million dollar memoirs, he recounts a story told him by Benes which appears to substantiate the Stalinist version of the trials and then adds his own cautious approval of this monstrous blood letting, with these words:
“Thereafter there followed the merciless, but perhaps not needless, military and political purge in Soviet Russia, and the series of trials in January 1937, in which Vyshinsky, the Public Prosecutor, played so masterful a part.”
Such an endorsement from an avowed enemy of Russia is of more value to the Stalinist propaganda machine than a thousand articles by fellow-travellers. We can be sure that it will be cited for years as the testimony of the star witness. For those “anti-Stalinists” who embrace every reactionary opponent of Moscow, from Herbert Hoover to Chang Kai-chek to Tsaldaris, as is the case with the New Leader school of anti-Stalinism, the opinion of Churchill on the Moscow Trials should serve as a crushing object lesson.
 
Stalin Is a Man He Can Understand
Churchill’s views on this subject are astounding only to those who forget that enmity toward the Kremlin can be compounded out of the most varied factors, not the least among them being ignorance and ancient prejudices. Churchill assumed the role of the most implacable enemy of the Russian Revolution in the years following the first World War. His hatred of the Bolsheviks was limitless and took on a personal character n reference to Lenin, Trotsky, Zinoviev, Bukharin, Radek and the other revolutionary leaders who personified the Soviet regime and the Communist International in the eyes of the West. The personality of Trotsky especially seemed to incite almost psychopathic fury in Churchill’s mind. The defeat and destruction of the great leaders of the revolution at the hands of Stalin could not but have given Churchill great satisfaction.
If he did not feel any friendlier to the new rulers of the Kremlin, he at least thought he understood them and spoke a common political tongue with them. In Churchill’s eyes, Stalinism represented the resurgence of Russian nationalism and its victory over Bolshevik internationalism. As the ardent defender of the British empire, he saw in a revived Russian nationalism a rival to be watched and fought, in the same manner as his forefathers had watched and fought the expanding empire of the Tsars. But this was honorable combat; English statesmen were equipped to participate in it by centuries of experience and careful training. In contrast, the Bolshevik movement was a conspiracy against civilization itself, an insidious pestilence which merited no quarter. Churchill’s rancor-ridden mind was prepared to believe anything about the old Bolshevik leadership – and he did. In 1917 he believed Kerensky’s frame-up of Lenin and Trotsky as agents of the Kaiser and in 1937 he believed Stalin’s frame-up of the old Bolsheviks as agents of Hitler.
The role of Stalinism in world politics, however, began to jar Churchill’s version of national resurgence in Russia. Stalinism was most certainly the latter, but it was more. The Comintern emerged as a widespread Russian Fifth Column, intent upon penetrating everywhere and preparing the ground for a Stalinist coup d’etat. In despair, Churchill got off his well known remark to the effect that Russia was “a puzzle wrapped in an enigma.” In the light of his bewilderment about Stalinism, his view that the purges were “perhaps not needless” and that Vyshinsky “played so masterful a part” must betaken as the judgment of a man who has revealed his shrewdness on the familiar ground of Empire politics in war and peace, but has equally revealed an abysmal ignorance of the great historical questions of our day.
 
Development of Relations Between Russia & Germany
We can assume that Churchill faithfully repeated the story told to him by Benes to the effect that the Czech intelligence discovered that the Soviet embassy in Prague was being used as a contact post between military personages in Germany and Russia. It is also not excluded that Benes’ secret service actually ferreted out such a German-Russian military liaison via Prague. This mere fact, if it were established, does not necessarily give an iota of credence to the Stalinist version of the execution of the Russian general staff.
(Cont’d next week)
 



(Continued from last week)
It is by now a well known fact that a secret relationship existed between the Reichswehr and the Red Army beginning in 1921. The victorious allies, through the instrument of the League of Nations, had turned revolutionary Russia and defeated Germany into pariah nations. Russia was blocked off from normal diplomatic and economic relations with the rest of the world. Germany was disarmed and forbidden to rearm by the stringent clauses of the Treaty of Versailles. Russia had the freedom to build a strong military machine and had the manpower, but lacked the necessary industry and “know-how.” The German general staff could not conduct the experiments necessary to develop their armaments, especially artillery and aviation, on German soil due to Allied controls. The Russian and German army staffs, therefore, came to a secret agreement to supplement each other’s needs. The Russians permitted German military men and technicians to work in Russian industries to develop their war material and experiment with it on Russian soil. In exchange, the Germans shared their inventions and developments with the Russian army and trained Russian personnel in its use. The secret understanding was worked out by the Soviet Commissar for Foreign Affairs, Chicherin, and the German Ambassador at Moscow, Brockdorff-Rantzau. However, its execution was left in the hands of military men like von Seeckt and von Schleicher on the German side and Frunze and Tukachevsky on the Russian side, who operated through an elaborate conspiratorial apparatus to conceal their work from the eyes of French and English spies and German liberals and Social Democrats. (In 1926 the latter created a sensation by a big exposé in the Reichstag about the secret shipment of Russian-made bombs to the German army.) It is quite likely that the Berlin-Moscow military liaison was maintained through some third capital, like Prague, in order to hide its tracks. Meetings between Russian and German attachés in Prague would be less likely to be observed than in Berlin.
The Russian and German general staffs had more than technical needs as the basis of their collaboration. Both of them considered Anglo-French imperialism and the network of alliance of small states on the Continent (Poland, Romania, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia) as the main enemy. Russian foreign policy proceeded from this point of view from the very beginning and had no fear of Germany except in the event that it fell into the hands of pro-French and pro-English elements. For this reason, the German Social Democracy, with its strong orientation toward the League of Nations was fought as a deadly enemy by the Comintern. The German nationalist politicians and military leaders took their lead from Count Reventlow’s dictum that “In domestic affairs Bolshevism is the main enemy; in foreign affairs the capitalist of the West.” They were willing to teach the Russians how to make the most advanced weapons in return for a share of them for the Reichswehr, even though they knew that the same Soviet ships that unloaded mysterious crates for von Seeckt’s agents in Stettin also unloaded similar crates for the secret arsenals of the military apparatus of the German Communist Party.
After the 1923 events, the German revolution receded into the background as a disturbing element in the Reichswehr-Red Army collaboration and the alliance grew ever stronger. However, a new disturbing element arose in the form of Hitler. Unlike the conservative Right, Hitler was not as unequivocally pledged to a war against the West instead of the East. Though Hitler was contemptuous toward the French, he held out an offer of friendship toward England, while speaking about Germany’s need for the bread basket of the Ukraine. Following Hitler’s victory in 1933, Stalin became thoroughly alarmed and undertook a complete reorientation of Russian policy. He began his orientation toward the West, which led to the Stalin-Laval pact, entry of Russia into the League of Nations, the slogan of collective security and the policy of Peoples Frontism. Hitler in turn began his anti-Russian policy of the anti-Comintern alliance, especially friendship with Japan. Germany and Russia were squaring off against each other and the collaboration between the Russian and German military men was drawing to an official close.
It is now known that a group of German generals opposed Hitler’s anti-Russian orientation and insisted upon the old policy of “the main enemy is in the West,” above all combatting the nightmare of another two-front war for Germany. Is it not possible that a group of Russian generals likewise opposed Stalin’s policy of rapprochment with the West? It certainly is not excluded. Moreover, the hopes of such a group for Russian-German alliance would have found encouragement in the knowledge which passed in the higher circles of the Russian leadership that Stalin himself had concluded that Hitler was here to stay after his successful blood purge of the Roehm opposition in 1934 and that it was necessary to keep open a bridge toward an agreement with Hitler if the “collective security” policy breaks down. General Krivitsky, the former military intelligence agent of the Russian army in Western Europe, adduces considerable evidence for the latter double orientation of Stalin’s. The best evidence, of course, is adduced by history itself, in the form of the Hitler-Stalin pact in 1939.
 
Liaison Not Illicit on Stalin’s Side
Is it not a possibility that the Russian and German military men who had a common view on the need for an alliance between their respective countries maintained the conspirative connections that had existed since 1921? It must not be excluded. Whether it will ever be established by documents and witnesses is dubious. We do know that the phenomenon of the German generals, headed by the Marshals von Paulus and von Seydlitz, entering the Russian propaganda service after Stalingrad can only be explained by an understanding of their past views in opposition to Hitler’s anti-Russian orientation and in favor of a war against the West. It is therefore not excluded that Czech secret service men came upon traces of what was now a German-Russian liaison.
However, considering Stalin’s policy as a whole and knowing his methods of work, and understanding that the Russian military leadership was far more closely controlled by the political heads of state than was the case with the German military leadership under the Nazis, there exists the greater probability that the liaison between the Russian and German officers was illicit ONLY ON THE GERMAN SIDE. If it is true that Stalin was keeping open a second line of action, that of an understanding with Hitler, he would have desired a sub rosa relationship with those in Germany who favored an understanding with Russia. It was all to his advantage and committed him to nothing. If the time for an alliance with Hitler arrived, such contacts within the German general staff would be of tremendous value to Stalin. It is therefore more likely that the German-Russian contacts that the Czechs discovered were not news to the Kremlin but part of a well-oiled conspiracy.
In any case, the existence of such a liaison between German and Russian military men cannot possibly be considered the basis for the great Russian purges. It is estimated that the purges in their totality between 1936 and 1939 accounted for two million victims in the form of execution, imprisonment, forced labor or demotion to obscure posts. This, says Churchill, was “perhaps not needless.” Why? In order to pave the way for the Hitler-Stalin pact which was signed only some months after the purges ended? Or in order to get rid of the pro-Nazi elements and to make Russia a firm friend of the western democracies, such as Churchill is the first to prove that they are not?
 
Purges Destroyed Revolutionary Opposition
There is no longer any mystery about the reasons for the purge. They represented the last stage in Stalin’s consolidation of totalitarian power and the final triumph of the new bureaucratic ruling class over those who were in any way connected with the Russian Revolution. Stalin knew that his regime would undergo severe tests in the war that loomed ahead. He knew that he might be forced to make sharp turns in policy. He knew that the Russian people would be subjected to inhuman misery. The purge was assurance that no one would survive who could become the center of opposition to Stalin. This is known to everyone today, including such skilled apologists for the Moscow Trials as Walter Duranty. He wrote recently as follows:
“... a rather bright young Soviet Russian said to me at the San Francisco conference:
“‘I can hardly understand how your President (Roosevelt) dared lead your country into war when he knew that at least 40 per cent of the electorate was in opposition to him and to his policies,’ he said.
“There you have in a nutshell the difference between Russian political thought and our own. To the Russian opposition means treason, to be punished – as it was punished in the middle thirties – by exile and execution.”
If this truth has not yet dawned upon everyone, it is being taught to many in the hard way. Among the latter is Benes, who was so anxiousto do a good turn for Stalin. Churchill, today the leader of His Majesty’s Opposition, most certainly does not subscribe to the view that opposition is treason. He does, however, believe that opposition to Stalin is treason – that is, if it is opposition that seeks to revive the Bolshevik program of workers’ democracy and Socialist internationalism.
 



The February coup of the Czech Stalinists was the result of a combination of national and international political factors. Of these, the international factors were the determining force.
In one sense it can be said that the events which culminated in February had their roots in the big-power relations produced by the war and were in the making ever since Russia was accorded the hegemony of Eastern Europe. In a narrower sense, however, the crisis that came to a head in February had its origin in the summer of 1947, beginning with the gyrations of Czech policy on the Marshall Plan.
Ever since the Stalinists assumed the dominant role in the provisional government, the Czech bourgeoisie [1] placed its strongest hopes for salvation on international economic developments rather than on internal political developments. Czechoslovakia had always been an integral part of the European economy, with strong financial ties to Berlin, Paris and London. The giant Skoda plant, for instance, was a classic example of industrial control by international finance capitalism. Representatives of the banking interests of all the big capitalist powers sat on its board of directors. The bulk of its production was destined for the world market.
The Czech bourgeoisie, therefore, counted heavily upon the weight of economic factors pulling Czechoslovakia back to its pre-war orbit, despite the advanced stage of nationalization. That section of the Czech bourgeoisie which still possessed its productive property saw in the reintegration of Czechoslovakia in world economy the means by which the trends set in motion by nationalization could be brought to a halt; and the ever-hopeful big bourgeoisie, though expropriated, saw in it the means by which nationalization could be undone and private capitalism restored, even if, for a period, in close partnership with the state.
As a consequence of this perspective, the Czech bourgeoisie took a keen interest in Secretary of State Marshall’s announcement that the United States was prepared to underwrite a large-scale, unified plan for the economic rehabilitation of Europe. It would have an immeasurable effect upon the rebinding of Czechoslovakia’s broken ties with the West. However, Moscow took just as keen an interest in Marshall’s announcement and was just as quick to realize the effects of his plan. Yet Moscow sought first to probe the possibility of utilizing the offer of American aid for its own economic needs by forcing the United States to refrain from any interference in the administration of the funds in Europe. The Czech bourgeois parties utilized this period of maneuver on the part of Russia to press hard for a commitment by the Czechoslovakian government to participate in the Marshall Plan conference called for July in Paris.
On June 8, a Czechoslovakian government delegation,including Gottwald and Masaryk, departed for Moscow to discuss Russia’s policy on the Marshall Plan. During the Moscow talks, the Czech press was full of inferences that Czechoslovakia’s participation in the Paris conference was being decided in the Kremlin. When the delegation returned, Gottwald lashed out at those who suggested Russian domination of Czech affairs, saying: “The USSR in no way interferes in Czechoslovakia’s domestic affairs. She is conducting her own affairs in a way which suits Czechoslovakian conditions.” Gullible people were prepared to believe every word of Gottwald’s statement when, on July 7, the Czechoslovakian government announced that it had accepted the invitation of the British government to participate in the Paris conference and designated as its representative the Czech ambassador to France.
What brought about this decision to participate is not known at present. Whether it was the result of a misunderstanding with Moscow or in agreement with Moscow is not clear. Within three days of the announcement to participate,the Czech government made a complete about-face. On July 10, the Prague Radio announced the following:
The government held an extraordinary meeting today at which Czechoslovakian participation in the Paris conference was again discussed. It was ascertained that a number of countries, especially all Slav states and other countries of Central and Eastern Europe,had not accepted the invitation to this conference ... Under these circumstances Czechoslovakian participation would be interpreted as an act directed against our friendship with the Soviet Union and our other allies. For this reason the government decided unanimously not to take part in this conference.
In a space of three days the soaring hopes of the Czech bourgeoisie were dashed to the ground. Stalin had decided that the efforts to render the Marshall Plan harmless through maneuver were hopeless and that the die was cast. The fateful division of Europe, implicit since Potsdam, was now to be made explicit. The day so dreaded by the Masaryk school of Czech politicians, who talked of Czechoslovakia being a bridge between the East and the West, had come.
After the July 10 announcement, it was impossible for Czech politicians even to pretend that their country was facing both ways. For the Czech bourgeoisie as a whole, it was now crystal-clear that the perspective of eventual re-integration in the economy of Western Europe was ended. The internal political struggle was now the only possible escape from complete destruction at the hands of the Stalinists. The stage was cleared for the series of events that led up to February 20, 1948. [2]
 
The Crisis Over the Capital Levy
The withdrawal of Czechoslovakia from the Marshall Plan conference was followed by a Stalinist propaganda campaign to sell the people the idea that Czechoslovakia would secure greater economic benefits as a source of industrial products for the Russian sphere of Eastern Europe than it could expect from the Marshall Plan. This was backed by the conclusion of a Five Year Trade Agreement between Russia and Czechoslovakia, announced to coincide with the opening of the Marshall Plan talks in Paris. Those who knew the facts about Russia’s economic relations with its satellites were less inclined to take the trade agreement at its face value than were readers of the Stalinist press who eagerly sought for reassurance that Czech withdrawal from the Marshall Plan would not have an adverse effect upon economic life.
The uneasy summer had hardly drawn to a close before the first big political explosion in the showdown struggle between the bourgeois parties and the Stalinists took place. It resulted from a discussion in the cabinet on September 2 on ways and means to finance a plan to compensate the farmers for losses due to severe drought.
Gottwald proposed that six and a half billion Kcs. allotted to this purpose be raised through a capital levy on some 35,000 persons whose property exceeded one million Kcs. (roughly $20,000 at its legal rate). The other parties opposed the proposal and offered as a substitute a tax on incomes, saying that Gottwald’s schema “will not touch the proteges of the Communists, who hold important administrative positions, draw high salaries and live in great luxury.” Since the CP ministers formed a minority of the cabinet, the Stalinist demand for a capital levy was defeated.
On the day that the discussions were taking place, Slansky, the general secretary of the CP and Stalinist hatchet man, already warned that trouble would ensue if the National-Socialist [3] and Slovak Democratic Parties joined with the right-wing (Catholic) People’s Party in an anti-CP bloc. The real storm, however, broke on the following morning when Rude Pravo, the central organ of the CP, appeared with an account of the discussions in the cabinet and the names of the ministers who had voted against the capital levy in large block letters on the first page. Duris, the Stalinist Minister of Agriculture, took to the air over the government radio station in an appeal to the drought-ridden farmers, attacking the non-Stalinist ministers in the most offensive terms. The speech opened a full-scale agitational campaign by the Stalinists throughout the country, especially in rural areas. On September 5 teams of CP agitators left Prague for all parts of the country.
The Social-Democratic press reported a wave of agitation, accompanied by terror against dissidents, in the factories. The secretariat of the SDP issued a statement denouncing the CP for abusing the confidential discussions within the cabinet for purposes of propaganda and “electoral demagogy.” The statement ordered members of the SDP to refuse to sign CP petitions and resolutions being gathered in the factories in support of the Gottwald proposals and in condemnation of the ministers who had defeated it. The National-Socialist Party daily Svobodne Slovo reported a meeting of the party presidium on the crisis and stated that it was “impossible to tolerate publication of cabinet discussions in the press and, worse still, on posters.” [4] The Social-Democratic Minister of Industry, Lausman, threatened to resign in protest against the unrest and strikes which the CP agitation had called forth in the nationalized industries.
On September 11, the Social-Democratic Party called a mass meeting in Prague to rally its followers in the face of the crisis. Majer, right-wing leader and Minister of Food, said:
“Those guilty of intellectual terrorism and of spreading disunity are the best friends of the reactionaries. Their actions have violated the laws of the republic, and smack of brutal, inhuman Gestapoism. We Social-Democrats shall never consent to such methods. We know that further propaganda campaigns are being prepared ... We are always ready to cooperate, but we refuse to submit to any dictates.”
Lausman said at the same meeting: “Keep calm, for the time being we do not know which way the wind is blowing. Since May 1945 we have not been through such critical times.”
 
Tug of War Around the Social-Democrats
On the following day, the governmental impasse was ended as a result of an unexpected action on the part of the Social-Democrats. They signed an agreement with the Stalinists to form a socialist bloc within the National Front. Its main provision was for discussions between the two parties to achieve joint action on all important questions in the future. The Social-Democratic daily, Pravo Lidu, sought to explain the sudden change of party line by saying, “As a result of the general inability to achieve agreement ... the Social-Democratic Party decided to solve the crisis by starting negotiations with various other parties one by one. The approach of the Communist Party proved that its leaders were most understanding.” It hastened to add that the agreement was not directed against the other parties. In another explanation a few days later, Pravo Lidu added that “The agreement with the Communists did not mean the setting up of joint organizations, the holding of joint mass meetings, or the issuing of joint proclamations.”
This latter assurance seems to have been designed to calm the party’s right wing, one of whose leaders, Majer, resigned his government post in protest against the agreement. However, the agreement gave Gottwald a theoretical 51 per cent majority in the Assembly and caused the bourgeois parties to take a conciliatory course to end the crisis. (Simultaneous with the end of the crisis, the Security Police announced the arrest of eighty more “conspirators,” alleged to be in contact with the underground “Hlinka Guardists,” in Slovakia.) After a short breathing spell, vicious attacks on the bourgeois parties were resumed in the Stalinist press, Slansky saying on October 13 that “If the National-Socialist Party wants to remain a government party, its leaders must abandon their present subversive anti-state policy and expel from their ranks people of the type of Fierabend.”
The struggle between the bourgeois parties and the Stalinists now centered upon the growing factional situation in the Social-Democratic Party. As has been the case in all European countries where Stalinism became the main anti-capitalist force, the Social-Democracy, in the absence of a clear perspective of its own, began to be torn into two wings, each gravitating toward one of the two main centers of power. The 13 per cent of the Assembly seats held by the Social-Democracy became the immediate focal point of the struggle. Gottwald needed the solid support of the Social-Democratic deputies in order to preserve a parliamentary majority. The bourgeois parties needed a split in the Social-Democracy to form an anti-Stalinist majority. The Stalinists sought a Social-Democracy led by a Czech Nenni, while the bourgeois politicians sought a split in the Social-Democracy led by a Czech Saragat. Each side found its man. The Stalinist hopes were placed on Fierlinger, vice-premier and the party’s president. The bourgeois hopes were placed on Majer, leader of the intransigent right wing. Both wings of the party rallied their supporters for the coming congress of the SDP at Brno on November 14.
The line of the SDP since the liberation had been one of veering and tacking between the two big power concentrations. In questions of foreign policy, the SDP had followed a firm pro-Russian course, not unlike that of Benes-Masaryk. In economic questions, the SDP had been firmly, even aggressively, for the nationalization program. [5] It had taken the difficult Ministry of Industry and made one of its ablest men, Lausman, available for the post.
If foreign policy and nationalization brought the SDP into line with the CP, questions of political democracy and individual liberty brought the SDP into continual clashes with the Stalinists. The SDP opposed the Stalinist’s line on police powers, censorship, academic freedom, etc. The sharpest friction between the two parties, however, arose from the tactics employed by the Stalinists in the labor movement. The main pre-war base of the Social-Democracy had been its control of the trade-union movement. The new, unified trade-union movement came quickly under complete Stalinist domination, in large measure due to the pro-Stalinist role of leading Social-Democratic trade-unionists like Evzen Erban. The Social-Democratic press repeatedly protested against the atmosphere of terror which the Stalinists introduced into the unions and factories against those Social-Democrats who bucked the CP line. Aside from its traditional attachment to bourgeois democracy as an arena for parliamentary activity and the basis for a free labor movement, the Social-Democrats feared further CP inroads upon its already greatly shrunken mass base.
 
The Social-Democrats’ Dilemma
But as much as it feared the growing power of the Stalinists, the Social-Democracy also feared an anti-CP bloc of the bourgeois parties. It saw in the latter not only an anti-Stalinist force, but also a possible anti-labor and anti-socialist force. The victory of such an anti-CP bloc could denote a long swing to the right. Even more depressing was the fear that such a bourgeois anti-Stalinist bloc might lead to civil war, in the course of which the Social-Democracy would be torn to pieces regardless of who emerged victorious.
These fears in the ranks of the Social-Democracy found their expression in the alignment of forces at the Brno Congress. Neither Fierlinger nor Majer had a majority. A large bloc of delegates were afraid of both extremes. However, the increasingly open Stalinist course pursued by Fierlinger caused many loyal Social-Democrats to heed the charges of the right wing that the party president was steering a course toward organic fusion with the CP. As a result, an anti-Fierlinger majority emerged behind Lausman, who did not have the vehement anti-Stalinist record of Majer. Lausman defeated Fierlinger for the party presidency by a vote of 283 to 182. The 40 per cent of the vote received by the pro-Stalinist wing represented a solid base of support for the CP, which in a time of crisis would prove itself more potent than the variegated majority led by Lausman.
The defeat of Fierlinger, however, was a clear danger signal for the Stalinists. The Social-Democracy would now prove an unreliable ally, especially since the outcome of the Brno Congress was considered an implied rejection of the CP-SDP agreement for a socialist bloc. The Stalinist press launched an attack upon the SDP majority and called the election of Lausman “a victory of the right wing.” Lausman sought to mollify them with a pledge of allegiance to Russia,saying: “The efforts of true socialists throughout the world must rally around the Soviet Union, although their practical policy and tactics must take into account the particular conditions prevailing in their country.”
However, the Stalinist campaign was not abated. Hardly a day went by without heated and lively exchanges between Rude Pravo and Pravo Lidu, the central organs of the CP and SDP respectively. [6]
With the beginning of December, the government under-took a wide publicity campaign in connection with the arrival of the first shipments of “Soviet” grain to supplement the drought-depleted granaries of Czechoslovakia. The bourgeois press was soon printing notices that the grain was so inferior that it had created technical difficulties for the millers. The bulk of the grain was reported to have come from Rumania, Lithuania and East Prussia, rather than from the Ukraine. The freight cars that delivered the grain were sent back with sugar for Russia. The Stalinists utilized the grain shipments for a wide campaign of telegrams of thanks to Stalin personally, from trade unions, local government bodies, etc. The Stalinists did not limit themselves to a propaganda campaign against the Lausman Social-Democrats nor to whooping it up for Soviet grain. They had read the danger signals of the Brno Congress correctly. If they had been uncertain, the more aggressive tone assumed by the bourgeois parties after Fierlinger’s defeat convinced them of the drift of events. The Stalinists everywhere stepped up the pace of preparations for the final showdown.
Remembering some of the Marxist teachings, especially the knowledge that the essence of state power is its armed force,the Stalinists began to push through a reorganization of the Security Police to place reliable “party men” in all key posts. The bourgeois parties responded with an open attack, both in the Assembly and the press, upon the manipulations within the police force.
The Peoples’ Party deputy Bunza said that senior officers of the Security. Corps “made no secret of the fact that Communist Party members were given priority in appointments and promotion ... The most oppressive feeling which takes away the people’s joy of life and enthusiasm for work is fear of the ruling power, which knows neither moral nor political responsibility, and does not respect the freedom of the citizen.” The Stalinists answered with an announcement of the Security Corps head in Slovakia, General Ferjencik, that another “anti-state plot” had been uncovered and 207 persons arrested, most of them having alleged ties with the People’s Party or the Slovak Democratic Party.
 
The Terror Grows Bolder
The entire struggle now began to center on the Stalinists’ manipulation of the Security Police. An article by the National-Socialist deputy Hora on December 23 in the daily paper of his party, Svobodne Slovo, described Czechoslovakia as a “police state.” “Anyone who raises his voice in defense of the rights and liberties of man and protests against the heritage of the Protectorate and the Nazis, is immediately attacked as a protector and collaborator of traitors.” The Special Secret Department of the State Security authorities, according to Hora, was “screening civil servants before their promotion.” He demanded that the police cease acting as the agency of “a single party.”
The National-Socialist deputies submitted a memorandum to the Ministers of Social Welfare and of Industry drawing attention to the reign of terror in the factories. Complaints came in from Slovakia charging that the police were beating and tormenting arrested “plotters” to secure confessions. The chairman of the Slovak National Council was indicted in Prague for having “criticized” (!) the Stalinist editor of Prace, the central organ of the Revolutionary Trade Union Movement. The council refused to permit his extradition.
The year 1947 drew to a close amid alarms and growing tensions and the year 1948 opened with ominous forebodings of worse to come. The correspondent for Reuters closed out. his year’s work with the prediction that January would see a revolution in Czechoslovakia which would prove “the chief conflict for the future of Europe.” The trade-union daily, Prace, replied that “This will be assiduously spread by those who have been prognosticating and provoking a Communist revolution in Czechoslovakia.” (Italics not in original).
On January 8, a Communist Party conference of some 1,300 agitprop directors opened in Prague. The main themes were The New Czechoslovakian Patriotism and The Ideology of the New Czechoslovakia. The eager Stalinist agitators did not let the grass grow under their feet in demonstrating the “new ideology.” [7] Already on the following day, Pravo Lidu, the Social-Democratic daily, announced that a new wave of terror against dissidents had begun in the factories.
The fanatics are smashing up the unity of the trade unions ... Reports on the elections to the factory trade-union groups show that the propaganda machine of the political parties [a discreet circumlocution for the CP – E.E.] has again been in full use ... All improper practices are being employed to force people to vote in a certain way, instead of voting freely. Open threats against those who swim against the current are professed, including threats that they may lose their jobs ... Political terror in the factories is again on the agenda ... Even in factories with an uncontested Communist majority, the employees are fed up with these methods. [8]
On January 17, the Social-Democratic press published an important article exposing the Stalinist strategy for taking over all power. It stated that the Stalinists were grooming certain key people In all the other parties with the intention of splitting these parties at the decisive moment into “left” and “right” wings and reorganizing the National Committees on the basis of the “left” wings only.
The National-Socialist Party press announced that the days of great trial had arrived for the people of Czechoslovakia and called upon the people not to crack under CP pressure but to hold out for the elections. The latter had been expected in May, when the two-year term of the National Constituent Assembly would end. The National-Socialists now gave evidence that they did not think the anti-Stalinist forces could remain intact that long. The consolidation of police power by the Stalinists, the new arrests, the elimination of the remaining anti-Stalinist Social-Democrats from the trade-union apparatus, all indicated to them that the elections in May would find the Stalinists holding everyone by the throat, with an absolute CP majority a foregone conclusion.
 
The National-Socialist Strategy
Out of these considerations was born the new strategy of the bourgeois parties. This consisted of an intransigent. stand against the Stalinist domination of the police and a resignation from the government if the Stalinists refused to submit to a majority vote. The outcome of this tactic, they naively thought, would be immediate elections, with the return of an anti-CP majority.
The National-Socialists, in agreement with the People’s Party and the Slovak Democrats, began to unfold their strategy on February 5. They moved a proposal in the cabinet that a special committee of cabinet members be formed to investigate the Security Police. The proposal received seconds from all parties except the CP. The National-Socialists announced that they would present their proposal in resolution form for adoption at the next meeting. If the CP voted against, as it was obvious it would, the coalition would be broken up and the Assembly would have to constitute a new government on the police issue. The National-Socialists then proceeded to charge the Stalinists with obstructionist tactics in reference to the adoption of a constitution, and stated that if agreement could not be reached in ten days the Assembly should be dissolved and new elections held.
This demand convinced the Stalinists as to the strategy of the bourgeois parties and they began to make preparations to meet it. On February 8, a secret session of the central committee of the CP took place, according to National-Socialist sources. The preparations allegedly made at this session were such as would prepare the CP forces for either an immediate election or extra-legal mass action. Whether the preparations were made in this general form because the Czech Stalinist leadership, regarded as “weak sisters” in the Comintern from its earliest days, began to falter or whether it was necessary to wait for instructions from Moscow cannot, of course, be known now.
Events now began to move with great rapidity. On February 12, the National-Socialist deputies in the Assembly’s Security Committee, led by their party’s general secretary, Vladimir Krajina, secured the adoption of a motion ordering Minister of Interior Nosek to appear before the committee for questioning and meanwhile to end all transfers in the Security Police. On February 13, the non-Stalinist majority in the cabinet adopted an order instructing the Minister of Interior to cancel a regulation of the Security Police chief for Bohemia providing for the replacement of regional police heads by CP appointees.
The next cabinet session was scheduled for February 17. When the ministers assembled, the Stalinists stalled for time by stating that Nosek could not be present on account of illness. The matter was placed on the agenda for February 20. On the evening of the 17th, the CP issued a special appeal to the people, asking that they be on the alert for a reactionary coup against the Gottwald government.
On February 20, the National-Socialist ministers did not attend the cabinet meeting but asked Gottwald in writing whether the cabinet decision on the Security Police adopted on the 13th had been carried out. Gottwald replied that the Minister of Interior would report in person at the cabinet meeting, along with information of the discovery of a new “anti-state plot.” The National-Socialist ministers found the reply unacceptable and resigned their posts. The ministers belonging to the Slovak Democratic and People’s Parties did likewise. The Social-Democrats stated their agreement with the bourgeois ministers on the police issue but refused to resign.
The Stalinists denounced the ministers who resigned as traitors and reactionary enemies of the republic and announced that they would under no circumstances reconstitute a government with them. They called for a reorganization of the National Front in the form of a “People’s National Front.”
To back up their demands, they called the masses out into the streets for monster demonstrations, utilizing the trade-union apparatus for this purpose and calling them in the name of the trade unions. The high point of the demonstrations was a one-hour protest strike. The bourgeois parties, in turn, called upon the people to be calm and assured them that the crisis would be solved in a constitutional manner.
 
What Were the Action Committees?
Benes, meanwhile, procrastinated in accepting the resignations. He evidently feared that acceptance would result in the formation of a CP-SP government, having full claims to legal existence on the basis of a slight parliamentary majority. Procrastination might lead to a new compromise. At this point, the Stalinists took steps to break through the impasse and went over from mass demonstrations to a call issued by Gottwald, on the evening of the 22nd, for the formation of the now well-known “Action Committees.”
The Action Committees were extra-legal bodies, formed on a united-front basis with representatives of trade unions, farmers’ associations, youth organizations, cultural groups, partisans’ organizations, writers’ leagues, and pro-Stalinist dissidents from the other parties, most prominent among the latter being, of course, the Fierlinger Social-Democrats. The formal organization of the Action Committees differed from place to place and in each different sphere of action. However, the nucleus was everywhere provided by the CP.
A mass rally of representatives of the organizations enumerated above met on the evening of the 23rd and elected a Preparatory Central Action Committee to negotiate a new government. Action Committees were rapidly formed throughout the country on a local scale. Action Committees were also formed within the various mass organizations that were not yet under Stalinist control, like the Sokol movement. These Action Committees simply seized the headquarters of the various organizations, declared a reorganization of the leadership in such a manner as would place the neo-Stalinist types in control. In the localities, the Action Committees took over the functions of the National Committees by purging the latter of anti-Stalinists and reorganizing them with “reliable” people.
On February 24 the Fierlinger Social-Democrats seized control of the party headquarters and the party press and demanded that the party leadership support the Action Committees and the new government proposed by Gottwald. The Social-Democratic leaders capitulated, including Lausman,but excluding Majer and the intransigent right wing. Fierlinger was restored to the chairmanship of the party.
Meanwhile the Security Police announced the discovery of a plot on the part of the National-Socialist Party aimed at taking over the government by armed force. The Security Police raided the party headquarters and shut down its press. The headquarters of the Slovak Democratic and the People’s Parties were taken over by pro-Stalinist elements within those movements. On February 25 Benes accepted the resignations of the bourgeois ministers and prepared to accept the new slate of ministers which Gottwald submitted.
The struggle was over.
What the naive National-Socialists began as a clever strategy within parliamentary channels, the Stalinists ended with lightning moves that combined legal with extra-legal measures and police terror with mass action. The resignations, undertaken not in dismay but with stern purpose, unloosed a situation which the bourgeois parties had not calculated upon and which they could not hope to master.
Once the Stalinists began mobilizing their forces, the parliamentary constructions of 51–49 ratios and 38–62 ratios became mere paper work. What Trotsky said to the German workers in 1932 about the specific weight of the party that bases itself mainly on the industrial proletariat as compared to the party that draws its support from the general population remains true even when the proletariat serves as the mass base for Stalinism. [9]
 
The New Government
The Stalinist victory was not without its drawbacks, however. The initiative undertaken by the National-Socialists had prematurely forced the Stalinists’ hand in Czechoslovakia and upset their international timetable. The result was that the Czech coup had the effect of hastening American action on the Marshall Plan and rearmament and (it appears at the time of this writing) has had a detrimental effect upon the Stalinist chances in the Italian elections.
The new Gottwald cabinet reflected the composition of the Action Committees. Of the twenty-four members (including the unfortunate Masaryk), twelve were avowed members of the CP, although some represent non-party organizations, like the old veteran of the Czech Communist movement, Antonin Zapotocky, who became a vice-premier as a representative of the trade-union. movement. The Minister of National Defense, Ludvik Svoboda, a holdover from the previous cabinet, is officially listed as a non-party man but is unofficially regarded by nearly everyone as a representative of the Russian general staff.
The Social-Democrats were given five posts, including one for the former “anti-Stalinist” party chairman, Lausman. The latter, however, was not returned to his former important post at the head of the nationalized industry. This job now went to the more reliable Fierlinger. The National-Socialist, Slovak Democrat and People’s Parties were each given two posts.
It is not quite accurate, however, to say that these parties were given the posts. What really happened is that neo-Stalinist types from the ranks of these parties were given posts. These men are not responsible to their parties but are entirely creatures of the Stalinists. The National-Socialists in the cabinet are virtual unknowns. The People’s Party ministers are men who were on the verge of being expelled from their party before the coup. One of them, the Minister of Transportation, Alois Petr, is one of the few prominent trade-union leaders from the ranks of the bourgeois parties. His elevation to the cabinet was, no doubt, motivated by a desire to enhance support from among the Catholic workers of Slovakia. The appearance of Zapotocky, president of the trade-union movement, of Erban, the secretary-general, and of Petr indicates a conscious effort to weight the cabinet with known leaders of the workers’ economic struggles.
The other People’s Party member in the cabinet is the priest, Father Josef Plojhar, serving as Minister of Health. He is typical of the neo-Stalinist type-part careerist, part confused idealist, part faker – so well illustrated in this country by Henry Wallace.
On February 27, Benes, war-time lecturer at the University of Chicago on how to make democracy work and the man who tried to outsmart Stalin, whimpered to the thundering Gottwald, “You speak to me like Hitler” – and humbly affixed his signature to the paper that made the new cabinet official. Czechoslovakia was eingeschalten. The new bureaucratic-collectivism was firmly in the saddle and the Minister of Interior, Nosek, spoke the truth when he informed the country in a radio speech that a membership card in the Communist Party is “today the most valuable paper in political life.”
* * *
Footnotes
1. “Bourgeoisie” is used here in a very inclusive sense. It is used to embrace both those bourgeois still in possession of their properties and those whose properties had been nationalized, as well as all pro-bourgeois elements like landowners, the Catholic hierarchy, a large section of the Protestant clergy, and those politicians, technicians, professionals, journalists, army officers, etc., who found their conditions better before the war and yearned for a return to their former status. It must be remembered in any discussion of the Czech events that a bourgeoisie in the traditional sense no longer existed after the nationalization of 65 per cent of the economy, including all the major units.
2. The effect of Czechoslovakia’s withdrawal from the Marshall Plan upon its internal affairs can be seen from the wild rumors of an impending CP coup which circulated in the country during July. The press of all the parties united in calming the public with reassurances, and even the most conservative papers referred to the rumors as being “fantastically untrue.”
3. The National-Socialist Party was not strictly a bourgeois party in the formal sense of the term. It traditionally considered itself a socialist party. though it rejected Marxism and based itself upon the anti-Marxist revisionist theories represented by Sombart, Böhm-Bawerk, Struve and, in Czechoslovakia, the elder Masaryk. Though it espoused “Czech socialism” and called for measures of economic socialization in its program, it never did anything serious toward achieving them. The National-Socialists had a considerable stratum of well-paid workers among their supporters and several trade unions were organized under their inspiration. It is therefore not quite accurate to compare their party to one like the Radical Socialists in France or the New Deal in the U.S. Its closest counterpart in European politics, perhaps, would be the Polish “Fraki,” Pilsudski’s right-wing split off from the Polish Socialist Party in the period before its complete degeneration. Like the Czech National-Socialists the “Fraki” believed in a “national socialism” which was, more accurately, a “socialistic nationalism.”
4. This statement went on to discuss the proposal for a capital levy and stated that it was wrong from a socialist point of view. It would strengthen the position of the new privileged classes, “living in the style of millionaires, who enjoy every comfort and luxury, thanks to the villas and limousines which they have been allocated by the authorities and to their high incomes. Their luxury standards would remain unaffected if the Communist proposals were accepted, for the tax returns of these people showed them to be property-less – in form only ... The Communist press campaign gives the impression that we are witnessing something more than a mere pre-election maneuver. Perhaps reactionary elements have wormed their way into the Communist Party with a view to achieving the collapse of the peoples’ government and of the National Front.”
5. It has been reported that the SDP initiated the proposal for the immediate nationalization of all enterprises employing over 200 workers at the time the Kosice program of the National Front was being formulated. The Stalinists hesitated on it, perhaps in order to check with Moscow first. Once they made up their minds, they took the play away from the SDP on this issue.
6. The internal differences between the two parties were exacerbated by the establishment of the Cominform and the renewal of links between the Social-Democrats and the labor movement of the West, especially the British Labor Party. According to some sources, the fraternal delegates of the British Labor Party at the Brno Congress played an important behind-the-scenes role in the defeat or Fierlinger and the election of Lausman.
7. While the CP was mobilizing its forces and making dire threats, the Czech press carried the speech of Premier Dmitrov (the Gottwald of Bulgaria) in which he warned the socialist opposition in the Parliament as follows:
“I have many times warned the members of Nikola Petkov’s group, but they did not listen. They lost their heads and their leader now lies buried. Reflect on your own actions lest you suffer the same fate ... If you have not learned and do not try to learn your lesson, you will get a lesson you will remember forever ... At a moment when the budget Is being submitted to the National Assembly, miserable chatterers, who talk like foreign gramophone records, stand up here to create a disturbance ... This will lead to no good for you ... If you will not vote for the budget, you will not fulfill your duty as people”s representatives. Such as you have no place in the Grand National Assembly.”
8. On the same day the Stalinist press carried two significant items. One was a demand by Slansky, the CP boss, that there be a purge of the army, especially of those who “slander ... our Slav allies.” The other was that Gottwald had received a letter from Stal1n himself, promising that a “great delegation of Soviet gymnasts” would soon arrive to partake In the coming Sokol conference.
9. “... in the social struggle. votes are not decisive. The main army of fascism still consists of the petty bourgeoisie and new middle class; the small artisans and shopkeepers of the cities, the petty officials, the employees, the technical personnel, the intelligentsia, the impoverished peasantry. On the scale of election statistics, one thousand fascist votes weigh as much as a thousand Communist votes. nut on the scales of the revolutionary struggle, a thousand workers in one big factory represent a force a hundred times greater than a thousand petty officials. clerks, their wives and their mothers-in-law ... The Social-Revolutionists were the party of the greatest numbers in the Russian Revolution ... They turned out to be a great national zero.” Leon Trotsky, Germany – The Key to the International Situation, p. 21.
 



The main source of information used in compiling this account of the development of Stalinism in Czechoslovakia is the excellent weekly news bulletin, East Europe, published in English in London. All materials referred to as appearing in the Czech or Slovak press are from its weekly press summaries, unless otherwise noted. East Europe has supplied a unique and invaluable service in covering the press of the Eastern European countries for the last two years. Though differing widely with the political views of its editors, I unhesitatingly recommend it for its objective, factual news coverage. Its address is: East Europe, 16 Chester Bow, S.W.1 London, England. The subscription rate is £2 12s. a year. A single copy sells for one shilling.
 



“The way to liberated Czechoslovakia leads through Moscow. Soon all Europe will be free.”
These words were spoken by Eduard Benes, president of the Czechoslovak Republic, in Moscow on March 17, 1945.
This March, three years later, a broken and cowed Benes, tears streaming down his face, followed to the grave the body of his close collaborator, Jan Masaryk, to whom death had come suddenly and violently as an aftermath of the Stalinist coup. With Masaryk was laid into the grave the last hopes of the Czech bourgeoisie to reconstruct their pre-war parliamentary state and salvage some degree of social and economic power. Czechoslovakia’s “liberation” had not only led through Moscow, but “Moscow” had come to Prague to make certain that its special form of “liberation” would become permanent. The Russian armies brought with them not only Benes but also Klement Gottwald. Events soon showed that the “liberation” was not cut to fit Benes’s pattern but that of Gottwald.
Public opinion in the West was shocked more by the comparative ease with which the Stalinist machine consolidated its power during the five days of the revolutionary overturn than by its ruthlessness. Yet an analysis of the events in Czechoslovakia during the last two and a half years reveals that the Czech Communist Party had so systematically and thoroughly prepared the ground that the final seizure of power became almost an aftermath. The forces that confronted each other during the February days were so unequal that there could not have been the slightest doubt about the outcome.
Not only were the bourgeois-democratic forces stripped of all real power long before the final test, but they were hopelessly disoriented and continually off balance. Appearing in the eyes of the workers less as the defenders of democratic rights and more as the defenders of private property, the bourgeois-democratic camp was, in the very nature of the situation, constantly on the defensive. Their first efforts to take the initiative during the early part of February revealed them to be utterly naive vis-à-vis the Stalinists. The childish strategy of the resignations, designed to force early elections, merely played into the hands of the Stalinists by permitting their coup to appear as a defensive counter-measure. The events assumed the appearance of a contest between raw amateurs and hardened professionals.
While the bourgeois-democratic camp conducted itself as if the parliamentary institutions and rules were inviolable, the Stalinists did not overlook a single possibility that promised to give them added advantage. They exploited every question that permitted itself to be twisted for their use – from the Czech’s fear of a revived Germany to Slavic chauvinism and anti-Semitism. Stalinist propaganda was in turn cynical, hypocritical, demagogic and ruthless. It bespoke at all times an unbending will to conquer to which all else was subordinated. It conveyed to its opponents the well-founded impression that an effort to obstruct the Stalinist march to power would result in oceans of blood. It made effective use of the technique of paralyzing the enemy’s will to resistance, first developed in political warfare by the Nazis. Its tactics and propaganda exuded an air of self-confidence, of determination and of overwhelming force, in the face of which its opponents were gripped with a feeling of helplessness, indecision and futility. The advantages on the side of the Stalinists in Czechoslovakia proved so overpowering, that they produced a psychology of terror which sufficed to carry the day.
 
The Long Shadow of Munich
The factors that combined to set the stage for the Stalinists go back a number of years in recent Czech history, beginning with the Munich betrayals.
The imprint which the latter left upon the Czech people has never been fully appreciated in the West. The Czechs have never forgotten the bitter memories of their national degradation at the hands of the four powers at Munich. As children of Versailles, born of the machinations of Wilson, Clemenceau and Lloyd George, the Czechs regarded the role of France and England at Munich as a form of infanticide against their own offspring. Their very sufferings under the Gestapo were linked in the minds of the Czechs to the role of their Western allies.
In contrast, the Czechs felt a warmth and gratitude to the Russians as a result of the latter’s offers of military assistance at the time of Munich. The legend of Russia’s fidelity was so strong that not even the Hitler-Stalin pact could destroy it. Munich, in short, left the Czechs with fear and hatred of the Germans, suspicion of England and France, and friendship for the Russians.
Beginning with the German invasion of Russia, the Czech Stalinists began to play an active and increasingly important role in the anti-Nazi resistance movement. Their political line was one of unbridled chauvinism, vying with and outdoing the most ardent Czech nationalists. The forces they brought to the resistance were exceedingly important both in numbers and in composition. The Czechoslovak Communist Party had been a mass workers’ party from its inception in 1921. In 1923 it reported 132,000 members, organized in over 3,000 local groups and was considerably larger than the Czech Social-Democratic Party. It was the third largest party in the Comintern – only the Russian and German exceeded it. Though it lost much proletarian support to the Social-Democrats in the late twenties as a result of right-wing splitoffs, it recouped much of it during the crisis years of the thirties and added a considerable petty-bourgeois layer during the People’s Front period.
In addition to numbers, the Czech Stalinists brought to the resistance movement their valuable network of factory cells. With Czech industry playing a vital role in the Nazis’ munitions program, especially after the mass bombings of Germany were under way, an organized resistance among the industrial workers was a power far more weighty for the liberation movement than was represented by the demobilized officer caste, university students, lawyers and shopkeepers. With each Russian military advance after 1943, the influence of the Czech Stalinists rose, especially among the Partisan fighters who received Russian equipment and officers by parachute in the last stages of the war.
As the Russian armies penetrated Czechoslovakian territory from the east toward the west and the Nazi military machine began to crumble, the resistance carried through a successful insurrection in Prague on May 5, 1945. Since the Stalinists played the leading role in the uprising, the Czech capital fell into their hands even before the Russian army arrived. [1] This gave them added bargaining power in the crucial period that followed.
 
Effect of Russian Occupation
On the whole, the Russian occupation of Czechoslovakia seems to have been accompanied by far less looting and rape than occurred elsewhere. The close cooperation between the Czech Partisans and the Russian army, the similarity of language and a policy of stricter discipline seems to have been effective in restraining the Russian soldiers. Having known German occupation for seven years, the Czech population was inclined to view the conduct of the Russian troops as the inevitable tendency to lawlessness that characterizes every army in a strange country under frontline conditions.
The occupation by the Russian army, bringing with it swarms of GPU agents, was of short duration (some five months) but left a decisive imprint on the political relations within the country. It was during the Russian occupation that the provisional government was organized with the CP receiving the key posts. In keeping with the integral character of Stalinism, once having secured the inside track the Stalinists were never to voluntarily surrender it.
The program of the provisional government had been agreed upon earlier in Kosice in a meeting of the representatives of all political tendencies in the liberation movement, officially known as the National Front of Czechs and Slovaks. Its main provisions were for the establishment of a purely Slavic state, the division of large estates among the peasants, and the nationalization of large industry. This program suited the needs of the Stalinists perfectly and they utilized it for all it was worth. Throughout all the later political skirmishes the Stalinists were to parade as the defenders of the Kosice program and to denounce their opponents as traitors to it.
Another factor which colored the Czech political scene in the post-war period and of which the Stalinists made effective use was the fear of a revived German military power. The speeches and writings of all Czech statesmen are studded with references to it. Benes and Masaryk set the pace in whipping up this fear. Fear of Germany played the decisive role in shaping Czech foreign policy. In this instance too, the Stalinists were able to make political capital. They became the most blatant German-haters, ever ready to accuse their opponents of weakening Czechoslovakia in the face of the German threat.
The reverse side of the coin of anti-Germanism was, of course, pro-Russianism. If Germany is our main enemy, only an alliance with Russia can save us, ran the Czech argument. “Russia stood by us at the time of Munich.” “The Russian army liberated us from the Nazis.” “Russia is our only firm friend and ally.” These themes were played over and over again by all Czech politicians, regardless of party. However, no one could play these themes as loudly, as frequently and in as many different keys as could the Czech Stalinists. When it comes to praising Russia, no one can hope to outdo the experts in this field.
The Stalinists made of “friendship for the USSR” the test of loyalty to the new Czechoslovak state. A politician who dared speak without taking a bow to the east was already suspect. When a writer in the opposition press stated that the price which Czechoslovakia was paying for her alliance with Russia was well worth it, the CP press came down on him like an avalanche, saying, in effect: “What does this anti-Soviet element mean by saying that Czechoslovakia pays a ‘price’ for its alliance with Russia?” Spanish socialist refugees were expelled from Czechoslovakia on the charges that they had “a hostile attitude toward the USSR.”
Czech Stalinists could argue reasonably that if friendship with Russia is Czechoslovakia’s only salvation in the future, is not that friendship best guaranteed by having the most pro-Russian party at the head of the state? The protests of the other politicians that “friendship for Russia is not the monopoly of any one party” could not hope to destroy the logic of the Stalinist argument.
 
Pan-Slavism – Race Theory of Benes-Gottwald
But the pro-Russian orientation was motivated not only by considerations of foreign policy. It found further support in the acceptance by all the large Czech parties of a race doctrine – Pan-Slavism. This vile political philosophy, product of the most reactionary Czarist circles, was revived by the Kremlin during the war to implement its policy in Eastern Europe; an All-Slav Committee was formed with headquarters in Moscow. This Stalinist demagogy found greater response from the Czech petty bourgeoisie, main support of the Benes National Socialist Party [2], than anywhere else among the Slav peoples.
The Czech Stalinists, of course, became the most ardent Slavophiles. If Russia was “our big Slav brother,” were not the Czech Stalinists – who not only gloried in Slavic culture and language but also gloried in the political system of the Slavic heartland – the best representatives of Pan-Slavism? Was not Gottwald, whose political home was in Moscow, a better spokesman for Slavism than Benes, whose political home was in London? When Jan Masaryk proudly proclaimed to the National Assembly, “We Slavs now step before the world united” (July 17, 1946), he was merely introducing the thought which thousands of Communist Party agitators completed by adding “... under the leadership of the Great Stalin.”
The Pan-Slavic doctrine was given a political form and became the basis for state measures as soon as the republic was re-established. It took form in the inhumanly conceived and brutally executed policy of “cleaning” the territory of the republic of all non-Slavic minorities to achieve the Hitler ideal of a pure national state. This goal was achieved by driving two and a half million Sudeten Germans and a half million Hungarians out of the country (nearly 30 per cent of the pre-war population of Czechoslovakia). This monstrous action is without precedent in modern history before the advent of Hitler and Stalin, and only Hitler’s treatment of the Jews exceeded it in cynical brutality.
The Germans and Hungarians were driven from communities they had inhabited for over six centuries. They were forced to vacate their homes, farms and businesses upon notice that varied between ten minutes and two hours. The deportees were rounded up in concentration camps, driven along roads, or loaded into cattle cars and trucks. They were robbed of all their worldly goods with the exception of what they could carry on their backs. They were taken to the Hungarian frontier and to the frontiers of the American and Russian zones of Germany and unceremoniously dumped into the open fields. Many, especially the aged and the children, died by the roadside for lack of food and shelter. [3]
The Stalinists and the bourgeois nationalists vie with each other in claiming the “credit” for this policy of barbarism. Speaking to the Provisional National Assembly in March 1946, Dr. Ivo Duchacek of the (Catholic) People’s Party, which stands to the right of Benes’s National Socialist Party, argued:
We want to exclude nobody from this success, though it is true that, e.g., the Communist Party had in the years 1939, 1940 and 1941 no such clear and uncompromisingly Slavonic conceptions in this matter as it has today. However, I regard it as a downright falsification of history and as a building up of legends, which I do not hesitate to call pre-election legends, if the Communists, of all parties, assert that mainly to them or almost alone to them the credit for the transfer of the Germans from our country is due. [Lidova Democracie, March 9, 1946, quoted in Der Sozial Demokrat, London, May 1946.]
The Communists got the better of the argument, however, by pointing out that the mass expulsion was only possible as a result of agreement with the big powers and that this was secured due to Russian influence at the Potsdam Conference. Furthermore, everyone knew that the actual operations against the Germans and Hungarians were carried out under the jurisdiction of the brutal Stalinist Minister of the Interior, Vaclav Nosek.
The expulsion of the Sudetens resulted in a loot of real estate, buildings, industrial equipment and personal possession’s valued at more than four billion dollars! In accordance with the nationalization policy, to be discussed later, almost all manufacturing and commercial enterprises were declared state property to be operated by the state. However, the farms (valued at $1,200,000,000), homes and personal possessions were distributed or sold to “worthy Czech patriots.” This accumulation of wealth gave its dispensers political patronage that would make any politician green with envy. Since the Stalinist Minister of the Interior passed on who was a “worthy Czech patriot,” there is little need to go into details on what followed.
The Sudetenland and the corner of Slovakia formerly inhabited by the Hungarians were converted into Communist Party strongholds. Not only were the farms settled with loyal Stalinists or those who proved pliable instruments, but a huge bureaucracy, composed of faithful party supporters, was set up to administer the resettled districts. Such settlers as may have had other political views than the Stalinists soon learned that it was not in keeping with their designation as “worthy Czech patriots” to voice them. Slavism as a state policy paid off well for the Stalinists, much better for them than for the traditional Czech nationalists like Benes and Masaryk.
 
Economic Consequences of Expulsions
The economic consequences of the mass expulsions were catastrophic. “Owing to unforeseen circumstances [3a], the eviction of the Germans had to be carried out faster than was anticipated, and the border region was suddenly faced with large ownerless herds of cattle and empty villages.” (Report of Minister of Agriculture, October 14, 1946)
Since the expulsions were carried out during the summer, the crops were left standing in the fields and mostly went to waste. The result was a sudden shortage of foodstuffs, followed by increased prices and growth of black-marketeering. This, too, played into the hands of the Stalinists by making necessary the importation of grain from the Stalinist-dominated countries of Eastern Europe and Russia, thereby tying Czechoslovakian economic relations more firmly to the Russian bloc. The disorganization of agriculture in the resettled regions continued in 1947 and was further aggravated by a severe drought that affected the entire country. The importation of Russian grain became necessary and every delivery was accompanied by a big Stalinist propaganda campaign in favor of Russia to offset the good will for the United States that had been created by UNRRA aid. Inspired telegrams from all over the country were sent to Stalin personally. Typical was that of the Slovak Board of Commissioners, ruling provincial body, on December 6, 1947: “The catastrophic harvest caused a serious situation in Slovakia which, without your help, could not be solved.”
Another economic consequence of the expulsions was the creation of a sudden labor shortage. Among the expelled Sudetens were Czechoslovakia’s most skilled workers in textiles, glass, porcelain, toys, musical instruments and other industries that accounted for a large part of the Czech export trade. Among them also were the indispensable miners from the Sudeten coal fields.
To make sure that the newly nationalized industries in these border regions were a success, the Stalinists (and also the Social-Democratic heads of the Ministry of Industry) did their utmost to attract Czech workers to settle in the vacant cities. They were offered their choice of a home, furniture, bicycles, etc. The resulting movement of workers from the Czech industrial centers created a labor shortage of crisis proportions on a national scale.
To this was added the fact that the farmers in the resettled regions demanded farm labor to get in the crucial crops, and farm labor was already scarce in the rest of the country. As a consequence, the 100 per cent “Slavicizers” decided to keep some 310,000 Sudetens and 200,000 Hungarians on the sacred Slavic soil of Czechoslovakia – but only as laborers and under conditions that make of them virtual slave laborers. Since they are non-Slavs and will be driven out when no longer needed, these technicians, skilled workers and farm laborers are not granted rights of citizenship. They are specifically prohibited from belonging to a trade union. They are not permitted to share in social security benefits. One-fourth of their wages is deducted by the state for “reparations” to compensate for losses due to the Nazi occupation. They are not entitled to the vacations legally granted all Czech workers. Their children have been deprived of public education since May 1945. (Der Sozial Demokrat, Sept. 1947)
 
Slavism Gives Rise to Anti-Semitism
The old dictum that no people can enslave another without becoming enslaved itself worked with cruel speed in Czechoslovakia. The utilization of the German and Hungarian “slave laborers” proved insufficient to resolve the labor shortage and it became necessary to pass a National Labor Mobilization Act, which provided for compulsory labor. Labor camps were opened to assemble persons judged to be either evading work or working at non-essential jobs.
The right of designating who was to be placed in the labor brigades – assigned mainly to work in mines, construction projects and agriculture – was placed in the hands of the local National Committees, the composition of which, as we will see later, was either directly Stalinist or Stalinist-dominated. The result of the labor shortage and the compulsory labor draft was to place another weapon in the hands of the Communist Party. They put this weapon to effective use, especially during the crucial February days, by threatening those of whose support they were not sure with dismissal from their posts and, as unemployed, assignment to the labor brigades.
The wild chauvinism unleashed by the doctrine of a purely Slavic state had still other consequences. It gave rise to reactionary demands for the expulsion of all residents of any foreign extraction. This agitation became serious enough for the government to make an official announcement that no citizen of the Czechoslovak Republic of Slav extraction would be forced to leave, thus setting at ease the Polish and Ruthenian (Carpatho-Ukrainian) settlements in Slovakia.
The evil doctrine of racial homogeneity could not be unloosed upon the country without affecting that segment of the population which is always its inevitable victim – the Jews.
Already thousands of Jews had been victimized in the expulsion of the Sudetens and Hungarians. If Hitler refused to accept the German Jews as Germans, the Czech racists now refused to accept the German Jews as Jews. Since the Jews had lived among the Sudetens and Hungarians for many generations and had adopted their language and culture, the Czechs looked upon them as part of those minorities. Those Jews in Sudetenland who managed to escape the Gestapo dragnet were now dumped into Germany along with the Sudetens. Many Jews who returned from Nazi concentration camps found their businesses confiscated and their homes occupied by Czech settlers, and even experienced difficulty in securing ration books. On March 2, 1947, the Prague radio, mouthpiece of the Stalinist-controlled Ministry of Information, denied the charges of Jewish organizations that Jews were being forced to leave Czechoslovakia by means of refusing them jobs and rations.
On August 6, 1946, the evil seeds of racism sprouted in typical fashion when a rally of former Partisan fighters in Bratislava ended in an anti-Semitic pogrom. The Stalinists attributed it to the machinations of the underground remnants of the Hlinka movement, the Slovakian clerico-fascist allies of the Nazis. How they could have brought about a pogrom by the veterans of the anti-Nazi underground was not made clear.
Most of the Jewish refugees who returned to Czechoslovakia after the war found it impossible to regain their business property which had been taken by the Nazis, even where the size of the business did not make it liable to nationalization. Court actions by Jews to regain such property gave rise to much anti-Semitic agitation among the workers, especially among the employees of such establishments. On May 22, 1947, the Stalinist-led Revolutionary Trade Union Movement (sic!) in Varnsdorff called a strike to prevent a Jewish businessman from operating the establishment that had been legally returned to him. Deputy Hora, of the National Socialist Party, speaking before the Parliamentary Security Committee which investigated the strike, reported that in Varnsdorff the Communist Party was alone in supporting the strike action and that CP speakers made anti-Semitic speeches to the strikers. He also quoted one as saying: “The laws are made in Prague but we shall change them here to suit our needs. Our party will not tolerate a single private enterprise.”
 
CP Purge Kept Going
Another factor in the post-war political scene in Czechoslovakia that served the Stalinists well was the purge policy against those who had collaborated with the Nazis. The big bourgeoisie was, of course, the most collaborationist during the occupation. The proletariat was, again of course, the least. The in-between layers of the population tended to collaborate in proportion to their property and rank. As a consequence the Stalinists, whose main base was in the proletariat, favored as thoroughgoing a purge as possible.
As soon as the liberation took place, the Stalinists took the lead in carrying out the “purge of public life” which all parties had adopted as the program of the National Front. The purge became a terrible weapon in the hands of the Communist Party. Long after the genuine collaborationists had disappeared from the public scene, the Stalinists continued to make fresh charges in their press and demand new trials. When it became impossible to make the charge of collaborationist stick because of the known anti-Nazi role of a public figure, they would accuse him of “shielding collaborationists” by opposing further purges. The result was that the “purge atmosphere” continued to play an important role in Czechoslovakian politics long after it became a dead issue, even with the Stalinists, in the Western European countries.
In large measure, the prolonged “purge atmosphere” was related to the question of Slovak separatism. The latter has roots that go back many years in the history of the Czechoslovak Republic. The Czech bourgeoisie controlled the big banks and heavy industry of the state and their political agents dominated the political apparatus. The Czech petty bourgeoisie – urban, cultured, “Western” and secular in its politics – looked upon the Slovaks – agrarian, poorly educated, priest-ridden – as an inferior people. The Slovaks resented the domination of the republic by the Czechs, especially since the latter did not compose the majority of the population.
In the early period of the Communist Party, when it was still inspired by Leninist principles on the national question, it had been a vigilant defender of the rights of the Slovaks to equality in the affairs of the republic, despite the domination of Slovak political life by the clergy. As a result, the Communist Party achieved considerable influence among the proletarians of the towns and, to some extent, among the agricultural laborers. These points of support among the Slovak population, although numerically insignificant compared with its position in the industrial centers of Bohemia and Moravia, served the CP well during the resistance and the liberation.
The economic crisis of the thirties had given a considerable impetus to anti-Czech feeling in Slovakia and had also produced the native clerico-fascist Hlinka movement which had definite separatist tendencies. When the Czechoslovak Republic began to disintegrate under Hitler’s blows, the Hlinka movement came to an understanding with Berlin and was permitted to set up a separate Slovak state with the diminutive priest-politician, Tiso, at its head. The Slovak state became a German satellite in the war and furnished troops for the German military campaigns in the East, both for the invasion of Poland [4] and, later, of Russia.
From all appearances, the Tiso regime had a considerable mass support, especially among the peasants. Some estimates of objective observers are that easily 75 per cent of the population supported the regime. This support can be accounted for by such factors as these: (a) The puppet state had saved the Slovaks from Nazi occupation, (b) The influential Catholic clergy gave it ardent support, (c) The peasants received relatively good prices for their crops from the Germans, especially in the first years of the war. (d) The Germans constructed a considerable war industry in Slovakia, including the removal of plants from Germany, because it was beyond the range of enemy bombers.
As a result of the above factors, the majority of the Slovak population could be said to be guilty of collaboration with the Nazis. The Slovak CP, therefore, was able to play the leading role in the Slovak resistance, despite its small numbers. Much of the Stalinist resistance took the form of guerrilla bands, since the Slovakian terrain (forests and mountains) lent itself to this type of fighting. After the invasion and occupation of Slovakia by the Russian army, the Stalinist-led Partisans had a field day in cleaning up collaborationists – they had almost a whole nation to work on. Once the Stalinists had entrenched themselves both in Prague and in the Slovakian provisional government, the withdrawal of the Russian troops did not affect their role as the organizers of the purge in Slovakia. Since the bulk of the Slovak public figures, both major and minor, were guilty of collaboration, they were at the mercy of the CP. The most effective way of saving themselves was either to join the CP or to become its docile tool in whatever party or organization they remained.
The Czech population had been justly outraged by the pro-Hitler-role of the Slovaks. In addition, they felt that they had been deserted in their hour of trial. As a result, “Slovak separatism” became the most heinous of political crimes – really high treason – in the eyes of the Czech nationalist politicians. They were resolved to weld together the new republic in such a manner that Slovak separatism would never again be a threat. The Czech Stalinists, of course, immediately presented themselves as the firm anti-Slovak-separatist party. Were they not taking the lead in cleaning up the separatist collaborationists in Slovakia? Every manifestation of opposition to the Stalinists in Slovakia was immediately denounced by the CP press with cries of “separatist sabotage of the republic.” [5]
In Slovakia, on the other hand, the Stalinists were able to pass themselves off as the only party which could be trusted with the defense of Slovakian interests at Prague. After all, argued the Slovak Stalinists, is not our comrade, Gottwald, an old enemy of the Czech bourgeoisie, at the head of the government?
 
Post-War Role of the Partisans
If everything else failed them in Slovakia, the Stalinists could always rely upon pressure through their Partisans’ organization. The latter, of course, enjoyed great political capital in a nation that had undergone seven years of occupation by the Nazis. The political weight of the Partisans was incomparably greater than that of the war veterans in other countries. Once the liberation had been achieved, the non-Stalinists among the Partisans tended to lose themselves once more in the civilian population. Not so the Stalinist Partisans. Their important function was just beginning. They did not dismantle their organizations and, instead of disarming, secreted their weapons for future use. Demonstrations by threatening Partisans (and who isn’t a Partisan when the party needs support?) often carried the day against recalcitrant majorities in local National Committees.
The role of the Partisans in Slovakia became especially pronounced in the summer of 1947 in connection with the invasion of Czechoslovakian territory by the “Banderovici” – the anti-Stalinist Ukrainian Partisans. [6]
Just how many Banderovici penetrated the frontiers is not known. The Stalinists raised a huge alarm and undertook a great propaganda campaign to awaken the people to the Banderovici danger. Prominent in their propaganda were accusations that public officials and Slovak Democratic Party members were supplying the invaders with hiding places in the mountains and providing them with food, in preparation for an imminent uprising of the separatists, led by the underground Hlinka movement. The aim of the uprising, they claimed, was to re-establish the separate Slovak state and wipe out the loyal supporters of the united republic.
On the basis of this campaign the Stalinist Partisan movement demanded to be supplied with arms with which to repel the invasion. The non-Stalinists, not only in Slovakia but in Prague, were alarmed at the prospect of the armed Partisans running amok in Slovakia, and the National Socialist Party and Slovak Democratic Party press denounced the whole anti-Banderovici campaign as a “bogy” intended to give the Stalinists control of Slovakia. Despite these protests, Prague radio announced on Sept. 5 that armed Partisan units were cooperating with the army and Security Police against the Banderovici.
The Slovak Stalinists used the anti-Banderovici campaign and the arming of the Partisans as the occasion to demand the renewal of purges in the Slovak civil service. Demonstrations of the Partisans backed up this demand, and on September 2 the Slovak Board of Commissioners announced that it had decided to carry out the purge as demanded by the Partisans. Gottwald used the occasion to call upon the Slovak people to get rid, once and for all, of elements who had served Hitler.
 
Nationalization and Workers’ Control
From the long-range point of view, the most telling blow struck the Czech bourgeoisie was the elimination of the big capitalists as a result of the Nazi occupation, the purge of the collaborationists and the expulsion of the minorities. The elimination of the big capitalists was made permanent by the policy of nationalization of economic enterprises employing 200 or more workers, agreed to by all parties adhering to the National Front. Without the pressure of the Stalinists and the Social-Democrats (the latter proving themselves ardent nationalizers) the bourgeois-democratic parties would have disposed of the industries rendered ownerless for political reasons by finding private interests to take them over. Once the Stalinists got their bearings in liberated Czechoslovakia, they made the nationalized economy their special concern and constantly sought to extend it. This role of the Stalinists coincided with the desires of the workers and did much to enhance the prestige of the Communist Party in the working class.
However, the interests of the Stalinists and those of the workers did not always coincide in regard to the nationalized economy. The workers saw in nationalization the means of ridding themselves of all bosses, not merely private owners, and of achieving economic democracy on a plant level. The Stalinists saw in nationalization a means of (1) eliminating the bourgeoisie as rival aspirants for power; (2) providing thousands of bureaucratic jobs with which to build a firm layer of supporters; and (3) coordinating Czech industry with the new economic order being introduced into Eastern Europe by Russia. These differing interests – really the difference between the socialist collectivism of the working class and the bureaucratic collectivism of the Stalinists – gave rise to a number of specific problems.
Many of the enterprises were taken over during the liberation days by the workers in the shops driving out the collaborationist managements and German representatives. The workers sought to organize production through the medium of the Works Councils or, as they have generally been called in the revolutionary movement, factory committees.
After the decree on nationalization was issued by the provisional government and a Ministry of Industry was organized to coordinate the nationalized economy, frequent clashes occurred between the central direction of the economy and the local Works Councils. On October 14, 1946, Minister of Industry Lausman of the Social-Democratic Party decreed that the engineers and managers have first responsibility in the direction of production. He asked that “The Works Councils and trade unions should give them the greatest support.” Yet ten months later, on July 8, a session of the central council of the trade unions was still occupying itself with the problems caused by “usurpations” of authority by the Works Councils, and instructing the latter not to interfere in questions of production since these were the responsibility of the managers. [7]
The leading role in breaking the authority of the Works Councils was played by the Communist Party, operating through the trade-union apparatus. With the liberation, the unity of the trade unions was achieved for the first time since the founding of the Red International of Labor Unions. Having a voting strength that was three times that of the Social-Democracy, and even greater strength among the industrial workers, the Stalinists completely controlled the Revolutionary Trade Union Movement, as the united organization was called. The Stalinists introduced the strictest centralization in the trade unions and thoroughly bureaucratized them. They introduced the practice of voting on the basis of single lists submitted by the leadership. (See La situation réelle en Tchécoslovaquie by the anonymous Czech worker, P.L., in Quatrième Internationale, 1947.) The Social-Democrats in the trade-union apparatus valued their posts above all, as trade-union bureaucrats always do, and quickly adapted themselves to the Stalinist methods. The trade-union staffs were loaded down with Stalinist functionaries. The national headquarters in Prague had 1,500 employees! (Only a tenth as many, some 150 employees, suffice to operate the national headquarters of the Trade Union Congress of Great Britain.) In the nationalized industries, the Stalinists took into trade-union membership all non-industrial employees, from the top managers and engineers down, thus diluting their class character and confronting the workers with their direct superiors inside the labor movement.
As time went by, the Stalinists succeeded in subordinating the Works Councils to the control of the trade unions, making of the former pliable tools for whatever aims the party leadership was pursuing from time to time. The Works Councils themselves were then increasingly bureaucratized and turned into a source of more patronage jobs for the CP machines. Workers elected to the Works Council no longer were required to do manual work and were paid for all extra time spent on official duties. Instead of functioning as the workers’ spokesmen in the front offices of the factory, many of the Works Councils became adjuncts of the management and the means of achieving the latter’s aims in the operation of the plant. But above all and in the first place, the Works Councils, composed overwhelmingly of CP members, functioned at the beck and call of the party leadership. As a result of CP control of the Works Councils and the trade unions, the real control over production and over all industrial activity was in the hands, not of the Ministry of Industry nor of the managers, but of the Central Committee of the Communist Party. (The role of the trade unions as battering rams to force through the political demands of the Stalinists will be dealt with separately.)
 
Stalinist Economic Policy and the Workers
The Stalinists were, above all, interested in the successful operation of the nationalized industries. In large measure their political prestige depended upon it. Equally important was their interest in developing Czech industry into the main source of manufactured goods for the integrated economy of Eastern Europe taking shape under Russian direction. The Stalinists’ efforts, as a result, were directed toward increasing production. Here, too, they experienced difficulties with the workers.
From all indications, the workers took nationalization to mean an end to the enforced labor discipline and the pressure to produce to which they had been submitted by private capitalism. As a result, the level of production declined in the nationalized industries. Two years after nationalization, the Ministry of Industry was still complaining that most factories were still only achieving eighty per cent of the production per man-hour that had been the norm in 1938. Complaints about the inefficiency of the nationalized industries were a constant theme in the press during 1946 but appear to have become less frequent in 1947. Without a doubt, this reflected to some degree an improvement in the situation.
Judging from the repeated arguments against wage increases that appeared in the CP and trade-union press, there must have been a considerable pressure by the workers for higher wages. The Stalinists stressed the need to first achieve the production goals set in the Two Year Plan before increasing wages. They insisted that the nationalized economy be placed upon a solvent basis. Efforts to secure increased production through piecework appear to have met with resistance from the workers. On May 28, 1947, the Czech press reported that during the course of strikes, which were trade-union inspired but unauthorized, in opposition to the restitution of certain enterprises to private owners, the workers also raised the demand for the abolition of piecework.
It would be false, however, to assume from the above conflicts between CP aims and the desires of the workers that the latter were indifferent to nationalization. All indications are that they wholeheartedly favored it and, despite dissatisfaction over wages and the diminished authority of the Works Councils, the workers found conditions in the nationalized industries far more tolerable than they had experienced under private capitalism. The strikes to defend individual factories against threats of restitution to former owners appear to have received the firm support of the workers.
Wherever the policies of the Stalinists brought forth too much resistance from the workers, they introduced such concessions and modifications as would not endanger their mass support. The extreme skill which the Stalinists have developed in demagogy, in maneuvering, in distorting issues, in catering to prejudice, in manipulating and misusing the terminology of socialism, and in diverting attention elsewhere, helped them over many a rough spot. The differences between the CP policy and the desires of the workers assumed, therefore, the character of minor frictions, always subordinate to and overshadowed by the major struggle between the CP and the old ruling class in its various segments – capitalists, civil servants, old officer corps, church hierarchy, landowners, bourgeois politicians, etc. Whenever the friction between the interests of the workers and those of the party threatened to erupt, the Stalinists could always undertake a new offensive against the bourgeois elements and immediately enlist the support of the workers.
Part of the Stalinist strategy in minimizing the conflict between the workers’ and the party’s interests in the nationalized economy was to avoid placing a Stalinist at the head of the Ministry of Industry. The latter post was given to the Social-Democrats and occupied by Bohimil Lausman, a man known for his independence from Stalinist control. Government policy in the nationalized economy was, therefore, not attributed directly to the CP.
The Stalinists, of course, could well afford not to occupy the Ministry of Industry, since their real control was exercised through the trade-union apparatus and the party fractions in the shops. In addition, the Social-Democrats were the one non-Stalinist party that could be relied upon to follow a pro-nationalization policy. Although Lausman did announce on April 13, 1947, that the nationalizations had been concluded and that the remaining small capitalists and merchants need not fear for their enterprises, the Stalinists always knew that this policy could be changed by sufficient pressure from below, a pressure to which the Social-Democracy, a workers’ party, was especially susceptible.
 
The New Bureaucratic Aristocracy
The Stalinists built up a tremendous base for themselves by always, everywhere, and consistently expanding the number of bureaucratic jobs. The result was that there emerged what the Czech press got into the habit of calling “the new bureaucratic aristocracy.” The phenomenon represented by the inflated bureaucracy was frequently discussed in official bodies and in general political polemics. It could hardly have remained unobserved, for by the middle of 1947 public administration absorbed 48 per cent of the national income.
For those who did not follow the statistical reports, the size of the bureaucracy was impressive by its omnipresence. Estimates were made in 1947 that there were from 130,000 to 200,000 more public functionaries than in 1938, despite a considerable decline in the population (due to the cession of Ruthenia to Russia and the expulsion of the Germans and Hungarians). These figures do not include the managing personnel of the nationalized economy. The latter represented an additional layer of bureaucratic posts.
Part of the swollen bureaucracy resulted from the struggle between the Stalinists and the bourgeois politicians over the old civil service. It was difficult for the Stalinists to remove the old civil servants from their posts without precipitating a major crisis. As a result the Stalinists merely added thousands of their own appointees onto the staffs of ministries and other agencies of government under their control. One of the largest bureaucratic creations of the Stalinists were the administrators of the former German and Hungarian territories. Another factor in swelling the bureaucracy was the National Committees which resulted from the liberation movement and paralleled the old state apparatus (a development that will be dealt with later). The Prague weekly Hospodar complained in January 1947 that there was one public official for every 105 inhabitants. In the cities, it added, the proportion was much higher and it cited as examples: in Prague, one official for 42 inhabitants; in Brno, 1 for 35; and in Ostrava, 1 for 62.
There were frequent complaints in the Czech press that the staffs of the nationalized enterprises were top-heavy with directing personnel. In a report that sought to give a balance sheet on the nationalization program, given on March 6, 1947, Lausman listed as one of the problems the disproportion between staffs and workers in the nationalized industries.
The overwhelming bulk of the new bureaucratic apparatus was a Stalinist creation. Most of the non-Stalinist criticisms of the inefficiency of the nationalized enterprises blamed it on the political appointment of the technical personnel. The failure to mention the Stalinists in these accusations was due to the prudent self-restraint which the non-Stalinist press followed. Not only could the Stalinists secure such appointments but incumbents in such posts knew that a membership card in the CP guaranteed them their jobs and offered excellent prospects of advancement. If a member of the managing staff of a nationalized enterprise proved unresponsive to Stalinist wooing, the Stalinists could always create enough “labor trouble” in a given shop to secure the removal of such a person.
The upper layer of the “new bureaucratic aristocracy” lived well, and did so ostentatiously enough to cause widespread comment. On September 3, 1947, the National Socialist press referred to them as “the protégés of the Communists, who hold important administrative positions, draw high salaries and live in great luxury.” The People’s Party daily, Lidova Demokracie, referred to them on January 2, 1948, as being “drunk ... with their newly gained power and wealth.” Almost all of the higher bureaucratic posts rated an automobile and, in many cases, a government-paid chauffeur. Many of them lived rent-free in the villas of the former capitalist owners. The article by the Czech worker, P.L., which we cited previously, documents the standard of living of this new bureaucracy in the following figures, after describing the living standards of the ordinary workers:
Quite different is the situation of the big bureaucrats of industry and the state, currently called “the new aristocracy.” The spread between the minimum base pay of the manual worker and the maximum salary of the highest functionary of the nationalized industry is extremely wide; it is easily more than one to ten, fifteen and even twenty. Not infrequently one finds industrial managers earning 40,000 Czech crowns a month (nearly twenty-four times more than the worst-paid workers!) and enjoying in addition the free use of a villa, an auto with chauffeur, etc.
The specific weight of these unproductive expenses in the national economy is enormous. The [Czechoslovakian] magazine Accounting and Control [Ucetnictvi a Kontrola] ... submits the state budget to a detailed analysis to get an approximate estimate of the cost of the bureaucracy. With regard to the governmental administration properly so called – that is, the ministries, not including the administration of the nationalized industry – there were not less than 780 million Czech crowns of expenditure for trips, and 180 million for the maintenance of automobiles (excluding trucks). What these figures represent becomes clear when it is realized that the amount which the honorable bureaucrats spend for trips could cover, for 300,000 families, the difference between their starvation wages and a minimum living standard.
 
Structure of the State Apparatus
The new state apparatus that came into being with the liberation was a de facto authority that emerged from the liberation movement (organized officially into the National Front of Czechs and Slovaks) and came into power with the advance of the Russian armies and the Prague insurrection. It began its work as a provisional, quasi-revolutionary regime which aimed to carry out the Kosice program, in which the purge of collaborationists was the first aim. To achieve the main points of this program, it was necessary to short-circuit the old constitution and to act through bodies which would not be encumbered by the traditional legal safeguards.
The bodies formed for this purpose were the National Committees. These assumed supreme state power, both nationally and locally. This extra-constitutional apparatus appointed the provisional government and arranged for the elections to a National Constituent Assembly, which was empowered to adopt a new constitution. Since the National Committees reflected the division of party power in the resistance movement and since they were organized in the period of Russian occupation, the CP played the leading role in them. In keeping with the Stalinist doctrine of never surrendering a position until a stronger one has been conquered, the CP maintained its leading position in the National Committees and fought to preserve the authority of these bodies.
After the elections to the National Constituent Assembly in May 1946, the composition of the National Committees was to reflect the party vote which these elections recorded. For example, the National Committee in Pilsen was composed of the following party representatives: CP, 8; National Socialists, 7; Social Democrats, 3; People’s Party (Catholic), 2. Where the CP did not have enough pliable tools among the representatives of the other parties (most often from among pro-Stalinist Social Democrats) to assure their control, the Stalinists managed by one means or another to circumvent the majority. On May 13, 1947, for example, the National Socialist daily, Svobodne Slovo, complained about the “undemocratic rules of procedure in district NCs,” which resulted in all manner of manipulation. Such manipulation was not too difficult since out of 154,000 members of the NCs, 69,786 were members of the CP, according to a report by Gottwald to a meeting of the Prague CP on June 6, 1946. Since the local NCs organized extensive staffs of their own, in large measure paralleling the civil service, the CP found them a lucrative field for bureaucratic jobs.
The Stalinists did their utmost to preserve the authority of the NC setup against the efforts of the bourgeois parties to “normalize” administration by restoring the power of the pre-war institutions like city councils, etc. On December 31, 1946, the CP daily, Rude Pravo, declared that the NCs are repositories of all executive power in Czechoslovakia until the adoption of a new constitution. As executive organs their power cannot be curtailed by anyone except the cabinet (headed by Gottwald) in Prague. It was the strategy of the Stalinists [8] to keep the governmental machinery in a provisional state, and consequently in flux, until they could consolidate their own power.
 
The CP in the Government
The Kosice program provided the basis for collaboration of all parties of the National Front in a coalition government, thus eliminating a parliamentary opposition in the traditional sense. [9] The National Front regime was the Czech variant of the tactic used throughout the Eastern European countries dominated by the Stalinists. Due to the strong mass base of the CP in Czechoslovakia, the National Front was not quite as totalitarian as its counterparts in Rumania and Bulgaria, where the Stalinists insisted that all parties appear upon a single list in the elections, or even in Poland, where all except the Peasant Party appeared in a single bloc in the elections. The elections of May 1946 in Czechoslovakia permitted a choice of parties. The CP received 38 per cent of the vote. Since the Social Democracy received some 13 per cent of the vote, the two parties that based themselves upon the working class had a slight parliamentary majority, a fact that was to play a role in the February coup.
The CP divided the posts of cabinet rank with an adroitness that revealed how thoroughly Stalinism had learned, and adopted to its own purposes, the Marxist teachings on the nature of the state. As the leader of the largest single party in the Assembly, Gottwald was, of course, called upon to head the government as premier. The CP took for itself the posts of minister of interior (police), information (press and radio), and agriculture (agrarian reform). The Ministry of National Defense was given to an ostensibly non-party military man, General Ludvik Svoboda. The latter had functioned with the Russian army during the war and was a thoroughly reliable Stalinist tool. [10]
The important post of foreign affairs, usually regarded as next in importance to the premier in European governments, was given to Jan Masaryk, who had broken all party ties to devote himself to diplomacy as a non-party man. However, the real power in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was Vlado Clementis, a Stalinist wheelhorse. Masaryk served the Stalinists as window dressing in foreign affairs just as Benes served in this capacity for the Gottwald government as a whole. However, since the regime was a coalition of five parties, among which the CP only represented two-fifths of the electorate, the occupation of the key posts by Stalinists created the danger that it might appear as almost total control. The Stalinists sought to offset this by dividing the rest of the government functions, consisting of the more “harmless” departments, into the largest number of divisions. The result was an unusually large cabinet in which all other parties appeared to have adequate representation. There was not only a minister of agriculture but also a minister of food. (The former, a Stalinist, was praised by the peasants for giving them land; the latter, a Social-Democrat, was blamed by everybody for not giving them enough food.) There was not only a minister of commerce but also one of foreign trade. There was not only a minister of posts and telegraph but also one for transportation. There was a Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare and also a Ministry of Health, etc. etc.
 
Stalinist Control of Police
The Stalinists showed little interest in the “economic” posts, which naive Social-Democrats usually go for in the illusion that they can use them to construct “socialism.” The Stalinists made a beeline for the posts not of “construction” but of destruction – i. e., destruction of their enemies. Of these, the most potent is the Ministry of Interior. “Interior” to the American means national parks, Indian reservations, oil reserves, forests, etc. “Interior” to the European means but one thing – the national police apparatus. There is no exact counterpart to this institution in the Anglo-Saxon countries. (The trend of the FBI, however, is toward becoming such an instrument.)
The prime function of the national police is the security of the state against its internal enemies. As a result, the national police is always in greater or lesser measure a political police, operating to hinder, harass or destroy the political opponents of the state power. It keeps lists of “dangerous” organizations and individuals, keeps them under surveillance, sends informers among them, organizes battalions of shock troops trained in riot work and street fighting, etc. In total police states the national police operates without legal restraints of any kind, like the Gestapo and the GPU. Under constitutional regimes they operate within the limits of statutory provisions and judicial authority. Therefore, when the Gottwald government organized the National Security Corps as the police arm of the Ministry of Interior, it built upon a solid continental (and, of course, Czechoslovakian) tradition. The function of the Stalinist minister of interior, the notorious Vaclav Nosek, was to convert the Security Police from the traditionally, legally circumscribed, bourgeois-democratic police institution to a Czech replica of the Russian GPU. Nosek proved equal to his task.
If Stalinist aims required the revamping of the army, in the case of the Security Police it required building from the ground up. The Security Police was heavily weighted with Stalinists to begin with, and every effort was made to influence the rest. For instance, the CP organized special classes for Security Police personnel; opposition papers charged that the word was passed around in the force that those attending CP classes would be favored in promotions. A conference of Security personnel in Prague on June 17 was addressed by the Stalinist trade-union chief and CP deputy, Antonin Zapotocky, though the latter had no official position in the Ministry of Interior. [11] As things came to a head, the Stalinists acted ever more openly in consolidating their hold on the Security Police. The unconcealed promotions of the CP adherents in January of this year was the incident that set under way the events that culminated in the coup.
The two and a half years between the liberation and the coup saw no dearth of activity by the Security Police. The country was kept in a continual state of nerves by the announcement of new plots, conspiracies and subversive movements unearthed by the Security Police. These were always followed by arrests and treason trials that kept most of the country in a state of tension that gradually developed toward that total psychosis of fear which is the normal state of mind in a modern police state.
Given the political situation in Slovakia, which we have described in dealing with Slovak separatism, this part of the country became the main center for Security Police operations against the political opposition. The main aim of the Stalinists in these attacks was to break the power of the Slovak Democratic party. Since it was fairly easy to establish ties between this party and the remnants of the Hlinka movement, the Security agents had a field day in cooking up amalgams.
 
Toward the Czech GPU
The biggest “plot” was broken to the public on October 7, 1947, when the political situation was beginning to approach a crisis and the Stalinists feared the formation of an anti-CP government. The Slovak Commissariat of the Interior announced the arrest of 380 persons involved in an anti-state conspiracy, among them civil servants, businessmen, priests, public officials, etc. This was soon followed by the “discovery” of a second plot, centering in Bratislava, resulting in the arrest of seventeen “important persons.” Most of these arrests were accompanied by the discovery of pro-Hlinka leaflets. Later a scandal broke out when political opponents of the CP announced that they had discovered bundles of such pro-Hlinka leaflets in a provincial headquarters of the CP!
The power of the Security Police is demonstrated by the fact that they searched the offices of the Vice-Premier, Ursiny, in connection with these “plots” and arrested members of his staff. [12] On January 7, 1948, General Ferjencik [13], head of the Security Corps in Slovakia, denied that political prisoners were being tortured in the Bratislava prison. Such “denials” in themselves helped create the psychological terror which the Stalinists aim at.
But the operations of the Security Police were not confined to Slovakia. They reached everywhere. On March 23, 1947, all Social-Democratic papers published on their front pages a protest against police supervision of political meetings as directed in instructions from the minister of interior to local and district NCs. The protest called upon political parties to bar police from attending their meetings. Nosek denounced the SDP protest as “a call to public violence against police officials executing their duty.” However, the practice was continued. On May 6 the Social-Democratic daily Pravo Lidu, complained: “Not a day has passed lately without a public meeting of the SDP having been prohibited or control officials being sent to meetings of party members.” On October 9, 1947 a National Socialist deputy exposed a Security Corps agent-provocateur who had approached him posing as an agent of the underground Hlinka movement. Thus the record establishes the progress that the Security officials were making in learning their lessons from the GPU book.
 
Information – CP Style
Next to the Ministry of Interior, the most potent governmental weapon the Stalinists had in the internal life of Czechoslovakia was the Ministry of Information, headed by the blatant party propagandist, Vaclav Kopecky. The Stalinists thoroughly understand that “ideas are weapons” and that without ideological offensives the naked force of the police could not totalitarianize the population. Radio Prague and its provincial subsidiaries became potent mouthpieces for the CP. The party line was woven into all its features whether educational, cultural or entertainment. In April 1947 there was adopted a law on the press, introduced by the minister of information which made provision for a “Union of Czech Journalists” (plus another one for Slovak journalists) in which membership was compulsory for those working at the profession. These journalists’ “unions” were in reality semi-official bodies which provided the minister of information with another means of applying pressure upon the press to conform to Stalinist concepts.
Direct censorship of the press was not invoked until the coup. The Czech traditions in this respect were too strong to permit the Stalinists to indulge in the type of open dictation to the press that was imposed in Poland and other Eastern European countries. The need for direct censorship was, in a measure, obviated by the self-censorship which the bourgeois press imposed upon itself. Here, too, the psychosis of fear proved sufficient to achieve the Stalinists’ ends.
A picture of the state of Czech journalism under the Stalinist shadow is drawn by F. Perutka, editor of the independent daily, Svobodne Noviny, who deserves commendation as one of those rare political specimens – a liberal with a backbone. His paper spoke its mind more openly than any other. On July 28, 1947, he wrote as follows in reply to the questions of some young people who had asked him what qualities were needed “in these days” to make a good journalist:
Above all, good nerves. But there is a more comfortable way if you are prepared to join the mob which never denounces a wrong unless permitted to do so by those who have committed it, the mob which is ready to rejoice or shed tears, or praise or revile at orders. What strikes me most is that we have beautiful ideas and deplorable practices ... Our public life is riddled by intrigue. Lying is becoming the rule of the country ... Discussion has long ceased to be a means of ascertaining the truth ... There is no bad quality in man that the press does not nourish and strengthen. All this is happening to the accompaniment of honeyed phrases by the official Union of Journalists, which claims “only now have the conditions been created for the honorable exercise of the profession of journalism.” Those who are active in public life, however, feel as if they are wading in mud up to their knees ... The political parties in this country regard their struggle for power as more important than the fundamental principles of decency and fairness. The worst thing is that the liars have learned to imitate the voice of truth.
The Ministry of Information functioned as a “police on the cultural front” and its long arm reached everywhere. It publicly denounced the booksellers for not promoting the sales of “progressive” books. It purged the National Theatre and brought from Minister of Education Stransky, a National Socialist, a protest that appointments to the theatre could not be made “according to election results.” It launched a furious attack upon the universities [14], the bulk of whose students were politically active in opposition to the Stalinists.
On December 5, when the political crisis was already threatening to boil over, Kopecky addressed the Communist Student Organization to mobilize them against the minister of education, denouncing the latter as the inspiration of “reactionary” agitation by the students. Kopecky predicted that “before six months the Ministry of Education will again be in progressive hands.” (The CP had been at its head during the early period of the provisional government.) Many professors were reactionaries, Kopecky said, pointing specifically to the rector of Prague University, Professor Englis. He called for a purge of the faculties. “The ideology of dialectical materialism must be made to assume a leading and dominant position in our educational system.” Propaganda against the Communists, he said, was hostile to the spirit of the National Front and the republic. “The patience of the workers has its limits ... We made a great mistake in admitting everybody to the universities ... In the future, students with a positive attitude toward the regime and the New Order will have priority.” He stated that students with anti-Communist records would not be accepted for employment in the ministries headed by Communists or influenced by them. “To be anti-Communist is to be a traitor,” Kopecky shouted, and urged all students to join the Communist camp since “there will be nothing else for them to join.”
The Ministry of Agriculture also played a key role for the Stalinists. A partial distribution of landed estates had taken place after the First World War. These estates, usually the property of the Hapsburg nobility, were expropriated but usually only a part of the land was distributed among small peasants. The reduced estates, referred to as “remnant estates,” found their way into the hands of Czech politicians, officers, etc. The CP carried on a vigorous campaign for the total distribution of such lands. The Ministry of Agriculture under the Stalinist, Julius Duris, set up a vast network of ministry representatives to carry the CP campaign into the countryside and recruit for the party. Protests were made in the press of the other parties upon a number of occasions that peasants were being promised first choice on new land if they joined the CP. On June 24, 1947, a demand was made in the Assembly for an investigation of the Ministry of Agriculture to determine how much money had been expended to finance CP propaganda among the peasants.
 
Mass Action from Below
The thorough exploitation by the Stalinists of all government posts within their control to build up a mass base did not prevent them from utilizing all the techniques of mass action from below to achieve the same ends. Stalinist policy skillfully dovetailed the two forces. This was not always easy, however, for the presence of Stalinists in responsible posts often made them the target of popular discontent. The regime as a whole was, after all, a “Gottwald government” and the Stalinists had to be its foremost defenders. But the strength represented by a mass Communist Party made it possible for them to manipulate the very discontent of sections of the population and turn it against their political opponents.
The most potent weapon for pressure from below at the disposal of the Stalinists was the trade-union movement. At every crucial stage of a political dispute in the cabinet the Stalinists would bring to bear the mass action of the workers. The government would be flooded with telegrams adopted by factory meetings, or visited by workers’ delegations, or con fronted with mass demonstrations, all demanding the solution favored by the CP. If such pressure was not sufficient, the trade unions would utilize the strike as a political weapon. Strikes against the return of enterprises to their former owners, in cases where the nationalization decree did not cover them, were very frequent. These reached a peak in the spring of 1947 and, on March 22, Cos, the daily of the Slovak Democratic party, demanded that legal measures be taken against such strikes, saying that some parties have “the wrong conception of the right to strike.” This unloosed a barrage in the CP press and over the government radio in defense of the right to strike.
A case in point was the strike of the employees of the Ara department stores against the decision of the Prague district court to return the stores to their former owner, a Jewish businessman by the name of Andres who had fled to the United States to escape the Nazis. The CP daily, Rude Pravo, called for complete support to the strike by the workers. This was repeated on June 10 when the employees of the Franck Coffee Substitute factory in Sered struck against its return to private ownership.
The trade unions used the threat of strikes to bring about changes in the composition of the Slovak provincial government on November 11. As a result, the Board of Commissioners reorganized itself on November 18 and elected a Stalinist, Dr. Husak, as chairman. Four days later, Prace, the trade-union daily, said that it was still dissatisfied with the political situation in Slovakia and warned that unless the voice of the working people was respected, the trade unions would mobilize the workers “to assert their will.” Another example of mass pressure through the trade unions was the mobilization of factory delegations at the meeting of the provincial NC at Prague to demand a trade-union majority on the Food Supply Commission. The delegations paralyzed the functioning of the NC until it promised to add the required majority, compromising, however, by seating them without decisive votes.
In January 1947 the CP minister of agriculture distributed drafts of his proposed laws on land reform to the workers organizations and asked for mass support. The result was a deluge of resolutions, wires, delegations, etc. In reply to the outraged protests of the non-Communist ministers who had not yet had time thoroughly to discuss the draft, Rude Pravo answered, “Never again will this policy be decided behind the shutters of the Zivno Banka and the cartel palaces” (January 27). On February 28 the National Socialist Vice-Premier, Zenkel, gave indirect reply in a speech which said that “the will of the people” is not necessarily synonymous with “mass demonstrations, previously-ordered telegrams, resolutions, etc.”
Delegations of farmers were continually brought to Prague to back up the views of the minister of agriculture. On June 11 a delegation of 200 farmers gate-crashed into a meeting of the Assembly’s agricultural committee and demanded the immediate consideration of its demands. The CP members of the committee steered them to a session with Gottwald and Duris (minister of agriculture) who pledged their support. Visitations by such mass delegations of farmers continued all through the summer of 1947, since the draft laws of Duris were meeting with considerable opposition from the bourgeois parties. This dispute led to the first big open crisis in the National Front in September, when the CP pulled all stops and called for the mobilization of the workers and peasants behind its demands for land reform.
After all governmental levers are given their due importance in the development of Stalinist power in Czechoslovakia, the party apparatus must still be viewed as its greatest asset. It was the mass character of the party, resulting in its control of the trade unions, that made its manipulation of governmental posts possible and effective. The party was the great coordinator and centralizer in the Stalinist drive for power. The hand of the party was everywhere. And everywhere everything was done in accordance with the party’s tasks of the day.
On January 16, 1948, the General Secretary of the CP, Slansky, reported in Rude Pravo that the party membership stood at 1,329,450, excluding Slovakia. With a total population (i.e., including aged, children, etc.) of 14,500,000, nearly one out of every eight inhabitants belonged to the party, and two out of every five voters voted the CP ticket. During a membership drive last November 31, 657 recruits joined the party on a single day, Sunday, November 23. Of those who joined during 1947, 230,000 were described as “young people.”
The CP conducted a vigorous “educational” campaign among its new members. It organized special courses of training for CP members of the NCs and for those in various other government jobs. It organized a Central Party School at which it gave six-month courses for party officials. It published a wide variety of books, pamphlets, magazines and other material to supply the various educational requirements of its membership, which in its bulk was composed of industrial workers.
Perutka’s Svobodne Noviny on October 27 gave an analysis of the CP membership which was summarized in the November 6 issue of the news report, East Europe, as follows:
Its [the CP’s] largest group consisted of once exploited and now resentful people, who entered the party as a means to right their wrongs. Most of them were not even aware of the Communist program, yet were “faithful adherents” of the party. It was for the benefit of such people that the party staged mass rallies and processions. The second group, the party’s weak point, consisted of pre-war Communists, well trained politically and tempered in the struggle against the occupation. They formed a cadre of brave, cultured and honest people. The fourth group, numerically the smallest, but the most powerful, consisted of professional Communists, “whose ultimate aims were wholly shrouded in mystery.” They maintained that their aim was the Communist “single-party state,” and that the present regime was a temporary makeshift.
It would be futile to study the events in Czechoslovakia for the last two and a half years for the purpose of discovering the pattern of conquest which Stalinism will follow in Italy or France or some other Western country. There was already a considerable difference in the Cezch pattern as compared with Rumania and other Eastern European states that were in the immediate shadow of the Russian army, and also as compared with Yugoslavia, which had its own distinctive features. In turn, the difference between Czechoslovakia (and all the eastern countries) on the one hand and France and Italy on the other is even greater.
However, the detailed study we have made of the Stalinist road to power in Czechoslovakia has great value in casting light upon the nature of Stalinism as a social, political and economic phenomenon. It is this which we must thoroughly comprehend. Few in the world do comprehend it today: The bourgeoisie remains baffled by it. The self-styled “official Trotskyists” are, perhaps, more in the dark than anybody. The views developed by the Workers Party come closer to a real insight than any thus far expressed, but remain to be fully developed. It is my aim to contribute to such a development in an article formulating the conclusions I have come to on the Czech events.
(To be continued)

Sources

Footnotes
1. Though the American army was only forty kilometers from Prague at the time and the Russians were 140 kilometers away, the American advance was stopped in order to permit the Russians to “liberate” the city in accordance with an agreement between Roosevelt and Stalin.
2. Not to be confused with the National Socialist Party of Germany (the Nazis). The Czech NSP was a bourgeois-democratic party with an economic program comparable to that of the New Deal Democrats in this country.
3. Among them were some 400,000 anti-fascist workers, including over 8,000 victims of Hitler’s concentration camps. Over 3,000 had fled to foreign exile in 1938 to escape the Gestapo. Some 630 were executed or died in the Gestapo torture chambers. These figures cover only the socialist working class of the Sudetenland. Thousands of liberals, Catholics and others of the general Sudeten population also suffered at the hands of the Nazis. These figures are based on reports that have appeared in various numbers of Der Sozial Demokrat, organ of the Sudeten socialists, published in London since 1939.
3a. In large measure, the “unforeseen circumstances” consisted of a growing possibility that the western powers would reverse themselves and withdraw approval of the expulsions. The English press, especially, was beginning to strike a note of humanitarian protest. The Hungarian government was active in promoting an international protest against the treatment of its nationals in Slovakia. At the Paris Conference of Foreign Ministers, the English and American became irritated with the fanatical intransigence of the Czechs in demanding that every last Hungarian and German be expelled and one American representative is reported to have declared angrily that if the Czechs were so anxious not to have a Hungarian minority they could easily achieve this by ceding these border regions to Hungary. In alarm, the Prague regime decided to speed up the expulsions and drive out the minorities en masse.
4. During Tiso’s trial after the war, the Prague regime indicted him for cooperating with Hitler in the invasion of Russia but was silent about the 50,000 Slovak troops who joined the Reichswehr invasion of Poland. Since the latter was carried out in cooperation with Stalin, Tiso’s role in it was a dangerous question to bring up in the courtroom.
5. A case in point is the trial of Tiso and its aftermath. The popularity of Tiso called forth widespread support for his acquittal. A number of street demonstrations took place, mostly by women inspired by the clergy. The Czech press generally predicted that the court would not condemn him to death. The reports are that the Cabinet intervened and insisted upon the death penalty. The court condemned him to death. Benes refused to pardon him and he was hanged. (Benes was denounced for his “perfidy” and “ingratitude” in Slovakia since Tiso’s support had made possible his election in 1935.) In anger, the Slovak National Council removed Dr. I. Daxner, the president of the court that sentenced Tiso. The CP members, a minority in the SNC, protested and walked out. They appealed to Prague and raised a hue and cry about the dangerous trend toward Slovak separatism represented by this act. The cabinet backed the Slovak Stalinists unanimously and decreed that the removal of a judge is unconstitutional on the basis of the old constitution of the republic! This constitution, though nominally in force, had been observed more in the breach than the application under the post-liberation regime. Though it never proved useful against the Stalinists it sometimes proved useful for them.
6. Little is known in this country about this formidable movement. It had its origins in the Ukraine during the Nazi occupation. It claims to have operated behind the Nazi lines as a guerrilla movement. The Stalinists claim that it was a tool of the Nazis. Which version is true cannot be established at present. Without a doubt it was anti-Semitic. This would not, by itself, establish that it was pro-German. The Banderovici cooperated closely with the Polish anti-Nazi guerrilla movement, which likewise was largely anti-Semitic. After the Russians reconquered the Ukraine they operated behind the Russian lines and claimed to have 100,000 in the field with light artillery. After the Russian conquest of Poland, the Banderovici passed back and forth over the Polish-Russian frontier, fighting the armies of both countries. In the summer of 1947, a Joint Russian-Polish offensive sought to trap the Banderovici. Some 50,000 tried to escape to the American zones of Austria and Germany, by way of Czechoslovakia. Only small numbers got through. The Banderovici issued newspapers and pamphlets in the territories they occupied, filled with anti-Russian propaganda. They call themselves the Anti-Bolshevik Bloc of Nations (ABBN) and use the slogan “Liberty to the nations, freedom to men.” Their leader is a legendary figure called Col. Bandera after whom they are named. Bandera is reported to have been killed in the fighting last summer.
7. The relationship between the authority of the factory committees and centralized economic planning is one of the most important questions for revolutionary socialists to resolve. Lack of clarity on this question proved to be one of the big handicaps in the Russian Revolution. The struggle to deprive the factory committees of their authority in matters of production began one year after the Soviet power was established. It continued until 1920–21, when it merged with the dispute over the trade unions.
8. This did not prevent them, however, from freezing political institutions where it was to their advantage. For instance, on March 5, 1947, the cabinet decreed that political parties were to be incorporated and that new political parties could be formed only with the permission of the government.
9. Since cabinet meetings were closed, reports of its proceedings confidential, and all of its decisions reported out as the views of the cabinet as a whole, and since these decisions were assured the unanimous support of all parties in the Assembly, at least in theory, the debates in the latter body were never full-fledged, direct presentations of differences between the parties. The deputies limited themselves to insinuations. Implications, guarded references and vigorous attacks upon anonymous evildoers. The real debates took place behind the closed doors of the cabinet’s meeting room. These gave rise to widely circulated “unofficial” reports and became a substitute for the parliamentary forum. When the CP found it necessary, as we shall show, they would flagrantly violate the confidences of cabinet discussion.
10. The old officer corps was thoroughly purged of all collaborationist elements when the Czechoslovakian army was reconstituted. However, further purges were continually being called for in the CP press. The general secretary of the CP, the Stalinist party whip. Slansky, demanded in a public speech on January 9. 1947, that: “Those [officers] who slander our republic and our Slav allies are not good Czechs or Slovaks, but agents in foreign service.” The Stalinized character of the new officers is indicated by the demand made in the Czech press during December 1946 by a number of officers that the officers’ corps be permitted representation in the trade unions.
11. The theme of his speech was to denounce those who said that the Security Corps was tainted with “Gestapoism.” “If transgressions have occurred and possibly still occur, they must be regarded as a survival of fascist-reactionary times.” The main duty of the Corps, he said, was to guard state property against theft.
12. No public official was immune from the prying of the undercover agents of the Security Police. The zeal of the Stalinists in shadowing their opponents resulted in several CP-controlled ministries resorting to this practice. This situation brought forth from Deputy Firth of the National Socialist Party the following remarks on the floor of the Assembly on June 24: “Much money can be saved by a coordination of the government’s intelligence agencies. Why should I, as a member of the National Assembly, be followed by three snoopers – one working for the Ministry of Interior, one for National Defense, and one for Information? If this sort of thing has to be tolerated, let it be done by one man.”
13. The Security Corps had been reorganized on military lines on May 21, 1947.
14. On April 1, 1947, the Central Union of Czechoslovak Students was suspended when non-Communists threatened to become the majority on the executive board.
 



The indictment of the national leaders of the Communist Party by a grand jury that heard the testimony of Elizabeth Bentley, confessed former agent of the Russian spy apparatus, indicates that the federal prosecutors will seek to link the defendants to espionage activities, in addition to the charge of conspiring to overthrow the government by force and violence. This line of attack on the part of the government raises a problem for the defenders of civil liberties that is not easily resolved today.
The radical movement has, in the past, proceeded on the formula that it was obliged to defend the civil liberties of all political tendencies, except the fascists. Whereas the Marxists never called upon the government to act against fascist organizations and periodicals, it never rallied to the defense of the latter when they were prosecuted. The Marxists differed in this respect from the American Civil Liberties Union’s point of view, which demanded civil rights for everyone, including fascists.
During the time when the CP was already a bureaucratic, monolithic organisation that waged a war of “rule or ruin” against all its rivals but was yet considered basically a labor organisation, Marxists defended the civil liberties of the Stalinists without reservations. Today our Workers Party no longer finds it possible to consider the CP a workers’ party. We have designated it in official resolutions as a totalitarian, anti-socialist and anti-working-class party that aims to destroy the civil liberties of everyone and establish its own rule on the Russian model of a slave state.
Along with this designation we have recognized that the CP bases itself primarily upon the working class and makes the labor movement the main arena of its operations. As a result, an attack upon the CP can often be a simultaneous attack upon a section of the labor movement, especially when the prosecution is guided by reactionaries who have as little use for progressive unionism as for the CP.
We have avoided, therefore, taking a stand against defending the civil liberties of individuals because they are Stalinists. Where the defense of a Stalinist official of a trade union is a defense of the union itself, the Stalinist politics of the official must not be a barrier to rallying to his defense. However, do the interests of the labor movement demand the defense of the arrested leaders of the CP in the present case?
 
Compares Case of Fascists
The argument has been made that though the conduct and aims of the CP are such as to make them undeserving of civil rights, the denial of their civil rights would constitute a reactionary victory and a threat to the civil rights of all other political minorities. In my opinion, this argument is not different from the traditional position of the ACLU, and its logical application by one who believes the CP to be a totalitarian organization must lead to the defense of the civil liberties of fascists as well.
Otherwise one would have to make an exception for the CP solely on grounds that it camouflages itself as a socialist and labor organization and, therefore, has the external appearances of a genuine labor and socialist movement. In this case, one ends up by making a virtue of the CP’s worst vice, its deceitful misrepresentation of iteself. Such a position, therefore, contradicts what should be the main task of Marxists today in relation to Stalinism, that is, exposing its fraudulent claim to being part of labor’s great struggle for the emancipation of humanity.
We have followed a policy for some years now of disregarding the fate of the known agents of the GPU (the Russian secret police) when they were arrested by capitalist governments. The latest instance is the case of Gerhart Eisler. The latter’s role as an operative in the Kremlin’s international network is well known. We took the position that his imprisonment or deportation was no concern of the American working class. The question that arises, however, is whether a genuine distinction can be made between an Eisler and a Foster.
All the evidence that is available (and it is considerable) establishes that it is impossible to make a clear-cut distinction between the GPU apparatus and that of the Stalinist parties. That is why the GPU is unlike any other intelligence service in the world, with the possible exception of the relationship between the Jesuit order and the Catholic Church as a whole.
 
GPU and Communist Parties
The Russian state is not merely a police state in the traditional sense of a state that maintains itself through police powers. The Stalin state is a police state because the GPU is its very essence. The GPU regulates life in Russia in the coal mines, in the theater, in the scientific laboratories, in the military academies, in the Orthodox Church, in academic lecture halls, in the party cells, in the diplomatic corps – in fact, wherever two Russians get together for any purpose. The international Stalinist movement, now doing business as the Cominform, is merely an arm of the Stalinist state. If the GPU is the essence of the Russian state, it is likewise the essence of the international Stalinist movement.
If there is a division in Stalin’s international apparatus between specialists in espionage and specialists in political infiltration, the division exists only in the interests of efficiency. Eisler and Golos (Bentley’s immediate superior) operated as part of the same international machine, though functioning in different spheres, Eisler was a specialist in politics and gave orders to Browder, while Golos was a specialist in espionage and gave orders to a motley crew of agents.
However, the cadres that served Eisler and those that served Golos were often the same and were always interchangeable. It is a notorious fact that even public leaders in the CP “disappear” for whole stretches from open activity while on secret GPU missions, either within the country or abroad. Trotsky accused Duclos of being the head of the GPU in France at a time when the latter was vice-president of the Chamber of Deputies. At another time, Trotsky flatly stated that the national leaders of every CP were part of the GPU apparatus.
To say that no clear-cut distinction can be made between the GPU and the CP is not the same as saying that they are one and the same thing. Obviously the millions of members of the Stalinist parties are not conscious agents of the GPU. Yet they belong to organizations that are merely extensions of the GPU.
As such even the lowliest rank-and-file member is utilized to facilitate the work of the GPU, even though he is rarely aware of it. One of the Swiss Stalinists who played an important role in the murder of Ignace Reiss claimed she was told that Reiss was an arms runner for Franco and willingly played her part as a service to the anti-fascist cause. Several of the Stalinists caught up in the GPU passport ring that was exposed as a result of the Robinson-Rubens case in 1939 said they were under the impression that the fake passports were being used to send volunteers to fight in Spain.
When a Stalinist fraction chairman in an industrial plant or engineering office sends in detailed reports on production he assumes it is for the trade-union department of the CP. When Stalinists in the army keep the party informed of their whereabouts and activities of their units, they assume it serves Stalinist propaganda among the troops. Yet all such information is collated and channelized to the proper authorities in GPU headquarters in the Lubyanka.
 
Nature of Stalinist Spying
Is such espionage immoral in itself? Obviously not. It depends upon whom it serves and against whom it is directed. Such a network of espionage by anti-fascists in Hitler’s industry and army would have won the approval of democrats everywhere. Similarly, such activity in Stalin’s industry and army by a democratic opposition would likewise receive the approval of all democrats today.
What is immoral about the espionage of the Stalinists is that (a) it cloaks itself in the garments of socialism and liberty in order to advance the interests of totalitarianism and slavery; and (b) it debauches and corrupts the labor movement and seeks to turn it into an agency of espionage on behalf of a power that destroys everything the labor movement stands for.
To say that the American intelligence services seek to corrupt democratic political movements behind the Iron Curtain and to turn them into agencies of American espionage is as specious as the Stalinist reference to lynching in the South whenever one raises the question of slave labor in Russia. The attempt of the American OSS to subordinate democratic opposition movements in Stalinist countries to American strategic aims must be exposed for what it is and fought. However, it cannot serve as a cause for disregarding the role of the GPU in the United States and elsewhere, including those of its activities that are not specifically directed against its socialist opponents.
Mickolaczyk, the former leader of the legal opposition to the Stalinist government of Poland, was an agent of Anglo-American designs in Eastern Europe. Socialists who supported his fight against the Stalinist regime had the duty of combatting his efforts to convert the peasant and socialist opposition into a tool of Anglo-American imperialism. Yet his pro-Anglo-American role was not a bar to supporting his struggle against Stalinist totalitarianism. Our press repeated this upon innumerable occasions in its articles on the Polish situation.
However, one cannot take the same attitude toward totalitarian agents, whether fascist or Stalinist, operating in democratic countries. What a Poland ruled by a Mickolaczyk would eventually look like we don’t know. Even if we assume it would revert back to the Poland of the infamous “colonels” of the 30s, the overthrow of the present regime by Mickolaczyk forces would be a huge step forward that would open new prospects for the workers and peasants. However, a France ruled by a Duclos or a United States ruled by a Foster would in no wise be a step forward. On the contrary, it would be a catastrophe of historic dimensions.
It is my opinion that the socialist and labor movement has no obligation whatsoever to defend the leaders of the CP in the present case, no more so that they had in the case of Fritz Kuhn and the German-American Bund. Foster, Dennis et al. are not martyred labor leaders; they are the arrested leaders of the Russian-American Bund.
We do have the obligation of fighting all reactionary legislation that in any way curtails civil liberties. Among such laws is the Smith Gag Act. However, the fact that fascists were convicted under laws we opposed was no basis for our rallying to their defense. We owe no more defense to the Stalinists indicted under the Smith Act than we owed to Eisler on grounds that aliens should have the same political liberties as citizens. Our struggle to repeal the Smith Act must go on, but it must not be linked to the defense of the arrested Stalinists.
 



PHILADELPHIA – Seven workers were shot, one of them critically, when company guards fired into a crowd at the yards of the Sun Shipbuilding & Drydock Corp. last Wednesday. The outbreak was the result of a policy of brutality and intimidation used by the management in its fight against the CIO drive to organize the yards.
Although none of the wounded, all Negroes employed in the Jim Crow No. 4 Yard, were CIO members, the “treat ’em rough” attitude of the guards has been applied toward all employees. Among the wounded was even a prominent company union man and stooge for the management.
The guards, also all Negroes, are paid by the company but function as members of the Coast Guard. The latter held them under military arrest, pending an investigation. In an effort to protect them against the vengeance of the men, the Coast Guard has refused to make public the identity of the guards involved.
The story of how the shooting started follows two versions; one, that of the company and the Coast Guard, the other that of the union, Local 2 of the Shipbuilders, CIO.
The union story, authenticated by numerous workers who were eye witnesses, says that it started in the company cafeteria during lunch hour. A warning whistle blows at 12:25 and the men are supposed to be back on the job at 12:30. Several workers who were finishing their meal as the warning whistle blew were approached by several guards with a demand that they “get back on the job.” One of the workers replied that he was still on his own time and would finish eating. The guard proceeded to take his number, which is the usual procedure when reporting a worker for violating a rule.
The worker followed the guard and asked what he was being reported for. At this moment the captain of the guards pushed his way through the small group that had gathered during the argument and punched the worker. Soon a general scuffle ensued, during which someone threw a half-brick and struck a guard. The guards immediately pulled their automatic pistols and the crowd scattered. However, the guards opened fire and felled a number of persons.
Five workers were taken to the hospital and two were treated at the company dispensary for minor flesh wounds. Almost all of the wounds were in the back or the back of the legs, indicating they were running from the guards when shot.
Following the shooting the workers lined up against the fence and refused to work. Edward Abrams, popular CIO organizer in No. 4 Yard, attempted to speak to the men but was arrested and held in $3,000 bail on a charge of inciting to riot!
Though the men were persuaded to go back to the job, virtually no work was done for the rest of the shift.
The version of the stories given by the company and the Coast Guard say nothing about the cafeteria incident and claim it started when a guard challenged a worker who worked without an identification badge. None of the workers present can even guess how this story ever got started. It is pointed out that no one can get by the guards at the gates without a badge. Even should this have happened in the morning rush, it is impossible to believe that he could have worked all morning without being challenged by his leader, his foreman, or by one of the guards on the hourly visits to check all badges.
The intensive activity of the: CIO is continuing to enroll more and more members as the date of the NLRB election, June 30, rolls near. Union spokesmen feel that the brutality shown by the company guards in the shooting will help open the eyes of many Negro employees who have been taken in by the company union line that John Pew, the company president, Republican boss, and die-hard enemy of unionism, is really interested in the welfare and future of the race.
Negroes are more and more coming to understand that Pew really loves them as long as they are satisfied to keep their mouths shut and let Pew judge when they should have a raise or a promotion and, above all, join his company union.
But Negroes who stand up like men, think their own thoughts and speak them out, which means joining the CIO, are manhandled, laid off, fired, and generally pushed around by Pew management and guards.
 



Our perspectives on the war have had as their central axis the concept of the “long war.” This concept was adopted following America’s entry in December 1941. It was based on the view that the production and military potentials of the Allies and the Axis, considered from the standpoint of logistics, sufficiently balanced each other to make a military knockout highly improbable until after a war of attrition of unforeseeable length. (Estimates ran from ten to fifteen years.) However, we added, this military appraisal must be complemented with a revolutionary appraisal of the warring nations. The latter led us to the conclusion that it is likewise highly improbable that the masses would permit such a protracted reign of blood-letting, starvation, and destruction without intervening to bring it to a revolutionary end.
The recent turn in the fortunes of war in favor of the Allies has caused a widespread feeling that the above perspective is no longer tenable. This view, usually implicit but often explicit, has been voiced particularly in the present discussion of the national question, by both the supporters and critics of the resolution of the Workers Party.
 
Optimism About the War’s Duration
Following the American landings in North Africa last winter, many of our supporters were ready to throw overboard the “long war” theory, being convinced of a rapid Allied victory. This optimism dissolved during the early stages of the Algerian and Tunisian campaigns, especially with the initial American defeats. However, it seems once more to have shot way up with the successful conclusion of the North African campaign and the accelerated bombing of Europe. Some have almost given way to the optimism of the bourgeois commentators, viz., that German power is rapidly disintegrating and needs but the appearance of a second front on the Continent to give it a death blow.
An examination of the military prospects in Europe is very essential to the revolutionary forces. For us it is not idle speculation based upon purely military hypotheses, as with the average “military expert” in the press. The basic approach for us stems from an understanding of the economic and political forces at play. If we err in our estimates of the forces at play we will adopt a perspective that the events themselves will continually overturn and, consequently, leave us disoriented and without compass or rudder.
This applies above all to the present discussion of the national question. It is easy to see that a war of attrition ended by revolutionary upheavals will leave Europe in a considerably different state of affairs than an Allied “blitz” with Allied armies of occupation. Though not on the same level of importance, it is yet exceedingly important to examine where the Allied occupation will most probably occur in any event, what the r61e of the Red Army will be, and where English and American forces will seek to “police” the revolution.
It is a matter beyond debate that the initiative has passed into the hands of the Allies. From the expected invasion of England we have now come to the expected invasion of Europe. The course of the war has advanced the latter as the next logical step.
But what is the significance of an invasion o£ the Continent? Can it be equated, as so many think, with a knockout blow for Germany? Where will the invasion come? What will its effect be upon post-war revolutionary developments? Events that have occurred since we first adopted a perspective on the war permit us now to elaborate and bring some details into sharper focus.
From a purely military point of view the destruction of the enemy’s armies and the occupation of at least strategic parts of his homeland must be the aim for a total victory. The shortest route to the German homeland is across the Low Countries, less than two hundred miles at its widest point and nearer to one hundred miles at its narrowest point. But is anyone so foolish as to believe an Allied army could land on these coasts and push across to Germany without staggering losses? Here, above all, the prospect would be one of stalemate, reorganization, large-scale replacement, delays, reverses and, at best, a slow, piecemeal reduction of an intricate system of German defenses directly based upon the German home industries and connected by means of the most excellent transport facilities found anywhere. A British army on the Somme in 1943 will not necessarily be nearer to Berlin than a British army on the Somme in 1915.
 
Significance of the Invasion Routes
But this short-line invasion route seems least likely to be adopted, if for no other reason than that the military considerations, which admit it as a possibility, will be outweighed by the political considerations, which exclude such a possibility.
It is the failure to appreciate this relationship between political and military considerations that leaves most bourgeois commentators at sea when dealing with the second front. They fail to understand that the capitalist statesman, when discussing strategy, places the question of “Who will occupy what at the finish?” before the question, “How can we finish it most quickly?”
Allied statesmen have spent many a sleepless night over the question of “Who will occupy what?” Beginning with the Allied chief in the White House and running the gamut through to the most insignificant little government-in-exile, they have all devoted much thought and time to the jockeying and maneuvering to determine who will be where when it is all over.
Above all have the gentlemen of Downing Street drawn upon their age-old experiences in statecraft to juggle the many delicate and intricate factors that make up “the European question.” Churchill once referred to post-war Europe as “that uninviting jungle,” about which he would rather not think. However, that was nearly two years ago. We can rest assured that the British statesmen have done considerable thinking since then on how best to “restore order” in this “jungle,” with the least possible harm to capitalism in general and British capitalism in particular.
Such Anglo-American plans for a “reorganization” of Europe must deal with two obstacles – the proletarian revolution and the Kremlin. For those who start at seeing these opposites linked by the conjunction “and,” a little realistic analysis will show how they are related to each other.
As revolutionary Marxists, we have long ago characterized the Kremlin as a deadly enemy of the proletarian revolution and a reliable emergency prop of the bourgeois order in countries where it begins to crumble. All we need do is to remember the GPU in Loyalist Spain. But let no one conclude from this that Churchill will calmly turn over to Stalin the task of “organizing Central Europe.” To begin with, we must not forget the elementary fact that even if Churchill were dealing with a Czarist Russia he would want most jealously to delimit Russian influence over European affairs. But the Russian bear today is a far stranger and more unpredictable animal than anything the British Foreign Office was ever called upon to fathom. And in its long history it has dealt with many strange and unpredictable peoples. Even we Marxists engage in polemics over what to call this monstrosity that has been fastened on the Russian people. What are we to expect from the products of Eton with their contempt for theory and penchant for a conservatively practical “muddling through”?
The British will be less impressed by the fact that the Russian bear is led, ring through the nose, by the executioner of the Third International than by the fact that in the lair of the bear exists an economy different from and hostile to capitalism.
We ourselves ask: “Is bureaucratic collectivism an export commodity? Will the Kremlin seek to impress its economic image upon the face of the Balkans and Central Europe?”
We can be sure that there is many a different answer given to these questions in different bourgeois circles. However, they will all agree in answering one question: “Can we safely entrust the policing of the Balkans and Central Europe to the Kremlin?” Here their unanimous answer will be “No!”
The Allied policy for post-war Europe will therefore be based upon a strategy to exclude Russia.
 
Russia and Her Allies
How will Russia react to such a policy? Whatever else we may debate about bureaucratic collectivism as a base for imperialist expansion, we know from considerations of Russia’s national security (as diplomats politely call it), that the Kremlin will seek at least the boundaries of the Hitler-Stalin pact period and, either as spheres of influence or direct acquisitions, Bulgaria, Rumania, Ruthenia, parts of Hungary, parts of Yugoslavia, most of Poland (including Warsaw) and more of the Finnish coast line. This would leave the Kremlin the strongest power on the Continent until such time as Britain could restore Germany or France as a counter-balance.
Would not the Anglo-American statesmen go to untold lengths to prevent such Russian expansion? Only a cursory knowledge of imperialist power politics in Europe for the last several decades is sufficient to understand this.
Russian agents and pro-Russian sentiment will cause the Allies enough headaches in revolutionary Europe without the added factor of the Red Army in Warsaw, Belgrade, Sofia and perhaps Budapest. The European bourgeoisie would shudder with fear as did once the Catholic prelates when the Turks marched out of Asia to appear under the walls of Vienna. How can The City and Wall Street proceed with plans for European reorganization, with capitalism being overturned by masses of workers and peasants in Eastern and Southeastern Europe who may view the Red Army as deliverers from class exploitation?
The arrival of the Red Army in these countries must not be confused with the arrival of the Nazis. The profound disturbances of property accompanying the Nazi occupations were in their fundamentals really bookkeeping operations. The native capitalists (Czechs, French, etc.) were forced to accept worthless German notes in return for majority control of their banks and industries by German capitalists. With the end of German occupation, it will not be too difficult to untangle these bookkeeping transactions and restore the property to its “legal” owner. But the prospect in the countries occupied by the Red Army is quite different. As in the Baltic states and in Poland, the entry of the Red Army will be viewed as the occasion for the workers and peasants to rise and settle old scores with their oppressors. The Kremlin can afford to sponsor an initial period of a “revolution from below,” demagogically blessed from on top. Then the commissars will arrive to “help” the occupied peoples organize “their” governments and industries and “vote” themselves into the Soviet Union.
Let the Anglo-Americans protest. The peoples of these “liberated” countries may very well rally or be rallied around the Kremlin standards. Would the Allies go to war with Russia to wrest the Balkans and Eastern Europe from her control against the sentiment of the peoples of these countries? And if they were reoccupied by the Allies through military force, could they reestablish and maintain capitalist ownership without the continued presence of Allied bayonets? And all this with the home front in Britain and America highly unstable, to say the least, and a worse situation in Western Europe. At best an unsavory prospect for the Anglo-American guardians of bourgeois order.
It must be firmly established that Stalin has no fears of the overturn of capitalism, as long as the Kremlin has a firm hand over the forces doing the overturning. It is only where the masses participate in the onslaught against capitalism independently, as in Spain, with the prospects for the creation of a real workers’ state, and not a Stalinist caricature of one, that Stalin sees the handwriting on the wall. Churchill may find the Russian agents who lead the Communist Parties of Western Europe unexpectedly cooperative in bolstering bourgeois order. It would be a gross error, however, to expect the same from the Red Army under all conditions.
It will be British strategy, therefore, to make sure that at the end of the war the Red Army will be as far as possible from the Balkans and Central Poland and that an Anglo-American army will be in a position to drive a wedge between the Red Army and Central Europe.
 
The “Second Front”
The way of guaranteeing the exact opposite would be for the Anglo-American forces to become enmeshed in Northern France and the Low Countries, giving the Red Army, in the event of a German collapse, a free hand in Eastern Europe and the Balkans. It is not for nothing that the Russian agents have been bellowing for a second front. And no matter how many new fronts are opened, they will keep on calling for a “second” front. For what they really mean is a front in Western Europe.
A second front in Western Europe would be as foolish for the Anglo-Americans as for a burglar to choose to break down the front door of a house, with his untrustworthy accomplice slipping in the back door while the householder is attracted by the noise in front. It would end with the burglar sustaining the blows and the accomplice getting the booty.
An invasion of Italy seems also unlikely, and in any case indecisive. It would prove a long-drawn-out and costly affair, with little gained toward a strategic breach in the enemy’s armor. Its success would achieve the dubious asset of knocking Italy out of the war. But this would be accomplished for all practical purposes by continued aerial harassment of her industries and transport and would save the expense of feeding and policing the nation. The German lines in the Brenner Pass, swollen with the remnants of the Italian forces, would prove impossible to crack. All this, looked at militarily. Politically, an Italian invasion would be no more beneficial to Allied strategy than one in Western Europe.
The strategic value of Sicily in the middle of the Mediterranean and as an air base for operations against Italy and Southern France will be sufficient to cause the Allies to expend a major campaign in occupying it. But the real invasion will be elsewhere.
All political necessities, buttressed, however, by military considerations, point to the invasion coming via the Balkans – either by way of Crete, Salonika, and up the Vardar valley or, with the aid of Turkey, from the Turkish bridgehead in Europe into Bulgaria supported by landings on the Bulgarian and Rumanian Black Sea coasts.
From the military side it is worth noting that the British have always found it advantageous to utilize their sea power to conduct a peripheral war, i.e., to engage the enemy in the far-flung corners of the war map, where shipping gives the British the advantage (witness the wars with France fought in North America, India, Spain, Egypt, etc.). The Anglo-American quartermaster staffs would find less of a supply problem in sea-borne transport of divisions and equipment to Greece from America, Britain, and North Africa than would the German quartermaster brains in rail communication from Germany. This is especially true since many of the railroads radiating south and east from Vienna would be required to do double duty, adding the Balkan front to their load for the Russian front.
Another military aspect is the question of the reserves. In the event of an invasion of Western France the British would still keep close to two million men in the British Isles as a reserve in the event something catastrophic happened on the Continent and another Dunkirk proved impossible. These troops would serve no strategic purpose as a counterweight to the Germans. However, the German home reserves would be within a few hours of the front. These same two million troops, however, stationed in Britain during an Allied invasion of the Balkans would tie up a German force of nearly the same number in France and the Low Countries, for the Germans could not strip their Western defenses in the face of such a force across the Channel.
It is not an insignificant factor to note that Churchill fought the British and French general staffs during the last war in favor of sea-borne operations (Gallipoli, Mesopotamia, Salonika) as against hopes for a break-through in France. As matters turned out, the Salonika army proved decisive in the last stages of the war in knocking Austro-Hungary and Bulgaria out of the war and sealing Germany’s doom at a time when the German armies in France still stood on the Hindenburg line.
 
The Invasion Through the Balkans
From the political side of the question, a Balkan invasion would have as its aim sending an Allied army into Europe through the rear door ahead of (at least abreast of) the Red Army. Allied control of the western shore of the Black Sea (Rumania, Bulgaria) and Yugoslavia would place them in a position to open a great offensive across the Hungarian plains toward Budapest and Vienna.
Meanwhile the Allies would keep a deft hand on the lend-lease faucet of Russia, turning it off and on to suit their own, not the Russian, military needs. If the Balkan campaign went well for the Allies, supplies could be withheld from the Russians to prevent them from utilizing the diversion in the Balkans to open offensives likely to make more rapid progress against the Germans in Russia than the Allies were making in the Balkans. If too many German troops were drawn from the Russian front into the Balkans, more supplies from the Allies to Russia would mean more pressure and the drawing off of German strength back to the Russian front. Lloyd George and Clemenceau sought to play the same game with Russia in the last war but usually the Russians got nothing at all because of the terrific needs of the Allied front in France.
If Allied offensives toward Budapest and Vienna then forced Germany to eventual surrender, Allied armies would race north from the Balkans toward Warsaw and Danzig, establishing an Anglo-American barricade across the path of the Red Army. Such a barricade, anchored on a British fleet in the Black Sea at one end and another British fleet in the Baltic at the other, would constitute a new form of the cordon sanitaire against the Russian menace, the difference being, however, that the cordon sanitaire of Clemenceau-Lloyd George was designed to keep the ideas of Bolshevism from “infecting” the masses of Europe who sought to follow in the footsteps of their Russian brethren. The cordon sanitaire of Roosevelt-Churchill would seek to keep the hob-nailed (probably lend-lease) boots of the Red Army from the streets of Warsaw, Budapest, Belgrade, Sofia and Bucharest. The cordon sanitaire of 1919 sought to exclude from Europe the messengers of the Communist International with their revolutionary manifestos and world-shaking ideas. The cordon sanitaire of 194(?) would seek to keep from Europe the armed expropriators of the new Czar of the Kremlin, the totalitarian missionaries of bureaucratic-collectivist slavery.
Whereas the earlier cordon was openly hostile to Bolshevist Russia, the new cordon will be formed with the oily hypocrisy typical of capitalist diplomacy. Like so many other moves in the relations of the Allies to Russia, the Balkan strategy will be a stinging slap in the face to Stalin. The ostensible reason for the route north from the Balkans will be announced to the world by the Allies as an effort “to cut off the German armies in Russia,” “to unite with our brave Russian allies” and, above all, “to go to the aid of Russia.”
Churchill recently promised some serious fighting in the Mediterranean “before the leaves fall.” However, the leaves will fall many times before Allied Armies reach the Hungarian plains and cross them to the gates of Vienna. It is already July and the Italians are still in Sicily and the Germans in Crete. Even if the occupation of Crete is accomplished this year, it is doubtful if a Continental bridgehead can be consolidated before next spring. The struggle up the valley of the Vardar will prove a much more protracted undertaking to the Allies than the headlong dash down the Vardar was for the Germans in 1941. The entry of an Allied fleet into the Black Sea depends not only upon Turkish agreement to open the Dardanelles, but also upon complete air mastery to protect the ships in this relatively small body of water flanked to east and north by German airfields. The vast edge of offensive mechanized weapons over defensive weapons which gave the Germans their “blitz” victories in Poland, France and the Balkans no longer prevails. Tank-destroyers and numerous special anti-tank weapons have once again brought defensive and offensive weapons on a more equal plane. Likewise, the infantry-scattering dive bomber has now become virtually a clay pigeon for a cool-headed crew on a modern anti-aircraft gun. Given sufficient time, the economic and manpower preponderance of the Allies will tell. But again we ask, how many times will the leaves fall before the enemy’s army is destroyed and his homeland occupied? All one can answer now is that the leaves will fall again and again upon millions of ever-increasing graves on the isles of the Aegean, on the ancient battlegrounds of the Vardar, on the wide wheatfields of Hungary – and still the slaughter will go on. For essentially the view we first enunciated – the theory of the “long war” – remains unshaken. Left to themselves, the capitalist rulers of the earth who called for the Frankenstein monster of war will prove unable to banish him.
But it is inconceivable that the toiling masses – in France, Belgium, Italy, Norway, Poland, Germany, Czechoslovakia, the Balkans, Russia, Britain and even in America – will continue to send their best blood to redden the Vardar and the Danube, will continue to see the cities laid low, the fields laid waste, pestilence and hunger stalk the streets and countryside, nerves wrecked and muscles wracked in unbearable toil to produce the means of destruction, without at one point saying, “It is enough!”
Again we repeat – it will be a long war, unless ...



 
July 7, 1943


Ernest Lund
 





Postscript. The above was written a few days before the invasion of Sicily, which brought in its train a series of momentous events. The editor has, therefore, kindly permitted me to add this note of comment to indicate how these events have influenced the perspective outlined in the article.
Sooner than most of us expected, the toiling masses have raised their own voice in the midst of the bedlam of war to say in no uncertain terms: “It is enough!” By their peace demonstrations, the Italian workers have toppled Mussolini from his perch. And with it the war has entered a new phase. We are now turning the corner of 1917. The Italian revolution is yet far short of the February days in Russia. But even if the heroic workers of Milan and Turin are held at bay by a military dictatorship, supported either by German or Allied bayonets, the workers’ revolution has appeared on the scene to stay.
Whereas at the time the article was written it was necessary to indicate the role of the masses with the hypothetical “unless,” it is now possible to say that the revolutionary volcano of Europe will erupt long before the time-tables of the Allied general staff calls for any decisive knockout blows.
The liberal commentators, who never see further than their noses, are already speaking of the possibility of German peace demonstrations. Yes, they will come, and with a ferocity that will make these liberals wince. But with it will come more than they bargained for. When the Hamburg dock worker and the Krupp steel worker again find their voice, its echo will be heard in the downing of tools on the Clydeside, the march of Welsh miners, the rumble of revolution in India and among the millions of British, French, Dutch, Japanese and American colonial slaves. Yes, and in the United States the workers will tear to shreds the straightjacket of wartime control and unloose their pent-up resentments in a great surge of economic and political offensives.
Meanwhile the antagonism between Russia and her allies comes ever more into the open. The Anglo-American strategists will make many a move against Russia without regard for its effect in lengthening the war. Only the growing specter of a revolutionary Europe will convert their cat-and-mouse game into a frantic scramble to hasten the end and jointly prop up the old order before it is too late.



 
August 2, 1943


E.L.
 



 



A new man started working in our shop the other day. He was a toolmaker by trade. Age: in the late fifties.
Yesterday afternoon the superintendent came out and spoke to him. The man looked worried. He put on his hat and coat. When asked, “What’s up?” he replied:
“My old boss is after me. He found out where I am working and notified the Manpower Commission office. They called here and now I have to go down to see them.”
The next morning at 10:30 the man came in and with a crestfallen look began packing up his tools.
“It’s no use. Got to go back to that sonova...... boss of mine. He won’t give me a letter of release. If it weren’t for the war I would put a couple of his machines on the blink. Shove you right in jail if anything happens now. He will be watching me like a hawk. Might as well be working in Germany. What’s this war about, anyway?”
*
The history books tell us of a great fight over a law we are reminded of when we see things like the above. It was a law called the Runaway Slave Act. It was passed through Congress by the powerful slave-owners’ bloc in the 1850’s. The law gave a slave owner the right to ask the government to arrest and return a runaway slave, no matter where he went, even in “free” states. The courts upheld the law. Federal officials enforced it. Yes, the judges and politicians worked hand in glove with the slave owners in those days just as they do with the capitalists today. And most of the newspaper editors, then as now, added their blessing.
Is it far-fetched to compare “letters of release” with the Runaway Slave Law? Not if you are a worker in a shop where conditions are unbearable and they won’t let you go. Have you ever been on a job where the foreman had it in for you and rode the life out of you? Have you ever been given monotonous work so it came out of your ears and you felt you couldn’t stand the sight of it? Have you ever been stuck on a “graveyard shift” month after month with no hope of change? Have you ever worked the evening shift while your wife worked days? Have you ever worked for a company that was so cheap and chiseling and strict that yon wanted to go elsewhere just so you could breathe freely again?
And then been told that they would not release you?
Or, if by some means you got another job, they reached out and hauled you back to the old slavery?
Well, if you have lived through it, as hundreds of thousands of workers do, you will agree that Roosevelt’s “Letters of Release” order is nothing but a NEW RUNAWAY SLAVE ACT.
But let the powers-that-be read their history books. The Runaway Slave Law hastened a bloody civil war in this country.
Do they believe free labor will stand for these new chains being forged in the name of a “war for democracy”? Do they believe our generation to be too servile and cringing to act as did the abolitionists of eighty years ago? Every recent strike, from the anthracite miners to the Boeing Aircraft workers, should teach them what they are in for.
 



Henry A. Wallace, the first speech-making vice-president in American history and hero of The Nation-PM-Daily Worker brand of “liberals,” last week made the third of his major wartime speeches.
In the first speech, he hailed this as the “century of the common man.” In the second, he saw the economic systems of Russia and the United States growing closer together. In his last speech be complained that his first two speeches were badly misunderstood. What he really was talking about, it now becomes plain, is that America must organize the world for the “century of American big business.”
The speech took up two major questions: the political organization (or the policing) of the post-war world, and the economic organization following the war.
 
Proposes Super-League of Nations
The post-war world should, according to Wallace, be run by a super-League of Nations. This will be modeled upon Wilson’s plans except that it will really have teeth because, unlike 1919, this time America will get behind it. Wallace would have been more truthful had he bluntly said that this time America will run it.
A study of the famous debates in the Senate that led to American refusal to join the League of Nations will show that the greatest fear of the Republican majority, direct spokesmen for Wall Street, was that the USA would be a minority in a league dominated by Great Britain. American capitalism chose a free hand. However, following an American victory in this war, they look forward to an entirely different situation.
Germany, Italy and Japan will be disarmed and “policed.” “France” will have about as much to say as did, let us say, Rumania in 1919. England will be so dependent upon America (as France was upon England in 1919) that she will have lost her former commanding role in world affairs. American food and economic aid will also bring the lesser nations into line.
All this leaves is Russia. The rest of Europe will be only too glad to call upon American help to save them from Russian “meddling” in the affairs of Europe. We can be sure that the political spokesmen of American capitalism will have no objections to this set-up. Their 1919 isolationism will quickly change into American “internationalism.”
But even in such a super-League, America is to keep its own back yard for itself. While America would dominate the whole, through the “regional principle” it would exclusively dominate Pan America, that is, Latin America and Canada – the fields of the greatest Wall Street investments.
Wallace goes on to repeat the now four-square gospel of American imperialism, “equality of opportunity in international trade.” This has become the sacred doctrine of the American industrial giants, preached with equal fervor by the conservative Hull and the “anti-imperialist” Willkie. For all of them it means the end of COLONIAL imperialism, like British rule in India, in favor of DOLLAR imperialism, like American rule in South America.
“Equality of opportunity in international trade” means to Wall Street a preference for “banana republics” ruled by puppet dictators who get their orders via Sumner Welles, over British, French and Dutch colonies in which the mother country has first choice in picking the ripe fruits of exploitation.
Wallace spent a section of his speech in dealing with the criticisms made of his earlier speeches. The president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce had said, in reply to Wallace, that he was not interested in fighting a war to give a quart of milk to every Hottentot. Hull had made some unkind remarks about “utopianism.” Wallace’s answer amounted, in effect, to saying that he was still in favor of a quart of milk for every child in the world but what he meant was that it should be delivered at a profit by the Borden Milk Trust.
 
No Answer to This Contradiction
He made it clear that the only hope he saw for world prosperity in the post-war period was based upon an American capitalist organization of the world economic order. He pointed to American imperialist rule over the Philippines as an example of what he meant by American economic intervention on a world scale. “But it is also true that stronger nations, like our own, can provide guidance, technical advice and, in some cases, capital investment to help those nations which are just starting on the path of industrialization.” There is one contradiction that Wallace leaves unanswered. After stating the need of American investments to industrialize backward nations, Wallace, later on says that “Our surplus will be far greater than ever within a few years after this war comes to an end.”
But these newly industrialized countries will also be producing a surplus. What are they expected to do with it? Their failure to dispose of it at a profit means they will quit producing. This, means no further industrialization. This means no further American production for export of basic goods like steel, machinery, railroad equipment, cement, glass, etc. This means unemployment in Pittsburgh, Detroit, and Chicago.
Yet Wallace poses exactly this question: “This problem is well recognized by the average man on the street, who sums it up in a nutshell like this: If everybody can get a job in war work now, why can’t everybody have a job in peacetime production later on?”
And what is his answer? None! None, beyond pious wishes and faith in what he calls the “new type of industrialist.” He probably means men like Henry Kaiser. But what good will production genius do when people do not have the money to buy? What good did it do the country in 1933 to know that Ford had the ability to make millions of cars when few had the money to buy a car, and half of Ford’s workers were unemployed?
Wallace spoke about the “plans that will speed up the shift from a government-financed war program to a privately-financed program of peacetime activity. Why we needed government financing in war and private bank capital financing in peacetime, Wallace did not stop to explain. If government financing is superior for one, why not for the other? Or is it less important when all that is at stake in peacetime are jobs and happiness of 85 per cent of the people?
We need government financing of industrial production not only in peacetime, but government OWNING and government PLANNING to guarantee a job and a living wage for all. BUT THIS, CAN ONLY BE DONE WHEN A WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT IS IN POWER. The economic nightmare of this crazy world can only be straightened out through socialist production for USE. instead of capitalist production for profit!
 



Fascism is the ugly child of capitalist decay.
Fascism is the last resort of the capitalist class every where – of the Thyssens and Krupps, of the Beaverbrooks and Hearsts, of the Mitsuis and Mitsubishis, of the duPonts and Fords.
Fascism is the. answer of capitalism to the working class, the answer of concentration camps and machine guns.
Fascism becomes the political form of capitalist rule in the period of the Death Agony of Capitalism.
Fascism in Germany today is a picture of America tomorrow – if the capitalists have their way about it!
Fascism is born out of capitalist decay, out of unemployment, out of hunger, out of discontent, out of bankruptcy.
Fascism is the violent cough out of the tubercular lungs of capitalism.
No cough drops will stop it Only killing the disease itself will stop the cough.
Stopping the cough and leaving the tubercular germs at work is futile. And this is what a mere “defense of democracy” does. Because “democracy” today is also based on capitalism. It can only afford it in time of it “capitalist democracy.” [sic] It has survived in those countries rich enough to survive the epidemic of capitalist crises. It has survived in England because her vast Empire permitted the capitalists to skim off enough cream to keep the population at home satisfied. English “democracy” is based on slavery for millions of Indians, Africans, and Arabs. American democracy is based on the fat accumulated by capitalism in the past and economic exploitation of the world.
Democracy is a luxury for capitalism. It can only offord it in time of prosperity. When capitalism begins slashing wages in time of crisis or rationing food in time of war, and mass discontent arises, it is necessary to dispense with the luxury of democracy. Germany, Italy, Japan, France and smaller capitalist countries have already done away with democracy. England and America, the richest capitalist nations on the earth, have until now still been able to afford this luxury.
The fight against fascism must be an offensive one. Not “defense of democracy,” but “down with capitalism,” must be the watchword. But the offensive must begin by fighting tooth and nail to DEFEND every democratic right – the right to strike, to speak freely, to write freely, to meet freely, to organize freely.
But everywhere under democratic capitalism the question must arise, to paraphrase Abraham Lincoln: “This house cannot remain divided against itself. Either it will be all slave or it will be all free. Either the capitalist dictators of industry will do away with political democracy and establish fascism, or the mass of the workers will do away with the dictators of industry and establish democracy everywhere.”
Hitler did the bidding of Thyssen and Krupp, and struck down the German labor movement. The leaders of the working class parties and unions were arrested, many murdered, others exiled. German capitalism was then free to slash wages and regiment labor for its next job – rearmament and war.
The English and French capitalists feared war. They were still fat from the spoils of the last war. They had little to gain compared to the risk. The risk was great. The war may end in revolution. Hitler feared a revolution, too. But German capitalism was up against the wall. It was being slowly strangled by the capitalist crisis. It was willing to gamble. Hitler played a clever game. He knew that he could move ahead without fear of the English ruling class. They were more afraid of revolution than of Hitler. So he militarized the Rhineland, occupied Austria, scared Chamberlain into giving him the Sudetenland, grabbed up Czechoslovakia, took Memel, prepared to march into Poland. All the while the English capitalists were hoping he would become satisfied and stop, or direct his blows against Russia. Finally they had to overcome their fear of revolution and go to war.
Not to save democracy!
Not to defeat fascism!
But to save the British Empire!
To prevent the German capitalists from re-dividing the earth!
And the American imperialists are just as interested in the question of democracy or fascism. Witness the scandalous affair in North Africa with the French fascist, Darlan. And now with the arch-reactionary militarist, Giraud, and the monarchist-turned- emocratic politician, deGaulle. Or the maneuvers with the Austrian pretender, Otto of Hapsburg. Or the paens of democratic praise for bloody dictators like Batista of Cuba and Vargas of Brazil.
World War I was continued in World War II. The imperialist powers of the earth took a breathing period, raised more cannon fodder, prepared and maneuvered for position. Then they continued in 1939 essentially where they left off in 1919.
Again the big industrial giants wrestle for control of the earth. Germany with its allies on one side, England and America and their allies on the other.
Capitalism must expand – or die! “The earth is divided? Then it must be redivided,” say the hungry imperialists.
Thirty or forty million men are placed in uniform and given guns to slaughter each other.
Cities are bombed. Ships are sunk. Crops laid waste. Oil wells blown up and oil made from coal. Gunpowder made from cotton and clothing from paper. Coffee allowed to rot in Brazil and substitutes used in America. Sugar piled up in Puerto Rico and rationed in New York. Millions of strong men sent into the Army and women sent into heavy industry. Liars put on the radio and honest men in jail. Civilization “defended” in Lybia and Guadalcanal, and schools closed in Germany and America.
This is capitalism in its Death Agony.
This is capitalism gone mad.
This is World War II – second ugly child of the social crisis of capitalism.
Depression – unemployment – hunger.
Fascism – murder – barbarism.
War – mass slaughter – devastation.
That is the “normal” life of capitalism today.
That is the foul death stench of capitalism.
That is the REAL enemy of civilization.
 



The War Labor Board has turned down the demand of the CIO Shipbuilders Union for a nine per cent general wage increase for the nation’s shipyard workers. This action follows several weeks of deadlocked negotiations between the union and the shipyard corporations, during which the latter have tried their best to break the back of unionism in the East Coast yards.
The refusal of the pay raise by the WLB is the board’s answer to the union, whose leaders have been telling the workers to “leave everything in the hands of the national office and the WLB.”
All of the important East Coast contracts are piled up in the files of the WLB. These include the contracts for Federal Shipbuilding of Kearny, N.J., Cramp of Philadelphia, New York Ship of Camden and dozens of others.
The local negotiating committees were turned down by the corporations when they asked for a wage increase. Opposing any kind of action to force the profit-swollen corporations to give their workers enough pay to keep up with rising prices, the national leaders of the union asked that all deadlocked contracts be filed with the WLB. Here the union leaders expected to make deals through their clever lawyers to gain something for the workers.
 
Leaders Fumbled Wage Confab
However, even in dealing with the WLB, the John Green administration of the union showed less understanding or courage than any local negotiating committee. Every experienced union negotiator knows that it is necessary to open negotiations by asking for the maximum demands of the workers.
The national leaders of the union, however, went before the WLB with a cringing and whining appeal in which they pointed out that although the cost of living has gone up eighteen per cent since the last pay adjustment in May 1942, all they were asking for was a nine per cent raise!
The conduct of the Shipbuilders Union officials stands in marked contrast to that of the United Mine Workers. The latter made the whole country aware of the just demands of the miners. They talked tough and acted tough. They treated the WLB with the contempt it deserves. Today there is hardly an honest rank and file union man in the country who does not understand that the miners’ case is just and who is not ready to back them up. With a little more heat under the John L. Lewis machine that runs the union, the miners will still succeed in forcing the Roosevelt Administration to grant them their just demands.
 
Owners Use Connally Bill
However, the decision of the WLB in the shipbuilders’ case has not created a stir. Many papers have not even taken notice. Why should they? They rely upon the John Green leadership, supported in many locals, by the even worse Communist Party-line boys, to hold the shipyard workers in check.
Meanwhile the companies continue their arrogant anti-union attitude which they have adopted since the Smith-Connally bill was passed. In one yard after another the militant shop stewards report that the mood of the men is turning toward a feeling of hopelessness and lack of confidence in the ability of the union to do something for them.
These militant shop stewards now have a doubly hard job. On the one hand they must fight the “do-nothing” policy of the national officials and on the other they must fight all sorts of anti-union sentiment and remarks in the ranks of the men, which is created by the leaders’ “do-nothing” policy.
The more active union men are now talking daily about the need of sending real fighting delegations to the national convention of the union in New York in September. Reports from a number of yards indicate that the militant shop stewards are plugging for the election of delegates pledged to repeal the “no-strike” pledge, recall the CIO members from the WLB, and repeal the Smith-Connolly bill by forming ah Independent Labor Party.
 






Following is a chapter taken from the pamphlet, Plenty For All, a popular presentation of the socialist program, by Ernest Lund. It was published by the Workers Party this month.



*
Why did the capitalists mess up this chance of plenty for all? Why did they bring about chaos instead of order? Why wealth piled up on one side and poverty on the other? Why “boom” years followed by “depression”? Why “depression” followed by war? Why the turmoil of strikes, strife, struggle; man against man, class against class, nation against nation?
Because the very root of capitalism is wrong.
Because the basic idea is unsound.
Because the foundation is illogical.
Because the capitalist system is founded on a CONTRADICTION.
What is this contradiction?
It is the system in which the man who owns the tools of production does not work them; and —
The man who works them does not own them.
This is, the basic contradiction of capitalism.
Before we had capitalism the owner of the tools and the worker of the tools WERE THE SAME MAN. In those days the tools were simple: saws, hammers, spinning wheels, weaving looms. The workman owned his tools. He bought his raw materials. The product he made was his own. He sold it for the best price. He was his own boss. True – he worked long hours and hard. He never lived well. Life was a drudgery. But he didn’t know wage cuts, lock-outs, unemployment, speed-ups, strikes and insecurity.
Then came the inventions. The tools of production became workshops, factories and, finally, gigantic industries. Only a rich man could set up a factory. Land owners, bankers, merchants had the capital. They became the capitalists.
Each machine now turned out as much as several workmen formerly did with hand tools. The owner of the machine could pay the worker to run it and still keep a good margin pf profit. The profit bought more machines. More workers were employed. More profit. More machines. On one hand, a handful of men who owned the tools of production. On the other hand, the mass of workers who could only make a living by working for the capitalists.
What happened now?
The product no longer belonged to the producer – the worker at the machine. It belonged to the capitalist owner of the machine. He sold it for the best price the market would pay. And he gave the worker the smallest wage he would work for.
The less the wage for the worker, the bigger the profit for the capitalist.
The bigger the wage for the worker, the less the profit for the capitalist.
The capitalist was interested in longer hours, speed-up, and low wages?
The worker was interested in shorter hours, easier work, and high wages.
Capitalism created a class of owners pitted against a class of workers – at war with each other – engaged in a CLASS STRUGGLE with each other.
The capitalist owner of industry has only one reason to run his factory – profit. Under capitalism, the needs of the people for various goods are not the PRIMARY purpose of production. The capitalist will just as soon make rifles as Bibles, medicine as poison gas, pre-fabricated houses as “block-buster” bombs, artistic reprints as pornography. All he asks is: “Which will pay more?”
The fact that the millions of people depend upon industry for food, clothing, housing, furniture, transportation, communications and amusement is of interest to the capitalist only as the “market” in which he can realize a profit.
He is the dictator over his plant. He can run it or shut it down to please himself. If there is profit in production he hires men, works overtime, night shifts. If profit falls off, he throws his workers into the street to shift for themselves.
He operates anarchistically. Without plan, without social purpose. His only god is the Almighty Dollar – his Holy Script is the magic word, “Dividends.”
That is why capitalism is more destructive than all the earthquakes, tornadoes, floods, cloudbursts, tidal waves and volcanic eruptions ever visited upon earth from the beginning of time.
Capitalism kills and cripples millions in its wars, in class strife and civil war, in hunger and freezing, in industrial accidents and disease, in malnutrition and child labor, in poverty and crime. It destroys the wealth of society and wastes the labor potential of millions of idle hands.
Capitalism pits worker against worker in bidding for a job. It pits Capitalist against capitalist in fighting for profits. It pits workers against capitalist in class struggle. It pits capitalist nation against capitalist nation in imperialist war. It pits producer against consumer, landlord against tenant, farmer against city dweller, white against Negro, Gentile against Jew. WHY?
All in the mad race for a crust of bread, for survival, for security. In an age when plenty is possible for all!
It is the system of COMPETITION – It is the system of dog eat dog, of each man for himself and the devil take the hindmost, of the law of the jungle.
And in the mad scramble of capitalism, the Age of Plenty – the New World within our power – is being trampled in the dust.
So that Mrs. McLean can throw a $50,000 party and parade her two million dollar diamond before her six hundred and fifty guests.
And ten million workers run bayonets into each other’s guts in an imperialist-war.
Capitalism stands before us indicted as a system of criminal madness, “dripping with blood and filth.”
And the capitalist class stands before us as mad overlords in control of a high-powered auto careening furiously to destruction.
 



The Smith amendment to do away with time and a half for overtime has been defeated but the capitalist press still carries on its campaign to rouse the country against workers being paid extra for overtime.
“It is time to forget the 40-hour week when extra hours can put airplanes, tanks and guns where they are so desperately needed at the fighting front,” says an. editorial in the New York Times of last Thursday.
What 40-hour week, Mr Times Editor? What guns, planes and tanks are not being produced because of the 40-hour week? In New York? Chicago? West Coast? Everywhere workers put in from 48 to 74 hours in defense plants. Does anyone know of a defense plant anywhere working a 40-hour week? If the Times knows about one it has failed to mention it.
Then why statements like the above? Obviously to impress the middle class and others not directly connected with industry with a picture of soldiers dying for lack of equipment while lazy workers insist on working only 40 hours a week. Be careful, Mr. Editor. The working people have stood a lot of kicking around since the war began and are liable not to take any more.
“AUTOMATIC SCREW MACHINE operator, thoroughly experienced, must be able to make own set-up, 74 hour week.”
The above is from an ad run in Sunday’s Times. How many of the hirelings of the capitalist press would even have the strength to write a labor-hating editorial after working 74 hours in a machine shop, not to speak of the inclination to write one? And what is more important, how many of the pot-bellied bankers and industrialists, who smack their lips as they read this stuff in the Times while their chauffeur drives them down to work in the morning (around 11 o’clock) would even have the strength after 74 hours to say “damn the labor unions”?
But, argue some of the apologists of the ruling class, even if all industries are running on an overtime schedule, it is unjust to make the employer pay extra when he is so patriotic as to make an effort for national defense.
As if the industrialists did anything except for their own profit. If war orders mean more money in their pocket, why not run their plants day and night? If, however, war orders interfere with profits, as in the case of the auto industry, just stall along with “business as usual” as long as possible.
Aside from this, all the big defense plants are operating on a “cost plus” basis, i.e., they submit a bill for material and labor and add a percentage for profit. Why should time and a half pay prevent them from producing?
The real question isn’t time and a half at all. A man working 60 hours at a 90 cent rate gets paid $63 on the basis of time and a half for all over 40 hours. If he were to offer to work for $1.05 per hour straight time for 60 hours to make up his same $63, those who howl against time and a half would not in the least be satisfied. What they really want is to cut the wages of labor while industry is stuffing itself with war profits!
Every worker knows what the loss of time and a half would mean to him. That is why all the plants were buzzing with excitement when the Smith amendment was before the House. Had it been passed, this country would have witnessed such a reaction on the part of the workers as to make past strike waves tame in comparison. And that is why Roosevelt, knowing the power of the aroused working class, put the screws on the House to defeat the measure. But it is not the last we have heard of it. Not by a long shot. The capitalists will not be content as long as this worker earns a dollar they can gouge out of him. Let’s be on guard. Let them know we are not in a mood to have something put over on us.
 



Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Spain
by Felix Morrow
Published by Pioneer Publishers, New York (203 pp., 50 cents)
The need for a Marxist analysis and interpretation of the world-shaking events in Spain has long been keenly felt by those fighting for the ideas of Bolshevism. This indispensable and long-awaited work has made its appearance with the publication of the above volume.
The revolutionary movement of the English-speaking world will find in this book an invaluable weapon in the fight for the program of the Fourth International. Utilizing the concrete experience of Spain it drives home the lessons of the difference between class collaboration and class struggle as no abstract thesis could succeed in doing.
The present work begins, with only a slight overlapping, where the author left off in his previous work, The Civil War in Spain. The latter, now unfortunately out of print, serves as a valuable introduction to the present volume, since it gives a wealth of background material on Spanish political developments since 1931, unavailable elsewhere in such comprehensive form. It is not, however, necessary to an understanding of the events dealt with in the present volume.
In his effort to achieve conciseness, the author has not fallen into the error of making unsubstantiated assertions. The book abounds with quotations from a variety of sources which bolster the argumentation. In fact, the wealth of the material presented should make the work a valuable source book on the important governmental decrees and the political declarations of the various parties.
Approaching the question as a Marxist historian, Comrade Morrow makes no pretense at being “objective” in the sense of the bourgeois historian’s objectivity. Historical phenomena are treated from the standpoint of the class struggle and the roles of the participants judged by the criterion of the struggle for working class power.
This approach reveals the leaders of the Spanish working class in a sordid light. One is at a loss to find an analogy in history for such a concentration of treachery, betrayal, and blundering stupidity in one epoch. The roles of the cynical mercenaries of the Stalinist movement, the bewildered opportunists of the anarchist bureaucracy, the “practical” politicians of the Prieto school, the naiveté and political dishonesty of the Caballero wing of social democracy, and the whining centrists of the vacillating P.O.U.M. are analysed at every decisive stage of the struggle.
The author does not, however, limit himself to criticism. The policy of the opportunists is constantly contrasted to the revolutionary strategy advocated by the Fourth Internationalists. Their strategy on the struggle for power, the economy, the national and colonial question, the international situation, and the military struggle composes a program for the Spanish revolution.
 
New Facts Presented
Comrade Morrow presents many facts which are new even to those of us who made a special point of keeping informed on the Spanish events. These facts, dug out of little-known provincial papers, government documents, or the abundance of eye-witness accounts, attest to the wide research conducted by the author. In writing an analytical history, one is inevitably confronted with the shortcomings of a chronological treatment of the events, since it does not permit exhaustive treatment of the special problems that come to the fore. Comrade Morrow solves the problem very ably by combining a chronological treatment of the events with special chapters devoted to specific questions. The chapters devoted to the military questions raised by the war give a new insight into the fundamental link between the politics and the military policy of the Loyalist government.
 
The Summary
The author sums up the last six months of the struggle with the following terse sentence:
“The jailing of workers and peasants and the opening of the front lines by ‘republican’ officers to the fascists: that is the story of Loyalist Spain from November 1937 to May 1938.”
The reader, under the immediate impressions of the ugly accumulation of betrayals and treacheries, cannot but feel that this sentence could sum up the whole experience of the Spanish masses under the banner of the People’s Front. But the reader is not left with a feeling of despair, despite the sordidness of the story, for transcending all else is the unforgettable heroism of the workers and peasants of Spain, deceived again and again since they took to the road of revolution in 1931, but grimly determined to conquer or perish in the attempt. For as Comrade Morrow points out: “Pessimism and skepticism are luxuries for the few. The masses have no other choice except to fight for their lives and the future of their children.”
But this fight will only be successful when the workers of Spain and the world will have learned the lessons of Spain so graphically portrayed in this book.
 



One of the features that distinguished the last Moscow Trial from its predecessors was the attempt of Stalin-Vyshinsky-Yezhov to explain the programs of the Left Opposition and the Bukharinists during the period of the open factional struggles as having been merely a cover for counter-revolutionary aims. By this method the whole history of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union can be re-written and all blunders and failures explained as the activities of spies and wreckers, disguised as faction leaders.
It now seems that this method is just as applicable to the problems of explaining the past history of the various parties of the Communist International. The current issue of the Communist International contains the first attempt in this direction.
 
History Rewritten
In an article called Provocateurs at work, one of the present leaders of the Polish Communist Party sets out to rewrite the history of that organization. It now develops that the Polish party has for years been led by secret agents of the “Defenziva,” the secret police organized by Pilsudski.
These “spies of Pilsudski” are now blamed for the idiotic ultra-left slogans which the Comintern raised during certain periods of its history, particularly from 1929 to 1934. The author of the article says that
“... they (the spies) systematically distorted the line of the party in the attempt, on the instructions of the ‘Defenziva,’ to present the Polish Communist movement in such a politically ugly light as to shake the confidence of the masses in Communism, and to enable the Polish ‘Defenziva’ and Polish fascism to say that the Communist movement is alien to the Polish people. Hence, the fact that the agents-provocateurs put forward all kinds of ‘extreme slogans’ like those imposed upon the soldiers of the Warsaw garrison by provocateur Panitz in calling upon them to murder their officers.”
 
Factionalism a Crime
The Polish C.P., like the other parties of the Comintern, was beset with factional struggles under the international leadership of Stalin-Zinoviev, and after 1926, of Stalin-Bukharin. Since factional struggles are now regarded as crimes in the Stalintern, the fights in the Polish Party are attributed to ‘Defenziva’ agents. “A most important method resorted to by the Pilsudski clique in disorganizing the Communist movement was the incitement of factional struggle inside the Communist Party of Poland. The Polish ‘Defenziva’ had its agents, in both factions, both in the ‘majority’ and in the ‘minority’.”
The Left Opposition severely condemned the criminal policies of the Comintern in Poland in 1926 when the Polish C.P. supported Pilsudski in his military coup. This is also explained to day by the Stalinist “historians, who declare that “during Pilsudski’s May coup d’etat in 1926 the leaders of both factions did not take up an independent class attitude, but supported Pilsudski.”
 
How They Lied
Most humorous “explanation” of all is the following:
“In addition, leading members of both factions – ‘majority’ and ‘minority,’ acting on the instructions of the ‘Defenziva,’ made a wide practice of deceiving the Communist International. They fabricated data regarding the state of the party organizations, sent in inflated materials, regarding mass movements, exaggerated the role of their respective factions in these movements, whereas actually these movements were led by honest rank-and-file Communists who were utterly sick and tired of the ‘factional’ struggle staged by the ‘Defensiva’.”
The writer would be much nearer the truth if he confessed that the reports were sent in by party bureaucrats who lied in order to make their jobs secure, and that the mass movement did not exist at all.
The article on the Polish C.P., no doubt, heralds the appearance of “explanatory” histories for all the sections of the Comintern. We can expect an article most any day now describing how Lovestone and Cannon were sent into the Communist Party of America by the Department of Justice to stir up a faction fight to demoralize the membership and sell out the party to Al Smith and the Liberty League and how, thanks to the eternal vigilance of Comrade Browder, the party was saved for Roosevelt and the Democratic Party.
 



The revolutionary party must be attracting to itself all the best in the movements around it. Lenin pointed out to the foreign communists at the time of the founding of the Communist International that Bolshevism did not only develop by disagreements and splits but that “Bolshevism had proved a unit, it had drawn to itself all that was best among the currents of socialist thought close to it.”
The Bolshevik core that emerged from the corrupted body of the Communist Party of the U.S. to found the Left Opposition had its share of conflicts in the last ten years. Its break with “fellow-travellers” of the moment like Ludwig Lore and Louis Budenz and with die-hard sectarians like Oehler and Field are described elsewhere. But like a Bolshevik tendency that knows how to swim against the current without bowing its head, the “Trotskyite” movement drew “to itself all that was best in the current of socialist thought close to it.”
 
Merger with A.W.P.
The merger with the American Workers Party not only strengthened the movement by adding experienced cadres of militants who had proven their mettle in the struggle, but also gave the movement some valuable lessons in the realm of working with and assimilating elements who were approaching a revolutionary position through the experiences of life in another tendency. These lessons proved invaluable during the next great strategic turn undertaken by the movement.
This turn, the entry into the Socialist Party, was necessitated by the whole course of development that followed the bankruptcy of the Communist International under Stalin and the task of merging the principles of the small Bolshevik vanguard with the leftward moving Socialist militants around them.
That the appearance of a left wing in Social Democracy in the post-war era could only come as a result of the bankruptcy of the Communist parties was nowhere better illustrating than in the U.S. Beginning with 1919 and continuing until 1923, the Socialist Party passed through a series, of splits that drew from it virtually every single member who stood to the left of Morris Hillquit; including 95 percent of the youth movement. The S.P. struggled along as a slightly-living corpse from 1924 until 1929. It consisted of grossly opportunist municipal machines in Milwaukee and Reading, national language groups held together on a cultural and social, rather than a political basis, and the Jewish Daily Forward with a treasury and considerable influence in the New York labor movement.
 
Move Left with Depression
The crisis that began in 1929 and the mass unemployment that spread over the country during the succeeding months, turned the attention of thousands, particularly young workers and students without a future under capitalism, toward the political movements on the left. The hysteria of “third period” Communism, with its almost daily adventuristic demonstrations, its disruptive role in the mass organizations, its theory of social-fascism and “united front from below,” repulsed thousands of sincere young rebels and forced them to look elsewhere for a means of expressing their revolt against the chaos and misery about them. Beginning with 1930 these young people began flowing into the Socialist Party and the Young People’s Socialist League in increasing numbers.
The “Old Guard” of Social Democracy first welcomed these new recruits, naively believing them to be material for a rebirth of a reformist Socialist Party. They soon discovered, however, that these people had not rejected revolutionary views when they passed up the C.P. but had merely turned to the S.P. as a momentarily more convenient vehicle for the free expression of these views.
 
Conflict Takes Form
By 1932 the conflict had taken somewhat definite forms, dividing the party into two more or less amorphous groups that went under the name of “Old Guard” and “Militants.” The “Militants” began, as their name indicates, as primarily opponents of the do-nothing-ism of the Old Guard rather than as political opponents. The conflict, however, soon found its proper channel. This development was given a great impetus when history, for the benefit of the new Socialist generation, once again exposed Social Democracy during the German events in all its revolting corruption, aggravated by senility. The Austrian revolt of 1934 accelerated the discussion on Marxist principles, particularly the discussion on the “road to power.”
By the end of 1935 the “Militants” had gone a long way in political development. Only a fool could fail to see that their cohabitation under one roof with the “Old Guard” was no longer possible. Marxists were forced to ask themselves where this potentially revolutionary force in the S.P would go. With the Seventh Congress of the C.I. in the summer of 1935 and the shedding of the “third period” idiocies, there was a possibility that the Stalinists would intervene in the revolutionary development of the S.P and draw off the bulk of the left wing.
 
Entry of Workers Party
The leadership of the Workers Party, sensitive to the changing currents about them, reacted to this new situation by proposing the entry of the “Trotskyites” into the Socialist Party. This bold step was taken in the spring of 1936 and, not accidentally, coincided with the departure of the “Old Guard” at the national convention in May.
Even before the final split with the “Old Guard,” political differentiations were taking place in the “Militant” group. A right wing under Altman played the role of obscuring the political nature of the struggle and re-echoing the political line of the Stalinists, even to opposing the entry of the Workers Party. The grouping opposed to Altman was composed of Party groups in New York and Chicago and the majority of the Y.P.S.L. The publication of the Socialist Appeal in Chicago under the editorship of Albert Goldman resulted in a clarification among the left wing “Militants” and the beginning of a separation between those genuinely concerned with the building of a revolutionary party and the centrists who followed the leadership of Herbert Zam and Gus Tyler.
 
Revolutionists Unite
As a result of the preparatory work of the Socialist Appeal, a revolutionary nucleus was developed that readily merged with the Bolshevik current from the former Workers Party. These “native” Socialists proved the link by means of which increasing numbers of left wing Socialists were drawn to the Fourth Internationalist current until the alarmed bureaucracy took steps to expel the revolutionists from the party. The dead hulk of the S.P. today is visual evidence of the ability of the Bolshevik current to draw the revolutionary elements to itself.
Common principles and common experiences have long ago obliterated all differences between former S.P.ers, and the original “Trotskyite” core. Like the Bolshevik Party, we have cemented the revolutionary elements from diverse currents into one unit, prepared for ideological struggle against our enemies on a greater scale – the struggle for the leadership of the American working class.
 



The end of OPA price controls confronted the working class with a crisis of major dimensions. The spiralling prices wiped out within a matter of weeks the gains of the recent strike wave. Every worker began to understand that the fight to keep wages on a par with soaring living costs was like trying to fill a tub without first stopping up the drain. As a result, labor, fresh from its strike struggles for higher wages, wheeled about to attack on a new front – the price front.
From coast to coast the trade unions took the lead in local actions to oppose price rises. They picketed stores, they demonstrated; they called buyers’ strikes. The American workers, despite their traditional political backwardness, recognized that efforts to tie wages to rising prices was now only a defensive effort to avoid the worst effects of the inflationary movement. They knew that the offensive had to be in the direction of price control, both through their mass struggles and through their political pressure upon government.
 
A Step Forward
This realization by the workers that wage increases have meaning only when linked to the fight to control prices is a tremendous step forward in their social consciousness. It means a break with the old, time-worn concepts of unionism that regard as the sole function of a trade union the fight for “more money.” It means that the workers can no longer be content with viewing only the small segment of the economy marked “wages.” They must concern themselves with the economy as a whole – wages, prices, profits, control of production and, eventually, nationalization of industry.
Wages relate to the immediate employer. Prices are a question of the economy as a whole. This increasing understanding of the broad social and economic questions of the day on the part of the workers is something for the Marxist to seize hold of and drive toward a Socialist solution. This was the tremendous significance of the GM Strike program – linking wages to prices and profits and proposing to make them all subject to check and control by the union. The concepts pioneered by the GM strike are now being forced upon the working class as a whole. The entire labor movement must now make the GM slogan its own – “Wage Increases Without Price Increases.” The settlements of John L. Lewis in coal and Phillip Murray in steel based on price increases for the corporation are now revealed to be hollow victories.
The Workers Party from the outset seized hold of the GM program and sought to pound home its meaning to the working class. It extracted the heart of that program – labor’s control of prices at the point of production and throughout the distributive process – and sought to link it to every fight for more wages. The Workers Party immediately realized the tremendous socialist content in this position because it knew that the workers’ fight along this line would lead beyond the framework of capitalist economic relations, as General Motors itself so well understood when it fought against it. The Workers Party understood what was at stake in the GM program because it had been taught to think in terms of programs that are transitional from capitalism to socialism – programs that the workers fight for as the only effective answer to their problems and which lead in “the effort to realize them, beyond the framework of capitalism. And if not realized, as is more likely at this stage, this form creates a transition in the thinking of the workers from the old routinist union concepts to new, revolutionary concepts. The latter is, of course, the first and foremost function of a transitional demand. The actual realization of transitional demands is related to the revolutionary period.
Having made this introduction to the question of the fight for price control, the GM program and transitional demands in general, we now turn to the specific subject of this article – the miserable role played on these questions by our rivals and would-be teachers in the strategy of working class politics, the Socialist Workers Party and their newspaper, The Militant.
 
The SWP’s False Position
In contrast to the Workers Party and Labor Action, the SWP has understood nothing about the tremendous developments going on about them. To read their press one wonders where it is published or in what year it was written.
Their root error is that they failed to understand the GM strike program. They viewed it merely as a militant trade union program. The demands for union price control were viewed as mere “propaganda” to win public support. They endorsed the slogan of “Open the books” but they saw no connection between this slogan and the demand that wage increases be granted without price increases. As far as they were concerned the slogan of “Open the books” somehow accidentally wandered into the GM program.
But since they regard “Open the books” as their own child, they were able to recognize it no matter where it turned up. The fact that union control of prices at the point of production is the first form of workers control of production never occurred to them because the GM program did not plainly label it so.
As a result they criticized the way in which the slogan of “Open the books” was used. In their reply to Felix Morrow’s criticism of the SWP policy on the GM program they say: “Reuther, however, never agitated for this slogan in the revolutionary spirit of our transitional program which conceives this as a bridge to workers’ control of production.” How else did the SWP theoreticians think that the GM workers could control GM prices except through workers control of production? And what is the first step toward the latter other than “Open the books?” Who cares what Reuther had in mind or what he agitated for? The real question is: once the union has come out for control of GM prices and access to the books, what should we agitate for? Here is the real opening for the Marxist. Here is the real chance to grab hold and go to town. How did the SWP react?
Of this splendid opportunity to press for a drive toward a socialist solution along the road of transitional program – of this they could say no better than the following hair-raising pronunciamento:
“The second slogan ‘Wage Increases Without Price Increases’ is not our slogan and we do not accept it” (!!!)
What the SWP is really saying is this: “How dare they meddle in such matters, these UAW unionists who have not even been issued a license to practice revolutionary politics!’ If what they want is a slogan that goes beyond hum-drum unionism, they should know where to come. Our address is 116 University Place, New York City.”
But not content with consigning the slogan of “Wage Increases Without Price Increases” to perdition, they must speed it on its way with a few vigorous kicks in the form of “arguments.” Says the same statement:
“The erroneousness of this formula consists in the fact that it directly links together the struggle for higher wages with the fight against high prices.”
That’s right, re-read it. It still reads the same.
It would be bad enough for a Marxist party to walk right pass the GM program in broad daylight and fail to note anything unusual about it, above all when every two-bit commentator is raging that it is unusual, and outrageously so. But to walk right up to it and spit in its eye for linking wages and prices, the very thing that marks it off from routine union programs, for that it is not enough to be simply ignorant – or even exceptionally ignorant. For this a mad genius is required, capable of intellectual mayhem against all that passes for common sense among men.
 
Prices Under Capitalism
But this is not all. The crime of “directly linking” up the wage and price question is not the sole crime of the GM program and its slogan of “Wage Increases Without Price Increases.” Another charge is hurled after its beaten and battered corpse.
“This formula likewise (!) contains the false implication that it is possible to effectively stabilize commodity prices under conditions of capitalist anarchy and disintegration.”
Not only does this formula proceed on crooked lines which link prices and wages, but, according to the SWP, it also throws sand in the eyes of the workers by implying that the fight against price increases is not a hopeless one.
What sectarian nonsense! Straight out of the book of De Leon, but not of Trotsky! If the slogan “Wage Increases Without Price Increases” is to be rejected because it spreads illusions, what about all the other planks in the transitional program? Will the housing question ever be solved under capitalism? Of course not. Do we tell workers to fight for housing? Of course we do. Does not this apply to every other demand we raise which is incompatible with the continued existence of capitalism? Of course it is. Then wherein is the crime of the slogan: “Wage Increases Without Price Increases”? Again we insist that its real crime, in the eyes of the SWP, is that it had the misfortune of an illegitimate birth instead of being sired by SWP’s Political Committee. This becomes abundantly clear when Felix Morrow is condemned for his efforts to legitimatize the slogan with the argument that Morrow is “proposing a FUNDAMENTAL REVISION of this (transitional) program with regard to the question under discussion.” (their caps)
For them the transitional program of the 1938 Founding Congress is the last word on the subject. That which Trotsky considered a “first approximation” and advised the movement to implement and adapt for the different countries and changing situations has been canonized into an unchanging and unchangeable article of faith to which it is sacrilege to either add or subtract jot or tittle.
As a result, when the GM program was formulated, the SWP strategists placed it alongside of their party’s transitional program and approved everything that was familiar (“Open the books”) while rejecting everything that “is not our slogan” (Wage Raises Without Price Increases).
 
Blind to GM Program
But perhaps they were convinced of more than the fact that the GM price slogan was strange, new, and, therefore, to be avoided. Perhaps they were convinced that it was bad and dangerous. Perhaps they immediately saw that the GM demand was an incorrect substitute for the demand of a sliding scale of wages which is the central wage-price demand in the 1938 program. Were this the case, the SWP had the duty of taking issue with the GM program, of subjecting it to criticism, of proposing the sliding scale formula in place of the “no price rise” formula.
Did they do it? Not a word. During the GM strike, the SWP maintained the silence of the tomb – both in regard to criticism of the GM program and in regard to proposing the sliding scale of wages.
Why? Was it because they decided to be discreet and not get involved until they exactly knew where they stood? No. The real fact is that they remained totally blind to the real significance of the GM program. They could see no transitional demand inherent in the GM program except “Open the books,” which stuck out so that a totally blind Marxist would stumble over it if he could not see it. They viewed the GM program as nothing beyond the level of militant unionism. This is the beginning of all their troubles. After this, refusing to admit their blunder, they sought to extricate themselves with arguments that only led from one contradiction to another and from bad ones to worse ones.
Having failed to see the significance of the GM program initially and having their noses rubbed in it later by the growing price crisis they were forced in RETROSPECT to polemize against the slogan of “ Wage Increases Without Price Rises” and counterpose the slogan of the “Sliding Scale of Wages” as the central slogan in the fight against rising prices.
Now that the price question has become the central issue before the labor movement as a result of the end of OPA, the SWP is driven into the sectarian and reactionary position of trying to force the mass struggle away from the price control front back into the narrow confines of simple wage demands. Now that workers are forced to think of the economy as a unit – to link wages, profits and prices – the SWP tells them that “prices are not our business, let’s get more wages.”
Now that trade unions are forced out of their pure-and-simple collective bargaining role and call mass demonstrations, buyers strikes, political pressure actions – in short, embark upon a political struggle – the SWP tells them to go back to the old narrow wage struggle à la John L. Lewis. When this, the most non-political working class in the world, struggles for its bread by increasingly political weapons, the SWP gives them nothing beyond the advice of “strike at the point of production.”
When trade unions everywhere are swarming down on the heads of the politicians demanding laws for rent control and other price control measures, the SWP says “You’re wasting your time. Go out and get more money.”
The OPA, says the SWP, is nothing but a tool of the monopolists to increase their profits. Good. But now that the monopolists do not need OPA and want to get rid of it (or seriously modify it) don’t they do this too in order to increase their profits? Is this of no concern to the working class? At whose expense are profits increased?
But price control is hopeless under capitalism? So is an attempt to maintain the workers’ living standard through a sliding scale of wages. The fight for price control, above all when its central demand is the GM program formula of price control at the point of production, sets masses in motion on a level far higher than a mere wage struggle and forces them to think in broad social and political terms.
It is the struggle for price control that is paramount today. The struggle for a sliding scale of wages is subsidiary to it and applicable in a far more narrow, trade union sphere.
What would a member of the SWP do in a union where it is proposed to call a mass demonstration in front of the city for rent control legislation? Would he get up and say it is a waste of time and propose a sliding scale of wages as the means of covering rent increases? (In this case he would be following out the party line.)
Or would he get up and call for an “effective bill” and that it is time that “Labor’s voice ... should have been heard in Congress demanding drastic measures against the profiteers and price gougers...” and link it up with a speech for the Labor Party? (In this case he would be contradicting the party line just as it was done in The Militant editorial on page 4 of the July 6 issue.)
The plight of the SWP on the price question is another lesson in the murderous logic with which an initial blunder will raise hob with the political line of a party until it is corrected. Every effort to adhere to the false premise and conduct a political line in consonance with it will not merely perpetuate the error but will drive its proponents into ever worsening predicaments. No half-baked union progressive could have ended up in as reactionary a position in the current price crisis as did the SWP.
A union progressive, operating without theory and unencumbered with the need to be logical and consistent, finds it easier to respond to a correct course on the price question than do the highly-vaunted half-theoreticians of the SWP. Those who use a program as a substitute for thinking end up worse than those who operate without a program. Caught in the contradictions of their sliding scale of wages formula in the midst of a mass fight for price control they arrogantly and stubbornly refuse to re-examine their initial blunder in the GM strike and serve as an excellent example of how to act when one is intent upon breaking one’s neck.
 



In last week’s article we came to the conclusion that it was not our party but, rather, the capitalist system that had no future. Whether socialism proves victorious or not, the continued decline and disintegration of capitalism are inescapable. That which was predicted by Marx on the basis of THEORY has been confirmed in our time on the basis of FACT.
We stated that United States capitalism was not immune to this decline, that nearly everyone accepted the present boom as a temporary one which would be followed by a crisis on the order of 1929–39 or worse. We said that the American workers would turn to socialism, not because we would succeed in painting such an attractive picture of the socialist future, but rather because life would become intolerable for the masses in the capitalist present. We said that the American worker was not biologically different from the European worker who embraces a socialist program. Historical development would create a mass socialist movement in this country also.
At this point the skeptic asks:
“How so? Did not America follow the same pattern of industrial development as Europe? If economic development is the key to historical change, why should the United States not have also produced a mass socialist movement? Haven’t socialist parties been preaching their programs in this country for as long as in Europe? Isn’t it even true that the socialist movement in this country once represented a force far stronger than that of today? If you expect the rise of a mass socialist movement to result from the further decline of American capitalism, why did not the depression of 1929–39 produce such a movement?”
 
Method of Reasoning
This line of reasoning appears to be crushing, both in the accuracy of the facts presented and in the logic of the argument based upon them. However, it only APPEARS to be. Marx long ago pointed out (and before him, Hegel) that APPEARANCE and REALITY rarely coincide. Since everything is in motion and in process of change, it could not be otherwise. The economic and political development of the United States and the kind of labor movement it has produced must also be examined from the point of view of MOTION. The first general criticism of the skeptic’s approach we quoted above is that it is based on a wrong METHOD of analysis. It sees American economy, politics and the working class as being static, that is, the same today as yesterday and, therefore, the same tomorrow. Nothing could be further from the truth, as we shall demonstrate.
The second error in the above argument is that which confuses economic development as the KEY to historical change with economic development as the DIRECT, IMMEDIATE AND MECHANICAL IMPULSE to change. When Marxists say that economic development is basic, they are not saying that one need only examine the economic changes and find the answer to all questions. Man is no mere automaton who reflects economic changes in the manner of the wheels of an automobile which reflect the’ power supplied by the motor. The social order which man has developed is exceedingly complex and never more so than now, in this last stage of capitalism, when all social contradictions are driven to their utmost limits.
As a result, the impulse supplied by economic change passes through various phases before it registers decisive political changes and continues on to register changes in the other manifold fields of human activity. Sometimes the impulse of economic change (even when it is sudden and sweeping enough to constitute a virtual shock) is absorbed by the political institutions for years and even decades with only slight visible effects upon these institutions,. However, the longer the delay in bringing the political institutions into line with basic economic change, the more contradictions pile up that cry out for a solution. These contradictions pile up like flood waters behind a dam. While the only result visible to the eye is that the sluice gates are opened wide and running full in an attempt to adapt the dam to the flood, the dam will suddenly crumble under the weight of the waters and the whole situation, which developed slowly over a period of time, is suddenly changed in the twinkling of an eye. Such changes are called social revolutions in the terminology of history.
 
Historical Development
History develops most unevenly. It is always the process of slow accumulation of basic contradictions and then a sudden forward lurch to overcome them. To our friend, the skeptic, it appears that if industrial development in Europe produced a mass socialist movement fifty years ago and a similar industrial development in the United States failed to produce a mass socialist movement within fifty years, then there must be something about the kind of capitalism we have in this country or the kind of political institutions or the kind of working class that makes a mass socialist movement impossible. In essence this argument boils down to the completely illogical reasoning which says: “It’s never been and, therefore, it will never be.”
Or does the skeptic protest that this is an unfair presentation of his point of view? That what he really means is: “It has not been for FIFTY YEARS and, therefore, it will never be.”
But what is so magic about fifty years? Why not ten years or twenty or seventy-five? Arbitrarily placing a time limit on a historical development changes nothing. The skeptic’s argument remains, therefore, that “since it’s never been, it will never be.”
How many progressive and intelligent trade unionists did not say during the period between 1900 and 1935 that it was impossible to organize the mass industries in the United States? How many did not argue that since the membership of the AFL remained between one and two million for thirty years, this represented the maximum of workers who COULD be organized? How many did not give up the fight for industrial unionism because it had been advocated for forty years without success? Yet today the mass industries ARE organized, the two million organized workers have become FIFTEEN MILLION and the CIO (and in large measure the AFL) are based on the INDUSTRIAL FORM of organization.
 
Summing It Up
Yes, in one sense it is true to say that American capitalism IS different, that the American political institutions ARE different and that even the American working class IS different. Nor only in minor factors as, let us say, the difference between Belgium and France in these matters. (Even in the case of two countries as similar as Belgium and France the NATIONAL forms and historic backgrounds are different enough to produce working class movements that are different from one another in many pronounced respects, so pronounced that even a superficial study immediately reveals them.) The difference between the United States and Europe as a whole is far greater than the differences between the most widely different of the European countries; as between Sweden and Spain, or The Netherlands and Yugoslavia, or Poland and Italy, or Germany and Greece.
We have established (a) that history must be seen in its process of motion; (b) that the economic changes are basic hut most often delayed in their effects upon political change; (c) that history moves unevenly, by slow accumulation and sudden change; and (d) that while capitalism is basically the same in Europe and the United States, there are vast differences between the two continents in a whole series of important factors.
In order to discover why the American working class has never developed a mass socialist movement (or even an independent class party) we must analyze the differences between Europe and the United States. This will be. the subject of our next article.
 



The main aim of our present drive to build up the circulation of The New International is a distinctly political one.
It is true, of course, that an increased circulation would ease the financial problems of the magazine and permit us to render a more efficient service to our readers. But the financial, problem is not our most pressing one.
 
Journal of Marxist Theory
Our most pressing problem is born of this, really tragic, situation:

The postponed proletarian revolution and the continued decay of social institutions has produced developments that confront our generation of Marxists with questions of such historical scope as no other generation has faced since that of Marx himself.
 
A whole new “lost generation” of young intellectuals and politically awakened young workers do not know where to turn in trying to understand the world about them – a world more complex and contradictory, perhaps, than any since the dissolution of the Roman Empire.
 
The New International is the sole journal of Marxist theory in the world that even recognizes that history has presented us with problems that are both new and fundamental in their character, let alone the fact that we represent the only serious and fruitful efforts to answer them. We record this fact without boasting – for there is nothing to boast about – but with gravity.
 
But with all we have to offer the thousands of serious students of our times, we reach too small a number, 3,000. Were The New International widely known and rejected by those who are seeking a way out, a situation would prevail that could not be solved by “campaigns” or promotion of any sort. That tragic situation consists precisely in the fact that our magazine remains as yet a “candle hidden under a bushel.” This is the problem that our present circulation drive must tackle.
 

Spread Living Marxism
The historical developments referred to above have been used by the enemies of Marxism, with ex-Marxists in the lead, to gleefully celebrate the “crisis of Marxism” and the “death of Marxism.” Marxism faces no crisis and it certainly is far from dead.
Those who have issued the certificate of death have yet to prove their competence as practicing physicians. But their voice reaches tens of thousands and supplies the intellectual fodder for a new generation of disillusioned youth, especially on college campuses. Little wonder that malnutrition of the mind is a striking feature in such circles today.
However, the reason why the talk about a “crisis of Marxism” makes such a profound impression is that there is really a “crisis of Marxists,” or, to be more exact, of “certain Marxists.” Those who believe that Marxism consists of “applying” the quotations of Marx, Lenin and Trotsky to the new phenomena, that there is really nothing new, that everything is working out according to the “finished program,” such “Marxists” really present the spectacle of being in a crisis.
Not dogma but living Marxism is required. Marxism is a method and a framework, not some kind of historical schema based upon “inevitability.” Such Marxism offers the only tools with which our complex and contradictory world can be analyzed. Our failure to energetically promote The New International really robs thousands of potential young Marxists of the opportunity to learn how to use these tools. Let us use the present drive to make a modest beginning and introduce at least 500 new readers to our magazine.
 






The articles that appear below are DISCUSSION ARTICLES published as part of the pre-convention discussion in the Workers Party. Because our space is limited, it will be impossible to devote more than two columns per issue to this material. Contributions will therefore have to be brief, not exceeding 750 words. Pre-convention discussion articles are also appearing in The New International and in the Workers Party Bulletin. Copies of the latter may be gotten by sending fifteen cents to the Workers Party, 114 West 14th Street, New York 11, N.Y. Readers will understand that these articles represent neither the views of the party nor of Labor Action, but are written with a view toward establishing policy at the coming convention of the WP.



*
The minority resolution of Comrade J.R. Johnson for our Workers Party convention has provoked a lot of discussion in our ranks about “factory committees.” Unfortunately, the resolution makes such a capital point of “factory committees” without any elaboration as to just what they are or how we should go about the task of getting them established. As a result, a considerable confusion has resulted, with little advance in the education of our membership. The small space which Labor Action can afford to allot to this discussion is terribly inadequate for the purpose of clarifying some of the misconceptions on this question. However, a few points can be indicated.
The term “factory committees” arose in Europe during the war and the post-war revolutionary period. It was used to designate the on-the-job organizations which the workers formed by short-circuiting the trade union officialdom and proceeding directly to militant actions. They arose from various causes and played somewhat different roles in various countries.
Sometimes they were organized because of the ABSENCE of a trade union tradition and the weakness of trade union organization, as in Russia. Sometimes they were organized because the trade union officialdom had deserted the struggle on behalf of the workers in the interests of the war effort, as in Germany and England during 1914–18. Sometimes they arose from the revolutionary (usually anarcho-syndicalist) background of the trade unions themselves, as in Italy. They arose, therefore, as a result of one or a combination of the following reasons: (1) because the trade unions proved inadequate to the most ELEMENTARY economic tasks of struggle to defend the workers’ wages, (2) because the country was in a REVOLUTIONARY CRISIS and the unions proved too hidebound and bureaucratized to keep up with the revolutionary development of the working class, (3) because “factory committees” were part of the revolutionary philosophy of the trade unions themselves. However, they were usually INDEPENDENT of, if not directly hostile and dual to, the official trade union organization.
The role of the “factory committees” varied with the causes that produced them and the situation prevailing in the country. In the revolutionary situation in RUSSIA between February and October 1917 the “factory committees” were intertwined with the life of the workers’ councils (soviets) and played a highly revolutionary role. Due to the breakdown of Russian economy, they established workers’ control of production long before the Bolshevik Revolution.
In ENGLAND, the “factory committees” took the form of what was known as the shop steward movement. This movement grew out of the failure of the trade unions to struggle on behalf of the workers during the war. The shop steward movement, in the absence of a revolutionary situation, never rose above a militant trade union movement. When the official trade unions led large-scale strike actions in 1919, the shop steward movement was absorbed in the general trade union movement.
In GERMANY, the Shop steward movement began as a frankly revolutionary movement and then oscillated between a “Russian role” and an “English role,” depending upon the situation that prevailed. At various times they were either the white- hot storm centers of the revolutionary movement (1918–19 and 1923) or merely adjuncts of the collective bargaining process. Sometimes they stood in violent opposition to the official trade unions and sometimes they were absorbed in its structure.
In ITALY, the role of the “factory committees” was so closely related to the anarcho-syndicalist influence in the trade union movement that an adequate discussion of this aspect of “factory committees” would require a considerable digression.
Do any of the conditions which produced “factory committees” in the above classical examples prevail in the American labor movement today? Or will they emerge in the next year or two? The trade unions are not abdicating their functions (they did during the war by adopting the no-strike pledge) but, on the contrary, are leading tremendous struggles. There is nothing, however, in the struggles that even approximates a revolutionary situation. (Far from anarcho-syndicalist influence, represented in this country by the IWW, the workers have yet to free themselves from the Democratic and Republican parties.)
Perhaps Comrade Johnson does not at all mean that members of our party should conduct an agitation for “factory committees” in the trade unions nor that Labor Action should call upon labor militants to organize them today. What Comrade Johnson may have in mind is that we should EDUCATE the more politically advanced workers to an understanding of the role which “factory committees” can play in a revolutionary period. With this no one can disagree. Our enlarged Labor Action must devote space to such fundamental revolutionary socialist education. But this cannot be the “center of the party’s propaganda and agitation,” as Johnson proposes, un[less] he wants also to remove us from playing a role in the daily struggles of the labor movement TODAY. This is quite all right for an educational society or a propaganda circle but not for a political organization that seeks to carry its program into the labor movement and find points of contact with what the progressive unionists are thinking and doing NOW. For this latter purpose, the slogan of “factory committees” is more than meaningless, it is dangerous and misleading, as any member of our party who is active in a trade union should know.
 



The demand of the United Automobile Workers that General Motors “open their books” to the union has been greeted with more enthusiasm than understanding in the ranks of even the politically advanced workers. Very much of what one hears and reads about the slogan is terribly naive, if not infantile. But worse, most of the comments reveal that the far-reaching revolutionary implications of the slogan are not understood.
Let us first set straight what the demand did not mean. It did not mean, as so many assume, that General Motors make public its earnings for the last years. These are not a closed book. Anyone can go to a public library and secure one of the various annuals that give reports on the financial situation of joint-stock corporations and secure a record of General Motors earnings before and after taxes, and various other data on its financial situation.
No investor would sink a dollar into the stock of a corporation unless he had such information. The financial pages of the newspapers, special investor’s reports and services, monthly reports by the large banks, and other sources, regularly report on these matters. This is required by law and has been almost since joint-stock corporations assumed important dimensions. The law which established the Securities and Exchange Commission further tightened up the requirements for public reports by corporations on their financial standing. These “books” are always open to accountants from the Treasury Department for purposes of checking on tax remittances. Any single stockholder can secure a court order for access to the financial records of the corporation if he has grounds to suspect that his interests are not being safeguarded.
It is, of course, true that the financial reports which are public property often conceal hidden assets and, in other ways, juggle the accounts to add to the corporation’s wealth without full payment of taxes or declaration of maximum stock dividends. The stockholders are often milked by the “insiders” who control the corporation by means of special “bonuses,” often consisting of blocs of stock, voted to the officers, or by means of inflated salaries to the executives. It must also be remembered that if the earnings show up badly the price of the stock will fall. The “insiders” may manipulate this for one or two years in order to buy up the stock at deflated prices but this cannot be a consistent practice even if they could avoid prosecution by the SEC. It is these malpractices that the SEC was created to combat. This, however, has mostly to do with the defrauding of the middle class investor by the big capitalist or the defrauding of the government. Its main aim is not to hide the corporations earnings from the unions.
 
What the Auto Workers Wanted to Know
If the demand of “open the books” merely meant the right of the union to know how much the company earned it would certainly not be anything new in the labor movement. The practice of demanding that the employer make known his financial standing has been a standard procedure in negotiation for a long time, particularly on the part of the AFL unions who deal with small employers, as for instance the teamsters, printing, building trades, food industry, etc. The best organized system of examining the employers’ books is operated by the ILGWU in the ladies garment trade. The small shop character of this and other needle trades industries requires that the union deal mostly with privately-owned shops or partnerships. In these cases the union has no other means of checking the financial records of the employer except to examine his books. The ILGWU maintains an extensive accounting department that occupies itself exclusively with this task.
That the auto workers were not concerned with this aspect of “the books” is obvious from the brief which they submitted to General Motors as the statement of their case in the negotiations. Their brief contained a detailed account of General Motors earnings from 1917, when the corporation was organized, to 1944.
What, then, DID the auto workers demand to know?
What they wanted was access to the production data of General Motors or, as it is usually known, the cost accounting system.
What is the significance of this?
Precisely in order to know, not what GM earned last year, but how much GM will make this year and, therefore, how much it can pay.
What the union wanted to know were the exact figures on increased productivity of labor in GM plants, how many man hours it takes to machine an axle, how a new power press has reduced the man-hours per so many fenders, etc. What the union wanted to know was just how much did it cost the corporation to manufacture a Buick in 1936 and 1940 and how much will it cost in 1944. What the union wanted to know was just how many cars does GM expect to produce in 1946? What the union wanted to know was just what effect has the expansion of GM plant space by government building of war plants had on GM production costs? Just how has the replacement of thousands of machine tools by new equipment furnished by the government during the war increased industrial efficiency? Just what new wrinkles have GM production engineers added to the assembly line process? Just what degree of speed-up is involved for the workers? Just how is GM planning to make use of new discoveries in chemistry, electronics and other fields during the course of the war? What will be the “workload schedule” for the some 92 odd GM plants all over the country? How much over-time is being scheduled? When and where are layoffs indicated?
It is precisely this information which is necessary in order to know how much GM will earn in 1946. But this information is the most guarded secret of any large corporation. This is what Charles Wilson, GM president, referred to when he said that “we don’t open our books to our own stockholders.” This is what the head production manager of GM sparred around with in an exchange with Walter Reuther during the Pittsburgh sessions of the negotiations. In answer to Reuther’s question as to how GM computes the cost of a certain part, the production manager grinned and replied: “We make a good guess.’’. It is this information which GM refused to turn over to the War Production Board during the war on the grounds that it is their top commercial secret and turning it over to the WPB may lead to it falling into the hands of GM’s competitors.
 
The Significance of This Demand
What is the tremendous significance of the union wanting to base its wage demands upon what GM will earn in 1946 instead of what they did earn last year?
The tremendous, even revolutionary, significance comes under several headings:
Firstly, it runs counter to the entire basic principle upon which capitalism pays wages. Under the capitalist system, wages are paid out of existing capital. As Marx pointed out nearly a hundred years ago, the capitalist buys labor power, that is, he buys the workers ability and availability to labor rather than paying for labor performed. Marx used the term “variable” capital to describe that portion of capital which is used for the payment of wages. The capitalist pays wages in accordance with its market price, that is, pays as little as he can to get the kind of labor power he needs, just as in buying any other kind of commodity. The market price of labor power (wages) is determined, roughly, by the cost of living (based on a prevailing standard) and the law of supply and demand (the amount of competition for jobs).
The union demanded, on the contrary, that General Motors reveal what it expected to earn in 1946 and base its wages on ability to pay as revealed by those figures. The union does not want labor power to be regarded as a commodity to be purchased in the market for the lowest price it can be obtained. The union does not want the workers to produce tremendous profits for GM in order to be able to ask for a little more in 1947 by pointing to the 1946 earnings. The union demands that if the “books” show that GM will produce at lowered costs in 1946 and increase its income, that labor share in that increased income by higher wages now.
In short, implied by the union’s demand is a rejection of the whole basis of the relationship between labor and capital that prevails under capitalism and the establishment of a principle for the remuneration of labor which, in the last analysis, can only prevail under socialism.
Secondly, the demand to open the production schedules and cost accounting records to the union means to admit the union into what the capitalist press refers to as the “sacred rights of management.” It is this which caused GM executives to get blue in the face and scream about labor getting a “finger in the pie.” The crucial importance of keeping labor away from any voice in problems of management has long been recognized by capital. This is why almost every union contract has a clause inserted by the company’s attorney which states that nothing in the contract can be construed as authorizing labor’s interference with the rights of management in the sphere of production.
 
A Step Toward Workers’ Control
To “open the books,” in this sense, is the first stage toward workers’ control of production. For the right of labor to keep itself informed on production data to be effective, it must be done on all levels of labor-capital relations from the main office of GM to every division plant, to every separate building, to every department. Who will exercise this right on behalf of the union? Only the hired accountants of the union? No! The latter will work under the jurisdiction of union committees. On a department and plant level these will be the shop stewards’ councils and shop committees.
What will happen to the authority of management if the shop committee can go to the superintendent and ask to see his production plans for next month? What will happen if they demand a 10% slow-down of the assembly? What will happen if they demand that the wages of milling machine operators be increased because of the introduction of a fixture which permits doubled output? What will happen if they demand that he cut down on overtime in department 12 and quit laying off men in department 9?
This is what will happen: the workers will enter stage two in workers’ control of production – the right of the shop committees to veto, to counter-propose, to countermand, in short, to use their organized strength to impose,their own ideas on production upon management.
Can such “dual power” prevail in the shop indefinitely? No. Such industrial democracy is incompatible with the industrial dictatorship of capitalism. One or the other will prevail in the long run. For workers’ control of production to prevail, it must be fortified with a political power that is also “dual,” in this case, to the capitalist government. In the last analysis it is control of the power of government that decides. That is why workers’ control of production must lead to a workers’ government and, through it, the nationalization of industry under democratic management. This is, of course, what we call Socialism.
 



Thousands of the readers of Labor Action first came to read our paper during the war years. The paper appealed to them because it told the truth about wartime profits, about the Little Steel formula, about the no-strike pledge and about the need of labor to have a party of its own. They came to rely upon Labor Action for a “line” in the many tactical turns of the struggle.
But the steady reader has come to demand more than this. He has come to demand answers to the more basic questions. Why must the working class, which produces the wealth of the nation, constantly fight for sufficient wages to maintain a decent standard of living? Why is there poverty in the midst of plenty? Why must we live in out-dated and run-down buildings when there is enough material and skilled labor to construct decent homes for everyone? Why did we fight two wars to “end all war” with the third one already in sight? Why were millions of lives and billions in property sacrificed in a war “against the fascist aggressors” if dictatorship, tyranny, oppression and aggression continue to rule the world today?
What is fascism, what causes it, who supports it and how can we end it? Can capitalism be made to work? Are we headed toward real prosperity or toward another depression? What about Russia? Does it hold out any hope for the working people? Why do the Stalinist puppets like Browder and Foster act the way they do? If there is no socialism in Russia, just what is socialism? How can we achieve it? What do the lessons of history teach us about the struggle of the working class for liberation from economic oppression?
Labor Action has tried to the best of its ability to deal with all these questions. But it has seldom been able to do more than touch upon them. IT COULD DO NO MORE IN FOUR PAGES.
The immediate and pressing problems always came first. Yet our readers are right. We need more than the answers to the questions of the day. The daily press of the capitalists, with its circulation of tens of millions, can swamp us here. But there is one field in which it cannot touch us. That is the field of SOCIALIST EDUCATION, the basic answers to the questions posed above. Once the worker has come to understand the scientific method of socialist analysis, the lying and tricky propaganda of the capitalist press cannot mislead him.
We need a Labor Action that can do a complete job of socialist education. A six months’ subscription must become a six months’ course in scientific socialism. For this we need an EIGHT- PAGE paper. The way to get it is to ring the bell in the $15,000 Fund Drive. We have no advertisers or “big money” backers. We operate without making a profit. It’s up to our readers. What do you say?
The first issue of the eight-page paper will appear on June 17. On April 1 a sample copy of the eight-pager will appear so that all our readers may see for themselves what a great advance this expansion will represent.
The thousands of dollars required to make this advance must come from our readers. We appeal to every reader to send us a contribution to make the expansion possible. Make all checks and money orders payable to Labor Action, 114 West 14th Street, New York 11, N.Y.
 



“Who puts out this paper?” asks a new reader as he scans an issue of Labor Action.
“Labor Action represents the point of view of the Workers Party,” answers his fellow worker who has given him the copy.
“Who’s behind the Workers Party?” asks the reader and in asking this question reveals much about how the average person thinks in such matters as a result of all the corruption and racketeering that has become a part of life under capitalism.
With so many people and movements out to take one in and the “never-give-a-sucker-a-break” philosophy that governs conduct under capitalism, the idea that people can join a movement because they sincerely believe what they say, strikes the average person as most unusual. That people should “get into something” without “getting something out of it” seems foolishly impractical to many.
The answer to the question, “Who’s behind the Workers Party?” is that there is no one behind the party. Everyone who has something to do with the policies of the party is inside the organization. Organizations with people behind them are controlled by the rich, big business. They stay in the background and supply the money and pull the strings. The Democratic and Republican Parties have people behind them. These are the bankers and industrialists who finance Republican and Democratic campaigns. They are not publicly linked with these parties. It would not do them much good to have bankers and manufacturers openly controlling them. The Communist Party has “people” behind it. These are the people who run the dictatorial government of Russia and pull the strings for the Communist Parties all over the world.
 
Worker Idealism
The Workers Party has no one behind it and desires no one. It firmly adheres to the idea that no movement will ever do the workers any good unless it is democratically controlled by the workers themselves and that they put up the money to finance it. A movement that will stay true to its working class program must be made up of people who will give- freely of their time and money because they fully understand and believe in what the movement stands for.
“But aren’t you expecting too much of people to build a movement on such a basis? You can’t expect workers to be idealists,” objects the new reader.
Yes, we DO expect workers to be idealists, at least in the sense in which we understand the term. As a matter of fact the workers give daily evidence of their idealism in their trade union struggles. True enough, when workers strike they expect to see an immediate improvement in their conditions as a result of increased wages. But isn’t it true that the increase of 18 cents which the General Motors strikers got after three months without pay checks could not make up the lost wages in many years, even if the price increase had not wiped it out? Then why did they continue to go on striking? They went on striking because they knew that there was more at stake between the workers and the corporation than a few cents an hour. Workers know that you either whip the corporation or it “whips you. And woe to the workers if the corporation does the whipping. The steel strikers of 1919 suffered for seventeen years because they were crushed in their strike. Workers go on striking even when the simple arithmetic is used to prove that it “does not pay” because they know that there are things that “pay” in terms that cannot be calculated in dollars and cents.
Take the many strikes that take place simply for the right of union recognition. During the organization period of the CIO in 1935-37 the majority of strikes made no demands for wage increases. Their sole demand was “recognize the union.” Millions of upper and middle class people could not understand why millions of workers should lose weeks of wages in striking for “a principle.” Yet anyone who has worked in a shop and knows the difference between taking whatever gaff the foreman wants to cut loose with in an open shop and being able to tell the foreman off where you have union security, will immediately understand why workers strike for the “principle” of union recognition.
Then, there are the sympathy strikes in which workers walk off the job with no demands for themselves but out of solidarity for other workers. Why should workers have made an unbreakable principle out of never crossing a picket line? It is because someone else’s bread and butter is at stake and they act out of solidarity with them.
 
Two Examples
No, fellow worker, you are wrong when you say that you can’t expect workers to be idealistic. Workers continually sacrifice immediate personal gains in behalf of the movement of the workers as a whole. What is required is that the workers thoroughly understand why they should make sacrifices. Wherever a union acts fully in accordance with such an idealistic view of the struggle of labor it is a fighting, progressive movement. Its idealism is born of an understanding of the long range aims of their struggle. Wherever a union places its own immediate craft interests or the interests of its own industry above that of the workers as a whole, it is a backward and reactionary movement.
An example of union idealism is the GM strike. The auto workers said, “Wage increases without price rises” because they were not interested in gaining more wages through higher prices which the workers as a whole would have to pay. An example of union backwardness and shortsightedness is the scabbing of the 18 railroad unions during the railroad strike. These 18 craft unions said that they had no dispute with the railroads. It only involved the two brotherhoods that walked out. If scabs operated the trains, they were perfectly willing to supply crews. Their lack of idealism was not due to some streak of meanness in their character. It was due to their backwardness in not understanding the real nature of the struggle between the rail workers and the companies and of labor and capital, in general.
When we use idealism in this sense, we are really discussing the degree to which workers have come to understand that their interests are tied up with those of the working class as a whole, that no worker or group of workers can in the long run improve their position at the expense of the working class as a whole. The long run effect of such efforts always plays into the hands of capital and to the detriment of all workers, including those who secured some short run advantage. Such an understanding of the interests of the class as a whole we Socialists call class consciousness.
 
Building the Future
The most class conscious workers are those who understand, not only the need of class unity in the immediate fight against capital, but also the long-range, historic goal of the working class in re-organizing society upon a Socialist basis. The most thoroughly conscious and far-sighted of these join the Workers Party.
“But how many are there who understand these things today? Isn’t it true that your Workers Party consists of only a handful of people? How can such a small party get anywhere?”
We are firmly convinced that even such a small party, with a program that coincides with historic development, can not only “get somewhere” but will re-make the world. However, we will leave the reasons for our firm belief to our discussion of next week.
 






This article, and those to follow in this series, are directed primarily to the 5,292 subscribers who became readers of our paper as a result of the drive conducted last April in preparation for the expanded 8-page Labor Action.



*
It is natural that most new readers of Labor Action should still have many questions about and objections to the ideas it represents, even after three months acquaintance with the paper.
To a person totally new to the ideas we hold, much of what we say sounds strange and, like all strange things, is not easy to accept. Some of our views are objected to because they seem extreme. Still others are dismissed as being a mere “pipe-dream” that will never come true. And toward the whole there inevitably remains, to greater or lesser degree, a certain amount of “show me” skepticism, if not outright suspicion.
We say that this is but natural because we are familiar with the manner in which the thinking of the average person is shaped. Everyone likes to pride himself upon the fact that he “makes up his own mind.” But few people realize how extremely difficult this is and how seldom it happens. The views which the vast majority of people hold on public questions are thought out for them.
From the day we start going to school (and even before) and throughout a lifetime of reading newspapers, hearing radio commentators, and just generally absorbing ideas through the various channels of what is called “public information” we submit our minds to a process of shaping, hammering, gouging, pruning, grinding and coloring that makes them fit the pattern of thought that accepts things as they arc as the best possible arrangement.
“Ours is the best system of government.” “You have got to have rich and poor.” “Someone will always be on top.” “Without the rich people to run things we would starve.” “Wasn’t this country built up under the present system?” “Aren’t American workers the best paid in the world?” “Without profit there would be no production and no jobs.” “Everybody with money in the bank or an insurance policy is a capitalist.” “This is the country of opportunity. Every boy can become president.” “There are no classes in America. Here every worker can own his own business some day.” “Even if things are not so good, radical changes will ruin everybody.” “Radicals are screwballs.” “Radicals are only people who are jealous of the rich and want to get on top themselves,” “Radicals cause trouble.” “Radicalism leads to violence and bloodshed.” “Americanism is good enough for me.” “We want no foreign ‘isms’ in this country.” “If people don’t like this country, let them go back to where they came from.”
 
How the Ideas Arose
Are not the above ideas, in one form or another, accepted by the vast majority of Americans, including the majority of the workers? Of course, they are. How did they get these ideas? Did each person sit down and think them out for themselves? Or did each person, when he heard them, at least sit down and say to himself, “I wonder whether this is so or not” and then decide that these ideas are right? Or are these ideas so logical that everyone with any intelligence cannot think otherwise?
Far from it. As we will show in this series of articles, the ideas held by the average American worker are compounded of misinformation, lack of political education, prejudice and bad logic. And, above all, they are opposed to his own best interests.
How did he get them? He just acquired them by FORCE OF HABIT because the majority of the people he came in contact with had them, just like men just naturally wear ties and women just naturally powder their noses. But how did the majority happen to hold just THESE ideas? Because these are the ideas that are logical and natural to that class of people who set the pattern and whom the majority tries to imitate – that is, the well-to-do and rich. Ever since there have been classes in society, the poor, seeking to get ahead, have used the rich as their model. The more examples there are of poor people actually getting ahead by individual effort (as often happened in the past periods of American history) the more do the poor seek to pattern their lives, including their ideas, upon the rich.
(This tendency existed even among the chattel slaves of the South, who had as much chance of becoming slave-owners themselves as the camel getting through the needle’s eye. Those slaves who worked in the master’s house and were given his cast-off clothing sought to imitate his manners and his way of thinking, even to the extent of sharing his contempt for the slave class by looking down on the field hands as an ignorant and uncouth lot. When a slave revolt was being hatched, the word would be passed around among the slaves, “Don’t trust those working in the master’s house. They will betray you.”)
Trying to imitate the rich in their way of life is not easy for the working man (or his wife who seems especially attracted to this notion) because his income as a wage earner forces him to worry most about paying next month’s rent or, at best, the next payment on a second hand car. But it’s cheap to imitate the rich in their way of thinking. All one need do is spend 3c or 5c to buy a daily newspaper full of capitalist ideas, either disguised in the form of news stories or straight stuff in the form of editorials and feature columns. If one cannot afford to call at the store patronized by the DuPonts, Morgans and Rockefellers to buy a rod and reel for $75 or a “casual jacket” for $45 or a $35 hat for the wife (latest creation by Madame Featherhead) as advertised in the paper, one can always share the DuPont’s notion that Socialism is a fantastic idea or the Morgan’s wisdom that industry cannot operate without capitalists, or the Rockefeller’s advice to the labor movement to stay out of politics and, above all, to stay away from radicals. Even if one cannot afford to buy the clothes to look “respectable,” one can always at least hold “respectable” ideas.
 
Workers Are Learning
Does this mean that the bulk of American workers see eye to eye with the DuPonts, Rockefellers and Morgans? Far from it. Most certainly, further from it today than ever before in this country. Despite the best efforts of the capitalist-owned press and radio to convince the working class that unions are bad for them, the overwhelming majority of wage earners (15 million) belong to unions today. There was a time, however, when the workers swallowed the capitalist propaganda against unions hook, line and sinker. Many a union organizer was beaten up and run out of town by the very workers whom they had come to help because these workers had no understanding of unionism other than that which the capitalist press fed them.
However, workers discovered over the years that they could not live on editorials denouncing labor organization. They needed higher wages and union security on the job. They quit sharing the ideas of the DuPonts, Morgans and Rockefellers on the question of unionism. They had listened to the capitalist side of the question. Now they began listening to the union side. They made up their minds that unions were necessary. ON THIS QUESTION THEY FREED THEIR MINDS FROM CAPITALIST CONTROL.
Today, there are few capitalist papers that come out against the idea of unions. Not because they have come to change their minds on the matter. But they see that it is useless to try to influence the workers against the idea of unionism after the long experience which has taught the working class the benefits of organization. Furthermore, the capitalist editors realize that if they were to continue to preach against unionism as such they would only antagonize the workers who read their papers and make them so hostile to it that the papers would lose all influence over the thinking of workers.
As a result, the capitalist press has shifted its tactics. They say, “Unions are all right but they must be properly run.” Then they go on to tell the workers how the unions should operate. They tell them that strikes are bad. They tell them that the unions have too much power for their own good. They tell them that what is good for the employer is good for the union and that capital and labor must work together. They tell them that unions must keep out of politics; above all, the unions should not entertain the idea of forming a Labor Party of their own. They tell them that the worst enemies of unions are, not the capitalists, but the radicals. They tell the unions to beware of radical ideas. And so on and on. The capitalists have learned that they cannot prevent the existence of unions so they must seek to control them through controlling the thinking of the workers.
Once they have decided that it is necessary to put up with unions, what is the big danger, from the capitalist point of view, which they must guard against? The big danger to capital is that the workingclass will not remain satisfied with economic organization but will also organize its own political movement.
Has the capitalist press succeeded in prejudicing the mind of the workers against “radicalism” and “reds”? Of course they have. One need but go door to door with Labor Action trying to sell subscriptions to see what a thorough job they have done and keep doing. The treatment given workers who stuck their necks, out and thought for themselves on the question of trade unions in the past is now reserved, with extra doses, for those workers who think for themselves on the question of the profit system, of capitalist ownership of industry, of workers’ control production, of workers control of prices, of a Workers Government, and Socialism.
Today unions are accepted and being an active union man is considered “respectable.” But since no “respectable” man is a radical, the average worker shies away from that which is labelled “Socialist” as did his father from the message of unionism. Every new idea makes headway only when the ground is ripe for it. In another article we will discuss why the political thinking of the workers has lagged so far behind their trade union understanding. However, we have full confidence that the next few years will see this gap closed up and the socialist thinking of the American workers take real shape. Today, however, the thinking of the American workers on social and political questions takes place under a thick crust of prejudice and miseducation, the result of years of capitalist poisoning of his ideas. Though some workers are completely steeped in such capitalist thought and think on these things just as does “the boss” while others have reached various stages of progressive liberation from such capitalist ideas, everyone living in a capitalist society like ours has his thinking influenced to some degree, even if only slightly, by the capitalist environment.
Is it any wonder then, that even you, the subscribers of Labor Action, who have had enough independent intelligence to subscribe to our paper, should still regard it with skepticism, unbelief and misunderstandings to one degree or another? That is why at the outset of our article we began by saying that this is but natural and that we understood the reasons for it. However, we have full confidence that the events unfolding in the United States and the world, today, together with our analysis and explanations will clear up these matters and along with it clear up the accumulated results of years of capitalist propaganda.
(Next Week: The Workers Party – Who Is Behind It and Why It Will Succeed)
 



Two weeks ago we dealt with the question posed by the skeptic who asks, “But how can such a small party get anywhere?” We answered that the Socialist future did not depend upon the present size of our party, but rather upon historical development. We said that a movement flourished only when the preceding economic and political development had prepared the soil for it. We said that regardless of the wisdom of its leaders or their tactical skill or their excellence as writers and speakers, it still confronted the law of historical development which Marx summed up when he said that man does not make his own history “out of conditions chosen by himself, but out of such as he finds close at hand.”
We concluded, therefore, that the real question concerning the future of our party was whether historical development in the United States has and is preparing the ground for a mass movement based on our program.
Socialism ceased being utopian and became scientific with the theories of Marx, above all, because he established the concept that a socialist society was only possible when the means of production (more specifically, machine production) reached a level that assured an abundance for everyone. Marx, therefore, established that Socialism could not have been achieved in Ancient Rome, in the Middle Ages or at the time of the French Revolution. Socialism was not a possibility in the United States of a hundred years ago. History gave to capitalism the progressive role of expanding the means of production to lay the economic foundations for a Socialist society. We assume that the skeptic who asks about the future of our party does not dispute that the economic forces available today could produce the abundance necessary for Socialism. (See my pamphlet, Plenty for All and Shachtman’s The Fight for Socialism.)
 
Prospects for Capitalism
However, the fact that socialism is now possible does not yet establish that the mass of workers will fight for it. History is not made that way. People do not discard that which they are satisfied with to adopt something that is still untried, no matter how alluring the latter appears. Masses are never moved into action by general plans about a future society. They only fight for that which is an immediate need. They only discard the old way of life when it no longer assures them stability and security to the degree to which they were accustomed.
If capitalism were to continue as a flourishing, prosperous system which guaranteed full employment, peace and a continuation of present living standards, the American workers would show no more interest in Socialism in the future than they have in the past.
Before we can answer the question of what the prospects for Socialism are, we must answer the question: what are the prospects for capitalism?
On a world scale, capitalism continued to expand until 1914. The standard of living of the masses rose. Democracy was being strengthened everywhere, even to a limited degree in Czarist Russia. Liberalism and social reform were everywhere on the order of the day. Economic crises were only minor interruptions. in the general upswing and were relatively short and mild in their effects. The “success” of capitalism was so imposing and seemed in such contradiction to the predictions of Marx that a whole school of Socialist thought emerged which stated that “the movement (fight for reform) is everything; the goal (Socialism) nothing.” (This was known as “revisionism” or “Bernsteinism,” after its founder, Eduard Bernstein.)
However, the expansion of capitalism over the face of the earth brought the leading capitalist powers into ever sharper rivalry. The increased imperialist antagonisms ushered in the era of militarism, of huge and growing armies and navies. The process exploded in 1914 in the form of the First World War. Though the United States had a period of post-war expansion (1919 –29), capitalism on a world scale now entered a period of crises, upheavals and threats of war that have been the main feature of history since. Lenin called it the “epoch of wars and revolution.” With the worldwide economic paralysis that set in in 1929, the capitalist system everywhere, with the United States in the front ranks, tobogganed downward with increased speed. The economic paralysis of Germany gave birth to Hitler. Hitler rearmed Germany to fight for survival of German imperialism at the expense of its rials. The economic crisis dissolved into the war crisis.
European capitalism has been shattered to its very foundations. It survives only due to the crutches supplied by American capitalism. Though England, historic home of capitalism, is in, better shape than the countries of the Continent, she also leans heavily upon American capitalism to survive. The United States is today the last bulwark of capitalism on a world scale.
 
Europe and America
The workers of Europe no longer have faith in capitalism. The tremendous votes for the Socialist and Communist parties indicate this. It is only the American dollar and the American bayonet and the power of counter-revolutionary Stalinism, on the one side, and the absence of a revolutionary party, on the other, that prevents the workers’ desire for Socialism from being translated into its achievements.
And how does it stand with American capitalism? Who has confidence that it will achieve stability and offer the workers security and a continuation of even the present declining standard of living? Most certainly many workers have no such confidence. Everywhere, among workers, farmers or businessmen, one hears talk about making money “while it lasts.” Everyone knows what the latter phrase refers to. It means let us make the best of the present, TEMPORARY boom, before we hit another 1929. But the depression that began in 1929 did not end-until war production began in 1939. (Let us not forget that WPA was dissolved AFTER Pearl Harbor!)
The next depression will, therefore, not be another mere “recession” to be followed by another boom. If capitalism could not get out of the crisis during the ten long years between 1929 and 1939, what guarantee is there that it will get out of the next one, short of World War III?
We conclude, therefore, that not only is Socialism possible but that capitalism is proving itself increasingly impossible. Even the skeptic who considers Socialism to be a daydream will increasingly be driven to consider capitalism a nightmare.
American workers are not biologically different from the workers of Europe. If American workers have not accepted Socialism yet, it is not because their blood cells (or their brain cells) are different. It is to be explained entirely on grounds of the historical development of the United States as compared with that of Europe.
“How so?” asks the skeptic. “Did not America follow the same pattern of industrial development? If economic development is the key to historical change, why should the United States not have also produced a mass Socialist movement? Haven’t Socialist parties been preaching their programs in this country as long as in Europe? Isn’t it even true that the Socialist movement in this country once represented a force far stronger than that of today? If you expect the rise of a mass Socialist movement to result from the further decline of American capitalism, why did not the depression of 1929–39 produce such a movement?”
These are most pertinent questions. They will provide us the material for our next article.
 



The spectacle of a Russian judge sitting on the Tribunal at Nuremberg and joining in the condemnation of the Nazis for “planning and waging a war of aggression” establishes a new low in hypocrisy.
Not that the Kremlin gang is the only government that should have sat in the prisoners’ dock instead of the judges’ bench. All the warring imperialist governments belonged in the dock. None have the right to sit in judgment upon others. But the case of the Russians is especially reprehensible because even a short memory cannot have forgotten that they directly participated, cheek by jowl, with Hitler in “planning and waging” the war upon Poland which raised the curtain on World War II.
Who can have forgotten that it was the Hitler-Stalin pact of August 1939 which gave the Nazi regime the green light for war? Who can have forgotten that the invasion of Poland by Hitler’s armies was undertaken through agreement with Stalin? Who can have forgotten that Stalin joined in the assault upon Poland and dealt the death blow to Polish resistance? Who can have forgotten that the two “victors” met over the mortally wounded body of Poland to divide the booty? Who can have forgotten that Stalin said his friendship with Hitler was “cemented by blood” as a result of their joint Polish campaign? Who can have forgotten that the Stalinist and Hitlerite press united in accusing England and France of having fomented the war?
Who can have forgotten?
Millions have already forgotten.
 
Power of Propaganda
The overwhelming power of propaganda has all but eradicated from the public mind the outline of events of the Hitler-Stalin pact period. The propaganda’s success was in large measure due to the efforts of the Allied propagandists to wipe out the memory of the Hitler-Stalin pact after Russia became their ally. It was, however, the cynical role of Russia itself after Hitler double-crossed Stalin, in posing as the fiercest and most consistent anti-Nazi power of them all that made the Hitler-Stalin pact seem unreal. After Ilya Ehrenburg’s venomous hate campaign against the German people, after the Russian war-cry of “kill more Germans,” the memory of the Hitler-Stalin pact seemed like some vague recollection of something that may have been merely a bad dream. Stalin as a friend of Hitler? It just doesn’t seem possible.
The sheer gall of the Russian propaganda continued right through the Nuremberg proceedings and was capped with their demagogic denunciation of the verdict for not imposing the death penalty on all the defendants. After having listened to the anti-German line of the Russians since June 1942, who can believe that he heard the same people say the following:
“It is fear of losing world supremacy that dictates to the ruling circles of Great Britain and France the policy of fomenting war with Germany.”
In these terms Molotov described the “aggressors” in his report to the Supreme Soviet on October 31, 1939.
Molotov’s report followed the signing of the second treaty between Russia and Germany. The first one paved the way for their joint war on Poland. The second one decided the details of the division of Eastern and Northern Europe between them and planned for a joint “peace” offensive against England and France. Appended to the treaty was a propaganda statement signed by Molotov and Ribbentrop in the form of a protocol. We reproduce it in full elsewhere on this page. Its contents reveal that the bloc between Hitler and Stalin went beyond joint military and economic measures. They embarked upon a common political project. Their aim was to pin upon England and France the onus of being “war-mongers” and manipulate mass peace sentiment to force a settlement that would leave Hitler and Stalin in control of Eastern Europe.
 
Economic Treaties
The diplomatic treaties were reinforced with economic treaties that provided for the supply of Germany with many crucial materials cut off by the British blockade and for the transit across Russia of certain vital commodities supplied by Japan.
The Hitler-Stalin bloc led to an immediate cessation of all anti-fascist propaganda in Russia, including the stopping of anti-Nazi films and plays and the disappearance of anti-fascist books from book stores. The Communist International applied the same line throughout the world. It stigmatized anti-fascist propaganda as “warmongering” and conducted “peace campaigns” in England and the United States. Mosley, leading British fascist, and Gallacher, Communist member of Parliament, vied with each other in denouncing the British government’s part in the war and demanding peace. The British Communist Party organized “People’s Peace” meetings throughout the country. In the United States, the Peace Mobilization movement, organized by the Communist Party, picketed the White House under the slogan of “The Yanks aren’t coming!” and conducted a tremendous agitation in the union movement against lend-lease aid to Britain. Browder and Fritz Kuhn, Nazi Bund “Fuehrer,” sounded almost indistinguishable in their support of the Hitler-Stalin “peace” efforts.
 
Stalin Sent “Regrets”
When a bomb narrowly missed Hitler in the Munich beer hall shrine, the Russian government “expressed its regrets and indignation at the attempt to assassinate Chancellor Hitler” and “expressed satisfaction over his escape” and sent its “condolences to the injured and to the relatives of the dead.” The Moscow radio broadcast the German version of the incident, including its blame of the British Intelligence Service for the bombing.
Hitler showed himself just as tender and considerate for the welfare of his partner. On Stalin’s sixtieth birthday both Hitler and von Ribbentrop sent messages of congratulations. Stalin replied to thank them and to state to von Ribbentrop that the friendship was “cemented in blood.” (Meanwhile Hitler’s hangmen were adding to it the blood of the Jewish population of Poland.)
Stalin and von Ribbentrop clinked glasses in a sumptuous Kremlin banquet toasting their “friendship.” Red Army bands played the Nazi Horst Wessel Lied as German diplomatic delegations landed at Russian airports and Nazi bands defiled the Internationale by playing it on Templehof airdrome when Molotov visited Hitler. The swastika and the hammer and sickle flew side by side on these occasions.
Molotov explained:
“One may accept or reject the ideology of Hitlerism as well as any other ideological system: that is a matter of political views.” (Some translations of his speech said, ”... that is a matter of TASTE.”)
Today the Stalinist propagandists would have us believe that this was all a clever game on the part of the Russians, that it was necessary to “buy time” to prepare for war. But how then was it that the Russian armies were so badly prepared? How was it that Hitler’s attack caught them by surprise? But if it really was a game the Russians were playing and everything the Russians said and did was compounded of lies, duplicity, hypocrisy and double-dealing, all designed to deceive the Nazis, did it not also deceive and miseducate the people, both within Russia and Germany and throughout the world? Did it not deceive the members of the American Communist Party? Did not Browder and Foster repeat the same lies in the United States?
Was all this necessary as an elaborate cover to trick the Nazis? If this was the case, how can anyone believe the Stalinist regime today? How do we know that Molotov’s and Vyshinsky’s speeches at the Peace Conference are not a gigantic hoax to cover up some other ends? To say that the American, English and French diplomats also lie is not saying anything new. All it is saying is that Stalinist Russia is not different; it plays imperialist power politics in the same dirty manner.
That is why the spectacle of Hitler’s partner sitting on the judges’ bench at Nuremberg and pointing an accusing finger at the prisoners in the dock causes an honest man to become nauseous with disgust.
 






The following article is a continuation of a series by Ernest Erber explaining the aims of the Workers Party to new readers of Labor Action. The series was interrupted after the first two articles appeared in our issues of August 5 and 12 as a result of Erber’s absence on a national speaking tour. – Editors



*
In our last article (Who Is Behind the Workers Party?) we stated that only a party composed of workers who were prepared to sacrifice their time and efforts for the ideas they believed in would remain true to its working class aims. We said we were positive that the workers were capable of the idealism necessary for such self-sacrificing devotion because they have continually given evidence of it in strike struggles which involved more than an immediate dollar and cents gain for them. In this sense, idealism is but another term for class consciousness. The latter, we pointed out, was based upon understanding. The most class conscious, we said, were those who achieved an understanding that went beyond solidarity in the trade union struggle and succeeded in comprehending the “long-range, historic goal of the working class in re-organizing society upon a Socialist basis.” It was from among these, we added, that the members of the Workers Party came.
At this point the skeptic among the new readers said:
“But how many are there who understand these things today? Isn’t it true that your Workers Party consists of only a handful of people? How can such a small party get anywhere?”
The last thing that the Workers Party seeks to do is to conceal the fact that its numbers are small. It has no need to engage in wild exaggerations of its size, as so many small parties do, because it does not regard its present size to be the decisive factor in its ability to achieve its goal. If the achievement of Socialism depended upon the strength of the party today then the question of whether the Workers Party had five hundred or a thousand or five thousand members would surely make no difference, for one figure would be as inadequate as the other.
 
Historical Reasons
Our party will begin to “get somewhere” only when historical development has prepared the ground for it. In this premise we stand upon one of the basic tenets of Scientific Socialism or Marxism. Karl Marx laid it down nearly a hundred years ago when he wrote:
“Man makes his own history, but he does not make it out of the whole cloth; he does not make it out of conditions chosen by himself, but out of such as he finds close at hand.” (The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte)
What Marx taught was that men could change the conditions under which they live but only in accordance with the basic course of historical development. They could not arbitrarily run against the current of historical development nor would they run ahead of it. This current of historical development is based, in the fundamental sense, upon economic development. However, the latter gives rise to a whole series of complicated and contradictory political, cultural, psychological and sociological factors which often combine in such a way as to play a tremendously important role. Though their role is never decisive in that it never reverses the basic current of historical development, it is yet often important enough to vastly speed up or slow down social change.
Let us give some examples of what we mean. Had one set out to organize trade unions in this country during the late 1700’s, one’s most brilliant efforts would have been doomed to failure. Even had an organizing committee been formed with such writers as Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin, such agitators as Tom Paine and Patrick Henry, and such organizers as Sam Adams, its converts would still have been only a handful. Yet in the late 1800’s far less talented speakers, writers and organizers enrolled millions of workers in the Knights of Labor and, later, the American Federation of Labor. We need not explain much to show what had happened in the hundred year period between the two dates. The development of industry, the growth of a class of industrial workers, the sharpening battles between labor and capital all plowed the soil for the rise of the mass trade union movement.
 
Forerunners of Today
Let us carry this example further. From the earliest years of the American Federation of Labor outstanding leaders of labor have advocated organizations along industrial lines. Men like Eugene Debs and Bill Haywood stumped the country for years on behalf of this idea. A number of the important unions of the AFL were committed to it. Yet some forty years passed before it was realized in 1935 with the formation of the CIO. In this case the lapse cannot be explained by economic development alone. The mass production industries which became the backbone of the CIO were already fully developed by the end of the First World War. A whole series of other factors related with the development of the American working class and the labor movement in this country, many of them conjectural and “accidental,” combined to delay the appearance of the CIO.
In one sense, one can say that the history of the American working class as an organized movement on the economic field only began twelve years ago with the appearance of the CIO. The difference between three million organized workers at the high-point of the AFL at the end of World War I and fifteen million organized workers today is not a mere quantitative difference. Before the CIO was formed only a thin upper-layer of skilled workers were organized. Today the working class as such is organized. Those workers still unorganized today, except for the South, are relatively unimportant. If one dates the appearance of the first nation-wide labor organization back to the 1860’s when the National Labor Union was organized, one can say it took American workers fully seventy years to achieve anything near total economic organization.
Compared to this record, the English workers achieved the amount of organization proportionate to their numbers, in half the time. What roughly corresponds to our CIO movement took place in England in the early 1900’s. The speed with which workers on the Continent, like the German, Scandinavian, Belgian, etc., achieved their economic organization makes the English, in turn, seem very slow.
How explain these differences? By the wisdom of the leaders in one country compared with another? By the skill of labor agitators, writers and organizers in one country as compared with another? No. This is not the answer.
The answer is rooted in the historical development of each country. The wisdom and skill of the labor leaders can make a difference. But it is relatively unimportant in the long run. The labor leader, like anyone else, cannot make history “out of conditions chosen by himself, but out of such as he finds close at hand.”
 
Time and Place
Let us take another example. The ideas of social and economic reform which became known as the “New Deal” were not brilliant discoveries on the part of Roosevelt and his “brain trust.” Each of these reforms had been advocated for years by various groups or individuals. Had Roosevelt run on a platform calling for these reforms in 1920 or 1924 he would not have received much support. As a matter of fact, Robert La Follette, Sr., did run for President in 1924 on a platform calling, more or less, for the very things that the “New Deal” adopted ten years later. Yet LaFollette carried only his own state of Wisconsin.
Or another example, this time from the reactionary camp. Had Hitler written his Mein Kampf in 1900 it would have attracted the attention of only a handful of crackpots. Even had he organized them into a movement and agitated up and down Germany, he would have found little response. It took Germany’s defeat in the war, the failure of the Socialists to make a revolution, the Versailles treaty, the inflation, the paralysis of the Weimar Republic and the mass unemployment following 1929 to plow the soil for the Hitler movement. As a matter of fact, Hitler’s movement almost folded up between 1924 and 1928 when Germany had a few prosperous years.
We therefore see that the question is not one of how we “expect to get anywhere with such a small party.” The real question is this: Are the ideas of the Workers Party in line with historical development in general and the future political development of the United States in particular? Is history plowing the soil for the seeds which our party is planting today? Will millions of workers rally to the ideas of our party tomorrow? We of the Workers Party are supremely confident that they will. Our reasons for this belief will be dealt with in our next article.
 


Proofread by Einde O’ Callaghan (January 2013).

AS is done by every imperialist bourgeoisie, the Roosevelt administration proceeds with its war preparations under a thick smoke-screen of “national defense” hysteria. Since no worker will become excited when told that the Nazis threaten the Firestone Rubber Company properties in Liberia, Africa and the Chase National Bank investments in South America, or that the Japanese threaten to jump in on the oil wells of the Dutch East Indies before Standard Oil can get a hold of them, it is necessary to stir him up with stories about parachute troops about to land on his roof and tanks to rumble down his street.
The creation of a widespread fear of invasion in the past would have been almost impossible since the geographical location of the United States made invasion seem very absurd. Unlike the European countries in which the “enemy” was always at the border, the “enemy” of the United States was thousands of miles beyond the sea. However, the Hitler “blitzkrieg” has made such a deep impression upon the public’s thoughts that Roosevelt found little difficulty in convincing the bulk of the people that a plane and parachute invasion could suddenly swoop down upon the country without the slightest notice.
The “national defense” hysteria puts to the test for the first time the ability of the Revolutionary Marxist movement in America to withstand the tremendous bourgeois patriotic pressure and yet find the agitational forms through to speak to the workers without being driven to purely abstract formulas.
To place the two tasks in their proper relationship, it is necessary to point out that the maintenance of the basic views of Marxism upon the class state and national defense in the imperialist epoch is far more important than the task of forging the agitational weapons with which to burst through the “national defense” illusion. Once the movement has been swept from its basic moorings, all else is lost.
This article is, therefore, an attempt to restate those basic principles upon which our anti-war fight rests and show how our movement, far from standing on the side-lines and repeating bare formulas, can boldly wade into the struggle with a program to answer the “national defense” swindle.
The “radicals” of yesterday who are beating the drums on behalf of the re-armament program seek to convince us of the error of our ways with arguments like this:
“Of course we are still opposed to imperialism. If it were a matter of 50,000 planes to defend Wall Street investments abroad, we would also oppose re-armament. But you have to admit that every nation has a right to national independence. Is not that what we fight for in China? If we are opposed to China becoming a Japanese colony, should we not as vigorously oppose attempts to make America a German colony? If you do not believe in a war for democracy in Europe, you should at least support the President’s program of national defense.”
Unless the revolutionary ranks are steeled with an understanding of both the basic principles of our movement and armed with a living program, such sophistry, supported by the whole pressure of bourgeois public opinion, will make inroads among the most determined revolutionists.
 
I. The National State
Beginning with Karl Marx himself, Marxist historians have viewed the creation of the national state out of the ruins of the feudal system as one of the great progressive achievements of the bourgeois-democratic revolution. It was the political prerequisite to the expansion of the means of production and the basis for the extension and development of the class struggle and proletarian organizations.
As such, Marxists in the bourgeois-democratic epoch not only fought for the creation of national states but also for their defense. The creation and maintainance of national states coincided with the class interests of the proletariat. The fight for the national unification of Germany in the 19th century was also the fight for a strong German labor movement and the possibility of confronting the German bourgeoisie class against class, without the contusing and diverting baggage of a national problem.
However, the outbreak of the World War in 1914 signalized the fact that the means of production had outgrown their national borders. Capitalism had entered its imperialist epoch. Its further expansion now meant the clash of the capitalist states for a division and re-division of the earth.
The World War proved that capitalist economy was over-ripe for socialization. The hour had come for the proletariat to appear on the stage of history, in the words of the Communist Manifesto, as “the gravedigger of capitalism.”
With the Socialist Revolution on the order of the day in Europe, America, and other advanced industrial centers, national states lost their progressive character. They now became a straight jacket upon human progress. The new task for humanity became, not the preservation of state boundaries, but their abolition through the Socialist Revolution to clear the path for planned production and the division of labor on an international scale.
 
Marx and National Wars
Marx had already exposed the fraud of a war of national defense under capitalism at the threshold of the imperialist epoch. In his famous address to the General Council of the International on the defeat of the Paris Commune, written soon after the Franco-Prussian War in 1871, he wrote:
The highest heroic accomplishment of which the old order is capable, is the national war. And this has now proved to be a fraud perpetrated by governments for no other purpose than to put off the class struggle, a fraud that is bared as soon as the class struggle flares up in civil war. Class rule can no longer hide behind a national uniform. The national governments are united against the proletariat.
The unity of Bismark and Thiers against the Parisian proletariat was to be repeated on a much vaster scale and with less disguise when international capitalism, including the Russian capitalists who had sent millions to die on the battlefield in the name of “national defense”, carried on a joint attack upon the Soviet regime.
When capitalism entered its imperialist epoch and Socialism became the only way out for humanity, the defense of its own national state became a blind alley for the proletariat. The failure of Social Democracy to see this in 1914 lead the workers into the impasse in which wage slave murdered wage slave in the name of “national defense”.
The imperialist epoch has posed – all the more clearly in the post – war period of decline – the question as follows: Either subordinate the struggle for the Socialist Revolution in the interests of national defense or subordinate the interests of national defense to the struggle for the Socialist Revolution.
The proletariat cannot solve its problem by fighting for both – as Social Democracy claims to do in this war. The two tasks are contradictory under the police regime of degenerate capitalism.
The struggle for the Socialist Revolution means an intensification of the class struggle aimed at the establishment of a workers government. This weakens the war efforts of the capitalist state – above all in the totalitarian form which it assumes in modern war.
A policy of “national defense” under capitalist class rule means for the proletariat civil peace, the liquidation of the class struggle, and a postponement of the Socialist Revolution.
The continuation of the struggle for Socialism in time of war may lead, it is true, to the defeat and national subjugation of the nation by a foreign power. However, in the continuation of the struggle for Socialism in time of war there is the hope of a future for the proletariat. In the abandonment of the class struggle in the interests of “national defense” their is only the continued prospect of life under a degenerate capitalism with its future of hunger, totalitarianism, and more wars.
 
II. The Proletariat and Its Nation
Again the radicals” of yesterday come to the fore with an argument:
“Who will deny that German conquest had a detrimental effect upon the class struggle and the political education of the proletariat in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Norway, Belgium, and the Netherlands? These countries did not seek a war with Germany. They sought only to defend their national independence. How can you tell the worker that foreign conquest does not matter to him?”
The above is not a polemic against a Marxist understanding of the proletariat and the independence of its nation. This might be a polemic against those who have vulgarized Marxist teachings upon this question by literally saying that it makes no difference to the worker whether his nation lost its independence or not. It was this same vulgarization of Marxism that lead to the perversion of “revolutionary defeatism” to mean the active attempt of the proletariat to bring about the military defeat of its “own” bourgeoisie at the hands of the “enemy” bourgeoisie as an alleged means of advancing the revolution at home.
Such vulgarizations are not only inconsistent with the general body of Marxist theoretical views upon the national state and the revolution, but their very sectarian unreality lead to sterility and futility in the daily political struggle and are a source of weakness rather than strength in the face of the tremendous bourgeois pressure upon the movement in time of war. Such a position deprives the movement of some of its most potent agitational weapons against the “national defense” swindle of the imperialist bourgeoisie. Unless a living movement gives living answers, the un-reality of its slogans will lead to uncertainty in its own ranks and tendencies to seek refuge in opportunist formulations.
 
National Oppression and Class Struggle
Without a doubt, it is true to say that the conquest of half of Europe by Hitler has been a blow to the class struggle. The proletariat of the oppressed nation has always been driven into greater reliance upon its own bourgeoisie. It has always tended to see its problem through the nationalist spectacles of the bourgeoisie rather than its own proletarian class spectacles.
Also without a doubt, the countries overrun by Hitler did not seek the war and fought for their national independence.
But what do our Messrs. Ex-Radicals conclude from the above? They conclude what appears as a simple, “common sense” truth – support the transgressed nations against the aggressor.
But who will determine the policies of the “transgressed” nations? Who will limit it to a struggle for national defense? Not the workers of these nations. And certainly not the poor deluded and badly frightened ex-radicals. The policies will be determined by the bourgeoisie of the nations concerned.
Let us examine the case of Czechoslovakia. Certainly the Czech bourgeoisie did not seek a war with Germany when Hitler conquered the country in 1939. After they had lost the Sudeten areas and control over the Slovaks and Ruthenians, one could certainly have said that here was the case of a bourgeoisie solely concerned with saving its national independence.
But what would have happened had they fought Germany and won? Would the Czech munitions makers, textile barons, and shoe kings have retired to their own borders? Of course not. They would have disarmed Germany, robbed her of territory, re-erected their rule over the Slovaks and Ruthenians, and emerged as the dominant imperialist power of Central Europe.
What will happen if the Allies defeat Germany in this war? They would certainly carve it up beyond recognition. Germany would be set back to a stage it was in 100 years ago. Would not this also be a terrific blow to the “class struggle and the political education of the proletariat” in Germany? Of course it would.
The proletarian youth who enlists in the US army today in response to Roosevelt’s propaganda about “national defense” will in many cases be motivated by a genuine and progressive sentiment of wanting to defend his home. But tomorrow he may find himself dying upon a battlefield in Europe, Australia, Asia, or Africa.
No, Marxists do not say that the proletariat is unconcerned with the fate of its nation. What they say is that they place the interests of Socialism above those of the nation when the capitalist police state establishes an unbridgable contradiction between the fight for Socialism and national defense.
However, Marxists are not opposed to national defense when it does not contradict the struggle for Socialism.
Marxists were for the defense of the national state in the bourgeois revolutionary epoch because it furthered the proletarian cause. Marxists can be for national defense today, upon a basis that furthers the interests of the proletariat against those of the bourgeoisie. In this lies the key to our agitation in the daily political struggle – our agitation to expose the “national defense” of the bourgeoisie and reveal its fraudulent character.
 
Luxemburg’s Answer to National Defense
Writing on this problem during the last war, Rosa Luxemburg said:
In view of all these considerations, what shall be the practical attitude of the Social-Democracy in the present war? Shall it declare: since this is an imperialist war, since we do not enjoy in our country, any Socialist self-determination, its existence or non-existence is of no consequence to us, and we will surrender it to the enemy? Passive fatalism can never be the role of a revolutionary party, like the Social Democracy. It must neither place itself at the disposal of the existing class state, under the command of the ruling classes, nor can it stand silently by to wait until the storm is past. It must adopt a policy of active class politics, a policy that will whip the ruling classes forward in every great social crisis, and that will drive the crisis itself far beyond its original extent. That is the role that the Social Democracy must play as the leader of the fighting proletariat. Instead of covering this imperialistic war with a lying mantle of national self-defense, the Social Democracy should have demanded the right of national self-determination seriously, should have used it as a lever against the imperialist war.
The most elementary demand of national defense is that the nation take its defense into its own hands. The first step in this direction is the militia; not only the immediate armament of the entire adult male populace, but above all, popular decision in all matters of war and peace. It must demand, furthermore, the immediate removal of every form of political oppression, since the greatest political freedom is the best basis for national defense. To proclaim these fundamental measures of national defense, to demand their realization, that was the first duty of the Social Democracy. (Rosa Luxemburg: The Crisis in the German Social Democracy)
In our agitation we can truthfully hurl the lie back in the faces of the bourgeois spokesmen who accuse the revolutionists of being unconcerned with national independence. We oppose the hoax and swindle of the Roosevelt administration which is put over under a cover of “national defense” slogans. It is they – the bourgeois rulers – who are opposed to national defense. They are only for the defense of their own imperialist interests. Wall Street cares no more for “national independence” than did the Russian bourgeoisie after it lost control in 1917.
 
A Proletarian Program for National Defense
We have our own program for national defense – a proletarian program that will make national defense part and parcel of our struggle for the final solution of Socialism.

Arm the working masses – the city workers and poor farmers. Let them organize their own People’s Army with democratically-elected command and the right to keep their arms at home.
Abolish the standing army and National Guard with their officer castes of Jim Crow, anti-semitic, labor-hating reactionaries.
Establish sailors councils in the Navy.
Remove the “college education” clause and open the Air Corps training schools to sons of working class families.
If a militia composed of workers and farmers with their own elected officers was able to drive out the British in the War for Independence, a People’s Army today will be able to defend independence and democratic rights against the enemy at home and abroad.
 
Withdraw all troops from foreign territories and ships from foreign waters. Grant full and immediate freedom to all colonies and spheres dominated by American imperialism.
If it is national independence we are concerned with, let us begin by giving it to those nations subjected by American rule. If it is an invasion we are opposed to, let us stop invading foreign territory.
 
Abolish secret diplomacy. Open the files of the Department of State. Publish all diplomatic correspondence and treaties.
If we are only concerned with national independence, there should be nothing in our diplomacy that we are ashamed to publish. Conduct all diplomacy open and above board.
 
No war loans to Europe – 20 billions to build new homes in America.
Before having the temerity to ask the worker to “defend his home” give him a home worth defending.
 
Put the jobless back to work by reducing hours of labor without any cuts in wages. $30 minimum wage – 30 hours maximum work.
Hungry and jobless men will never be very enthusiastic about defending their nation.
 
Let the people vote on war through a popular referendum.
Certainly the majority of the people should know whether their national independence is threatened. Let them decide.
 
Abolish Nazi race practices in America first. Full social, political, and economic equality for the Negroes and all other minorities.
Why should the threat of a Nazi invasion frighten the Negro in Alabama who continually lives in fear of a lynch mob?
 
Fullest extension – not curtailment – of democratic rights. No wartime dictatorship. Smash the labor-spy system. Abolish poll taxes. Defend civil liberties.
Only a free people can defend its national independence.
 
Government ownership of all basic industries – steel, oil, chemicals, public utilities, railroads, coal, etc. – with control over production by workers committees in the shops.
Why should the bankers and munitions makers wax rich out of a struggle for so sacred a cause as national defense? The conduct of these gentlemen in the last war makes it sheer madness to leave them in control of basic industries. Only the workers employed in the industries can be trusted with their management in the interests of the whole nation.

* * * * * *
If the above program were to be accepted and executed, there would no longer be any contradiction between national defense and the Socialist future of humanity. But those bourgeois propagandists who howl loudest for “national defense” would as soon permit Hitler to take over the country as to carry out such a program. In their horrified rejection of the above, they reveal their own national defense talk to be a swindle to cover their imperialist aims.
For the revolutionists the task remains – not a single concession that compromises the struggle for Socialism, the only future for humanity.
Ernest ERBER
 



Here are a few of the pertinent facts and highlights
of the February 9–12 “National Citizenship Institute”
of the American Youth Congress:
1. REPRESENTATION: Some 4,600 “delegates”
registered who, the AYC leaders claimed; represented over four
million young people. About a thousand or so were delegates from
various bona-fide national and local organizations in which
members of the Young Communist League are active. Among these
organizations were Stalinist-dominated AFL and CIO locals, Industrial
Girls Clubs and Business and Professional Women’s Clubs of the
Young Women’s Christian Association. Then there were delegates
from the Stalinist peripheral organizations: American Student Union,
youth sections of the Workers Alliance, the International Workers
Order, the International Labor Defense, the Finnish Workers
Federation, Armenian Workers Federation, etc. Then came delegates
from hundreds of organizations with dubious names like the Modern
Youth Group, the Williamsburg Youth Center, the Streamlined Dance
Group, etc. In a word, the vast majority of the “delegates”
were members or sympathizers of the Young Communist League;
2. PROCEDURE: The entire two-day “Institute”
was controlled by the top leadership of the AYC with a firm hand.
Neither speakers nor resolutions were permitted from the floor.
“Discussion” was organized by having delegates submit a
slip of paper with their name and organization to the platform. A
“Trotskyite” delegate had as much chance of getting by
the committee on the platform as a snowball in hell. Ushers and
police took care of anyone attempting to speak from the floor.
3. PRESIDENT’S SPEECH: The delegates,
paraded down Pennsylvania Avenue in a drizzling rain on Saturday
morning, displaying banners with all the slogans which the Stalinists
are currently stressing, “The Yanks Ain’t Coming,”
“For the American Youth Act,” “Not a Dime for
Mannerheim,” “Keep America Out of the Imperialist War,”
and so on.
The parade ended on the White House lawn; where
arrangements had been made for an address by the President. The
delegates waited for a half hour in a rain that had become a downpour
to listen to Roosevelt denounce the Soviet Union as a dictatorship in
no way different than any other and call for American support to
Finland. The speech brought slight response from the delegates. At
one point the crowd began to boo, and the radio operators were forced
to cut out all microphones except those into which the President was
speaking directly.
The thousands of YCLers were a sorry sight as they
trudged back, wet, cold and miserable after Roosevelt’s
tongue-lashing.
4. THE LEWIS SPEECH: John L. Lewis decided to
address the Congress only on the day before he spoke. Speaking to the
delegates only some three hours after the President, Lewis’
speech was greeted with thunderous ovations. The bitter sarcasm he
poured upon the President’s remarks appeared as vindication to
the delegates for the abuse they had suffered in the morning.
5. TREATMENT OF AUBREY WILLIAMS: Coming right
after Lewis’ eventful speech, the speech of Aubrey Williams,
director of the National Youth Administration, received scant
attention from the press. Williams devoted the first part of his
speech to the economic needs of youth and surpassed any of the
invited speakers in the “radicalism” of his demands. He
referred to the $500,000,000 appropriation requested in the American
Youth Act as “insufficient” and called for billions of
dollars to finance a program to “rehouse America” and
“put youth to work at useful occupations.” However; when,
at the close of his remarks, he sought to justify his action of
turning over the NYA lists to the Army Recruiting Office, he was
greeted with such a storm of boos, and hisses that it became
impossible to continue his speech. He explained that he had nothing
against militarism as such but that “militarism must be
subordinated to democracy.” This brought forth renewed booing
from the young Stalinists, who, only a half year ago, printed
articles in the Young Communist Review on the advantages of
life in the U.S. Army.
6. MRS. ROOSEVELT’S SPEECH: Visibly
nervous and tense, Mrs. Roosevelt answered a series of questions at
the session on The International Scene on Sunday night. Her
remarks were the climax to participation in the previous sessions and
an active support to practical arrangements. Over a hundred delegates
were put up at the White House, in addition to other hundreds that
she provided with accommodations at the homes of Mrs. Cordell Hull
and other wives of government officials, at army barracks and a girls
school, and through negotiations with the hotel managers association
to lower rates.
Mrs. Roosevelt grimly sat on the platform through
speeches by Frederick “Blackie” Myers, Communist Party
whip in the National Maritime Union, an Indian “nationalist”
named Luis Perez of the “Brotherhood of Cuban Youth,” and
other speakers who followed the political form of the current Daily
Worker attacks upon Roosevelt. After the first speaker of what
the chairman announced would be a panel of five youths on the subject
of How the War Affects Me had concluded with a continuation of
the attacks upon Roosevelt as a war-monger, Mrs. Roosevelt, without
waiting to be introduced, strode to the rostrum and prepared to
speak. The chairman solved the situation by simply announcing, “I
present, Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt.”
 



Dear Comrades:
The New York comrades are no doubt anxious to know how the rest of the country reacts to the fight they are carrying on. Widespread approval or disapproval in the country at large will greatly effect their outlook and also their spirit. I do not know how many other midwest Yipsels’ opinions I am voicing, but I imagine that a considerable number of the comrades who know what the issues at stake are, will probably agree with my view. Particularly, will those agree who are politically developed to the degree of seeing the connection between the present fight and the future development of the party and consequently the whole future complexion of the American labor movement.
I was prompted to write this letter because of the attitude of a minority on the YPSL National Executive Committee and its differences with the majority on the inner party situation, which threw into bold relief a school of thought in the party that well merits examination. The fact that a number of NEC Members wanted to sit as judges in the affair between the Old Guard City Executive Committee and the NYC YPSL and decide on the technicalities of the case, as to who had a greater amount of right on their side, greatly surprised the New York Yipsels who had looked to their NEC for full and unreserved support.
Yet the position of McDowell and the rest of the minority has a deeper basis than a mere attempt to tee above factions and decide only on the evidence and the law without regard for the consequences. I believe the basic conception which divides McDowell and the New York Yipsels is the difference of opinion on the question of whether a split with the Old, Guard is inevitable or not.
If one accepts the position that a split is inevitable, one adopts such tactics as will put one in a favorable position for a split. One fights uncompromisingly, knowing that compromise can only be temporary and might have a demoralizing effect on one’s forces. One attempts to maneuver one’s enemy into a position where he will have to take the overt step in the direction of a split (and consequently, the blame) or will have to retreat thus weakening his prestige and following. Whether the New York Yipsels have consciously held this conception, I do not know. They have done a creditable piece of work in carrying it out in practice.
If one believes that a split is not inevitable, one then acts in a manner to avoid it almost at any cost. The most outstanding tactic is then compromise. One scolds both sides and enumerates the violations of ethics and law by both camps. One seeks out every unwise move to show that both sides are equally irresponsible.
The compromisers make a great fetish of technicalities. They write bewildering theses to show the logic of their position, balancing the authority of the NY SEC against that of the YPSL NEC, the meaning of the simple English word “support” against the possible meanings the SP NEC might have had, and the authority of their logic against each and all who base their reasoning on a factional position instead of law.
Those who accept the inevitability of a split do not nor should they, base their arguments on the simple fact that they consider the political position for which their side stands as being correct. Their arguments must be based on every ruling and precedent in their favor. They do not, however, deceive themselves by thinking that their position is the result of a study of all the legal and ethical questions involved. Rather they understand that all their legal and ethical arguments are used to support a position already arrived at by the logic of the factional fight.
One cannot justify the position that a split is inevitable on a short-sighted view of the day-by-day developments only. For this, one must look backwards and forwards also. It is therefore necessary to review very briefly the past of the contending groups. On the surface the most obvious feature in the fight is the difference between the average age of the Militants and the Old Guard. This line-up on the basis of age (realizing, of course, the many exceptions on both sides) cannot be explained simply by the rashness of youth and the conservatism of age. It rather bespeaks a peculiar historical development of the Socialist party.
When the split of 1919 resulted in about 80% of the membership of the party going over to the Communist party or dropping out because of the inner-party fight, the Palmer raids, and the attractions of high wages, it left the Socialist party strength concentrated in a few spots like Milwaukee, Reading, and New York City, due in the first two cases to Socialist influence in municipal politics, and due to influence in the local trade union movement and the Daily Forward in the latter. The Communist split had carried off most of the younger party members and almost the whole youth movement. The party control was left in the hands of men already set in their opinions and constituting a right wing theoretically. The years that followed saw the influence of the party narrow even more to just the above-mentioned centers (and of course, the more or less stable foreign federations), These years of capitalist prosperity and general working class aloofness from radicalism made the Old Guard feel more correct than ever for having resisted the Communists when they were prophesying the Social Revolution in 1919.
With the crisis lowering living standards and bringing on unemployment, the Socialist party entered a new period of development. To the Old Guard the crisis meant a justification in their faith that capitalism would break down. Now was the time to build up the Socialist party they had nursed during the Coolidge boom days, into a strong political mass movement to capture political power. Theoretically, their outlook remained the same. Their numbers were reinforced all over the country by other Old Guardists who had dropped out and were now coming back into the party. The party experienced a revival. And for the first time in years, large numbers of young people forced into action by the depression came into the party. Well I remember the first branch meeting I attended in 1932. Out of some 40 present, hardly more than 5 were under 50 years of age, the rest averaged around 50. Due to the youth being carried off by the Communist split and the years of inactivity, there had developed a situation where a whole generation was missing in the party.
The younger people joining from 1929 on, were seeking a way out of an economic calamity. They wanted action and more action. The Old Guard, still moving by the inertia of the years before 1929, looked upon them as novices who lacked both knowledge and experience. Almost all of the first differences between the Old Guard and the Militants were on questions of practical activity. Here in Chicago, the Old Guard was not charged with being reformist, but rather with being inefficient in administering the County office. On theoretical questions there was little occasion for difference of opinion until the Detroit Declaration of Principles.
Of great importance is the fact that the philosophy of the Old Guard has not changed since the Hillquit group broke away from the Socialist Labor party more than 35 years ago. If anything, they have shifted to the right. They are firmly convinced that they were correct in every major question in the past and are correct now. They built the party and their policies preserved the party. Any newcomer is not worth refuting, he is only to be told his place.
The Militants joined the party looking to it as the best means to find a way out for depression-ridden America. They rebelled against Old Guard control because of lack of activity. However, they sooner or later developed politically to the degree where they saw the Old Guard attitude on activity linked up with the Old Guard’s conception of the road to power. Consequently, the point of emphasis in the fight, particularly in New York, where the Militants have not displaced the Old Guard and must still fight them ideologically, shifted ever more to the deeper political questions involved. In Chicago, where the Militant victory in 1932 was a comparatively easy one, the Militants are correspondingly less developed theoretically.
If the situation were as in the years from the split of 1919 to around 1924, it would, be much simpler. Young people going to the left during this period went to the communists either directly or after a short stay in the Socialist party. The extreme difference of political questions, the one party composed of elderly men preaching a theory of growing into socialism, the other party with much youthful energy preaching revolution and having all the attendant romantic glamor, presented an easy choice and youth usually chose the latter.
Today, however, the situation is different. The tactics of the Communists, the falsehoods in their press more than anything else, repulsed large numbers of intelligent youth. The depression drove them to the left. The Communist tactics drove them away. Where were they to go? The Socialist party was not accepted because they agreed with it, but as a political necessity. Not only did they join the SP, but they stayed, despite, or perhaps because of, the bellowing of the CP. The essential fact is that these young people were driven in the direction of a revolutionary party by the objective factors but entered a party of reformism as the leaser of two evils.
Such elements in the midst of a party of reformism had not the opportunity for a rapid education in revolutionary Marxism. They groped about to unbelievable confusion in looking for theories to stand on that were neither those of the Old Guard nor of the C.P. Due to their sectarian isolation, the minority communist groups never even-reached them. The effect of the MacDonald betrayal was great, only to be pushed aside by the greater lessons of the German catastrophe. The great inspiration and lessons of the Austrian Civil War shock them to their depths. Here were practical answers to theoretical questions they were pondering over. The political education of the Militants has begun. It can end only with an understanding of Revolutionary Marxism.
These events did not stir the Old Guard, with the exception of the sentimental feelings aroused by the Austrian events. Why should it stir them? They had always been correct. These events are occurring in Europe. America is different. Nor will future events in Europe move them. And events in America will move them as it did their German counterparts, in the direction of defeat.
The fact of the Militants moving to the left continually and the Old Guard, remaining stable is the cause of the irreconcilability of the conflict. As the Militants develop and understand more clearly the necessity for a revolutionary Socialist party, understand it because the study of theory and daily practical lessons teach it as both teach the bankruptcy of the CP, the chasm between them and the Old Guard widens. The impending class wars in France, if they occur in the near future, are going to have a tremendous effect on this tendency.
The conflict between the two groups is decisive. The progress of the struggle can only deepen and widen the gap, Once one understands this, as I believe the New York Yipsels do, one looks with grave distrust at any attempt to compromise. McDowell does not believe a split inevitable. He thinks a compromise possible. He cannot support the Old Guard. To support the Militants makes a split more probable. Therefore an attitude of “A plague on both your houses!”
I can really see how the New York Yipsels who were expecting support from their NEC without “ifs”, “ands” and “buts”, looked upon their attitude of scolding both sides as trying to build a “logical position in the middle on the basis of technicalities.
Should the NYC YPSL be canonized? If this is accomplished by declaring that they acted in accord with “socialist law and ethics”, then yes. But let us not canonize them because they acted in accordance with “socialist law and ethics”. Let us canonize them because upon the success of the fight against the Old Guard hinges the future of the party. Is this factionalism? Yes! Just as every decision of the SP NEC is made with its effect on the factional fight in mind. As every decision of the NY SEC and NYC NEC is made with its effect on the factional fight in mind. Just as the actions of the NYC YPSL EC were made with their effect on the factional fight in mind.
If a split is inevitable there can be no retreat. A retreat brings on demoralization. Because of this the establishment of the Socialist Call marks a distinct Militant victory. It was decidedly an offensive move. Militant forces can rally around it and its growth will buoy up their courage.
Since the Militants find it necessary to keep the Call a non-factional publication, there is a distinct need for a left-wing theoretical publication. The establishment of the Socialist Appeal in Chicago was to meet this need. Nationwide support must be mobilized to make it a printed magazine or to establish some other in its place. It is obvious that the ASQ cannot fill this need. The establishment of such an organ will have as healthy an effect (if not a healthier one) as the appearance of The Call. Beyond this a national leftwing caucus or conference must be called to determine a program and course of action. Such a conference will solidify the Militant forces and carry the offensive further. An offensive that will stop only when the Socialist party has become the revolutionary party of the American working class.



 


With Socialist Greetings,
Ernest Erber



 



How unnecessary for a Socialist publication to carry an article considering such a closed question, think old-time old-line party members! Why, elections are all-important! And so they almost are. Yet there are reasons for considering the whole question. Especially are there reasons during this time of increasing militancy, of shift to the left, of general condemnation of much that existed in past socialist thought and practice.
In rapid flight from the theories and tactics that led to defeat, confused thought arises on many questions. To flee from the conservative, bureaucracy-ridden A. F. of L. unions, misguided comrades embrace dual unionism. In deadly fear of political alliances with non-socialists, bewildered comrades oppose the formation of a Labor Party. In an effort to block all tendencies toward reformism, unthinking comrades discourage the fight for immediate demands. The tendency of a moving object to continue in a straight line until another force counteracts it is clearly seen hero. The job of the Marxist is to apply the counteracting force at the correct time; to halt the pendulum in the proper place. This must be done without the least regard for labels such as “left” and “right”.
In the matter of elections, the contused reaction to the old outlook and methods manifests itself in two distinct forms, each flowing from its own theoretical criticism of the past. The first group are those who regard the failure of the Socialist movement to grow rapidly and achieve significant victories as the result of the defeatist attitude of old leaders and of mistakes in technique. The defeatist attitude led to inactivity. Inactivity led to dogmatism, sectarianism, isolation. The mistakes in technique were that the Socialist party propaganda did not speak the language of the American worker, the propaganda efforts of the party lacked dramatic appeal, the programs were not simple, direct, and detailed enough, the party submerged the individual leader when it was leaders that the masses follow.
The second group examines more fundamental errors that led to failure in the past. It examines the theoretical basis of the movement. It considers its maneuvers and strategy. It considers the trade union question, the question of degeneration into reformism, the frequent recurrences of outright betrayal by people put into public office, the illusions created by electoral victories. Then it decides the failure was caused by reliance on victory through the ballot, by the development of labor politicians, by the clinging to peaceful methods of struggle, by illusions about democracy and legality.
The first group adhere to all the basic concepts of the road to power held in the past. They seek to make it a road to victory, first by putting at the head of the party a younger, more enthusiastic, active leadership; then by winning more votes for the party by utilizing every technique that will gain additional votes. Forget the class struggle and give the voters a blue print of the road to socialism. Appeal for the support of your candidate on his superior merits. Hide the party if it helps your man get more votes.
Outside the Socialist party the extreme and classic example of this attitude and this sort of, a campaign is seen in Upton Sinclair and his Epic plan. In the Socialist party this attitude is seen in many tendencies working in the direction of Sinclairism and Epicism within the framework of the party.
In our present aldermanic elections the “Waltmire for Alderman Club” and its support of an individual is an example of this tendency. Do not the non-socialists who support Waltmire as a good man know he is a socialist? Sure they do. Then won’t they support him as a member of the Socialist party (and not despite his being a member of the party)? Then why hot direct their Support of an outstanding socialist in the community to a support of the Socialist party in the community. Why not a “Socialist for Alderman Club” and campaign? He would not get as many votes as a socialist, object the supporters of new techniques and more militancy. This objection raises the question, the answer to which must establish the purpose of the Socialist party in going into an election and give the answer to the title of this article, “Of What Importance An Election?”
If the “logic” behind the tactics of concealing everything and of presenting the most alluring platform, in order to get elected, were carried to its logical conclusion, the Socialist party should organize as a secret conspiratorial organization which would run innocent-looking candidates to fool the public until it had control of the government and then could shout, “Surprise!” as it uncovered it-self and the social revolution would have been accomplished. Even the most naive supporter of the “get votes at any cost” school reject the possibility of sneaking up on the capitalist class when it isn’t looking.
The second view of elections that developed as the pendulum swung away from the old tactics, is one that takes an infantile left attitude toward elections as being useless and at best unimportant weapons in the class struggle. This is the reaction to seeing the futility of an electoral struggle in the decisive periods when Capital and Labor lock horns in life-and-death struggle. The old situation which saw party branches remain dead for months until election time made them beehives of activity has been replaced by a situation in which many branches see no increased activity, no increased enthusiasm, no increased interest at election time. This attitude, in its failure to distinguish between the power of the ballot to bring the final victory and the use of the ballot as a tactical weapon, is as pitiful as the attitude of the men of action and new approaches.
The importance of an election to a revolutionary party lies in the fact that it (1) gives the party the opportunity to reach the masses when their political consciousness is at a high level; and (2) servos to measure the political shifts and tendencies caused by changes on the economic and political scene.
We must utilize the election to place before the workers the program and demands of the Socialist party in sharp contrast to those of the capitalist parties.
We must capitalize on the greater readiness of the workers to read political literature, attend political meetings and take part in political discussions to familiarize the worker with the Socialist movement.
We must use the election as the time to rally all our forces, all the support we have built up in constant work on the industrial field, among the unemployed, in the fight against fascism and war, etc.
We must use the election to teach workers the political nature of all their demands, the connection between their employer and the state, the connection between their status and the economic system.
We must direct all the discontent expressed in the outbreak of strikes, the unemployed demonstrations, the anti-war movements, in all the struggles for various demands that we supported, against the political powers and the ruling class they represent.
We must closely analyze election results to read from them the shifts in the moods and sentiments of the masses. The German elections preceding Hitler’s conquest of power should have been gold-mines of information for the leaders of the German working-class.
Are elections important? Need an answer be given after these facts have become clear?



While the various groups in the labor movement calling themselves Marxists have widely different views on many vital problems, there still remain fundamentals upon which they all agree. It is well in considering the question of legality and the Road to Power that we first briefly restate those fundamentals that form the basis of Marxist thought.
First, Marxists maintain that our society is divided into classes based on groups of people standing in the same relationship to the means of production.
Secondly, Marxists hold that the interests of these classes are antagonistic and irreconcilable and that a constant struggle goes on between them over the division of the   wealth that. society produces.
Thirdly, Marxists hold that the ability of the present ruling class, the capitalists, to maintain their power is due to their using  their economic strength to control the government and use it as “an instrument of oppression” against the rest of society.
Fourth, Marxists say that the ability of the present ruling class, the capitalists, to maintain their power is due to their using their economic strength to control the government and use it as “an instrument of oppression” against the rest of society.
It is on the issue of the taking of governmental power by the workers that the widest division of opinion exists. Whether this taking power by the working class, or the Social Revolution as it is called, will be accomplished gradually or suddenly, legally or illegally, peacefully or violently is the most vital question facing those in the vanguard of the labor movement. It is upon our view of the Road to Power that we base our education of the wording-class. It is upon the basis of its concept of The Road to Power that the working-class acts.
Those basic premises of Marxism enumerated above, namely that we live in a class society, that the dynamic force of that Society is the class struggle, that the capitalist class maintains its position by control of the government, and that labor can only free itself “by wrestling political power from Capital for the purpose of building a classless society, are all statements with which no member of the Socialist Party can disagree. If we keep these fundamentals in mind, we will see more clearly on this issue of legality and The Road to Power.
We agreed that the owing class was the ruling class because it controlled the government. The government protects the Capitalist class by protecting the source of its economic strength private property. It is the will of the capitalist class that the rights of private property be protected. It uses its control of government to write down its will and call it law. It uses its control of government to enforce its will, the law. The law is the voice of the ruling class.
In primitive tribes the command of the master was law to his slave. In ancient Athens the democratic assembly of slaveholders wrote the law for their slaves. The voice of the hierarchy of the Catholic Church and the commandments of generations of Feudal lords grown into tradition and custom were the laws that the serfs and guildsmen of the middle Ages obeyed. The will of the representative of Copper, the representative of Sugar, the representative of Textiles, the representative of Finance, all sitting in Congress, is the law the American Worker obeys.
At present the processes of government by which the Capitalist Class of this country rules are called the democratic form of government. Democracy literally means “Rule of the people”. We agreed however, that we live in a class society in which one class maintains   its favorable economic position because it controls the rule by the people, since the  capitalist class is a small minority, of the emulation. True enough, some still say, but the majority of people support the present system and therefore the capitalist class controls the government only as long as the majority of the voters permit them to. This objection    is an example of the illusion created by the fact that the working-class is allowed to vote.
First a bit of history of the right to vote. It was some decades after the adoption of the Constitution that the workers of America secured the right to vote. They secured this right as did the workers of Europe, after the great agitations for the right to vote had been threatened to educate such large masses to an understanding of the class nature of government that the ruling class thought it better to make concessions than to seek to maintain its power by force of arms and risk losing all. The concession of allowing the worker to vote was made with the knowledge that it would serve to further cover the dictatorship of Capital with a democratic cloak. This meant allowing the masses to vote but using Capital’s control of the channels of information to teach the masses to vote against their own. interests.
To America’s ruling class this was no new trick, for the merchants and bankers of the coast towns had long found the political formula that would let the farmer and backwoodsmen to vote “right.” This even long before the British colonies became the United States. While on the subject, it might be mentioned that one of the most significant movements by the farmers to free themselves from the rule of the merchants and bankers by electoral means was defeated by the ruling class with bribery,. corruption, election irregularities, and by a method invented at the time by Elbridge Gerry, (elected Vice President of the U.S.A. in 1812) which has since come down to us as “gerrymandering.” The farmers disillusionment on the possibility of a legal victory found its expression in an armed revolt recorded in our school histories as Shay’s Rebellion.
The right to vote for the propertyless was one of a number of concessions which a confident and secure class, made during a period of an expanding and strengthening   Capitalism. The right to vote for the propertyless is one of a number of other concessions   which a frightened and weakening ruling class, driven into a corner by the economic decline of Capitalism, will withdraw in self-defense. The argument is made that Labor can safeguard peaceful avenues of progress by fighting any attempt by Capital to abolish the right to vote, the freedom of speech and press, the right to stride. If Labor can prevent Capital from exercising its control of government to legally make these changes, it has dealt Capital a terrible blow and taken the offensive in a struggle which carried to its logical end can only result in the illegal overthrow of the capitally government power. Thus the defense of what are now legal methods of social change becomes a revolutionary attack on the political power of Capital.
It might be useful to remind those who doubt that the ruling class would take from Labor legal methods of change of the frenzied hate, born of fear, with which Capital meets Labor in every industrial struggle, of the fight that Capital wages against purely reformist movements like the Non-partisan League and the Epic Planners, of the terror and sadism practiced against members of the I.W.W and the Socialist Party during the World War, and the many similar examples. Historical incidents like the butchery of over 26,000 workers of Paris after the fall of the Commune, or the reversion to savagery by the ruling class of Hungary during the White Terror of 1919, or more recently the pent-up hatred of German Capital for the Labor movement unleashed in the convince us that when the struggle between Capital and Labor becomes a life and death issue, not even civilized methods of combat are recognized, let alone legality. Guns arc turned  on women and children, prisoners of war are shot. no rule covering  international warfare is observed.
For the working-class to hope for victory by legal means is like a football team hoping to win a game in which their opponents have the right to make and change the rules during the course of play, the only difference being that some degree of sportsmanship exists in a football game, but only a bitter hatred that stops at nothing in the class struggle.
To speak of a Social Revolution that is legal is to speak of an absurd contradiction. At the beginning of this article we agreed that Capital controls the government. From this we draw the conclusion that the voice of the government, or the law, was the will of the ruling class. Can we overthrow the ruling class by its own will? If the ruling class so desires, it can be done. However, if we must overthrow Capital against its will, it cannot be done legally, as its will determines legality.



The Eighth National Convention of the Young People’s Socialist League will be remembered, less for what it accomplished than for what it failed to do.
It is true that much of the failure is due to the technical arrangements, chiefly the lack of time. The technical arrangements, however, were themselves a reflection of the political condition of the League. I do not here mean the political view of those who planned the convention. I mean the prevalent attitude of the majority of the most active and leading comrades.
Before the League can feel prepared adequately to fulfill the tasks before it, it must give its members a much more intensive education in Revolutionary Socialism than they have had until now it must train the membership to understand and help develop an organizational structure more suited for the type of work the League must carry on, and must plan campaigns that will involve the whole membership in activity and through such activity aid the political and organizational development of the League. The work of advancing the League on these lines should have begun with a pre-convention discussion of these problems lasting at least three months. The basis of such discussion should have been supplied by the NEC in the form of an analysis of the work of the League since the last convention and a program, both theoretical and organizational, submitted as the basis of activity for the next two years.
Without such preparation the convention seemed of little importance to the membership. They looked upon it as necessary to fulfill the obligations of the constitution which called for a convention every second year. A large number seemed to have come to meet old friends or merely for a weekend vacation. That this attitude was not more prevalent, in view of the lack of preparation for the convention, speaks well for the bulk of our membership. This lack of preparation was also responsible to the vast majority of the delegates coming to the convention without any knowledge of what the important questions to be decided were. Most of them received such information when it was whispered to them upon their arrival that some group is preparing to have the convention adopt some proposal or other. This made it difficult for any group to organize a caucus on important issues. As a result caucuses were organized on vague tendencies and on personalities.
The first session, held on the morning of the 20th, was taken up with routine matters, mostly with the election of eight or nine committees. So many of the delegates were involved in committee work that it was impossible to hold committee meetings during sessions . The committees therefore had barely time to organize their work before the afternoon session began. The afternoon session lasted  until after 6 pm. The delegates hastily ate and scattered to the different caucuses, feeling that it was there that a frank discussion of the important problems they were interested in would take place. This resulted in having important committees meet hastily before the Sunday morning session to prepare their reports. One can well imagine the report of a resolutions committee meeting under these circumstances and preparing a Statement of Principles, resolutions on the International Situation, the Soviet Union, the Road to Power, Fascism, as well as on a number of current questions such as the Herndon case. An organisation that determines its political position charts its course of action in this way cannot be considered prepared to face the tasks involved in winning the youth of the nation for Socialism.
To leave the preparation of committee reports to such a haphazard method is bad enough. Worse was the distinction this convention achieved in adjourning without the adoption of a single resolution. And worst at all is the attitude of those “radical” comrades who cynically regard this as an achievement to be proud of. Here indeed is a example of near-sightedness an example for practicality. These “practical” people give adequate testimony to their political ignorance when they refer to the resolutions committee as the “hot-air” committee. Were it not for the high positions such comrades hold there would be no need of taking them seriously. The fact that they old these positions is a good indication of the distance the membership must travel on the road of political development.
The two matters that caused the most debate wore a majority and minority report on the right of members to issue statements and periodicals referred to the convention by the NEC, and a change in the constitution to raise the age limit to 50 years. The apparent similarity of the minority and majority on the matter of statements confused many delegates. The discussion revolved around whether it was more democratic to limit discussion of inner-League affairs to official channels or to permit members the right of issuing material of their own. The adoption of the latter caused the minority of the delegates to initiate a referendum.
The discussion of the age limit proposal was veiled in all sorts of arguments that evaded the core of the matter. Despite this the majority of the delegates looked upon it as a move to make the League the type of vanguard organization the left wing desired and to strengthen the influence of the League in shaping the policies of the Socialist movement to the left. Those who voted against raising the age limit were skeptical about the vanguard plan and looked upon the idea of the League’s influencing the political development of the movement as using “sing the League as a political football.” This matter has also been put to a referendum after its adoption by a narrow majority.
What the political composition of the new NEC is, is difficult to say. Just as in the party the definition of a left-winger is not very clear. It will be necessary to wait for a decisive issue, comparable to the question the last NEC was faced with on what support it should give the New York Yipsels in their fight with the Old Guard over the New Leader resolution, before getting an accurate picture of who’s who. The opposition to the candidacy of Winston Dancis for re-election as National Secretary was based chiefly upon the position he took on the NEC during the above mentioned fight. The left wing succeeded in electing Ben Fischer by a majority of nine votes.
Despite all the shortcomings of the convention, the fine spirit of the delegates and. their realization of the need of improving the structure of the League and their determination to concentrate on this work gives one much to feel hopeful for. With the final desertion of basic Marxist fundamentals by the Communist International the need for a revolutionary youth organization grows. The Y.P.S.L. must become a banner bearer of Revolutionary Socialism penetrating every youth organization with its message and mobilizing youth against war and fascism and for mighty campaigns for the economic demands of young people. As such an organization it can stop the progress of the Young Communist League and dislodge it from positions it acquired during the years of socialist inactivity. It will be prepared to cope with the fascist gangs that will inevitably appear on the American scene and will play a leading role in fighting them. With the development of a mass influence it will lead the youth of the nation in opposition to the war plans of American Imperialism.



LONG AND VIOLENT polemics were waged between Trotsky and his supporters on the one hand and ourselves on the other during the Russian invasions of Poland and Finland over the relation between the economy of a state and the character of its wars.
Trotsky insisted, in the case of Russia, upon an automatic relationship – “Progressive economy equals progressive war” was what his formula boiled down to. This resulted in the contradiction of simultaneously denouncing the invasion as a “blow at the world revolution” but characterizing them as “progressive wars.”
We answered that no war that dealt a blow at the revolution could be progressive since it was precisely the effect of the war on advancing or retarding the proletarian revolution that determined whether it was progressive or reactionary.
We did not, however, (nor could anyone who considered himself a Marxist), say that there was no connection between the economy of a state and the character of its war. What we insisted on was that certain states could, on the basis of the same economy, fight both progressive and reactionary wars. Factors in addition to the economy would have to be weighed in connection with a specific war to determine its character. These would be rooted in the political, diplomatic and military policies that preceded that war.
The war between Britain and Germany was an imperialist war on both sides because the economy of both countries forced them to fight for markets, raw materials and outlets for surplus capital. It was a war over the re-division of the world.
The war between Japan and China was imperialist on Japan’s side and national defensive on China’s side because the economy of Japan forced her to expand into China while the latter was struggling to create a unified national existence.
In the war between Germany and Russia we must begin by asking “What is the nature of Russian economy?”
A defensist cannot discuss the character of the war with those who hold that Russia is a capitalist state. The discussion with them can only revolve around the question of the nature of Russian economy. If Russian economy is no different from that of Germany’s or Britain’s, then, obviously, the matter of defeatism or defensism requires no discussion.
With those, however, who hold that Russian economy is basically different from the economy of the capitalist world, as does Shachtman, there is common ground on which to discuss an attitude toward the character of the war.
 
The Economic Conflict Between Russia and World Imperialism
The Russian Revolution dealt world capitalism a double blow. First, it established a workers’ state to act as both a beacon and a spur to the revolution in the rest of the world. We can refer to this as a political blow to capitalism. Second, it wrested one-sixth of the earth from world imperialism and threw up a monopoly of foreign trade to keep it free from imperialist penetration. We can refer to this as an economic blow to capitalism.
The Stalinist counter-revolution has effectively wiped out the existence of Russia as a political threat to capitalism. Far from remaining merely passive, Stalinist Russia did its utmost in Spain, China, Germany, France and elsewhere to reassure the capitalist states that it desired nothing else than the status quo – to be left alone. There was no political concession too treacherous or revolting for Stalin. He buried revolutions with an effectiveness that surpassed anything the capitalists themselves could do.
But he could not purchase peace and security! Neither from the Anglo-French imperialists nor from Hitler. For the new exploiting class in Russia was forced to exist upon the nationalized economy they had appropriated from the revolution. The existence of the nationalized economy was possible only as long as a monopoly of foreign trade kept Russia beyond the reach of world imperialism. Economically, therefore, the Russia of Stalin remained as much a problem on the agenda of world imperialism as the Russia of Lenin. As capitalism declined, the problem became ever more acute.
It is in this that the irrepressible conflict between Russia and world imperialism existed.
In speaking of “world imperialism” it is necessary to bear in mind that the term refers to both a generalized economic law and to definite national states. Economically imperialism is the same system, no matter which capitalist state carries it out. But politically, imperialism is the diplomatic and military activity of each particular imperialist state.
Thus we speak of the law of imperialist expansion into economically backward states. Yet in connection with a specific expansion, for instance Ethiopia, it was undertaken by Italian imperialism in the face of resistance by British imperialism. Not love for the Ethiopians, but their own imperialist interests motivated the British.
The above must be borne in mind when discussing the conflict between Russian economy and world imperialism.
 
Why the Concerted Imperialist Attack Did Not Occur
The years following the revolution in 1917 saw feverish activities on the part of the imperialists directed against the Soviet Union. The first activities consisted of small scale intervention – Americans at Archangel, Japanese at Vladivostok, French in the Black Sea – and material assistance to the White Guard armies. As long as the war lasted, the Germans were also active against the Soviets in Finland and the Ukraine.
Following the German revolution, the German bourgeoisie was unable to act against the Soviets on its own and unwilling to act as the agents of French and German imperialism. To do the latter would have only established Anglo-French imperialism on both of Germany’s frontiers and make the resurrection of German military strength all the more difficult. Following the failure to successfully utilize Poland against the Soviet Union in 1921, the British imperialists made preparations for a direct intervention. The militant response of the British working class with a general strike put an end to these moves.
The German bourgeoisie answered the anti-Soviet agitation of Anglo-French imperialism with the Treaty of Rap-polio, a German-Soviet pact for diplomatic and military collaboration. The pact was not the inspiration of German Social Democracy but of the Reichswehr general staff, the stronghold of the most aggressive German nationalists. Russian collaboration represented to the Germans both a weapon against Anglo-French imperialism and a means of blackmailing them. This tactic foreshadowed the policy of Nazism, which was nothing else but the national chauvinist element in complete control. From 1921 until 1935 the existence of a strong revolutionary movement in Central Europe and the anti-war sentiments of the British and French working classes prevented any further imperialist adventures against Russia. However, the victory of Hitler opened a new epoch. Beginning in Germany, the proletarian movements of Central Europe were smashed one by one. In their place arose the new military might of German imperialism. But German imperialism was not only a threat to the Soviet Union. It was also a threat to Anglo-French hegemony. Even if Germany struck at Russia first, Anglo-French imperialism would have little consolation. For the German organization of Russian resources would again make her the first military power on the continent and place France at her mercy. The result was the feverish and contradictory diplomacy of England and France from the advent of Hitler to the outbreak of the war. First, efforts to placate Germany with loans, permission to rebuild its navy, etc. – then the Stalin-Laval Pact – then the Munich Peace – then feverish efforts for a British-Russian Pact – then the war.
From this review it becomes apparent that the nature of the conflict between Germany and Anglo-France was such that a joint imperialist attack became ever more improbable. (The conflict between America-Britain and Japan in the Far East had the same result.) History had cast Stalinist Russia for the role of an ally of one of the imperialist camps.
Had England been willing to sign a second Munich Pact over the body of Poland, it is highly probable that German imperialism would have launched its first offensive against Russia. But another appeasement would have cost Britain every continental ally, with the possible exception of France. When Hitler realized that a second Munich was out of the question, he chose the pact with Stalin and the war against Britain first.
But the war against Britain has bogged down. The Channel could not be blitzed. The prospect is a long war. Russian supplies now became imperative for Germany. The economic organization of Russia by German imperialism would solve both its historic objective and its immediate military needs. The long awaited imperialist attack on Russia is taking place.
 
The Hitler-Stalin Pact and Russian Imperialism
For the Kremlin, the pact with Hitler promised two advantages: (a) another chance to escape involvement in the war and (b) the opportunity of sharing in the conquests of German imperialism. But did not the Russian participation in the division of Poland, the conquest of the Baltic states, etc., prove that Russian participation in the war was identical with that of Germany? Superficially it was identical. In both cases armies attacked and occupied territories. But fundamentally is was different.
The imperialism of Russia was of that primitive kind found in embryonic form in every exploiting class and awaiting but the opportunity to become active. Every exploiting class seeks to perpetuate itself against internal and external foes. This requires military and economic strength. An opportunity to increase its military and economic strength is therefore eagerly accepted. Parts of Poland and Finland, Bessarabia and the Baltic states were to be picked up, practically, for a song. The Russian rulers would truly have been altruists had they declined the invitation.
But is this the same as modern finance imperialism with its dictum of “expand or die”? Has anyone yet proven that Russian expansion was forced by internal economic pressures? Has anyone yet explained why Russia took such modest slices of Finnish territory when she could have extracted more if Finnish resources were vital to her? Or why she relinquished the nickel mines? Or why she chose territory that had primarily little economic value?
Russian imperialism has perhaps something in common with Chinese imperialism in Tibet but nothing in common with modern finance imperialism.
 
Stalin’s War Against Finland and Stalin’s War Against Germany
The invasion of Poland and Finland was an attempt by the Kremlin to strengthen its own reactionary rule. Since it made the workers of the occupied countries victims of nationalist illusions and agents of their own national bourgeoisie and through them of world imperialism, the Soviet occupation lowered their revolutionary consciousness and retarded their class development. This constituted a blow at the world revolution. The revolts in the Baltic states have revealed that Stalin had not turned them into fortresses but rather into prisons with inmates who were prepared to mutiny at the first opportunity. This has justified our position that military occupation of buffer territory at the expense of alienating the support of the workers of the world would be a loss, not a gain, to the defensive efforts of the Kremlin. The purposes, the execution, and results of the Soviet occupations were thoroughly reactionary.
Can we, however, say the same for the Kremlin’s attempts to defend Russia against German imperialism?
In the case of the conflict between Germany and the British Empire we are not concerned with who is waging a defensive and who an offensive war. All finance imperialism is, by its very nature, aggressive. If Germany attacked first, it only meant that the solution to her economic problems could not bear as long a postponement as those of Britain and France.
But can we also say that the conflict between Germany and Russia is basically an attempt to re-divide the world. We can say that on Germany’s side it was caused by the pressure of German economy upon the frontiers of Russia. But can we say that it was also caused by the pressure of Russian economy on the frontiers of Germany?
Germany’s attack on Russia is so obviously a predatory imperialist raid against Russian economic resources that no one – no one – has yet tried to attribute it to anything else.
Is the reactionary war against Poland and Finland – undertaken on the initiative of the Kremlin – being repeated in the attempt of the Kremlin to resist German imperialism? The answer is so obviously no that it seems a bit childish to have to deal with the question in these terms.
Russia is participating in this war because the Kremlin is fighting for its life. Further concessions to Hitler would have so lowered its prestige and strength within the country as to make it vulnerable to its internal enemies – either of the right or left. True, it turned down Hitler’s demands and chose to fight because its own neck was at stake. But why did Negrin fight? Why did Haile Sellassie fight? Why does Chiang Kai-shek fight? Stalin can save his own neck only by resisting German imperialism. In doing this his interests coincide with those of the world proletariat. Russia’s defense against Germany is a progressive war.
 
How the Outcome of the Russo-German War Will Effect World Revolution
Victory or defeat for either Germany or the British Empire will offer the proletariat as great or as small a perspective for revolution. The destruction of the British Empire will open up an epoch of colonial revolutions in Asia and Africa which might prove the Achilles’ heel of “victorious” German imperialism. The defeat of Germany will liberate Europe and once more offer the proletariat an opportunity to play its historic role.
What will Hitler’s conquest of Russia offer the world proletariat? The only answer that might be given – we hope never in our ranks – is that it will destroy Stalinism. This program has long ago been written for “Trotskyism” – not by revolutionists but by the GPU and Stalin’s pen prostitutes. The destruction of the Stalin regime by the Russian proletariat would of course mean the destruction of Stalinism everywhere. The destruction of the Stalin regime by Hitler would – aside from its other reactionary consequences – forever prevent history from putting the Stalinist lies about the Soviet “paradise” to the test. The Stalinist dupes would not become revolutionists because Hitler destroyed Stalinism. They would carry their illusions about the Soviet Union to the grave.
The effect of an imperialist conquest of Russia was very ably described by Max Shachtman in the December 1940 issue of The New International:
“The aim of imperialism in that case, whether it were represented in the war by one or many powers, would be to solve the crisis of world capitalism (and thus prolong the agony of the proletariat) at the cost of reducing the Soviet Union to one or more colonial possessions or spheres of interest. Even though prostrated by the victors in the last war, Germany remained a capitalist country, whose social regime the Allies did their utmost to maintain against the revolutionary proletariat. In the present war, we find victorious Germany not only not undertaking any fundamental economic changes in the conquered territories but preserving the capitalist system by force of arms against the unrest and revolutionism of the proletariat. There is no reason to believe that victorious imperialism in the Soviet Union would leave its nationalized property intact – quite the contrary. As Germany now seeks to do with France, imperialism would seek to destroy all the progress made in the Soviet Union by reducing it to a somewhat more advanced India – a village continent. In these considerations, too, the historical significance of the new, collectivist property established by the Russian Revolution again stands out clearly. Such a transformation of the Soviet Union as triumphant imperialism would undertake would have a vastly and durably reactionary effect upon world social development, give capitalism and reaction a new lease on life, retard enormously the revolutionary movement, and postpone for we don’t know how long the introduction of the world socialist society. From this standpoint and under these conditions, the defense of the Soviet Union, even under Stalinism, is both possible and necessary.”
(Comrade Shachtman, however, would defend Russia against the above consequences only in case of a combined imperialist attack in which Russia would have no allies. Why such a combined attack became virtually impossible was dealt with in point 3 of this article.)
But there are those who argue that Hitler is not invading the Soviet Union primarily to destroy the nationalized economy and make it a German colony. His primary concern, they say, is to defeat Great Britain. The Russian campaign is merely (!) a raid to secure the resources with which to continue his main war. True, perhaps. But how absurd when used as an argument to define the character of the war! Hitler, likewise, was not primarily interested in expropriating the German Jews. He only wanted their resources for his war against Britain. True, perhaps, but of little comfort to the Jews.
But what would the effect of a Russian victory be? The possibility of a Russian victory without the support of proletarian revolutions in the West is extremely hypothetical. But we can be sure that news of serious German reverses tomorrow would set the wheels in motion in Britain for an understanding with Germany. Is anyone so hare-brained as to believe that Britain would turn over the task of organizing Central Europe to Stalin?
But if the European revolution breaks out before Hitler has smashed Stalin, will it not fall victim to Stalinism as did the Spanish revolution? Of this we have no guarantee. All we can say is that with the rise of the revolutionary current, the revolutionary Marxists can again swim with the stream and seek to win it for their program. We can ask for no more.
 
Stalin’s Relations with Anglo-American Imperialism
“War is a continuation of politics by other means” has long been accepted as a guide-rule by Marxists. But progressive politics in time of a general imperialist war often become inseparable from one of the imperialist camps and, thereby, lose their progressive character.
In the last war the struggle of the Arabs against the Turkish Empire became merged with the reactionary struggle of British imperialism to control the Near Eeast. The struggle of Serbia for national unity and independence became merged with the struggle of Russia to break up the Austro-Hungarian Empire and control the Balkans. The struggle of Belgium to maintain its national independence became merged with the struggle of Anglo-French imperialism to control the continent. China was ordered by the Allied imperialists to declare war on Germany. The nationalist revolutionary movement of the Czechs was enlisted by the Allies against Germany. The fighting organizations of the Polish nationalists were enrolled by the Central Powers.
The Irish revolutionary movement entered into military relations with the Germans. Submarines landed arms on the Irish coast and conveyed information between Ireland and Germany. But revolutionary Marxists hailed and supported the uprising of the Irish nationalists against British rule in 1916.
These examples illustrate the fact that the mere alliance with a reactionary force for military reasons does not affect the progressive nature of a struggle. What is important is the extent to which the progressive side in the war can maintain its independence.
Had the Ethiopians risen in revolt against Italian rule at the outbreak of the war and accepted British arms, would this have changed the revolutionary content of their struggle? The fact that they arose at a time when Italy was occupied in a war with Britain would have attested to their perspicacity but would not have changed the character of their struggle. But their current r61e as auxiliaries of the British army in conquering Ethiopia for British imperialism has no progressive content whatsoever.
Chiang Kai-shek has long been acting as an ally of British and American imperialism in China. American imperialism has already given him mote financial, material and diplomatic support than it will ever give Russia. American engineers, military advisers, aviators and other specialists have long been part of the Chinese forces. Roosevelt seeks volunteers for China’s army by offering to accept service there as equivalent to service in America’s own army and therefore releases them from the draft obligation. Has this changed the character of China’s war? No. Will an American declaration of war against Japan alter the situation? It might. We would have to wait and see. Naval struggles in the Pacific between Japan and America and military operations on the Philippines would not affect the character of the war. Even a few regiments of marines joining the Chinese forces would not necessarily change the character of China’s war. Those who would become defeatists in China at such a time would, in effect, be punishing China for remaining at war with Japan while the latter was being attacked by a third power. Was the American Revolution any the less historically progressive because it was accomplished with the aid of Louis XIV’s army and navy?
If, however, the Chiang Kai-shek government were reduced to a mere facade for American imperialism, the character of its war would obviously change. Its outcome would only determine whether Japanese or American imperialism would exploit China. The world proletariat has no interest in this question. It rejects both imperialisms.
The argument that Russia takes part in the war in a reactionary manner because she is allied to Anglo-American imperialism becomes at first incomprehensible and then ludicrous. She has merely “switched sides” is the argument. That she has “switched sides” is incontestable. But this would only have validity if we had been defeatists during the Finnish war on grounds that Russia was allied to Germany. This was not the case. We were defeatists because the alliance with Germany had a reactionary purpose, the conquest of new territory by the Kremlin. Is this the purpose – today – of the alliance with Anglo-American imperialism? How utterly absurd! What the Kremlin may do tomorrow we will leave until tomorrow. No one has yet asked us to be defeatists in China on the ground that Chiang Kai-shek has designs upon Japan which he will realize after crushing the Japanese army. The argument that the alliance with Anglo-American imperialism makes Russia’s war reactionary is nothing but the other side of the coin from the Stalinist argument that the same alliance makes the war of Anglo-American imperialism progressive.
Those who hold that it is possible for Russia to fight a progressive war against imperialist encroachment upon her territory and who refuse to be for Russian defense today can only do so on one basis – that Stalin has already become a mere facade for the Anglo-American imperialists and turned the country over to them. That this might take place is improbable but not impossible. In that event it will be immaterial whether Russia becomes a colony of German or of Anglo-American imperialism. But since when do we base our strategy of today on the possibility of tomorrow?
Stalin’s alliance with Anglo-American imperialism today does not give the latter one-tenth as much entrée to Russia as the Anglo-American alliance with China gives it entrée to the latter country. To be consistent, those who hold that Russia is fighting a reactionary war by virtue of her alliance must certainly say the same for China.
 
The Lines of Defeatism and Defensism Tested in Action
An attitude toward the character of a war must be based on the fundamental factors – strategy of the world revolution, nature of imperialism, character of Russian economy, etc. But the position based on these considerations must also coincide with the obvious tactics of the revolutionary struggle. If they do not, something is wrong with the position. It was in this test that the line of Trotsky on the Polish and Finnish events bogged down worst. It bogged down so badly that a Finnish civil war had to be discovered to bolster it.
The revolutionary defeatist in Russia today must tell the workers to continue the class struggle without regard for its effect on the military front against Germany. This could only be justified with the argument that a German conquest of Russia is no different for the world proletariat than a German conquest of France. The quotation from Shachtman has already pointed out the significant difference. Or the defeatists would have to become preposterous and tell the Russian worker that the country was already in the hands of imperialism – Anglo-American imperialism – and that resistance to German imperialism is only in the interest of Wall Street and London investments.
(Or would the defeatist tell the Russian worker that there are only three camps in this war – two imperialist camps and the revolutionary camp, and that Russia is part of one of the imperialist camps? If it is the slogan of the Third Camp that has led our defeatist astray then the motion of Comrade Coolidge of a year ago to expunge all reference to the Third Camp from our documents was absolutely correct. The “Third Camp” as an agitational slogan was very much in order. But the “Third Camp” in the sense of military line-ups which precludes the possibility of a military alliance between a progressive and a reactionary force – this is a snare and a delusion. The sooner Marxist education roots it out of our movement, the sooner will the damage be undone.)
Basing himself upon this line, the defeatist would seek to institute a mass movement against the Kremlin on the demand that it cease its imperialist war against Germany – the slogan of “peace” in time of war is very revolutionary. But what would our movement say tomorrow if Stalin made peace – which could only take place on Hitler’s terms? We would denounce him as a capitulator and traitor. Why? We did not do it when he made peace with Finland. As true defeatists, we welcomed the latter. Would we welcome peace with German imperialism?
Would the defeatist ever be able to explain to a Russian worker why he should take the manufacture and transport of supplies to China into account when waging the struggle against Stalin but not the needs of the Russian front against Germany? How explain to the Russian worker that the conquest of China by Japan is of direct consequence to him, but the conquest of Russia by Germany does not matter sufficiently to require defensive efforts?
The program of the Russian revolutionary defensist would be along the following lines:

No political support to the Stalin regime. Only a democratically constituted workers’ regime can victoriously defend the Soviet Union. Continue the struggle for the overthrow of the bureaucratic exploiters as the first step in the organization of defense against German imperialism. On guard against attempts of the Kremlin to capitulate to Hitler.
 
“War at the front – revolution in the rear!” Support to all mass movements against the Kremlin, on a defensist basis, i.e., choice of those weapons of struggle that will not weaken the front.
 
Workers’ control of production – increase the output for military defense – decrease the salaries of managers and directors to specified maximums.
 
Election of committees in the shops, villages and armed forces as first step toward reconstituting Soviets. Freedom of press, speech and organization. Dissolution of the GPU and creation of workers’ vigilance committees. Release of all political prisoners held for revolutionary activity against the Stalin regime.
 
For a free and independent Soviet Ukraine! For self-determination for all national minorities oppressed by the Kremlin regime.

In America this policy calls for:

Revolutionary struggle against American imperialism and independent working class defense of Russia and China. No support of Roosevelt or Churchill. No cooperation with government “aid” to China or Russia.
 
Struggle against attempts of Anglo-American imperialism to utilize military aid as means of economic penetration in Russia and China.
 
Struggle against war aims of American imperialism.
 
Fight efforts of Stalinists to stop class struggle in interest of “national unity.”
 
For strike action against shipments to Japan – facilitate movement of goods to Russia and China.

July 6, 1941
 



The position of the Political Committee on the Russo-German war is a grave theoretical blunder. Attempts on the part of those who do NOT consider Russia a capitalist state to justify a policy of defeatism will do incalculable harm to the Marxist principles of our movement – certainly as much harm as those who make no distinction between Russian collectivism and capitalism. While its immediate consequences will not be catastrophic – in the sense of immediately driving our activity from its revolutionary rails – its eventual effect, if not corrected, will destroy the theoretical foundations of our movement.
If Russia is a state that has been closed to finance imperialism and if a German victory will turn it into an economic colony of German imperialism, and if defeatism can be justified only by Russia’s military relations with Anglo-American imperialism, then an entirely new concept of the strategy of the world revolution, as related to the struggle against imperialism will have to be developed. Already a local supporter of the PC is questioning the validity of further defensism in China. The inconsistency of defensism in China and defeatism in Russia will also prove too much for the PC. I can only hope that it is the stand on Russia that will be reversed.
The contradiction between the view that an imperialist conquest of Russia will mean a new lease on life for imperialism, on the one hand, and defeatism in the present war on the other, will drive more and more people to seek refuge in the theory that Russia is a capitalist state in the last stages of decay – i.e., fascist. Though its premise is false, its conclusions, at least, coincide.
The position of Shachtman is in every sense as untenable as the position of Trotsky when he denounced the invasion of Finland as a “blow at the world revolution” but called the war progressive.
I have submitted a lengthy exposition of my arguments for a revolutionary defensist policy for publication in The New International. I ask that every serious comrade thoroughly examine the new developments and realize all their implications before taking a definite position.
 

