 T. Farrell: The Pope Needs America (October 1936)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
The Pope Needs America
Vatican Politics and the American Dollar
(October 1936)

From New International, Vol. XII No. 2, February 1946, pp. 43–45.
First published in The Nation, 17 & 24 October 1936.
Copyright owned by The Nation. Reprinted with their permission.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.




The following article by James T. Farrell, well known novelist,
critic and political essayist, first appeared in The Nation
of October 17 and 24, 1936. We reprint it with the author’s
permission. Its subject matter assumes real contemporary
significance in the light of the recent appointment of four
American Cardinals as part of the Vatican’s adjustment to the
new post-war world relationships, above all, the dominant role
played by American imperialism. – Editors



I
The aged Pope recently appeared before 400 exiled Spanish
refugees, spoke solicitously of the mystical Body of Christ and the
ills and sorrows of war-torn Spain, and called benignly for a
world-wide anti-red crusade in the spirit of Christian tolerance and
charity. It was a scene rich in irony, but the Catholic press was too
concerned with heralding the words of the Pontiff to catch the note
of irony. The Jesuit weekly America drew a touching contrast
between the Holy Father forgiving Communists who are raping Mother
Church in Spain, and Joseph Stalin brewing new vials of hatred in the
Kremlin. Stalin’s adherents make him out to be infallible; the
church attributes to him other characteristics of the early popes,
one of whom wrote in the eighth century: “Do not the Franks know
that all children of the Lombards are lepers? ... May they broil with
the devil and his angels in everlasting fire!”
The Roman Catholic church has been built and defended not only
with prayers and the will of the Almighty, but also by means of blood
and the sword. Neither the Holy Ghost nor Saint Peter ever
contributed as effectively to the defense of the papacy as did, say,
the Frankish King Pepin and his great son Charlemagne, who restored
the weak Pope Leo III by force of arms. Down through the ages the
Roman Catholic church has balanced prayers with the rack,
canonization with the might of the sword, the power of wealth and
oppression with appeals to the dreams and ignorance of the masses. It
has, by the variety of its instruments, weathered the storms of
centuries. Revolutions have come and gone, but Mother Church has
remained the pillar of Christendom. In Spain today she stands with
gun in hand defending churches which have been turned into arsenals.
Her priests lay down their weapons to grant absolution to those who
are about to be massacred by rebels wearing the badge of Mary on
their sleeve and by those great defenders of Christianity, order and
authority – Mohammedan Moors. And the Vicar of Christ gently
restrains them, forgives the “reds,” and tacitly gives his
benediction to the slaughter. The American Catholic press backs up
the rebels. Thus America recently commented: “With such an
enemy [communism] there can be no compromise; the Americans with
liberal ideals will join the Bishops of Pamplona and Vittoria in
calling down a blessing ‘on those who at the moment are sacrificing
themselves for religion and country’.” And when Michael Williams
rather mildly dissented from this kind of rabidness in a recent issue
of the liberal Catholic weekly, the Commonweal, a priest took
the trouble to write in to correct him.
 
Church Investments
The Catholic church in America has never been more alert, more
militant. more on the offensive than it is at present. E. Boyd
Barrett, an ex-Jesuit, has written in the opening pages of his
excellent and well-documented book, Rome Stoops to Conquer:
“From an insignificant group of 25,000 adherents,
shepherded by thirty poor priests, in 1789, the Catholic church in
America has grown to be a congregation of 20,000,000 led by 30,000
priests. From being propertyless, she has become a rich institution,
whose wealth exceeds two billion dollars. From being a despised and
scattered flock, she has become the most perfectly organized body in
the world, enjoying immense influence and power.”
In an article in the American Spectator (January 1936)
entitled The Finances of the Catholic Church, Ferdinand
Lundberg furnished detailed and illuminating corroboration of
Barrett’s statements. Quoting from the New York State banking
records and “selecting items at random from the portfolio of the
church’s investments,” he presented a half-page list of the
corporations in which the church has invested its funds – Pure Oil,
Commonwealth Edison, Goodyear Tire & Rubber, Baltimore &
Ohio, and so on. The list is a directory of the industrial United States.
Many commentators have mistakenly appraised religion in terms of
individual piety, the attendance records at church services, and the
like. They have failed to realize that religion is an institution and
that it must be studied in terms of its influence as such. Among
religious institutions the Roman Catholic church is the richest, the
most solidly organized, the most cohesive. The strength of its
organization gives it a position in our society which no other church
possesses and makes it potentially a threat to progressive forces,
despite the fact that piety in American life is on the decline, that
many individual Catholics disregard the church’s doctrines on birth
control, and that many of the enrolled twenty million Catholics do
not partake of the sacrament regularly. Also, its organization is
strictly authoritarian and anti-democratic.
These facts are interesting, particularly at a time when Mother
Church has again come forth as the Church militant, flying the banner
of Catholic action. The center of its offensive under the leadership
of the Pope is, and must be, America. America is the citadel of world
capitalism. Christendom is one of the spiritual bodyguards of world
capitalism. Protestant Christianity was, of course, a reflex of the
rise of world capitalism. It furnished the religious ethics which
served as part of the rationalized explanation of the aims and ideals
of the rising middle class. The connection between the rise of
capitalism and the Reformation is close. In due time Mother Church
swung into line. Part and parcel of medievalism, dependent for her
strength upon her land holdings in the Middle Ages, she shifted her
emphasis and adapted herself to the new capitalist world economy.
Today the church remains the rock of Christianity even though it does
not possess the sweeping power which it once held, even though a
Hitler does not come crawling to Canossa. It is only logical that
Roman Catholicism should seek to conquer in America. The death of
capitalism will be the death of Mother Church. She will then be
divorced from Caesar, and forced to practice her platitude of
rendering unto Caesar his due, and giving unto God His due. The
church will become a purely religious organization. Its power will be
founded on prayer, superstition, and its ability to sell the promised
joys of the kingdom of heaven. Its economic basis will be shattered.
And no institution whose economic base has crumbled can survive as a
social force.
Rome has lost other countries. It is now faced with the loss of
Spain. Whoever wins in Spain, the church will emerge with lessened
power. Fascism will reduce it to the position of a subsidiary ally.
In order to retain its position, it must conquer America to
compensate for its losses in other parts of the globe. Today a
considerable proportion of the income of the church comes from this
country. If the annual American contribution to Peter’s Pence were
subtracted from the income of the Vatican, that income would be
shrunken indeed.
 
Attitude Toward Fascism
For financial and other reasons the Roman Catholic church does not
prefer fascism, despite its alliance with Mussolini. Monarchism,
Bonapartism or capitalistic democracy is better suited to its
intentions. Fascism is an expensive venture for the church, just as
it is for capitalism. Fascism is a desperate attempt on the part of
capitalism to save itself by hiring political Capones. These
gangsters must be paid. Capitalists have to fork over some of that
payment. If the church wants to survive, it also must contribute.
Before Mussolini signed a concordat with the Vatican, the Black
Shirts destroyed and outlawed Don Sturzo’s Catholic Party, and they
attacked the Catholic labor organizations as viciously as they
attacked the socialist trade unions. Even after the concordat,
official attacks upon Catholic Action brought forth a papal
encyclical in which the Pope complained of attacks on the youth of
Catholic Action and protested repeatedly that Catholic Action was
non-political. The experience of the Catholic church in fascist
Germany is similar. Thus the church repeats its own history. It
opposed the rise of capitalism and the bourgeoisie. It aligned itself
with the aristocracy in the period of the bourgeois revolutions, and
even down into the nineteenth century the papacy was anti-democratic.
We are now entering a period of new wars and revolutions. The defense
against revolution is fascism. If that defense is successful there
follows a new distribution of power, wealth and executive control, in
which Rome does not propose but must accept terms. In order to
survive, Rome must compromise and pay. For that reason the church
does not prefer fascism.
In America there is no strong likelihood of fascism in the
immediate future. American capitalism has not yet been forced to draw
upon its reserves. The American working class has not yet become a
direct revolutionary threat to capitalism. The American form of
government as an instrument of capitalist state power has not yet
broken down. Now is the strategic time for Rome to offset its losses
in Europe by gains in the United States – before fascism unleashes
all those vile and obnoxious anti-Catholic prejudices which are
smoldering in the Bible belt.
 
II
The instrument with which the church hopes to conquer America is
Catholic Action. The present Pope has defined it as follows:
“Catholic Action is nothing else than the apostolate of the laity
under the leadership of the bishops.” Michael Williams in The
Catholic Church in Action states that “primarily, Catholic
Action ... may be described as both the intensification and the more
highly organized collective direction of the apostolic mission of the
church to the world, built upon the ‘participation of the laity in
the apostolate of the hierarchy’.” E. Boyd Barrett defines it thus:
Catholic Action is best described as the new phase of
Catholicism ... In theory, Catholic Action is the work and service of
lay Catholics in the cause of religion, under the guidance of the
bishops. In practice it is the Catholic group fighting their way to
control America ... In medieval times the church gained supremacy in
various countries through her influence over nobles and soldiers.
Today she aims at the old supremacy by mass action of her organized
subjects and by systematic penetration of various groupings.
Barrett’s description of Catholic Action is a satisfactory one
if we apply two corrections. In his reference to medieval times he
neglects to indicate the economic basis of the church’s supremacy,
namely, its vast land holdings. Secondly, he speaks of the aim of the
Catholic church – to regain its quondam supremacy – as if this
aim were achievable in the present era. The church cannot turn back
the clock of history, the late Gilbert K. Chesterton and Hilaire
Belloc to the contrary notwithstanding. It can only defend itself by
becoming a staunch ally of capitalism, whether the latter takes the
form of bourgeois democracy or fascism.
 
The Apparatus
In America, then, Catholic Action is working systematically to
permeate the life of all Catholics. Christ instructed his apostles to
go forth and teach all nations. The Catholic laity is ostensibly
organized for a crusade to intensify Catholicism, to further the
spiritual and material aims of the church. For this purpose the
church has its Knights of Columbus, Holy Name societies, Catholic
alumni organizations, Catholic Youth Clubs, Newman clubs in the
universities, guilds for doctors, writers, actors, and nurses. It has
a powerful formal and informal apparatus of education, and it even
fights bitterly to force the appropriation of public funds for the
assistance of private – read Catholic – institutions. Through
such papers as the Catholic Worker, which offers saints and radical
phrases to the proletariat, it bids for stronger support from the
worker. Its journals now reflect plans for the conversion of the
Negro, whom it has long neglected, in order to neutralize his radical
and revolutionary potentialities. The church commands a fighting
press, manned by militant mediocrities of the type of Michaeldiv
Williams and Father Talbott, S.J. It has organized the Legion of
Decency with ten million members – and this organization is able to
dictate to supine producers in Hollywood what the American public,
including its millions of non-Catholics, shall see in motion-picture
theaters. It lobbies against child-labor laws on the theory that such
laws would give the state control over the child, who, according to
the will of God and natural law, belongs to the Deity, the parent,
and the parish priest. It attacks the dissemination of birth-control
information. In some of its organs, notably America, we occasionally
find expressions of anti-Semitism which might well have emanated from
Nazi Germany. Likewise the Catholic press conducts a consistent and
continuous red-baiting campaign, which is supplemented with speeches
by prominent Catholic laymen and clergymen. This theme dominated the
recent convention of the Holy Name Society in New York City. The
alumni of Notre Dame University are now planning to add bolshevik
hunts to college cheer-leading as an occupation for adults who have
never fully grown up. Meanwhile the church demands of President
Roosevelt that he interfere in the internal affairs of Mexico. In a
recent issue of America one Thomas S. Hunter writes:
“The Mexican issue is not a Catholic issue, it is not a
politico-religious issue; it is a fundamental issue in which our own
essential liberties are involved. If freemen, irrespective of creed
and color, fail to respond to Rome’s appeal, Mexico will perish,
and we who have stood by impassive and watched her agony, will we escape?”
Here is an open call for intervention. But where was Rome’s
appeal to “freemen” to halt Mussolini’s invasion of Christian
Ethiopia? What effective policies did Rome introduce to achieve
liberty and social justice in Spain? What did the church ever do to
alleviate the abject poverty and complete illiteracy of the Mexican peons?
Since this is the formal role which Mother Church is playing and
seeking to play in America today, it is pertinent to summarize her
apologetics. I have already suggested the biblical justification of
Catholic Action, the command to the apostles to go forth and teach
all men and all nations. Further, the church contends that since the
disruption of the feudal and medieval era materialism has been
growing in the world. Today neopaganism has gained such a foothold
that it threatens civilization unless the spiritual forces of
Christendom, guided by the firm hand of the Pope and led by the
church, organize to stem the tide. Today the world suffers grievously
from the heresy of materialism, which generates a false science. This
causes class war, irreverence for authority and order, and
immorality. And further, materialism as a heresy has become organized
in the movement known as communism, which operates from Moscow, the
red Rome. Communism persecutes religion and gloats over the murder of
priests and nuns. It promotes atheism and class war; it threatens to
destroy liberty and disrupt the family. Coeval with its threat to the
family is its attack on private property. Private property is an
institution justified by natural law. Its defense was framed in the
writings of Saint Thomas Aquinas. Evil does not flow from the
institution of private property or from the profit system which is
constructed upon it, but is the result of the failure of those who
own private property to make the right use of it. Thus the solution
of the economic problems of the world is not socialism, which places
the ownership of the means of production in the hands of the
proletarian state. Rather, it lies in the employer’s acceptance of
a moral obligation to give his employees a just and fair wage.
 
Catholicism and Democracy
In America the church now insists that it accepts democracy and
asserts that the Constitution of the United States must be defended.
And who is to be its defender? That 100 per cent American
institution, the Roman Catholic church, whose Pope lives in the
Vatican and is always Italian and whose College of Cardinals is also
preponderantly Italian. The entire structure of the church is
anti-democratic. Its theology is dogmatic. It permits no error, no
deviation in conduct, and it carries its dogmatic control to the
extent of maintaining a papal Index of Books. The church insists that
it accepts the principle of the separation of church and state. The
Dogma of Papal Infallibility, which was log-rolled into acceptance in
the last century over the arguments and protests of the more
intelligent Catholics, gives the Pope final authority on matters of
faith and morals, and it holds that on such matters the Pope cannot
err when he speaks ex cathedra. The only catch is the fact
that faith and morals manage to become intermingled with political
and economic questions. While the church professes belief in the
separation of church and state and in liberty of conscience, it
insidiously attempts to eat up the state and organize conscience
within the framework of an unrelenting set of dogmas. The democratic
pretensions of the church are a front and a heresy. They will be used
as long as they are needed, and when they become cumbersome, they
will be Jesuitically refined, refashioned, and placed on file in the
Vatican until they are again needed.
In its appeal to proletarians, many of whom are nominally or
actually its religious subjects, the church is beginning to assume
pseudo-radicalism. Up to now Father Coughlin has served well on this
front. His doctrines of social justice are indubitably modeled upon
the famous encyclicals of Pope Leo XIII and Pius XI. However, Father
Coughlin is an out-and-out, acknowledged fascist, and in his paper,
Social Justice, he is even now beginning to speak favorably of
the new Germany. A Catholic priest as a fascist leader in a
preponderantly Protestant country is too much for the Vatican. But
Father Coughlin has expressed the ideas and sentiments of the famous
“red paragraphs” of the encyclicals issued by the present
Pontiff. To quote Pius XI, “The immense number of propertyless
wage-earners on the one hand and the superabundant riches of the
fortunate few on the other are an unanswerable argument that earthly
goods so abundantly produced in this age of industrialism are far
from rightly distributed and equitably shared among various classes
of men.” Hence there is a need of social justice. The laborer must
be worthy of his hire. The rich must not abuse their gifts and goods.
“Every effort must be made that at least in the future
a just share only of the fruits of production be permitted to
accumulate in the hands of the wealthy and that an ample sufficiency
be supplied to the workingman ... Entirely false is the principle
widely propagated today that the worth of labor and therefore the
equitable return to be made fur it should equal the worth of its net
result. Thus the right to the full product of his toil is claimed for
the wage-earner. How erroneous this is appears from what we have
written above concerning capital and labor.”
This last is obviously an attack on Marxism.
As Adam Smith has said, there is a lot of ruin in any system.
There remains a lot of ruin in American capitalism. There remains a
lot of ruin in world capitalism. The policy of the Catholic church is
to intrench itself in that ruin. In a world on fire the policy of the
church is to ally itself both with God and with those who have
economic power. The church must retain its income from America. And
it must remain on good terms with American capitalism. The Holy
System of Profits and the Holy Ghost are lining up side by side to
save what privileges they can in an era of worldwide decay.



 


James T. Farrell
October 1936



 

 T. Farrell: Aid the 18 Class-War Prisoners and Their Families (February 1944)





James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
Aid the Eighteen Class-War Prisoners
and Their Families
(February 1944)
 
From Fourth International, Vol. 5 No. 2, February 1944, p. 32.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.
 
Fourth International
116 University Place
New York 3, N.Y.
Dear Editors:
You have written editorials in your magazine upon the unjust imprisonment of the 18 leaders and members of the Socialist Workers Party and of Local 544-CIO Truckdrivers Union, who are now behind bars in three Federal penitentiaries.
These 18 Minneapolis Case prisoners were tried and convicted under the Smith “Gag” Act, not for anything they did, but for their socialist ideas and opinions. Three times the US Supreme Court refused to review the case which would have tested for the first time the constitutionality of this viciously anti-labor act. Thus by these imprisonments, people can now be deprived of their freedom to think and speak – in defiance of our guarantees under the Bill of Rights.
You can help our Committee, which is the authorized representative of the 18. We need funds to carry on our national campaign to secure pardon for the 18 and to fight for the repeal of the Smith “Gag” Law. We also need funds to provide relief for the wives and children of the 18 prisoners while they are incarcerated. In some of the families there are babies and children of school age who need food, clothing, medical care.
You can help us by asking your readers to aid in this important campaign by contributing to the Minneapolis Prisoners Pardon & Relief Fund. Checks should be sent to the Civil Rights Defense Committee, 160 Fifth Avenue, New York 10, N.Y.
(Signed)

James T. Farrell
Chairman
 







James T. Farrell, noted novelist, who is chairman of the Civil Rights Defense Committee, discussed, on Radio Station WEVD on April 15 the Case of the eighteen Trotskyists and leaders of the Minneapolis Truckdrivers Union, Local 544-CIO, who are now serving federal prison sentences under the Smith “Gag” Act which makes the expression of opinion alone a crime, in an address entitled Free Speech and Labor’s Rights. Excerpts from the speech follow:





Practically all sections of the labor and liberal movement in this country have expressed alarm over the mounting tide of reaction. Today this threat is not distant; it is immediate. And inevitably, the major purpose of reaction is that of destroying the independence of the labor movement, and thereby of being free to forge new chains for the workers. In order to achieve this, it is necessary to abrogate civil liberties, and most especially the precious right of freedom of speech.
 
Freedom of Speech Abrogated
Freedom of speech and freedom of labor are integral. That is why the fascist dictatorships of Europe, when they achieved, power, immediately crushed the labor unions and imposed rigid censorships. And in, the last few years there have been a whole series of attacks both on the labor movement and on the Bill of Rights. Congress, largely under the inspiration of poll-tax legislators, has passed the vicious Smith “Gag” Act and the Smith-Connally anti-strike bill. The Smith “Gag” Act, a peacetime sedition law, is in flagrant contradiction with that provision of the Bill of Rights which state unconditionally that Congress shall pass no law abridging freedom of speech. According to this law, freedom of speech has not merely been temporarily suspended in the name of an emergency; it has, in essence, been abrogated. As a result of this law, it is possible for American citizens to be convicted and jailed, merely for the expression of opinion. In fact, this has happened as we will see in a few moments.
The passage of this act was opposed by both the AFL and the CIO. Speaking against it, Representative Geyer of California declared: “This bill is an attempt to put an end to real democracy. It is an attempt to break the labor movement.” Representative Martin of Colorado said: “It is enough to make Thomas Jefferson turn over in his grave. It is without precedent in the history of labor legislation. It is an invention of intolerance contrary to every principle of democracy.” After it was passed, the American Civil Liberties Union pleaded with President Roosevelt to veto it, charging that it violated the Bill of Rights.
Unfortunately for the cause of free speech, the prediction of the American Civil Liberties Union was fulfilled. As a result of a trade union conflict between Minneapolis trade unionists, who were also members of the Socialist Workers Party, and Daniel J. Tobin, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, the Minneapolis labor case has become an item in the history of free speech and of the American trade union movement The Minneapolis leaders opposed Daniel J. Tobin’s attempts to impose his authority over their local. Then, after a democratic and almost unanimous vote of nearly 4,000 members of their local, they disaffiliated from the AFL and joined the CIO. Daniel J. Tobin made representations to President. These were not ignored, for the New York Times of June 14, 1941, tells us that Stephen Early, secretary of President Roosevelt, told the press: “When I advised the President of Tobin’s representations this morning, he asked me immediately to have the government departments and agencies interested in this matter notified.”
Significantly enough, the government department which seemed most interested in this matter was the one which is described by the word – Justice! Shortly after Mr. Early made this statement, agents of the Department of Justice raided the headquarters of the Socialist Workers Party and also of the newly formed Motor Transport & Allied Workers Industrial Union, Local 544-CIO.
 
What Constitutes “Conspiracy”
The government indicted twenty-nine persons, charging them with a conspiracy to commit acts to overthrow the government, and with the expression of opinion for the same purposes. The first of these charges was based upon an antiquated. Civil War law, directed against supporters of the slave owners’ rebellion. The second was based on the Smith ‘Gag’ Act. Concerning the political motivation of this prosecution, the American Civil Liberties Union has stated: “It seems reasonable to conclude that the government interjected itself into an inter-union controversy in order to promote the interests of the one side which supported the administration’s foreign and domestic policies.”
In the government prosecution of this case, one of its attorneys, Victor A. Anderson, argued that in order to gain a conviction it was not necessary to prove that the defendants had committed overt acts: mere expression of opinion was enough. Thereby, this case was raised to the level of becoming an important constitutional trial concerning freedom of speech. In passing, one of the proofs presented by the prosecution was The Communist Manifesto, written in 1848 by Karl Marx.
The jury threw the first charge out of court and convicted eighteen of the defendants on the second count. The conviction was sustained in the Circuit Court and then carried to the U.S. Supreme Court. The U.S. Supreme Court three times refused even to hear the appeal on this case, despite the fact that it was the first one which tested the constitutionality of the Smith Act. With this action of the highest court in the land, the case is just about closed as far as the government is concerned. As a final action, evidence in the case, such as the seized literature written by Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky, was burned.
However, for the labor and liberal movements, this case cannot be closed.
 
The History of Fascism
The history of fascism teaches us that the first attacks made by reaction are against the labor movement, and usually against its extreme left wing. This has happened in the Minneapolis Case. Further, the force of law and the police power has now been substituted for the use of reason, persuasion, argument, in the case of those who defend the historic ideas of Marxian socialism. It should be clear that this kind of an attack against socialist ideas, this jailing of socialist leaders, can only help pave the way that makes it so much the easier for fascism. This kind of governmental action further has the effect of making men fearful, of helping further to spread that paralysis of will, of morale, of intellect which is already much too apparent in the present period of history.
When the penalty of open thinking is a cell in jail, fewer men will dare to think. Under such conditions, political argument is made more and more the province of those who are unprincipled, who are dishonest and unscrupulous. For such men have no need to try and tell the truth: they have no need to state what is their real conviction. They can, thereby, evade all such laws as these. But those whose political actions are principled cannot take this course. They must either be silent, or risk punishment. This is one of the most significant ways in which laws such as the Smith Act, and prosecutions such as the Minneapolis Case destroy the very moral fiber of men.
The eighteen defendants in this case refused to sacrifice their views and convictions, even at the price of their freedom. If those of us who are outside of prisons do not continue our struggle in their defense it is not at all impossible that they will have company in their confinement.
In the Lincoln-Douglas debates, Abraham Lincoln, remarked: “The fight must go on. The cause of civil liberty must not be surrendered at the end of one or even one hundred defeats.” Tonight I wish to reaffirm this sentiment. The Minneapolis Case has become the major focus in the fight for civil liberties in America.
The Civil Rights Defense Committee, authorized representative of the eighteen Minneapolis victims, is now conducting a campaign to appeal to the President for pardon. It is asking the entire labor and liberal movement to support it in this campaign by signing its petitions for a pardon and by writing directly to President Roosevelt, asking that this pardon be granted. The defense of the Minneapolis victims is, in itself, an attack on the Smith ‘Gag’ Act. And this law remains hanging over the head of labor like the pendulum over the head of the victim in Edgar Allen Poe’s story. The defense of labor’s rights, the defense of free speech, the defense of all of us against the danger of fascism, require that this pendulum be put into a museum.
 




This Christmas Help Labor’s Prisoners!
Dear Friend:
Twelve members of Minneapolis Truckdrivers Local 544-CIO and of the Socialist Workers Party have been in prison now for over ten months, solely because of their labor activities and political opinions. Six others were released on October 20.
The imprisonment of these eighteen under the vicious Smith “gag” law makes the Minneapolis Labor Case the most important civil liberties issue in recent years. Already over 350 unions and other progressive organizations representing more than 3,500,000 members have supported the work of the Civil Rights Defense Committee.
The Minneapolis Labor Case directly involves you and your democratic rights. Our campaign to free the prisoners and repeal the Smith “gag” act is a campaign to defend the hard-won rights of the entire American people.
Ever since the eighteen went to prison the CRDC has provided relief for their wives and children. Without this aid the families of these persecuted labor leaders would suffer great hardships and privations. Today the high cost of living makes feeding and clothing their unfortunate ones an ever-increasing problem for the committee.
HELP US TO MAKE THEIR CHRISTMAS CHEERFUL!
Please send your contribution to the Civil Rights Defense Committee, 1601 Fifth Avenue, New York.



 


Sincerely yours,







 


JOHN GREEN
President, Industrial Union of Marine
& Shipbuilding Workers, CIO
JULIUS HOCHMAN
General Manager, New York Joint
Board, Dress & Waistmakers Union
ILGWU, AFL
JAMES T. FARRELL
Novelist
JOHN DEWEY
Philosopher and Educator


GEORGE BALDANZI
Executive Vice-President,
Texile Workers Union, CIO
ROGER BALDWIN
Director, American Civil
Liberties Union
WILLARD S. TOWNSEND
President, United Transport
Service Employees, CIO
WARREN K. BILLINGS
Famous Labor Prisoner



 

 T. Farrell: Historical Image of Napoleon - 1 (May 1945)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
Historical Image of Napoleon
The Emperor as Prince of Glory
(May 1945)

From The New International, Vol. XI No. 4, May 1945, pp. 115–119.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





(The following is the first of two articles by James T. Farrell, one of America’s leading novelists and literary critics, on the historical significance of Napoleon, as a product of the French Revolution during its Thermidorean reaction. The articles are really one essay which will appear in a book now in progress evaluating Tolstoy’s epic work, War and Peace. [Copyright, 1945 – James T. Farrell] – Ed.)





Napoleon has frequently been characterized as “the child of the revolution.” And in War and Peace, Tolstoy remarks: “The sum of men’s individual wills produced both the revolution and Napoleon; and only the sum of these wills endured them and then destroyed them.” This sentence embodies one of the major ideas of Tolstoy’s theory of history. On the basis of it, an analysis could be expanded in order to demonstrate how Tolstoy posed the problem of history in his time, and how he failed clearly to meet the conditions which would have permitted an answer more satisfactory than the one he did provide. However, we have dealt with this in another part of this book. Because of the relationship of Tolstoy’s ideas of history to the ideas of the great French Revolution, and more directly, because of the role which Napoleon plays in this novel, it is appropriate here to focus some attention on the revolution, and on Napoleon as its “child.”
“The Revolution had been accomplished in the minds of men long before it was translated into fact,” wrote Mathiez in The French Revolution. This is correct. However, it does not follow from this that first men willed the Revolution and that then, by a combination or addition of their wills, they caused it to happen precisely as they had willed it. Behind the triumph of the ideas of the Revolution – i.e., those of individualism – there were historical needs. The ideas of the Revolution, the actions of unknown sans-culottes on the streets of Paris and of angry and rebellious peasants of the countryside who seized land, burned houses and murdered nobles – all these were in response to human historical needs. Feudal absolutism had become a shell, an empty shell. Intellectually and economically, the French middle class was ready to become master of France. As a class, it was confident, intelligent, determined. The triumph of the ideas of the Revolution prior to the effective change of property relationships carried out in the Revolution signified the ideological defeat of the ideas of feudalism and medievalism. These new ideas had been spreading and gaining in the world for centuries, most emphatically since the Renaissance. Long before 1789 the English had accomplished their bourgeois democratic revolution. The Americans, influenced by the French and the English, had achieved their colonial revolution prior to 1789: they had written their constitution, begun their career of nationhood, and their example was, in turn, a powerful influence in France. The intellectual and historical preparation of the Great French Revolution was thorough, complete.
Ideologically, then, the triumph of the ideas of the Revolution signified the rout of medieval ideology. The medieval idea of the world was that it was the stage on which was played out the drama of the eternal salvation or damnation of the souls of all men and women: this emphasizes an other-wordly ideal. To it, bourgeois ideology opposed an idea of the world as the arena in which man, armed with reason, creates his own free society: its ideal was this-wordly. The medieval idea of society was that of a static, “functional” organism established in the terms of set conceptions of duties, status, prerogatives, and rights, all of which were assumable derivations from God’s natural law. As such, it was a society conceived in terms of the fatherhood of God. The Church was the supervening authority between God and man: Church and State were associated in authority and privilege. And derivable from this conception was that of the divine right of kings. Bourgeois ideology opposed all of these conceptions. To the medieval idea of natural law, it opposed its own idea of natural law based on the nature of man. To the divine right of kings, it counterposed the natural rights of man. To, the idea of a society based on the fatherhood of God, it countered with that of a society established by a social contract. To the Divine Will, it affirmed the Will of Man. The static idea of medieval society was ideologically battered with the idea of progress. Instead of man saving his soul in the next world, bourgeois ideology offered to man the prospect of making his own history in this one. Instead of the authority and will of God then, it emphasized human reason, that “telescope of the intellect” which Pierre Bezuhov, at one point in his career, tried to use as the means of discovering the good life. The triumph of the ideas of the Revolution in the minds of men meant the acceptance of these new ideas.
All revolutions in history are explosive efforts to achieve economic emancipation. These are, to repeat, preconditioned on material and human needs. The great human tides in history which move toward economic emancipation by revolutionary means are tides made up of real human beings, not of abstracted economic men. These movements are dramatic moments in the long and bloody effort of mankind to achieve real individuality. In all real, i.e., progressive, revolutions, man takes a step forwards toward the end of becoming the human individual. The ideas in the heads of men express these hopes, these aims. But these ideas at the same time seem to exist as if in their own right. So it was in the case of the triumph of the ideas of the French Revolution prior to 1789. Further, it is to be remembered that in the realm of ideology, revolutions begin on the theological, the moral, the political plane. Ideologically, the bourgeois democratic revolutions began theologically and morally. From theology, the emphasis shifted to the moral, and then to the political plane. The authority generally appealed to in the English Revolution was theological: formally, the source of this authority was The Bible. In the American Colonial Revolution, and in the French Revolution, the appeal was to reason and human self-interest. The process of the triumph of the ideas of the Revolution in the minds of men was one which involved the secularization of ideas. And this demanded a complete revaluation of human values. These new ideas became weapons of the mind, used as later the guns and the pikes were used in Paris. It was an intellectually well armed French middle class which was prepared to take power in the year 1789. Kautsky, in Ethics and the Materialist Conception of History, wrote:
“The fight of the democratic and rising class against the governing power, independent of the bourgeoisie and subject to the feudal aristocracy with their court nobility and their state church, commenced in England more than a century before France, at a time when only a few had got over the Christian thought. If in France the fight against the state church became a fight between Christianity and atheistic materialism, in England it became only a struggle between special democratic sects and the state-church organized sect.”
The French middle class, ready for the Revolution, was materialistic. The writings of its ideologues had grown into a mounting and pitiless series of attacks which increasingly emphasized this materialism. [1]
“Thus,” as Mathiez wrote, “criticism was working under-ground which long preceded and prepared for the explosion. The opportunity had only to arise, and all this accumulated and stifled rage would lend force to the attacks ... stirred up and directed by a host of malcontents.”
The last days of the Bourbon regime were ones marked by a financial and economic impasse. Feudal absolutism served as an excuse for every form of abuse. A doomed class, with its apparatus, sought to hold onto every privilege which it could no longer really exercise or defend. And at the same time France was a land of flourishing prosperity. The Revolution was preceded by successive crises. Also, waves of popular emotions, peasant rebellions, sacking of factories, cries for bread, shouts of “Vive la liberté” troop mutinies, all this and more dramatically announced the coming Revolution. Arthur Young and other foreigners in France had predicted it. In France there was the most intense ferment. Lawyers, priests, publicists of every kind wrote pamphlets attacking the social system. The idea of a new freedom in the minds of men was alive, active, dynamic. Thus we see that this sum of individual wills, of which Tolstoy spoke, was being not only added up, but added up on a new sheet of paper. In other words, new wills were being forged.
The ideological preparation of the Revolution planted newer, fresher, fuller ideals of freedom in hundreds, thousands, hundreds of thousands of human wills. In his formal theory of history, Tolstoy placed the consciousness of free will in the minds of men. In France, prior to 1789, there grew in that consciousness – the will to be free. Formally, this was expressed in the idea of the nation, the idea of the will of the nation. But all of these ideas were differently interpreted by different individuals and, more importantly, by different social classes! The bourgeoisie and its idealogues controlled the pen. There was no proletariat in the modern sense: there were craftsmen, artisans, the lower middle class and what most historians call the urban “rabble”; and there was the peasantry. But at the head of this movement was the French bourgeoisie. Mathiez, in The French Revolution, also comments:
“The class which was about to take the lead in the Revolution was fully conscious of its strength and its rights. It is not true that it allowed itself to be led astray by an empty ideology: it had a thorough knowledge of realities and possessed the means of adapting its interests to their exigencies.”
 
The King, the Bourgeoisie and the People
Thomas Jefferson was in France during the first days of the French Revolution. On July 19, 1789, he wrote to John Jay, giving an account of some of the first revolutionary events. Prior to July 14th, the excitement in Paris had been intense, feverish: the tense atmosphere which immediately precedes the first elemental eruption of social revolution. The States General was meeting at Versailles. The Parisians, armed with stones, had frightened one hundred German cavalry and two hundred Swiss. The cavalry had retired in fear to Versailles, lest they be massacred. The people armed themselves with what weapons they could get, and they were roaming the streets. And “... the States pressed on the King to send away the troops, to permit the bourgeoisie of Paris to arm for the preservation of order in the city.” A committee of magistrates and electors of the city was formed to take the function of government. The King refused these propositions. The “mob,” joined by soldiers, broke into the St. Lazare prison, released prisoners, got some arms, took a great quantity of corn. “The committee determined to raise forty-eight thousand bourgeois, or rather to restrain their numbers to forty-eight thousand.” The governor of the Invalides told the representatives of this committee that he could not give out arms without orders from above. But the people took arms.
Such is part of the story of the prelude to Bastille Day, as Jefferson described it. And then, in the same letter, Jefferson penned an illuminating account of the return of Louis XVI from Versailles to Paris after the storming of the Bastille. His picture can be divided into two parts.
Here is Part One:
“... the procession ... the King’s carriage was in the centre, on each side of it the States General, in two ranks afoot, and at their head the Marquis de La Fayette, as Commander in Chief, on horseback, and Bourgeois guards before and behind.”
The Bourgeois Revolution marched in procession with pomp, the King in a gilded carriage, but controlled and protected by the representatives of the leading class of the Revolution. The parliamentarians trampled on foot on either side of the King; they were legislators, the representatives of the people, but not men of formal pomp and power. And this procession was protected by the Praetorian Guard (Kropotkin and other historians have quite properly described the Bourgeois National Guard as such) which marched arms in hand. And lest we forget, there was a commander in chief on horse: in fact, we can say that the Marquis de La Fayette here revealed himself in his true historic role, that of the transitional man on horseback of the Bourgeois Revolution.
And now, let us look at Part Two of this picture:
“About sixty thousand citizens of all forms and colors, armed with the muskets of the Bastile and Invalides, as far as they would go, the rest with pistols, swords, pikes, pruning hooks, scythes, etc., lined all the streets through which the procession passed, and, with the crowds of people in the streets, doors and windows, saluted them everywhere with cries of ‘vive la nation’; but not a single ‘vive le roy’ was heard.”
Remembering what Tolstoy said of wills in history, we can here observe that the separate wills had not been properly combined: the process of historical addition had not as yet been made thoroughly. For the two parts of our pictures show us two separate combinations of wills. The picture is uncomposed.
“When a revolution,” Kropotkin said in The Great French Revolution, “has once begun, each event in it not merely sums up the events hitherto accomplished; it also contains the chief elements of what is to come; so that the contemporaries of the French Revolution, if only they could have freed themselves from momentary impressions, and separated the essential from the accidental, might have been able, on the morrow of July 14, to foresee whither events as a whole were thenceforth trending.”
Kropotkin’s observation was made in reference to the consequence of July 14 at Versailles: it relates directly to the scene we have just described.
Let us return to this picture and some salient points of is background. Here is what Kropotkin wrote in his history:
“On the 14th, in proportion as royalty lost its menacing character, it was the people who in a corresponding degree, inspired terror in the ... Third Estate ... The King had only to present himself before the Assembly, recognize the authority of the delegates, and promise them inviolability, for the whole of the representatives to burst into applause and transports of joy. They even ran out to form a guard of honor round him in the streets, and made the streets of Versailles resound with cries of ‘Vive le roi.’ And this at the very moment when the people were being massacred in Paris in the name of the same King ... The middle class revolutionaries, of whom very many belonged to the Freemasons, made an ‘arch of steel’ with their swords for the King on his arrival at the Hotel de Ville.”
Let us now note what Jefferson wrote of the King’s arrival at the Hotel de Ville.
“The King stopped at the Hotel de Ville. There Monsieur Bailly presented and put into his hat the popular cockade, and addressed him. The King being unprepared and unable to answer, Bailly went to him, gathered from him some scraps of sentences, and made out an answer, which he delivered to the audience as from the King.”
Superficial observation would have suggested that at this moment the French Revolution had been achieved. Jefferson, who was very close to La Fayette, thought so. It was his interpretation that with this scene, the Revolution had been tranquilized and that the future would then be a mere matter of the countryside catching up with Paris in order that there be orderly progress and freedom in France. And the bourgeois hoped that tranquility had been gained. But these wills had not really been composed. This picture has not, as yet, been really put together. There were still those thousands in the streets, the armed masses which composed the most revolutionary class of the eighteenth century and who had entered the arena of politics. And there were thousands and thousands more of them in town and country. Concerning them, Mathiez commented:
“The workmen and peasants were capable of a brief movement of revolt when the yoke became too heavy, but could not see their way toward changing the social order. They were only just beginning to learn to read.”
They were – the masses of town and country – the beasts of burden of this society. But thousands of them, these beasts of burden from the villages, from the hovels, from such sections as the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, had gotten weapons and had glimpsed something of the light which is cast by the ideas of human freedom.
To repeat, they were grabbing muskets, pistols, knives, pruning hooks, scythes, everything they could and, arms in hands, they were combining their wills as they “... saw in the growing anarchy a chance to revenge themselves upon the social order ...” Mathiez here further added that: “The rising was directed not only against the feudal system, but against monopolies of commodities, taxes, bad judges, all those who exploited the people and lived upon its work.” Mirabeau had thundered at Versailles that the States General represented the people. But this body was no sooner starting to assert authority than the people also took into their own hands the task of representing themselves. Scarcely having learned to read, they had clearly grasped the meaning of some of the ideas in the air. When the procession had passed them from Versailles, they cried out: “Vive la nation!” They had become part of the nation in fact; they had entered history. But they were not, as yet, properly composed into that picture which Jefferson painted for us.
 
The Bourgeoisie Coaches the Monarchy
To continue, it is significant to note that at the Hotel de Ville, Louis XVI did not know what to say. A not unsympathetic biographer of Louis XVI, Saul K. Padover (The Life and Death of Louis XVI), says of him: “In a crisis he showed himself as helpless as a paralytic.” [2] Padover remarks on how a streamer inside the throne room at the Hotel de Ville expressed the new situation. It was worded: “Louis XVI, Father of the French and King of a Free People.” Louis XVI was without assurance. When the fires of revolution were lit in France, he could only stutter and mumble: he was unable to perceive, in fact, the difference between a street riot and a revolution. Just prior to this scene, when Bailly had met the procession at the gates of Paris, Bailly had told him: “The people ... have reconquered their King.” Further, contrast Louis XVI and Bailly. He had just previously sworn that “nothing in the world would induce him to deliver his welcoming speech [to Louis XVI] in any position other than an upright one” (Padover). Bailly, the bourgeois mayor, hero of the hour along with La Fayette, revealed his full presence of mind. He told the King what to say and, then, he said it for the King to the people. Clearly, we can here see a summing up of the Revolution in the sense in which Kropotkin spoke.
Here, likewise, is the implied prediction of events to come. Bailly’s actions, words, gestures reveal a consciousness of power. Surrounding the Hotel de Ville is the instrument of that power, the Bourgeois Guard, composed of Paris bankers and others. And checked by the “arch of steel” is the people. Also present is that popular man on horseback, the Marquis de La Fayette. He understood what was happening, Bailly under-stood. The people understood less, but they knew what they no longer wanted, and they stood watching, armed. But Louis XVI knew nothing. The significance of these events was not clear in his head. He woke up one morning in the year 1789, an absolutist monarch; he went to bed that same evening, a bourgeois king. [3]
 
History as the Greatest of Artists
The bourgeois program seemed, at this moment, to have been attained. Bailly, telling the King what to say, symbolized that program: the bourgeois wanted the reins of power in its hands: It seems that this had been gained. For Jefferson writes further of this scene: “On their return, the popular cries were ‘vive le roy et la nation.’ He [Louis] was conducted by a Garde Bourgeoise to his palace at Versailles, and thus concluded such an amende honorable as no sovereign ever made, and no people ever received. Letters written with his own hand to the Marquis de La Fayette removed the scruples of his position. Tranquility is now restored to the capital.”
Studying this picture, it seems as if history were the greatest of all artists. Here, in this scene, there is revealed an art as seemingly miraculous as that of Tolstoy in War and Peace, But it is a real historical scene. And in it, the gestures, the words, the roles are so correct, so proper. There is perfection of characterization. History comes before our eyes, yes, with pregnant artistry. Let us further note this “artistry,” The red cockade is put onto the hat of the King in the name of the nation. The man who does this is the leader of the bourgeoisie. Consider the symbol. There is no crown. And its color is the red of revolution. The class leading the revolution asserts itself: it bestows the revolutionary symbol on the monarch. The symbol attracts the people. And what of Louis XVI? There he stands, merely a bewildered spectator. How perfect his role, how proper that he has nothing to say, how artistically adequate that his best is a stutter! And, to the contrary, how quick, how ready is Bailly to speak in his name. And yet all of this would not have been possible, would not have been necessary but for those armed thousands out there in the street, standing determined and ready behind that bourgeois “arch of steel,” From that day forth the masses of humanity became revealed as a force that always must be reckoned with.
This scene embodies and predicts the course of the Revolution. But here there is not space for any detailed account of that course. In addition, I believe that I can assume a sufficient familiarity with it on the part of my readers. Suffice it to say that the French bourgeoisie triumphed in the Revolution; it gained its economic emancipation, became the master of France and, in fact, almost became the master of Europe. The American Colonial Revolution made possible the conditions which permitted the capitalist exploitation of a whole continent under one unified government: the French Revolution created the conditions which almost made possible, with Napoleon, the same accomplishment. Of this, we will comment later. Here, let it be stressed that in this scene we can see the program of the Revolution. That of the people was to create the nation, that is, to create themselves as rulers and free men. But they were not then capable of performing this task. The program of the bourgeoisie was to create a constitutional monarchy based on the English model, and to rule through this form. The program is here presented to us in picture, spectacle, in word, gesture, movement. But it has not been, at this date, really composed. The scene is only temporarily tranquilized. Before the tranquility is attained, before this picture is really composed, there will be war, terror, misery. Before the bourgeoisie can really attain its revolutionary aims it must first be pushed by these masses, and then it must tranquilize them.
With this in mind, let us skip from July 1789 to December 2nd, 1804. Many of the actors of that pregnantly predictive scene of 1789 are no more. Many of those armed thousands of that year have died as heroes and revolutionaries, martyrs on the streets of Paris and on the field at Valmy, or else they have died on foreign battle fields. Most of the leaders, too, whom these armed thousands erected on their shoulders, are gone. Some are temporarily forgotten. The very memory of some is still hated, and excoriated. Some of the living who were active spirits of that day are hunted by police, controlled by the ex-Jacobin and regicide, Fouché. The Marquis de La Fayette, that transitional man on horseback, sulks in exile: his fate was to be born too soon and too well. With new actors, that picture is composed. The pieces are fitted together. The wills are “combined.” The proper composition, in formal fact, occurs on the afternoon and evening of December 2nd, 1804. France was tremendously prosperous. Her armies, forged from the Revolution, had inspired fear in all the feudal courts of Europe. The party of Order had triumphed and it had found the man who sealed this triumph, Napoleon Bonaparte. It had even partially restored the land of the aristocrats; and it had reactivated the church, using it as an agency or instrument of government. The French bourgeoisie was, in passing, more lavish with its distribution of the immaterial goods of life than it was with the material goods. It reserved most of the latter for itself. It, however, was generous in its distribution of these immaterial goods, and wished to reserve merely the privileges of atheism for itself. It had gained control of all of the instruments which affected and influenced the will of the nation: thus, it had managed to equate that will with its own interests and aims. In 1789 and again in periods until Thermidor, the men and women of Paris had expressed the will of the nation, not only in words, but in the streets with arms in hand: that will had been listened to, heeded. Now, even private correspondence was opened. The police agents of Fouché were ubiquitous. Celebrations of Bastille Day, great national festivals in honor of the nation, these were no longer wanted. No more was the red cockade worn. The Party of Order was now ready to permit the final act in the achievement of its political forms.
 
Napoleon, Self-Crowned Emperor
Napoleon Bonaparte called the Pope of Rome to Paris so that His Holiness might place on Napoleon’s head the crown of Charlemagne. He waited for the arrival of the Pope with impatience. On the 25th of November, 1804, he wrote to Cardinal Fesch:
“It is absolutely necessary for the Pope to accelerate his journey ... the 2nd of December is my last possible date. If the Pope is not here by then, the coronation will take place, and the consecration will be deferred.”
The Pope came. Napoleon rode out to Fontainebleau to meet him, dressed in a hunting costume, surrounded by dogs and huntsmen. The Pope got out of his carriage, crossed the road and entered the carriage of Napoleon. Once installed in Paris, the Pope sometimes appeared alone on the balcony of the Tuileries, sometimes with Napoleon. When the latter was present, applause was always loudest. Meneval, the young man who succeeded Bourrienne as Bonaparte’s secretary, tells us of those days in his Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte. When the Pope dined with Bonaparte, “Napoleon kept constantly giving him his hand.” On December 2nd, the Pope went first to the grand cathedral of Notre Dame. He was, says, Meneval, “accompanied by a large retinue of priests and prelates, in magnificent robes, preceded by his cross-bearer, who was mounted on a richly caparisoned donkey. This monk, who wore on his head a broad-brimmed hat of a rounded form, carried a large gilt cross in his hands.” Yes, how different this was from the spectacles of the early Revolution, for instance, from the festival in honor of the Supreme Being. And let us note:
“It was three hours later that the Emperor followed the Pope ... driving in a stage carriage glittering with plate glass and gilding, and laden with pages, who hung on the door, and before and behind. The pomp of the procession was in harmony with the grandeur of the occasion.”
Many re-touches had been necessary before the picture of 1789 was, hereby, properly and finally composed. Now, the populace gazes awed, bewildered, amazed, seeing a spectacle that was novel. The medievalism which it set out to destroy in 1789 was restored, but only formally. The spectacle was grand, but empty. And watching it, what different populace! No more do we see the nation with arms in hands. For now, the man on horseback and the man in the carriage had become one. His rule is secured.
And then, the solemn moment arrives inside of the Cathedral. The Pope of Rome holds the crown of Charlemagne in his hands. And the man who is to be crowned reaches out, takes the crown, places it on his own head. Bonaparte makes himself Napoleon I. “The Pope was reduced to the role of a mere spectator,” commented Meneval. Next, Josephine knelt before her husband, and he placed a smaller crown upon her head. Tarlé, the Russian historian, speaks of this scene in his excellent biography, Bonaparte:
“This gesture of placing the crown ... upon his head with his own hands had a symbolic significance. He did not desire that undue importance should be attached to the Papal ‘blessing.’ The victorious soldier, born of the French Revolution, could not bring himself to accept the crown from anyone’s hands but his own ...”
This remark far from exhausts the symbolic significance of the scene. Napoleon was a new kind of Emperor – a bourgeois Emperor. The triumphant bourgeoisie – the class which had achieved its revolution, which knew what it wanted, the new master of society – it needed no Pope to bless its own authority. It merely needed a Pope as a spectator, as an appendage: it needed a Pope to console, to impress, to awe the sons and daughters of those men and women who had lined the streets in July 1789 and who had stormed the Tuileries in August 1792.
The snatching of the crown out of the hands of the legendary successor of Saint Peter had a still further significance. The richest, the most powerful bourgeoisie of Europe, with its goods selling all over the continent, its armies knowing what it means to march in the capitals of the old world as conquerors, its art galleries and homes filled with the loot of Europe – what need had it to be given anything? It could take: it had taken. The man who represented this victory, this power, who represented a confident hope for the future – what need had he, either, to be given anything? He, too, could take.
And in Notre Dame – the very cathedral no longer belonged to the Pope and his hierarchy, but to the French state – Napoleon, self-crowned Emperor of bourgeois France, said: “I swear that I will govern with the sole purpose of securing the interests, the happiness and the glory of the French people.”
According to Tarlé, there is a legendary story which tells us that, in the midst of all this pomp and glory,
“Napoleon asked an old soldier of Republican convictions how he liked the celebration and received the startling answer: ‘Excellently, Your Majesty. But it is a pity that there are lacking today 300,000 persons willing to lay down their heads to make similar ceremonies impossible.’”
Those willing to give their heads had sacrificed them: these heads had secured the Revolution. This new combination of wills – to revert to Tolstoy’s language – could only come after these heads had fallen. The wills of the bourgeoisie of 1789 had envisaged one state of affairs: that of the masses of the people another. In essence, the wills of the bourgeoisie had been attained, practically, and then, formally. And with this composition of the picture, the new and self-crowned Prince of Glory established himself: the era of la gloire gave formal and public recognition to itself.
(To be continued)

Notes
1. “None of the great noblemen who applauded the audacity and impertinences of the philosophes took into consideration that the religious idea was the cornerstone of the existing order. Once free criticism was turned loose, how could it be expected to confine itself to mocking at superstition? ... It spread doubt and satire everywhere. Yet the privileged orders did not seem to understand.” – The French Revolution, by Albert Mathiez, New York 1928, page 13.
2. In other portions of this book, some of Tolstoy’s characterizations of aristocrats are analyzed. It is noted how Count Rostov, of War and Peace, for instance, can only mutter and mumble when faced with a personal crisis, and how his characteristic gestures in such moments is that of waving: “his arms in despair.” Similarly, it is noted how Czar Alexander I, fleeing after the rout of Austerlitz, is overwhelmed because of the difficulty of leaping, on horseback, across a ditch, and how he is impelled to tears. The incapacity of feudal princes and nobles to meet crises in the modern period is quite observable in history and in literature. Trotsky, in passing, offers some brilliant observations on this in his comparison of Louis XVI and the last Romanov in The History of the Russian Revolution.
3. Concerning this “tranquility,” Kropotkin observed: “... the mass of the people preserved an attitude of reserve and mistrust, ... King of the middle classes as much as they liked, but not a King of the people.” And Nicker, following this scene, said to the National Assembly: “Today, gentlemen, it is in your hands that the salvation of the state lies.”
 

 T. Farrell Greets "Labor Action" (April 1945)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell Greets Labor Action
(April 1945)

From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 18, 30 April 1945, p. 7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

April 23/45
New York City
The Editors
Labor Action
114 West 14th St.
New York City
Dear Friends and Comrades:
Greetings and congratulations on your fifth anniversary, the fact that you have maintained yourselves, honestly presenting your views and defending your position – this fact is, in itself, no inconsiderable accomplishment. It should be a cause for the renewal of confidence in the socialist future as we approach another wartime May Day.



 


Fraternally yours,
James T. Farrell



 

 T. Farrell: The Language of Hollywood (January 1945)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
The Language of Hollywood
Mass Culture in Bourgeois Society
(January 1945)

From The New International, Vol. XI No. 1, January 1945, pp. 24–27.
Reprinted by permission from the Saturday Review of Literature.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In America, a tremendous commercial culture has developed as a kind of substitute for a genuinely popular, a genuinely democratic culture, which would recreate and communicate how the mass of people live, how they feel about working, loving, enjoying, suffering, and dying. This culture has become a big business. It is capitalized at hundreds of millions of dollars, returns many millions in annual profits, rent, and interest, and employs thousands of men and women to whom it pays additional millions more in wages and salaries. At times the apologists and propagandists for the cultural industries proudly boast of the “cultural” achievements of these industries: on other occasions, however, they assert that these industries produce entertainment, not culture. Let us not quibble over words. The products of these industries (motion pictures, songs, radio plays and soap operas, cartoons, and so on) recreate images of life: they communicate feelings, no matter how banal these may be; they externalize reveries; they fix ideals; they embody and illustrate moral attitudes; they create tastes which in turn influence how objects are regarded – in brief, directly and by lesson, suggestion, innuendo, fable, story, they tell huge masses of people how and what to believe. If the performance of such functions be described as something other than cultural, then the plain meaning of words is being inexcusably debased.
Usually, the debates concerning these industries – and most especially the motion picture industry – are concerned with the problem of commercial versus artistic values. Critics of the motion picture industry generally claim that pictures are not artistic enough; their adversaries then reply that pictures are as artistic as they can be made, considering the fact that they must be produced for a profit. The claim that the function of pictures is to produce entertainment serves as a justification of the simple and the admitted fact that the fundamental purpose of the motion picture studios is to make money. Not only in motion picture studios, but also in the offices of publishers and theatrical producers, a very common reason for the rejection of many books and scripts is that these do not promise to return a profit.
All this is common knowledge. It is clear, that business considerations play a decisive rôle in all these fields.
The laws of commodity production have governed the production and distribution of cultural objects ever since bourgeois society superseded feudal society. The fall of feudal society, the rise of bourgeois society, established the system of commodity production over that of the patronage system in the field of culture. While it is true that many great works of art of the past were not created to be manufactured and sold as commodities, it is nevertheless true that they were manufactured and sold as such. We see this in literature. Most of the truly great literary artists of recent centuries wrote works with the idea that these would be sold as commodities. Thus, Balzac, Dostoievsky, Tolstoy (until he renounced his copyrights) and many others had their books sold as commodities. The best literature of our own day is also sold as a commodity. Therefore, while it is true that the laws of commodity production and distribution play a governing rôle in the production and distribution of cultural products, the analysis of the way that these laws operate needs to be made in terms of specific times, specific conditions and periods. We will gain little in understanding if we merely protest the harmful effects of capitalism on culture in general, in the abstract. Art which we call good, art which we call bad, art which we call counterfeit – all this is sold on the commodity market. Due to basic economic causes, something of the most profound significance has happened in American culture: it has been invaded by finance capital, American commercial culture is owned and operated by finance capital.
 
The Double Restriction on the Motion Picture
The motion picture industry is dominated by a few huge studios; the same is the case in radio. The success of Reader’s Digest and the Luce publications reveals the same tendency triumphing in journalism. Some of the consequences of this fact must be noted. It is seemingly paradoxical but true that the bigger a corporation producing for the consumer market, the more it must depend on good will. The profits of huge concerns are vitally affected by the falling rate of profits: in time the more units of a commodity sold, the lower is the percentage of profit per unit. Inasmuch as the rate of profit falls as the volume of sales increases, there is a driving necessity that the market be expanded. This, in turn, demands the creation and retention of more and ever more good will. Here we see a major reason why the Hollywood studio can permit less freedom in the treatment of subject than the Broadway producer; he, in turn, can allow less freedom than the book publisher. The bigger our cultural industries become, the greater are the restrictions they must impose on the choice and the handling of subject matter. Also, their costs of production are staggering and, to repeat, their rate of profit falls. These economic necessities dominate all else. The aims, the tastes of the men controlling the industries must be harmonized with them. One producer may be more sincere, more artistic than another. But all must adjust themselves; all must work within this system. It allows relatively little real individualism of taste, daring, experiment. One act of daring experiment and bold honesty may cost a million dollars. Similar actions by book publlshers can be more easily sustained because the risks are not as great. Those who really control the studios are big capitalists. They think and act according to their class interests. It is folly to expect them willfully to produce art (and even to lose money on it) that will endanger their class interest. Honest art often threatens that interest. This means that there is a double restriction imposed on the character of what is produced in motion pictures. Besides promising a profit, a picture must not seriously threaten the class interests of the owners.
Genuine works of art have something new and individual to convey. They reveal new aspects of life, of human feeling. They make us conscious of what had been hitherto hidden, concealed, not clearly grasped in our own consciousness: To assimilate them is painful, disturbing, difficult; we must make an effort; we must expand our boundaries of feeling, thinking. Growth and assimilation are almost always painful, disturbing, demanding. For we are then forced to change, to alter the force of habit. It is a truism that in a shoddy culture shoddy art generally gains quicker acceptance than genuine art does. And, as Karl Marx once remarked acutely, that capitalism lives for the moment. The time required for the assimilation of new, more honest, more revealing pictures would be too long and, during that period, large losses would have to be sustained.
Now and then it may happen that a good picture is produced. This is exception, often accidental. Usually, bad pictures are produced. Here is the explanation of why this is the case. The aim of the studios is to get a return on investment, and to get profits, rent and interest. If returns on investment, profits, rent and interest permit the studios to produce great art, then, and then only, will they do it; otherwise, the artistic values, the truth values embodied in pictures, are and will remain merely secondary. In order to be a business man in this system, you must do what business requires; in order to be an artist, you must meet the demands and responsibilities required by art. An artist must be sincere, honest, clear, and for his work he must draw on his own inner life and inner tensions. A business man must stay in business. Q.E.D.!
 
Economic Relationships in Hollywood
My analysis can be extended to encompass the economic relationships which play an important role in other fields of culture, as well as in the motion picture industry. I use the latter as an illustration. Hollywood is not a cause; it is a consequence. And it reveals tendencies now at work in American culture with such relative purity that it serves me as a most illuminating illustration of what I want to convey. The rise of Hollywood to the realm of culture is a phenomenon analogous to that of the triumph of machine production during the industrial revolution. In the studios many separate crafts and arts are all linked together, mainly under one roof in one serial process. And this requires a huge capital investment. In other words, we find the division of labor; this means that we have social methods of production carried on for private profits. But those who contribute to this production do not (with rare exceptions) control it. They lose their independence as artists and craftsmen, and become employees. Their economic relationships thereby change. Most writers, for instance, become the wage-working writer. It is true that their wages are generally fantastically higher than those of factory workers, but this is not the decisive factor here. In the economic sense, most writers have a relationship to their employers similar to that of the factory workers to his boss. Just as the worker sells his labor power, so does the writer sell his skill and talent. What he then receives is a wage. All control over the product of his work resides in the employer. Thus the writer suffers from the same kind of alienation, the same kind of self-estrangement, as does the factory worker. He is alienated, self-estranged from control over his means of production, and over what he produces.
And there is a singular character to the alienation of the writer. His real means of production is his skill, his feelings, his needs which feed his work, his way of seeing life; in other words, his real means of production is his soul. This is what he sells. As a consequence of his economic relationships, the writer may write what he feels and wants to write, only if his employer allows him to do so. But he does not determine whether he will or will not do this.
Culture, art, is the most powerful means invented by mankind for preserving the consciousness of civilized man. It externalizes and communicates that in human life which is most important – man’s inner life. But here, the writer who plays the role of the artist, who is ostensibly the creator, sells his very ability to create as a commodity. There is a clear-cut difference between freely creating out of inner need and then selling the creation, and selling the very faculty of creating instead of the results of that creation. The writer may thus write out of his inner self, only when his own needs, feelings and attitudes coincide with the demands of his employer. The nature of these demands have already been uncovered in this analysis. Under such conditions, free creation is not a conscious act of will; it is merely accidental, coincidental. Such being given, it is, however, not accidental that so many Hollywood writers, once they become inured to their work, reveal a retrogression in consciousness. When they write they cannot fully draw on their needs and emotions. Much of their writing is reduced to the level of literary carpentering. They are fettered. And the fettered consciousness must retrogress. Here is the real situation. Here is the essential mechanics concerning how they who would be artists are turned into mere purveyors of entertainment. Let each make what he can of this situation in accordance with his values, his moral outlook, and with what he wants in life for himself, and for his fellow man.
Just as there is a huge investment capital in the production end of the industry, so is there in its distribution end. America (the world, in fact) is almost glutted with motion picture theaters, each of which also must return its profit, its rent, its interest. In many instances, they are also organized into chains. Taken together they constitute a huge and voracious mouth forever crying for commodities to be consumed. And they must be fed. They must stay open; they must have customers parading continually to the box office. The studios must supply them. Halt this flow of commodities and bankruptcies will follow. This need, more than any other, conditions the production schedules of the studios. Gigantic blocks of capital are involved in the total structure of the industry. Consequently, it must find the widest possible market. This means, the largest possible audience is necessary. Such an audience can be only a most heterogeneous one, encompassing ail age, emotional and mental levels. Such an audience will alone permit this industry to continue. There is no time to waste in educating the tastes of this audience. That would be too costly. Staple commodities based on the lowest common denominator of the mentality and the emotional life of the audience must be produced. Staple commodities in art, produced in this way, and in order to meet such requirements must mean, in the main, counterfeit art. This is the decisive reason why the masses of the American people really “need” so much Hollywood “entertainment.”
Actually, the motion picture industry needs the money of the American masses much more than they need its entertainment. We get, thus, an endless barrage of Hollywood publicity, of Hollywood advertising which almost batters the intelligence of the nation into insensibility. Hollywood must do this in order to give the public what Hollywood want it to want. The audience cannot directly choose. It is not given proper alternatives. Usually, it may choose one of various absurd pictures, or none of them at all. When choice is so restricted, it is meaningless to argue that the public really gets what it wants. Also, the contradictions which we have observed in the motion picture industry are apparent in American society as a whole. The conditions of American life create alienated and truncated personalities, a fact which has already engaged the attention of more than one generation of sociologists, political scientists, psychologists, judges, social workers, and others. The conditions of earning one’s bread in this society create the self-estranged modern man.
 
Motion Pictures as a Social Habit
It is such conditions which explain the need, sometimes feverish, for an entertainment which so repetitively presents the same reveries, the same daydreams, the same childish fables of success and happiness. So much of the inner life of men is dried up that they tend to become filled with yearnings and to need the consolation of these reveries about people who are happy, healthy, and who always succeed. Tastes are thus conditioned. Increasingly deprived of proper alternatives from which to choose, the American masses have also become habituated to this taste for the movies. The movies have, thereby, become a social habit. The kind of profitable commercial culture which we now have would have demanded conditions which would aid in the creation of the necessary audience. The two have developed more or less harmoniously. Hence, parallel to the retrogression of consciousness in, say, the Hollywood writer, there is a more widespread and also more pernicious retrogression of consciousness in the motion picture audience. Social and economic conditions have established the basis for this; the motion picture further enforces it. But such a process can continue only so far. Eventually a limit must and will be reached. Eventually there will be a profound revulsion of popular taste. But this will depend not only on the audience being saturated with what it is given; more than this, it will depend on fundamental changes which are economic, political, and social in character.
Most motion pictures enervate rather than energize. They distract the masses of the people from more clearly becoming aware of their real moral, esthetic, spiritual needs; in other words, they distract from what are the real and most important problems of life. As such, they offer what William James aptly characterized as “a moral holiday.” Moral holidays are necessary, but when so much time is used up in a nation in having these moral holidays, we have a social problem to define. The gap between the realities, of life in our time and the way that these are represented on the screen is a wide one. However, the masses of the people do not lose, their real needs merely because these are not fulfilled in motion pictures.
It should now be clear that this commercial culture is a safety valve. Here I offer in opposition to the conceptions, the apologetics, the theorizations of such a culture, a different idea of what a culture should do. It should help to create those states of consciousness, of awareness of oneself, of others, and of the world, which aid in making people better, and in preparing them to make the world better. Hollywood films usually have the precisely opposite effect; most of them make people less aware, or else falsely aware. This is, to me, the sense in which Hollywood films do not fulfill the real cultural needs of the masses of the people. For really to try and achieve that, one must not merely envision them as they were in the past, and as they are now; one must also envision them as they might be; one must establish as a premise their great potentiality. In other words, one must think in terms of the future as well as of the past and of the present. Such a premise is essential if one has the ideal of a culture that is truly free. Here, in essence, is the great ideal of a free, a human, a socialist culture expressed by Friedrich Engels when he spoke of the possibility of mankind, escaping from the kingdom of necessity, and entering the kingdom of freedom.
The content of motion pictures is so familiar that it need not be analyzed here in great detail. The values which pictures generally emphasize. are those of rugged individualism. The lessons which they inculcate are those which imply that the world we have, and have had, is the best of all possible worlds. The major qualities embodied in most motion picture heroes are those of the pioneer, plus those of the present which are either consistent with the practices, the standards, the mores of bourgeois America, or else are in no vital contradiction with them. The past is recreated in the accents of weak nostalgia; the present glorified. The future is promised
as no different. All history is, in fact, being gradually revised on the screen until it begins to seem like some glamorous fable. Further, pictures often embody within their very context a kind of visual and illustrative argument that the function of the motion picture is entertainment; thus the reliance which is placed on entertainment within the picture, which is itself an entertainment. Also heroes and heroines are sometimes given new occupations such as social workers; this seems to embody a change in the content of motion pictures. However, it is merely superficial and the heroes and heroines remain as absurd as before.
 
Outer Impressiveness – Inner Emptiness
But there is no essential change in the pattern, or in the moral, or in their implications. What characterizes almost all Hollywood pictures is their inner emptiness. This is compensated for by an outer impressiveness. Such impressiveness usually takes the form of a truly grandiose Belasco realism. Nothing is spared to make the setting, the costumes, all of the surface details correct. These efforts help to mask the essential emptiness of the characterizations and the absurdities and trivialities of the plots. The houses look like houses; the streets look like streets; the people look and talk like people; but they are empty of humanity, credibility and motivation. Needless to say, the disgraceful censorship code is an important factor in predetermining the content of these pictures. But the code does not disturb the profits, nor the entertainment value of the films; it merely helps to prevent them from being credible. It isn’t too heavy a burden for the industry to bear. In addition to the impressiveness of the settings, there is a use of the camera which at times seems magical. But of what human import is all this skill, all this effort, all this energy in the production of effects, when the story, the representation of life, is hollow, stupid, banal, childish? Because a mass of people see these films, they are called democratic. In addition, there is often a formal democratic character embodied in the pictures. Common speech is often introduced; an ambassador acts like a regular guy named Joe; poor working girls are heroines and, now and then, they continue to marry rich men; speeches are introduced propagandistically in which the common man is praised, democracy is cheered for, and the masses are flattered with verbiage. The introduction of such democratic notes is an additional way of masking the real content of the picture; these merely are pressed into service of glorifying the status quo.
Granted that, now and then, an unusual picture is produced, one different from those which I have characterized. Let us not forget that once we saw a picture called The Informer. But does one, or do even ten such films justify a greater number of their opposites? One might ask a theologian – if a man steals money and uses some of it to have masses said for the suffering souls in Purgatory, will he thereby redeem his guilt for theft? To argue that because we once in a while get a picture such as The Informer, Hollywood is, thus, justified, is to argue that you are forgiven for theft because you use some stolen money for the souls in Purgatory. I leave those who argue in this manner to the theologians who can explain what is wrong with their argument. And similarly, the argument that bad pictures are necessary to make money which will permit the use of profits for good pictures is a fallacious one. The reason that this happens, when it does, is because of the social organization of the industry, and I have already indicated what that is.
Hollywood has not created all of this counterfeit culture. It borrowed most of what it has given us from tendencies which antedate its appearance on the cultural scene. In fact, other than in the technical realm, it has invented very little.
It has used the powerful inventions of the cinema to repeat most of the cheap stories, the cheap plots, the counterfeits which have long been printed as stories in commercial magazines. Many of its jokes were even familiar to our fathers, and perhaps our grandparents. Here Hollywood is significant, mainly because it is a clear-cut example of the development of commercial culture in the period of finance capital. Due to its size, its wealth; its ability to reach such a mass audience, it has a penetrating influence in the whole field of culture, one which far exceeds that which was exerted in the commercial culture of which it is the heir.
Its penetrating influence has long been observed in the drama and the novel. At present, novels are even sold for pictures before they are written. One can guess what most such books will be like; or if one wishes to know without trusting to a guess, then one can read Louis Bromfield. Another penetrating influence of Hollywood in the novel is the stimulation which it has given to a kind of hard-boiled realism which imitates all the manners of serious realistic writing, but contains none of the inner meaning, the inner protest against evils, the revelation of social mechanisms and social structures which we perceive in serious realism. This tendency is illustrated by such books as The Postman Always Rings Twice. The influence of the film industry is to be observed, also, in an incalculable way. For instance, there is the diversion of talent, the fettering of talent, in brief, the retrogression in consciousness about which I have already commented. A large proportion of the literary talent of America is now diverted into Hollywood and radio writing. In many instances, there is a certain inevitability in this. For with the rise of these industries, the situation for writers is such that, on the whole, the book market can support relatively fewer of them. By and large, talent flows towards the highest bidder. A writer represents more than an individual talent; he represents so much social labor which had to be performed in order that he may have developed his talents. This social labor has been expended for the development of literary talent in America. Instead of these talents then returning honest work for this social labor which permitted them to develop, they are used up, burned out in scenario writing. This is a positive social loss. And there can be little doubt of the fact that a correlation exists between the success of this commercial culture, and the loss of esthetic and moral vigor in so much contemporary writing. Such must be a consequence when talent is fettered and sold as a commodity, when audiences are doped, and when tastes are confused, even depraved.
 
A Luna Park of Capitalism
The culture of a society ought not to be viewed as a mere ornament, a pastime, a form of entertainment. It is the life, the consciousness, the conscience of that society. When it fails to serve as such, then, it moves farther and farther away from the real roots of life. Such is precisely and unmistakably the situation in America where we have this tremendous commercial culture spreading itself like an octopus. And consider how many lives, how much labor power, how much talent, how much of social goods is poured, not only into Hollywood, but into American commercial culture as a whole. The social cost is fabulous. We are familiar with the news telling us of the financial costs of pictures. A million dollars. More than that. And then, we go once again and see what has been produced at such cost. Once again, we see a picture so silly that it insults one’s intelligence. Once again, the same old stupid and inept story of boy meets girl, framed, mounted, glorified until it becomes a monumental absurdity. And so inured are most people to this that they do not even see anything wrong in it.
This entire structure can be metaphorically described as a grandiose Luna Park of capitalism. And if the serious artist enters it, he well may quote these words from Dante: “All hope abandon, ye who enter here.”
This is a culture which does not serve men; on the contrary, it makes men its servants. Its highest measure of worth is revealed in little numerals, written in black and red ink on sheets of paper which record profits and losses. Let those who favor this masquerade try to justify it. Far better is to see it for what it is, and to renounce all of the ideals and aims which it embodies. For the writer to do this places him in that category which one motion picture executive has described as “the irresponsible literati.” Correct! Irresponsible to this system; responsible to an ideal of trying to show men what life is like now, of seeking to do what one can in the necessary effort of creating in men that consciousness of their problems, their needs, and their future which will help to create a better society.
 

 T. Farrell: Historical Image of Napoleon - 2 (August 1945)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
Historical Image of Napoleon
The Essence of Bonapartism
(August 1945)

From The New International, Vol. XI No. 5, August 1945, pp. 148–152.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





(This is the second article on Napoleon by James T. Farrell, from a work in progress on Tolstoy’s War and Peace. [Copyright, 1945 – James T. Farrell] – Editor)





Here, it is pertinent for us to go back and to examine the idea of glory. The men who Were the leaders of the Revolution in its great, its heroic, its democratic days, idealized the republicans of antiquity and they sought to emulate them. Robespierre and his contemporaries, for instance, cited, as models of emulation, such ancient figures as Solon and Brutus. They repeatedly used the phrase, “the Tarpeian rock,” and proclaimed, in the eloquent style of their times, that they feared not to go to it: to it, most of them did go. Napoleon, also, thought often and spoke of the ancient world. But, in it he found different models, Alexander and Caesar. He appreciated Homer, largely because of the Homeric accounts of war and of heroes. He thought of legions and eagles. He wanted, himself, to surpass Caesar in deeds and for his legions to surpass the achievements of the legions of Caesar. Even his style differs from that of the early men of the Revolution. They were more rhetorical, more eloquent: there is more of the language of persuasion in their writings: its appeal is to the people, not to soldiers and underlings. Napoleon – an excellent writer – wrote and spoke in a style that was crisp, clear, terse: it is a style of command. As a speaker, he was best when talking to soldiers. Among the many comparisons that can be made between Napoleon and Julius Caesar, one is that of style. Caesar, also, wrote in a crisp, clear and economical style. The early leaders of the Revolution, no less than Napoleon, dreamed of glory. But theirs was not precisely the same glory as was that of Napoleon.
“Revolutions,” wrote Kropotkin, “are never the result of despair ... On the contrary, the people of 1789, had caught a glimpse of the light of approaching freedom, and for that reason, they rose with great heart.”
Formally, the consciousness of freedom is expressed in such documents as the Bill of the Rights of Man. Among other things, it proclaimed that men have the right to think, the right to express opinions freely. This right is cognate with a real consciousness of freedom, and with human dignity. Man, in his ascent from the Kingdom of the ape, has had to – as must every child – discover that he has a mind, a consciousness. He had had to discover the very means which could even permit him to know that he has such a consciousness. The Great French Revolution was one of the mightiest steps in history aiding man in this discovery, in his further conquest of freedom. The ideas of glory of the early Revolution are intimately associated with these facts.
In those days, new men rose on the stage of history, nursing their new dreams of glory. The most extreme, the most enthusiastic, of these men dreamed of glory for all men, glory for all men in freedom. Anarcharsis Cloots visioned a universal republic. Yes, glory was then different from what it became in the era of la gloire. Parenthetically, I might remark that Stendhal, novelist of the tragedy of glory, recognized and commented on this. In his biography, Memoires Sur Napoléon, he described the enthusiasm of the first days of the revolution: he stated that the Napoleon, the great man he admired was General Bonaparte, and not the Emperor Napoleon I. He stressed the use of the former name, not the latter. In the first and heroic days of the Revolution, glory was associated with the ideals of liberty, fraternity, equality. Saint-Just, while still too young to be admitted to the Legislative Assembly, was intensely absorbed in the life of the times, and wrote an agitated letter to a friend which has been preserved. He stated: “I feel that I could ride the crest of this century. Companions of liberty and glory, preach them in your Sections: may danger encompass you!” Also, he spoke of “the audacity of magnanimous virtue,” and added: “Adieu! I stand above misfortune. I will bear everything but I will tell the truth.” To achieve glory then was to work self-sacrificingly and devotedly in the effort to create a great republic of freedom and virtue. Yes, in those days to scale the crests of that century was to avenge justice and virtue, and to cut down tyrants. To win everlasting glory was to help in he establishment of liberty. Personal ambition did not stir these men as it did those in the day of la gloire. Saint-Just, for instance, also said: “Let those who are ambitious go and walk for an hour in the cemetery, where the tyrant and the conspirator sleep together.”
 
“The Principles of Political Morality”
This ideal of glory was formally expressed in the Jacobin ideal of the Republic of Virtue. On February 5th, 1794. Robespierre delivered in the Convention, a report on les principes de morale politique. I quote from it:
“But what is our aim? ... the peaceful enjoyment of liberty and equality, and the reign of eternal justice whose laws are engraved not on marble or stone, but in the hearts of every man – whether of the slave who forgets them, or of the tyrants who denies their truth. We desire an order of things in which all base and cruel feelings will be suppressed and all beneficient and generous sentiments evoked by the laws: in which ambition means the desire to merit honour, and to serve one’s country, in which rank is the offspring of equality; in which the citizen obeys the magistrate, the magistrate the people, and the people the rule of justice; in which the country guarantees the well-being of every citizen, and every citizen is proud to share in the glory and prosperity of the country; in which every soul grows greater by the constant sharing of republican sentiments, and by the endeavor to win the respect of great people; in which liberty is adorned by the arts it ennobles; and commerce is a source of public wealth, not merely of the monstrous opulence of a few households. We want to substitute in our country, morality for egotism, honesty for love of honour, principles for conventions, duties for decorum, the empire of reason for the tyranny of fashion, the fear of vice for the dread of unimportance: we want to substitute pride for insolence, magnanimity for vanity, the love of glory for the love of gold: we want to replace ‘good company’ by good characters. intrigue by merit, wit by genius, brilliance by truth, and the dullness of debauch by the charm of happiness. For the pettiness of the so-called great we would substitute the full stature of humanity; in place of an easy-going, frivolous and discontented people create one that is happy, powerful, and stout-hearted; and replace the vices and follies of the monarchy by the virtue and amazing achievements of the Republic.”
From Meneval, Bourrienne and other sources, the private life of Napoleon can be glimpsed. Both in his private life, and in his public career, we find that he illustrates many of the precise opposites of that which Robespierre affirmed in his ideal conception of the Republic of Virtue. The pomp of the festival of the coronation here can suffice to suggest this to the reader. (2) The English scholar J.M. Thompson attempts to reconstruct Robespierre’s private life during the time when he lived in the house of the carpenter, Duplay. (3) Some evenings there was singing from his favorite Italian operas, and Buonarroti played the piano. Or Robesspierre read aloud from Racine or Corneille, and then, he would go to his room and work. All present sometimes would together take part in declaiming from the professional speakers. A few evenings a year, he would take Madame Duplay and her daughter to see classical dramas at the Théatre Français. The family would walk on the Champs Elysees or go on excursions into the country. They would enjoy quiet sports and Robespierre would watch the Savoyard children dance, give them money, and exclaim: “it etait bon.” (Thompson here, while giving this detail cautions that it might be borrowed from the life of Rousseau, Robespierre’s master.) At this point, Thompson continues: “he was never so gay and happy as on these occasions, and it was generally on these evenings, when they got home, that he recited his favorite poetry.” Or Robespierre would go on solitary walks with his dog. These recreations, says the same biographer, “were exceptional.” Usually, there was the Assembly from 10 to 3 or 4 in the afternoon: the Jacobin Club from 6 or earlier until 10. Around five, he ate a hurried dinner, and Madame Duplay tried to have oranges and coffee for him. And reports to read; letters, speeches to compose; interviews: “Robespierre’s was a regular, temperate, and laborious life.” And: “His hosts were simple, honest patriots of the lower middle class – the backbone of the Revolution; and the house in the rue Saint-Honoré was a perfect setting for the public life of ‘the Incorruptible’.” (Italics mine – J.T.F.) A similar reconstruction of the private life, say, of Marat would add additional emphasis here to the contrast. (4) Now, suffice it to say that the differences in the days when there was something glorious from those of the days of glory exist on every level of experience. Elsewhere in this book, I shall have other observations to offer in this respect.
 
Corruption and the Directory
The period between the fall of the Jacobins on the 9th Thermidor and the 18th of Brumaire, when Napoleon’s coup d’état lifted him to power, is almost uniformly described by historians as seamy. Mathiez quotes the writer, M. Thureau-Dangin:
“In the general histories, once one has passed the 9th Thermidor and arrived at the years which follow one another, colorless and desolate, agitated and sterile, up to the 18th Brumaire, the writers seem to be seized with weariness and disgust ... Everything, both events and men, is, on a smaller scale ... The stage is given over to minor characters, and things have reached such a pass that Tallien, Barrasand their like become leading characters.”
And Mathiez closed his study, After Robespierre: The Thermidorean Reaction, by pointing the moral to be found in this period:
“The profound unpopularity of the Convention in its latter days, which was also to weigh upon the government which followed it was well deserved. Since the 9th Thermidor the men who had overthrown Robespierre had identified themselves and their private interests with the Republic. They had constantly violated the principles of democracy. They had been even more arbitrary than the government whose place they had taken. Their policy had neither cohesion nor consistency, and, being inspired by nothing but the needs of the moment, alienated every party in turn – both the Jacobins, whom they imprisoned and allowed to be massacred, and the constitutional royalists, whose road to power they had finally barred ...”
The great majority of Frenchmen despised these men who made politics a profession and a source of profit. The Perpetuals had nobody behind them but the purchasers of national property and the army-contractors, a narrow phalanx, but bold and well disciplined. This, with the aid of the army, sufficed to enable them to maintain themselves in power in opposition to the wishes of the great majority. But it was a serious matter that the regime of parliamentary government which was now inaugurated should be vitiated from the outset at its sources and in its activities, and that so early as this the representatives of the people no longer represented anyone but themselves. This was an undoubted sign that the Republic which they exploited as though it were their own property would not last.
With the fall of Robespierre, no real reign of order was established, let alone one of liberty. The White Terror was ushered in. The ruling deputies “literally formed a new nobility, placed by the Constitution outside the common law,” as Mathiez further remarked. Step by step, the democratic gains of the Revolution were destroyed. Step by step, reaction proceeded insidiously. Robespierre had held that only the superfluities of commerce should be sold. But the Jacobins had not had the strength to achieve any such aim: they were sufficiently strong only to save France at the head of the most revolutionary class of their times. Their fall initiated the triumph of the middle class.
This dreary period is describable as a Roman middle class holiday. With the increase and intensification of reaction, the Convention broke up, and the Directory supplanted it. Kropotkin, who significantly closed his history with Thermidor, remarked in his conclusion:
“The Directory was a terrible orgy of the middle classes, in which fortunes acquired during the Revolution, especially during the Thermidorean reaction, were squandered in unbridled luxury.”
And the evidence substantiating such remarks is overwhelming. Mathiez opened his work, Le Directoire, by characterizing this period as one in which were violated “every day the principles of the Republic, under the pretext of saving the Republic.” The Directory was a government of a minority, a coup d’état government maintaining itself by exceptional measures. Here was, in fact, a seamy middle class regime of profit taking and spending, made possible as a consequence of the Revolution. The revolutionary war which France fought to defend herself became more than a war of defense. It, also, became one of loot. Pillage of one kind or another was on the order of the day. In fact, Mathiez called France of this time, “The Republic of pillage.” At the same time there was observable the phenomenon of personal government. And again as also said Mathiez, such a republic accumulated all of the vices of the old and the new society. Patriotism was either decadent or an excuse for such a regime, a reign of “order.” The real signs of patriotism, when they did flare in France, were crushed. The population became more and more indifferent to the suffrage and the election laws. émigrés marched in troops, sword in hand, singing counter-revolutionary songs. There was inflation with all of its inevitable concomitants, all of the misery which it brought to the weak and the poor. The great ideal of the nation gradually changed into the ideal of the Great Nation. And with this, foreign war became the war of the Great Nation: it became, among other things, a means of loot.
“It is not Bonaparte,” said Mathiez, “... who habituated the French army to marauding and pillaging ... The evil was before him. The miserable army that Bonaparte commanded lived on pillage for a long time: conquest was for it essentially a means to subsist.”
This was the period of the profit taking of the glory of the days from 1789 to 1794. And a study of this period makes it clear that it was not the democracy, the dictatorial democracy of the Terror that destroyed the Republic. Those armed citizens of 1789, they did not destroy the democracy. And neither did the license of popular will destroy the democracy. Those who profited most from the Revolution destroyed the democratic aspects of the same Revolution. In this early day, before the bourgeoisie had exhausted its progressive historical role, the contradictions between democracy and the rule of the bourgeoisie were already revealed. The rule of wealth and the reign of freedom were not compatible. Some writers on democratic theory, such as Harold Laski, formalize this by discussing the contradictions between the ideal of liberty and the ideal of equality. But this formality usually conceals the real contradiction: that is between the rule of wealth and the rule of the masses, the rule of the bourgeoisie, and the establishment of a real democracy.
Revolutions are periods of civil war. The French Revolution was civil war. Dual power was created in France in 1789. Dictatorship was ushered in then. The most revolutionary class, the sans-culottes, did not have a sufficient separation of interests, a sufficiently independent program, a sufficient power and force to push the Revolution further. This class – pushing its Jacobin leaders to the left, driving some of them into republicanism and regicide – saved the Revolution, assured its basic gains. Once this was done, once the victories of Fleurus finally assured defense against the foreign foe, the fall of the Jacobins was on the order of the day. Reaction took the form of the rule of wealth. And this period of middle class orgy created all of the conditions for the man on horseback. Just prior to the 18th Brumaire, there was a revival of the Jacobins: the clubs seemed to be springing back to life. Fear of the people was revivified. And, at the same time, concessions had been made to monarchy, to the defeated class. Politically, economically, the new ruling class needed order in its house, and it needed a man of order. The bourgeois man of order is, in the final analysis, the man on horseback. Between Thermidor and Brumaire, the conditions for the rise of this man were created. He came to power by the coup d’état of the 18th Brumaire. He breathed the very ideas of eighteenth century individualism, identified his own interests with those of the French nation and, in fact, Napoleonic egotism can even be described as a dramatization and super-extension of individualism.
 
Bonaparte: Child of the Revolution
Bonaparte was a “child of the Revolution,” not only in the sense that it created the conditions for his rise, his glories, his rule. He was, also, as a man of his century, fed by the ideas of the Enlightenment. In other portions of this book, when we consider and evaluate Tolstoy’s characterization of him,this will be considered in detail. Napoleon, who fathered the slogan that careers are open to all men of talent, was himself a young man of talent looking for a career. The Revolution opened the road to him for his career. It provided him with his Toulon. His fate was tied to that of the middle class. From the Bourbons he could expect nothing. The young men of Toulon and Vendemaire, in fact, could expect worse than nothing. He was, in the period just prior to his coup d’état, but one of the generals aspiring for that seat on horseback. We know how he maneuvered, plotted and succeeded.
No one ruler does all that is attributed to him. Napoleon was the administrator, the executive, the military leader, the man who forged and coordinated the policy of the French middle class. More than anything else, what is to be said of him was that he was adequate to his tasks. When his greatness is regarded, it can, most properly, be seen in contrast to the figures who immediately preceded him, rather than in connection with the leaders of the Revolution during its early stages. He seems so overwhelmingly superior because these men were so petty. It was under his rule that the economic gains of the Revolution were secured. It was under his rule of a grandiose policeman that order was put in the house of the bourgeoisie and that the populace was, as a whole, bribed and forced into its proper place at the bottom of society. It was under his direction and with his cooperation that the Code was written, ordering the law of France, establishing the changes of property rights which were effected in the Revolution. It was under his rule that the last democratic gains of the Revolution of a political character were erased: for instance, he ended local autonomy. His great administrative contribution was that of establishing a centralized system which made more easily, more orderly, more sure, the rule of the middle class. His work, his role was not to bring liberty. He was the hangman of liberty. Instead, he offered some equality, and order. This fact is suggestive, showing more decisively the nature of the incompatibility of equality and liberty as a consequence of class rule. Under Napoleon, the potentialities released by the Revolution, those potentialities which seemed so dormant in the post-Thermidorean period, were utilized. French arms were carried across the continent of Europe. The army, originally forged as the patriot army of Carnot, became the basis for the Grand Army, instrument of Napoleonic policy. Then, feudal thrones shook. The crowned heads of Europe received blows, blows from which they never recovered. Looking back at Napoleon today we must see him against the background of such an age, and as the product of conditions such as those outlined in this analysis.
 
Military Genius and Bourgeois Emperor
Napoleon Bonaparte was, in reality, the last great martial captain of the bourgeoisie, as Cromwell was the first. The tasks which he inherited were not merely military. He was well aware of this. With all of his apparent love of war, he did not make war for mere love. It was Clausewitz, military theoretician of the Napoleonic era, who declared that war is an instrument of policy. This was no mere speculation. It was concrete observation based on Napoleon and the Napoleonic period. Napoleon was the man of his times with grasp, policy. He neither invented nor visioned this policy out of his own head. He coordinated it, attempted to implement it in and by war. Before him, the mercantilist economists conceived war as an instrument of policy, a means of securing and increasing the wealth of the nation. Napoleon did likewise: he acted on the principle that war is an instrument of policy. His continental system was not merely a means of loot: it was the expression of this policy. It expressed the idea of a unified Europe under the aegis of a bourgeois France: with this, it embodied a Europe free of tariff barriers, free of all feudal fetters and one vast era for expansion. In a sense this was a vision parallel to that of Alexander Hamilton in America. Negatively, this system was a form of economic warfare aimed to bring England to her knees. But had this been accomplished, the positive aim of the system would also have been achieved.
Napoleon often spoke proudly of his work. There can be no doubt but that he was proud of his own glory. With success, victories, power, his egotism became exaggerated. He dreamed of mastery of the world. But, at the same time, if we interpret him subjectively, if we see him merely as the embodiment of a spirit of war and egotism, we will not understand either him or his times. He was a bourgeois emperor and acutely conscious of this fact, Thus, in Moscow, he posed the question of freeing the Russian serfs. He did not issue an emancipation proclamation. He knew that he was a man who ended revolutions, not one who began them. Aware of this he knew that he was based on the middle class. He was, thereby, the man of order. He was, equally, aware that in the period of his rule, the power of the middle class had been secured: the Revolution was, in this sense, made irreversible. Thus, when he was dethroned, he remarked that all that Louis XVIII needed to do was to change the bed linen at the Tuileries: also, at Elba, he said that if Louis XVIII did nothing more for commerce, he was doomed to failure. Just like his immediate predecessors in the Directory, Napoleon identified his own interest with that of the nation. But in his case, the juncture of his own interests, and that of the middle class masters of the nation, coincided. When this juncture was gradually severed as a consequence of recurrent war, then his fall became certain. The fall of Napoleon was not a mere military event, determined in the Russian snows and at the Battle of Leipzig. The task of unifying Europe was beyond the means of France. The correlations of power of the period indicate this. France faced the combination of absolutist Russia and mercantilist England, the latter in command of the seas. The Revolution stimulated a hunger for liberty all over the continent of Europe. It generated this same hunger in the countries which France invaded. Napoleon, unable to appease it in France, could not appease it outside of her borders. His role was twofold. He became judge and policeman in France, and he became the organizer and executor of French policy in Europe. Trotsky, in The History of the Russian Revolution, aptly summarized that role:
”Napoleon guaranteed to the big bourgeoisie the possibility to get rich, to the peasants their pieces of lands, to the sons of peasants and hoboes a chance for looting in the wars. The judge held a sword in his hand and himself also fulfilled the duties of bailiff. The Bonapartism of the first Bonaparte was solidly founded.”
But that solid foundation did not permit Napoleon to succeed in his continental system. Robespierre, years before Napoleon’s period of glory, said in opposing the Girondin agitation for the foreign war, that mankind does not love armed liberators. The armed liberator looked too much like the policeman. Outside of France, especially in Germany, the ideals of the Revolution stimulated opposition. And with this the separation of the interests of Napoleon and those of the nation – especially those of the big bourgeoisie – were evidenced. During the Hundred Days, he did not have the support of the French middle class. And when news of the Battle of Waterloo reached Paris, French government bonds rose on the Paris Bourse; they rose still further when Napoleon abdicated in 1815.
 
Napoleon: Bonapartist
Further changes can now be seen in our picture – uncomposed in 1789, composed in 1804. The scene becomes the Elysées Palace after the Battle of Waterloo. Outside on the streets are the descendants of those armed men and women of 1789, workmen, students, soldiers, young officers, the nondescript city rabble. Carnot, the old Jacobin, had spoken at the Assembly, calling for the armed nation to rise and to repulse the foreign invader, as it had done in the days of Danton. He received no encouragement. Caulaincourt was disturbed. Fouché, himself, sat unmoved, new plots spinning in his head. The fall of Napoleon meant more power for him and for Talleyrand. No one had seconded Carnot. But this waiting crowd was ready to follow Napoleon. Napoleon knew that he was not the man to drown Paris in blood. Napoleon could not speak as had Danton. Carnot had tried to do this. He failed. Napoleon, fat and over forty, had gone a long way since the days when he was a slim youth, friend and protégé of Augustin Robespierre. The little fat man walked alone in the gar den. The crowd outside saw him and cried out: “Vive la nation! Vive l’empereur!” But Bonaparte was no longer their leader. To lead them now he had to offer not loot, but liberty. And that would have meant no restoration of the glory of 1804.
The French bourgeoisie (led by the greatest military genius of the age, supported by the greatest army that had – up to that point – ever been assembled in human history) had proven insufficient to the task of mastering Europe. It was tired. It was ready, more than ready, to let its man of glory go into the shades. The solid foundation of the first Bonapartism left behind it a solidly founded French bourgeoisie. The returning Bourbons could not destroy that foundation. To have heeded the crowd outside, Napoleon would have had to try and undo that very foundation. In exile at St. Helena, he well could say that in the end he was only a Jacobin. But in June 1815, he could not be a Jacobin – he dared not be one.
Napoleon is disappearing from our picture. One of the last scenes as he fades out is that of old Carnot, in tears, embracing Napoleon in farewell. The men who helped forge the sans-culotte army of Valmy and the man of Austerlitz bid farewell. It is as if both were, at the same moment, bidding farewell to history. The period of glory symbolically ends, as it were, scenes like this one. An old man and a fat man in middle age say adieu – two children of the Revolution.
Napoleon’s memory is tied to that of the Revolution. But now we can see in what sense this is so. The legacy he left was real. We have seen what that was. From his name, the crisis form of bourgeois rule has been derived – Bonapartism. There is illumination in this fact. Bonapartism, as a form of bourgeois rule, is not a historical accident. It is a consequence of this contradiction of bourgeois society. In the histories, this is all implicitly recognized. For every bourgeois historian who condemns his memory there are scores who heap their scorn on the Jacobins. The tribute paid Napoleon is due not merely to his indubitable greatness and genius: far more than that, it can be seen as if an unconscious payment of respect for services rendered. He became a figure around whom legend grew. The old soldiers of his legions became part of the democratic movement in the Restoration. His influence was felt on every current of thought in the nineteenth century. His role in literature would be but a separate study. His name became a symbol of glory. Even his ashes, returned to Paris, were used by Louis Philippe as a democratic gesture. When they were returned to Paris on a cold and snowy day in December 1840, the forbidden Marseillaise was again sung in the streets.
But again let me emphasize that a major part of his historic contribution bears his name – Bonapartism, a word describing a form of personal and police rule in the interests of bourgeois society: this is a form of rule generally more adjustable to the conditions of bourgeois society as crises mount in intensity, and as the incompatibilities of this rule lead to a continual fettering of mankind in its long and blood-ridden struggle for freedom. In this sense, as well as in the more purely military one, he was the last great bourgeois captain. The next real man of iron was the reactionary Junker, Bismarck, the child of a revolution that failed rather than of one that succeeded. And after him, there came the more grandiose edition, Adolf Hitler, the child of a revolution that did not succeed on a whole continent. There were progressive elements in the work of Napoleon, as contrasted with the work of these men. And further, had Napoleon’s policy succeeded, had he unified Europe, his role would have been progressive in the same sense that the work of Alexander Hamilton, in America, had its historically progressive character. But we need not here discuss historical as ifs.
With this view of Napoleon in mind, we can discuss in more detail, Tolstoy’s characterization of him, his moral denunciation of Napoleon, his theory of history, and all of the real and seeming paradoxes which are to be found in these.
 

 T. Farrell: Resigns as Chairman of Civil Rights Body (12 October 1945)





James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell Resigns
as Chairman of Civil Rights Body
(12 October 1945)

From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 45, 5 November 1945, p. 2
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





(Labor Action received the following letter from James T. Farrell, noted American novelist and literary critic, announcing his resignation as chairman of the Civil Rights Defense Committee which handled the celebrated “Minneapolis Case.” – Ed.)



*
Oct. 12, 1945
New York City
George Novack
Secretary Civil Rights Defense Committee,
160 Fifth Ave,
New York City
Dear George:
With this letter, I am tendering my immediate resignation as chairman of The Civil Rights Defense Committee; however, I am not resigning from the. Committee proper.
I have received no communications from the CRDC office since last January. To my knowledge, the Committee has been inactive since early in the winter of 1945, when the last, of the Minneapolis defendants returned from prison. Thus, it seems to me that the CRDC has now become merely a paper organization, and that my sole remaining role as its Chairman is that of having my name on its stationery.
I assume that I have performed my function as Chairman, and; that there is no further work for me to do, I am, therefore, resigning.
Needless to say, I stand ready to offer any effective collaboration, that I can in the event of future defense cases,



 


Sincerely yours,
(Signed:) James T. Farrell



P.S. – I take it that copies of this letter will be sent to all members of the Committee so, that they may be informed of this fact.
 




Sir:
In your issue of May 30, 1949, you carried the translation of an interview with Richard Wright in Paris. Concerning “The International Day of Resistance to War and Dictatorship,” Richard Wright was quoted as having made the following statement:
“When the American delegates arrived in Paris, they expected that, like themselves, I would take a position resolutely in favor of the Marshall Plan and the Atlantic Pact. I immediately told them that my position on these questions – and on many others – was not the same as theirs.”
The American delegates to this conference, alluded to in this statement, were Sidney Hook and myself. Sidney Hook had no political discussions with Richard Wright in Paris. The consequence, this statement refers to myself.
Richard Wright has either been misquoted, or else he was inaccurate and misleading. Prior to the conference, I had one meeting with Richard Wright. He raised the question of his participation in the conference. He was dissatisfied, and his dissatisfaction had developed before Hook and I had arrived in Paris. It was an expression of an inner RDR difference. After he told me how he felt, I advised him to do nothing at all concerning the conference. I said that I did not think that a man should act against his convictions in any manner, and that if he had any doubts concerning the purposes of the organization of the conference, it would be best for him to play no role at all. In our discussion, differences concerning the Marshall Plan and the Atlantic Pact played no role. In fact, we scarcely discussed them at all. Far from attempting to put any kind of pressure on Richard Wright, I advised him, in the most gentle possible manner, to act on his convictions, and not to participate in any kind of a venture if he felt he would violate his convictions. In the light of this fact, it is clear why I describe his statement as inaccurate and misleading.
I might add that out of ignorance, you have pointed up the significance of this statement in the wrong way. Contrary to what you stated in Labor Action, Richard Wright did not attend the conference; he boycotted it. The statement which he, Jean-Paul Sartre and Merleau- Ponty signed was sent to the conference. It was written before Sidney Hook and I delivered our speeches, and neither Sartre, Merleau-Ponty nor Wright knew what Hook and I were going to say. Their opposition was against David Rousset and the other leaders of RDR, more than it was against Hook and myself, because of the fact that they did not know what position Hook and I were taking.
In the light of the above, I’d like to give advice to your editor, which I think is as good as the advice I gave to Richard Wright in Paris. My advice to you is this – in the future, it will not hurt you, your paper, nor your principles, if you will find out what you are writing about before you write.



 
 
June 11, 1949


Sincerely yours,
James T. Farrell
 



* * *

[Reply to Farrell]
1) We’re glad to publish Farrell’s comment on the statement by Richard Wright as given in the Salomon interview. Labor Action has always been, and will remain, anxious to correct any mis-statement of fact, including unimportant ones.
2) Why Wright’s incidental remark (to which he gave no emphasis at all in his interview) is considered so “misleading” by Farrell is a little hard for us to see at first blush, however, and it is perhaps slightly harder to see why Farrell should be quite as upset as the tone of his letter indicates. Perhaps Wright was mistaken when he thought the “American delegates” “expected” him to be for the Marshall Plan and the Pact – in any case we fail to grasp the “significance” which Farrell apparently sees. And to this Wright merely added that he “immediately told them” what his position was (he is NOT quoted in the interview as stating that there was any discussion on the questions).
3) Nor was there the slightest imputation by Wright that Farrell or any one else was “attempting to put any kind of pressure” (political pressure, we assume) on him. But we are compelled to add that in our opinion it would have been perfectly legitimate and natural for Farrell and Hook to have done just that – what on earth would be wrong with doing so? We make this comment only because we gather from Farrell’s letter that he feels he is defending himself from an accusation of having done something wrong, somehow.
4) In the detailed report on the RDR conference which appeared in our issue of May 23, the precise facts about Wright’s relationship to the conference are given. He and Sartre “withdrew their active participation in the conference” but “later modified their attitude and sent a written declaration to the conference expressing their views.” In the editorial note in the following issue preceding the interview with Wright, it was incorrectly stated that Wright “attended” the conference. Farrell’s correction on the second is enthusiastically welcomed.
That burning question being settled, we still have to be enlightened with regard to the “significance” of this error. Frankly we can’t think of any. For whatever relevance it may have to the question, it may be useful to add that the opposition of many in France to the arrangements made by the leaders of the RDR was at least in part motivated by the fact that Such people as Farrell, Hook and Mrs. Roosevelt, supporters of American imperialism’s policies, had been invited to speak as the representatives of the American Left.
5) The advice which Farrell says he gave Wright – “to do nothing at all concerning the conference” – is one which we are glad Wright did not accept, at least to the extent of submitting his excellent written declaration against both war camps. On the basis of the foregoing, the reader may perhaps agree with us that Farrell’s rather nasty last sentence is the peevish sort of thing which one writes in a pique and then discreetly crosses out before mailing – that is, if one has given it a second thought. – Ed.
 

s T. Farrell: The Literary Left in the Middle '30s From "Proletarian" to People's Front Literature (July 1947)




James T. Farrell   |   Trotskyist Writers   |   ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
The Literary Left in the Middle ’30s
From “Proletarian” to People’s Front Literature
(July 1947)

From New International, Vol. XIII No. 5, July 1947, pp. 150–155.
Copyright, July 1947, by James T. Farrell.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In the New Masses of April 9, 1946, Albert Maltz stated in
an article, Moving Forward:
“In the Thirties, as there now seems to be general
agreement, left-wing criticism was not always conducted on the
deepest or most desirable or most useful level. Its effectiveness was
lowered by tendencies toward doctrinaire judgments and toward a
mechanical application of social criticism. And these tendencies must
be understood and analyzed if working class culture is to advance to
full flower. [Italics in original] But, on the other hand, the
inadequacies of criticism, such as they were, are only a small and
partial aspect of the left-wing cultural movement as a whole. The
full truth – as I have been aware of for many years – is this:
from the left-wing cultural movement in America, and from the left
wing internationally, has come the only major, healthy impetus to an
honest literature and art that these two decades have provided.
Compound the errors of left cultural thought as big as you will –
still its errors are small as compared to its useful contributions,
are tiny as compared to the giant liberating and constructive force
of Marxist ideas upon culture. As a matter of sheer fact this is such
a self-evident proposition that it doesn’t require someone of my
conviction to state it: it has been acknowledged even by reactionary
critics who, naturally, have gone on falsely to declare that the
liberating force of left culture has run its course and expired.”
At the suggestion of the editor of a well known quarterly
magazine, I wrote the following article. This magazine, however,
decided not to publish it for the alleged reason that it dealt too
much in personalities. After trying to publish it in one or two other
magazines and having it rejected, I put it away in my files. But in
the light of the fact that the Stalinists again are speaking in
“left” terms, and in the light of the fact that Albert Maltz and
many others in the New Masses and elsewhere are offering new
interpretations of what happened in Stalinist literary circles in the
1930s, I think it pertinent to publish this article now as a
contribution toward keeping the record clear, and in order to remind
the younger generation of writers and intellectuals of what really
happened in the 1930s. In this spirit, I publish the article.
Also, it is hardly necessary to add that the same spirit of
literary terror pervades the world-wide Stalinist movement at the
present time. One instance of it has been the cultural purge in
Russia in 1946. All over again, the leading cultural figures of
Russia were attacked and required to make confessions and to pen
public retractions. Among those forced to such indignity have been
Shostakovich (his “confession” appeared in the Saturday Review
of Literature of January 25, 1947) and Eisenstein. This would be
comic if it were not so grisly, so menacing.
*
I
All is rather somnolent on the so-called proletarian literary
front. The official left is no longer so ambitious, energetic and
arrogant as it was in the first half of the 1930s. Then, the subject
of proletarian literature was frequently discussed and hotly debated
in the journals. The movement was consciously promoted by the
self-styled “Marxians,” who conceived themselves to be genuine
“scientific” critics, of literature; often they wrote with the
conceit of history. The novelists of the movement were producing a
rapid succession of books. A few of these works, such as Nelson
Algren’s Somebody in Boots and Henry Roth’s Call It
Sleep are of worth. But I believe that most of those novels were
over-praised, even log rolled, far beyond their merit. The critics of
the movement legislated what themes and subject matter a novel should
have. And when this legislation was more or less fulfilled in a novel
they praised it unduly. Then, if someone criticized the particular
work as bad, he would (in all likelihood) be taken over the coals by
Michael Gold, who was in the habit of making his own particular
conception of “loyalty” to the movement a primary basis of
literary appreciation. The growth of the left wing theater was also
celebrated; it was confidently predicted that the revolutionary drama
would drive Broadway to cover. The young left wing poets, just
beginning to lisp their numbers, were regarding themselves as the
leaders in a renaissance of American poetry. In brief, proletarian
literature, like Eclipse) was first, and the rest were nowhere.
 
Literary Left in Decline
Today this entire movement seems bankrupt. Many of its exemplary
writers have long been rather silent. Some have obtained jobs in
Hollywood and elsewhere, and the more commercialized spheres of art
and journalism have attracted their energies. The little left-wing
magazines which sprouted all over the country, and which were
received as a sign of youth and growth-these are practically all
defunct. The Theater Union, after an abbreviated season in 1936, has
been disbanded. The Group Theater was temporarily disbanded. In 1937
it returned only briefly. However, the Group Theater can no longer be
considered a conscious part of the left-wing theater. For in 1936 its
board of directors published a statement in the New York Times
in which they definite1y separated themselves from the cultural left.
They declared that their aim was to produce good plays, irrespective
of social orientation. This was a denial of a fundamental conception
of the entire left-wing cultural movement. The magazine New
Theatre (which lived a short life as New Theatre and Film)
was the organ of the left-wing theater; it has been abandoned,
apparently for good. Many of the so-called proletarian novelists have
had no new books published in two or three years, and the reputations
made for them by critics like Granville Hicks are embalmed in the
dust of forgotten book reviews. Some of those works which have
appeared in the last two years are miserably mediocre. I refer to
such novels as Isidor Schneider’s The Kingdom of Necessity,
Clifton Cuthbert’s Another Such Victory, Edward Newhouse’s
This Is Your Day. In general, there are fewer cultural organs
of the official left, and those that remain grow increasingly dull
and sterile. Where there was once frenzied sectarianism, there is now
such roominess of acceptance that even commercial writers of no
literary consequence are admitted into the fold. And at the same time
political dogmatism and hysteria have intensified.
 
II
Alan Calmer, an editor of Proletarian Literature in the United
States, published an article in The Saturday Review of
Literature [1] under the title of
Portrait of the Proletarian as Artist. Mr. Calmer is not
politically opposed to the Communist Party. He is not, to use the
prevailing language of anathema and excommunication, a “Trotskyist.”
Therefore, not even an editor of the New Masses is likely to describe
his literary article as an attack on humanity by an ally of William
Randolph Hearst. In his article he attempts to explain the causes and
to trace the process behind the sudden disintegration of the official
left-wing cultural movement. He points out the contrast between the
old period and the present one: “In the old era, only Marx’s and
Lenin’s observations on art were free from criticism; now critics
who maintain that even nostalgic ‘feudal fiction belongs to us,’
are heralded as Marxists.” He illustrates how, with the change in
the party line, the old sectarianism was abandoned with unabashed
opportunism. He suggests that this shift is confusing to the young
proletarian writer. His article is an alarm signal, and in it he puts
his finger on one of the causes of the present state of
disintegration; it is “the subjection of literature to the tactics
of a political party.”
 
Example of French Revolution
Keeping this in mind, I believe that some historical exposition is
in order. Behind the widespread agitation for a proletarian
literature in this country there stands the Russian Revolution. It is
to be remembered that the effects of the great French Revolution were
international, and of a cultural and social as well as of a political
nature. In other countries, the French Revolution became a political
axis, and its influence reached into other fields of interest. French
influence spread over Europe. As one example of this, I might cite
the impetus given to American democratic sentiment by the French
Revolution, following our own Revolutionary War. This impetus
influenced the plays and the journalism of the period. One of its
manifestations was the spreading of a sentiment against aristocracy,
a sentiment expressed even by the growing American plutocracy that.
had been ushered into the tents of the mighty by the victory over
England. A parallel manifestation is observable in the case of the
Russian Revolution. Before the Russian Revolution, there was an
international Marxist movement. Marxism claims to be a world
philosophy, encompassing all phases of human activity. Consequently
it is historically normal that cultural struggles in Russia, the land
of the first Marxist revolution, should carry into other lands.
One of the cultural struggles in post revolutionary Russia
centered around the question of a proletarian culture and a
proletarian literature. The first years after November were years of
chaotic ferment. There were many schools in Russian literature, and
these all competed to gain literary hegemony. This was the period
when the best post-revolutionary Russian literature was produced,
with books like Isaac Babel’s Red Cavalry and Neweroff’s
City of Bread. The struggle reached even the topmost ranks of
the Communist Party, and a commission composed of Trotsky,
Lunarcharsky and Bukharin was formed to study the question and define
the party attitude on literary questions. The decision to permit an
anarchistic competition of groups and schools which accepted the
Revolution established an essentially “hands off” policy. [2]
All groups which accepted the October Revolution were to be permitted
free scope. Such an attitude was essentially the one Lenin and
Trotsky took toward art; both of them inclined toward the “garden”
view of culture. Culture was for all. All were to be educated and
encouraged to partake of its fruits. Thus, Lenin once said:
“We need the theater, not so much for propaganda as to
rest hard workers after their daily work ... We must preserve the
beautiful. ... There is nothing better than A passionata ...
The proletarian culture must appear as a natural development ...
Every artist, every-body who wishes to, can claim the right to create
freely according to his ideal.”
 
The Fight Against “Trotskyism”
It was as a result of this ferment and struggle that Trotsky wrote
his book of literary essays, Literature and Revolution. [3]
In it he argued that there could not be a proletarian literature, for
the time elapsing between the November Revolution and the period of
the socialist classless society would be too brief in the historical
sense. The aim of the proletarian revolution was to create not a
class culture but a human and socialist culture. Trotsky also spoke
for art’s own laws and for the continuity of the creative
tradition. [4] After Lenin’s death,
Trotsky was on the way out. Because of the political struggle between
the Left Opposition, which he led, and Stalin, Trotsky’s views on
literature and culture were attacked. The Stalinist literary group,
At Your Post, conducted the fight against Trotskyism, and it
was the central agent in forming the organization of Russian writers
known as RAPP, which advanced theses such as the following:
“The rule of the proletariat is incompatible with the
domination of non-proletarian ideology and consequently
non-proletarian literature.” [5]
And this:
“The path which the proletariat has followed in the
field of politics and economics should also be followed in the field
of art – that is, the road to hegemony, the seizure of power by the
proletariat in the domain of literature.” [6]
Both the point of view and the pogrom methods of RAPP were
transported to this country.
Historically, then, it was to be expected that the international
effect of the Russian Revolution would be social and cultural as well
as political and ideological. It was to be expected that there would
be a reflection of Russian literary struggles in our own country. In
general, culture is now international rather than national, and the
effects of literary tendencies in one country carryover into other
countries. The particular effect of Russian literary struggles was a
consequence of Stalin’s victory and the fight against “Trotskyism”
which was carried on in all fields. In essence, this resulted in
complete subjection of literature to politics, the hitching of
literature to the party line. In this country the agitation for a
proletarian literature came most forcibly during the days of the
so-called “third period” of the Communist International. During
that period, the party line was based on the premise that an epoch of
capitalist stabilization in the West following the World War had
ended and that the proletariat of the advanced Western nations was on
the eve of seizing power. As a class, the bourgeoisie was losing its
grip. The workers of the world were preparing to overthrow their
masters and become the dominant class in modern society. If the
bourgeoisie was on the eve of losing state power, it was deduced, the
bourgeoisie was no longer capable of contributing to literature. For
bourgeois literature was without hope, defeatist, pessimistic,
despairing. Having a class orientation, it was dedicated to
emphasizing bourgeois values and defending the bourgeoisie against
the workers. [7] If workers were
subjected to it, their revolutionary hope and optimism would be
corrupted. The time had arrived, then, to create a proletarian
literature, and the vanguard of the proletariat was the Communist
Party. Those who were not with the party were against it; they were
the class enemies of the proletariat. To this category belonged the
Socialists. They were the main adversaries because they were “social
fascists.” And in the field of literature, all liberal and radical
writers, all novelists working in the traditions of realism, and
naturalism in terms of the internal logic and development of literary
tendencies, were attacked, as were the Socialists in the political
arena. The conception of the role of the party was carried into
literature. Thus Edwin Seaver once stated:
“The literary honeymoon is over, and I believe that the
time is fast approaching when we will no longer classify authors as
proletarian writer and fellow travelers, but as party writers and
non-party writers.” [8]
Joseph Freeman, in his introduction to Proletarian Literature
in the United States approved this statement.
 
Social and Political Motives
It should be pointed out that in much of the agitation for a
proletarian literature, one simple distinction was almost never made.
It is the distinction between what might be termed social motives
and political motives in literature. Many of our apologists
for a proletarian literature were not demanding social motives
only. The were demanding a definite political motivation. The
motives and intentions they demanded were not precisely the same as
those that went into the work of Dickens when he attacked prison
conditions in England. Nor were they precisely the same as those that
went into the composition of Zola’s masterpiece, Germinal.
Dickens attacked prison conditions and agitated for a change in them
because of their effect on human beings. Zola studied and observed
life in a mining community closely and attempted to describe that
life with the utmost precision. In both instances the authors wrote
in terms of own ways of seeing life, their their own temperaments,
the logic of their own literary developments. The apologists for a
proletarian literature not only demanded that the writer do as much
in terms of the present as did Dickens and Zola in their own epoch;
they called upon the novelist (whether they realized it or not) not
only to see life, but to see life as a corroboration of the
prognostications of the Comintern. They wanted the author to see the
party line working out in life, irrespective of what was actually
happening. Thus they would tell the writer what theme he should use
in his novels, what classes he should write about. The warrant
offered in justification of these demands was Marxism. They were
“dialectical materialists”; that is, true scientists. The truth
they spoke was scientific truth. They knew the laws of social
action and their speech embodied that law. They knew history and they
spoke in its name. To repeat, theirs was the conceit of history.
Writers often allowed themselves to become so badgered and upset
by this agitation that they tended to become dual intellectual
personalities. There was frequently a split between their literary
aims and their political affirmations. They had to apologize because
they failed to see the party line in the life they depicted, in the
literature they read and valued. Thus they would often say that they
liked such and such a book, that it was literature, but ... “it
isn’t our stuff.” Sometimes this agitation even went to the point
of castigation of literary forms. A leading figure of the movement
once called free verse a “fascist” form, and the young poets had
to waste time in the useless effort of disputing him.
 
“Party Line” Literature
The basis of this criticism was almost always “ideological.”
The writer was often criticized because he wrote about the wrong
subject matter. The writer was told to be a Marxist, and to change
history with a lyric or a novel. He was told that in the present
epoch there was no time for the description of that incipiently
fascist class, the petty bourgeoisie. He must write of the manner in
which the workers were becoming class conscious. In other words, he
was told to describe the workers as they were described in the
prevailing party line. Methodologically, the fallacy here was what
Alfred North Whitehead has described as “the fallacy of misplaced
concretion.” An analysis of life is, by definition, an extraction
of elements from life. Mere analysis, that is, the party line, was
concretized and substituted for the raw, emergent movement of life”
itself. The psychology of human beings was deduced not directly from
experience but from a set of political theses. Philosophically, this
was backhanded idealism, the very tendency then being so violently
attacked by those who were thus themselves taking a side door into
idealism. [9]
Social motives have been apparent in literature for a long
time-long, long before our recent agitation for a proletarian
literature. A continuation of such motives in terms of the internal
logic and development of literature – a continuation of the
creative literary tradition itself – was neither meant nor asked
for. Political motives were behind the demands of the “Marxians.”
They were not merely asking the writer to speak truthfully of social
problems, they were asking him to advertise the Communist Party.
Discussions of proletarian literature do not appear in journals as
frequently as they once did. There is a reason. The party line, upon
which the agitation for a proletarian literature was based, has been
changed. The present line postulates as the central issue of the
contemporary world the struggle between progressivism and reaction –
democracy versus fascism. The tactics based on this line call
for organization of all progressive forces in a popular front against
reaction. Applied to the cultural field, this means a front of all
anti-fascist intellectuals and writers. In many instances, the
writers to be won over to this front are the very ones who were so
stupidly attacked and so patronizingly insulted in the so-called
“third period.” It is obvious that such writers (with “bourgeois”
reputations) cannot be won over if the critics are to continue
attacking their work as they once did. The new line demands that the
old literary attitudes be sidetracked. [10]
Anyone who has followed the New Masses literary section
from 1933 on will readily perceive that the old literary attitudes
have been sidetracked. The old fanaticism is gone. Writers who were
attacked are now praised, flattered, cajoled. The New Masses
motion-picture critics are constantly measuring Hollywood productions
in order to ascertain which are so many inches over toward the side
of progressivism. A Hollywood scenarist like Donald Ogden Stewart is
referred to as a man of genuine literary attainments and definite
importance in the history of American letters. Even Fannie Burst
receives serious consideration. Any writer who makes the least
gesture toward the official Left is now more than likely to receive
kindly treatment and free advertising from it when his books appear.
The new orientation demands tactics completely opposed to those
which were used in the so-called “third period,” and the new line
has effected an almost complete reversal of literary appreciations.
The case of Archibald MacLeish might be cited. In 1933 he was
excoriated and young left-wing poets were warned to beware of him.
When his poems, Frescoes for Mr. Rockefeller’s City,
appeared, Michael Gold in the New Republic castigated them as
possessing reactionary implications and revealing the “fascist
unconscious.” Now Mr. MacLeish’s alleged “fascist unconscious”
is forgotten. He “belongs to us.” He was a featured speaker at
the second American Writers’ Congress. He makes no apology for that
“fascist unconscious” and his work is no longer attacked.
 
Intolerance Continues
On the surface, it would seem that the new line makes for greater
liberalism and tolerance. It would appear that greater literary
freedom is now permitted and that the official Left is going to grow
up. But appearances are deceptive. The new orientation requires that
the old scapegoats be freed from literary pogroms, and that a new
group be found to take their place. This has happened. All writers
who declare themselves against war and fascism, who affirm faith in
democracy, who accept the official interpretations of the Soviet
Union, the Kremlin foreign policy, the new Soviet constitution, and
the Moscow Trials – they are left alone and are eligible for
admission into all revised categories of “honest” intellectuals.
They are working for the future of humanity. But whether or not their
literary work has integrity is not particularly important. If, for
instance, they work in Hollywood on an anti-labor film – well, they
can be excused. After all, they have no more control over the product
of their labor than has a Bethlehem steel puddler. But if, because
they oppose war and fascism and believe in human rights and freedom,
they express skepticism toward the Moscow Trials, that is another
matter. Then they are not “honest” intellectuals (revised
category). They are enemies of mankind. They have entered Mr.
Hearst’s valley of San Simeon. On the basis of such a line, the old
intolerance flourishes as ever. If anything, political dogmatism has
been intensified under the new line.
One reason why the new slogans have become an effective cover for
a continuation of intolerance is that a number of respectable writers
have more or less been won over as allies. They serve the function of
attractive bay windows. The official Left is tolerant of them. They
help out by occasionally making speeches, by occasionally writing in
the New Masses. They are allies to be exhibited in public.
Writers like Archibald MacLeish, Malcolm Cowley and Donald Ogden
Stewart fall into this category. They do not do the hatchet work. But
the hatchet work is done. And when it is, such “allies” make no
protest. It is all for the sake of humanity.
Proof of increased intolerance is to be found, for instance, in an
article contributed to the Daily Worker on October 20, 193?,
by V.J. Jerome, a party functionary who works in the cultural geld.
It is titled, No Quarter to Trotskyists – Literary or Otherwise.
I quote from this article at considerable length because it is most
revealing. Mr. Jerome writes:
“What are our forces doing on the literary front to
expose and drive out from our midst the Trotskyist imposters? What is
being done by our comrade writers to attend the warnings sounded by
Comrade Stalin in his great address on Mastering Bolshevism?
How should they work to hurl out of the way the Trotskyist obstacles
to promoting, through the powerful medium of the pen, the People’s
Front principles? What should they do to bring socialist achievements
of the Soviet Union closer to literary creators and audiences? ...
“What strikes one at first glance is the too common
notion that the struggle against Trotskyism concerns the party and
trade unions but not writers; that the literary battle is a thing
apart from the political struggle; that the Farrells and the Lionel
Abels and the Rahvs may be Trotskyites [sic!] but as writers they
belong with us in one confraternity – a ‘united front,’ you
might say. Otherwise, how shall we explain their inclusion in our
anthologies [???] and the prise of their ‘style’ [???] in our
magazines? Not that this notion is prevalent everywhere in our
literary circles; but it does obtain in varying degrees and when
encountered is often met by a thoughtless conciliatory attitude.”
(It would appear that the “style” of Studs Lonigan is
threatening to become a Trotskyist menace to the working class front
– in fact, to the human race.)
Mr. Jerome goes on to criticize the New Masses. If a writer
is attacked there as “Trotskyist,” Mr. Jerome does not want the
editors to grant the common democratic and editorial courtesy of
allowing him to reply to such attacks. He says:
“To admit the right of counterrevolutionaries to the
platform or press of the working class or the progressive movement on
the assumption ofÂ·Â· ‘tolerance’ or ‘fair play’ means to
accommodate the worst enemy which now confronts the forces of world
progress.” (This means that he wants all such writers barred from
contributing to organs like The Nation and New Republic.)
It should be pointed out here that the definition of a
“counter-revolutionary” changes with each change in the party
line. It is to be remembered that three years ago Mr. Jerome would
not have publicly criticized any statement of, say, Karl Radek, and
that he would have been very likely to have called
“counter-revolutionary” any American writer who challenged an
article of Radek’s. One gets dizzy keeping account of who is, and
who is not, a “counter-revolutionary.” Such an effort demands a
separate full-time study.
Mr. Jerome concludes:
“It is time to recognize that Trotskyites, ‘literary’
or otherwise, are engaged in tearing down all that we are working to
build up, that the class struggle permits no rotten liberalism
towards our enemies, that the fight against fascism demands the
complete routing and annihilation [???] of Trotskyism. The writers of
the progressive camp – Communists, left-wingers and progressives
generally – with New Masses as the rallying voice, can play
an important role in the developing People’s Front by being
consistent in their anti-fascism, by being simultaneously loyal to
the principles of the People’s Front and ruthless with the enemy –
with fascism and Trotskyism.”
 
“Trotskyists” to Be Barred
The expressed purpose of the People’s Front is to defend
democracy. Two of our most precious democratic rights are free speech
and the right to be considered innocent until proved guilty. What
kind of loyalty is Mr. Jerome speaking of when he demands that the
New Masses and, also, progressive magazines deprive writers of
these rights whenever Mr. Jerome’s party calls them “Trotskyists”?
For Mr. Jones does not confine his meaning of “Trotskyist” to the
political followers of Leon Trotsky, who call for the Fourth
International, and who are organizationally connected with the
international Trotskyist movement. He refers to all sorts of
writers who maintain their independence of judgment and arrive at
conclusions on political, intellectual or literary questions which
happen to differ from the prevailing views held on these questions
within the official Left movement. Here he reveals that his mind has
a totalitarian cast. He lets the cat out of the bag. He talks of
democracy and uses new slogans to cover the naked face of intolerance.
This intolerance becomes clear if we remember what he has said of
“Trotskyites” and his call for their “annihilation” [?], and
then cite instances of “Trotskyism” mentioned in the official and
semi-official press. What are some of the crimes of “Trotskyism”?
One is that of unfavorably reviewing Robert Briffault’s novel
Europe in Limbo. The radical critic, Phillip Rahv, committed
this crime in The Nation. [11]
He concluded his review thus:
“Mr. Briffault is interesting for his eccentric
disposition, which in its composite effect recalls to us such diverse
figures as H.L. Mencken, Benjamin De Casseres, Nietzsche, Dean Inge,
and William S. Hart with a smoking gun in each hand and tears in his eyes.”
Michael Gold exposed this “Trotskyist” crime in a Daily
Worker column entitled A Literary Snake Sheds His Skin.
[12] He called Mr. Rahv a “literary
snake,” and added that “there is something sneaky, too, about The
Nation in encouraging him.” Rahv, it seems has no right to
criticize this novel because Mr. Briffault is “a great
anthropologist who turned at fifty-five to novel writing, and did a
really original thing in making a bestseller out of the revolutionary
criticism of capitalism.” Michael Gold refuses to grant Rahv the
status of literary critic, declaring that Rahv attacks Briffault “not
as a Trotskyite, mind you, but as a literary critic.” It would
appear from the above that there is no end of damage being done to
contemporary American letters. “Trotskyism” in American letters,
according to the official Left, is becoming the same kind of devil
under everybody’s bed that Rousseauism was in the mind of the late
Dr. Irving Babbitt.
 
Hitler’s Tactics in Literature
The moment one discusses the “official Left” in American
letters one is led into discussing almost everything but literature.
This very fact should make clear to the reader the degree of genuine
interest the “official Left” has in literature. Literature is
subjected to political expediency. It is part of a monolithic
political movement. It is dominated by totalitarian states of mind.
In one period, book reviews end with discussions of industrial
activity in the Soviet Union and condemnations of a “social fascist.”
In the next period a book review is likely to turn into an alleged
“Trotskyist” plot to break strikes. The “official Left,”
literary and otherwise, uses the same tactics that Hitler does. It
lumps all who disagree with it in the same category. This is a
familiar political trick. It has nothing whatever to do with literature.
The consequences of applying such tactics in literature should be
clear to those who read this article. When writers become absorbed
into the official Left, they unwittingly fall into line. The official
Left is primarily a pressure group. It uses culture and
literature as a means of advancing itself as a pressure group. The
writer who maintains his intellectual independence is bound to become
lost and sidetracked in its mazes, especially if he is a literary
critic. There is no place for the literary critic in such a political
movement. When he becomes part of it, he finds that maintenance of
his literary tastes constantly involves him in criticism of the books
of his “political” allies and comrades. If he is a novelist, he
finds himself running afoul of a party line laid down by an
infallible set of leaders. These leaders are all dialectical
materialists and are furnished with the key to all history.
Whatever they do becomes historic necessity. Their premises
concerning life are handed to the writer as life itself, and he is to
write books celebrating them. Furthermore, he will awaken one morning
and read in the New York Times that the party line has been
changed. He will suddenly discover his comrades applying the new
party line in literature, praising new literary allies. He will find
commercial writing and Hollywood, the foe of his every literary
ideal, now being given serious attention. It is apparent that there
can be no creative and intellectual continuity in such a literary
tendency. There can be no expansion of literary sensibilities. There
can be no development of those intellectual perspectives necessary to
fertilize a literary movement. In terms of literature, there is no
sanction for the cultural policies which the official Left has
successively implemented. If the official Left wishes to establish
political sanctions for its cultural policies, it must come forth and
do so by showing the co-relationships between literature and
politics. At the present time the only sanction offered in its
defense is its own infallibility. And it goes almost without saying
that creative writers do not fare well in infallible political
movements. If they allow themselves to be compromised by this
movement – as many contemporary American writers have – then the
future opening up for them is more likely to offer the roles of
demagogues, political hacks, and literary cops than those of poets,
novelists and literary critics.

Footnotes
1. The Saturday Review of
Literature, July 1937.
2. The reader who wishes to
investigate this literary struggle should consult such books as
Voices of October, by Joseph Freeman, Joshua Kunitlz and Louis
Lozowick, Artists In Uniform, by Max Eastman, Literature and Revolution, by Leon Trotsky, The Mint and Soul of Bolshevism, by René Fueloep-Miller. The files of the magazine,
International Literature, published in English in Moscow, will
also be valuable. Problems of Soviet Literature, by A.
Zhdanov, Maxim Gorky, N. Bukharin, K. Radek and S. Stetsky, present
attempts to explain the line of “socialist realism” which
followed that of the RAPP period.
3. When Leon Trotsky’s Literature
and Revolution appeared in English, Michael Gold wrote of it in
New Masses: “America needs a critic.” While
disagreeing with Trotsky’s thesis concerning proletarian
literature, Gold wrote:
“Trotsky’s book on literature is an amazing
performance. This man is almost as universal as Leonardo da Vinci.
The Revolution shares with the Renaissance the fact that men have
again become versatile ... Trotsky was the most single-minded of
pacifists but made himself the best general and mil1tary tactician in
Europe. He is a great financial expert. He is now chief organizer of
the reconstructed Russian industry. He helps direct the diplomacy. He
reads and writes five or six languages, and knows the intimate
affairs of every country in the world. Occupying a group of positions
that would correspond to several cabinet offices in this country,
combined with the presidency of the steel trust, and rubber, oil and
textile industries, this man finds time to turn out at least two
important books a year, some of which serve as textbooks in economics
and history, besides scores of articles on industry, international
politics, the Einstein theory, finance, Freud, the American agrarian
situation. Chinese history, and labor movements, poetry, the atom,
the stage – every phase of intelligence that the Revolution must
use or understand ... Criticism like Trotsky’s is creative criticism.”
4. Trotsky’s thesis on literature is connected with his theory
of permanent revolution and a discussion of it involves political and
literary eschatology. Particularly in the light of the course of
history since it was written, this is not now the aspect of his book
most interesting for America. The value of the book in America now
would he twofold: the specific literary studies of Russian writers
and the attempt to found literary criticism on a materialistic and
naturalistic basis.
5. These quotations are from Joseph Freeman’s summary of this
group’s position, printed in Voices of October.
6. Ibid.
7. My own views concerning the
categories of “bourgeois” and “proletarian” in literature,
and concerning the literary notions in general advanced in this
movement during this period are contained in my book, A Note on
Literary Criticism, and therefore I shall not go into detail
concerning them here.
8. Quoted in Joseph Freeman’s
introduction to Proletarian Literature In the United States.
9. In this period, for instance, some
attacks were made on John Dewey as an “idealistic” philosopher.
10. A good contrast in the moods and
attitudes of the two periods is to be found in the proceedings of the
first and second American Writers’ Congress, American Writers’
Congress, edited by Henry Hart, and in The Writer in a
Changing World, also edited by Henry Hart.
11. Philip Rahv, Europe in
Melodrama, The Nation, October 2, 1937.
12. The Daily Worker, October
12, 1937.
 

s T. Farrell: The Fate of Writing in America (April 1947)



James T. Farrell | ETOL Home Page
James T. Farrell
The Fate of Writing in America
(April 1947)

Extract from pamphlet of this name reproduced in The Western Socialist, Boston, April 1947.
Transcribed by Adam Buick for the Marxists Internet Archive.
 HTML by Jonas Holmgren.

The magazine Tide (August 15, 1945) printed an article on Book Publishing, which stated: “With the prospect of more paper for book publishers in the not far distant future, the big publishers are girding themselves for the biggest expansion and probably the greatest competition in their history.” This article gives an account of the connections of the four big reprint companies. [Simon & Schuster; Doubleday, Doran & Company; World Publishing Company; and the combination of Harper & Bros., Random House, Little Brown & Co., Charles Scribner & Sons and the Book of the Month Club.] These are now becoming the dominating organizations in the book business. The major publishers, the article remarks, ᰴagree that the industry is changing and will possibly evolve into a quite different animal.” Many have said the same thing, both in public and in private discussion. Publishers, writers, editors, economic journalists and others are all asking questions about what will happen in the book business. Contradictory predictions are being made, some gloomy, some optimistic. In general, there is a great deal of interest, curiosity, alarm and uncertainty in literary and publishing circles about these recent developments.
A number of serious critics have repeatedly discussed the differences between literature and commerce in American culture. A question posed for a number of writers has been formulated in terms of the opposition between success and integrity. Now, with changes in the book business, gloomy prophets and disturbed writers are predicting that in the future it will be impossible for writers to retain any integrity and that American writing will become merely a success chronicle of commercialized writing. It will be, they say, Hollywoodized. Heretofore, questions of this kind have usually been dealt with in terms of a juxtaposition of “high culture” and “low culture.” “High culture” has been treated as serious art and viewed as the concern of gifted, sensitive and educated people; “low culture” has been dismissed as cheap popular art, spiritual fare for the uneducated masses. This view can be very misleading, for what has long been happening in this country is that a commercial culture has been developing and expanding. It has confused cultural values, and has almost totally absorbed the theatre. Books have not been unaffected; in fact the fear of commercialized culture is the source of current alarm about the future of books.
 
II
However increasing tendencies toward centralization in publishing and the enormous influence of Hollywood cannot, singly or combined, kill living creative literature. But writers will kill it themselves if they surrender, if they passively acquiesce. It is true that we have in America a swollen commercial culture. But at the core it is empty. And we can see that it is hollow by noticing how, when serious books do have an opportunity to sell, they often maintain themselves in competition with the base products. For instance, there is the phenomenon of Richard Wright. But his example does not suggest the full situation. For the advance-guard writer and the poet do not have the same chances as does the realistic novelist. Still all serious and honestly written literature has the influence of helping the literary artist. Literary taste must be created, and this can only be done by examples, by examples of seriousness and truthfulness. In the final analysis the problems of literature and commerce will remain as long as we have a capitalist form of society. But the literary and cultural situation is a fluid one. The Hollywood film may be produced more or less on the basis of monolithic industry. There may and most likely will be pronounced monolithic tendencies in book publishing. But the character of the industry itself, the unevenness of monolithic economic development, the great variety in tastes, cultural levels, and cultural needs produce a very fluid and complicated book market. The publishers intend to make money. They will, within this compass, have a more or less neutral attitude on what they publish. They are now competing on all sides. Their very competition gives the author a certain independence of position, vis-à-vis commercial publishing. The production and distribution of books in America may be organized in terms of the needs of the commercial book trade. But literary influences can, if with difficulty, grow even outside of this organization. Thus the writer himself has a role to play, and he has some voice.
Even though the gloomiest of predictions be fulfilled, these tendencies must work out in time. And here time is of the essence. They have not worked out to their end of total standardization. The channels of serious communication in America have been narrowed in recent years, but this narrowing has occurred more in the field of ideas and political thought than it has in that of literary work. As long as channels remain open the object of the writer should be to use these channels. Viewing these problems from the standpoint of the writer who opposes the commercialization of art, we see that counter-efforts must be made to provide different examples, different types of work. The conditions of the social organization of literature are given for the writer. He does not control them. But Napoleon was fond of remarking: “Engage in battle, and see what happens.” The writer must do likewise. He must engage in battle and see what happens. His battle, as a writer, is made through his effort, through his opposition to shoddy standards of writing, and thereby, through the creation of counter-examples that are not shoddy.
As these centralizing tendencies do evolve to the degree that they may, it should become increasingly clear to the writer with a conscience that his long-run interests as a human being and as an artist fail to coincide with the interest of capitalism. But this conclusion, leading the writer toward socialism, does not, in itself, give him a literary perspective. By reaching this conclusion the artist will not thereby necessarily assimilate socialism as a perspective which motivates his work. Some of these problems are problems involving the economic position of the writer, and the degree to which he desires to struggle in order that he be able to write out of his own needs, his own feelings, his own tensions and emotions, his own experiences, rather than on the basis of the fluctuations in the book market. An analysis such as this one is not directly concerned with a discussion of the problems of orientation and perspective out of which a writer develops and works according to his own bent. This problem is a separate one, and to introduce it here would be as likely to confuse as to clarify. It is best treated separately. Further, we can now see that from the standpoint of the writer the direct and immediate problem he faces is precisely the same as that which his predecessors have faced – the problem of success versus integrity. The circumstances of that problem have changed somewhat, and the attractiveness of success is greater than ever. The rewards of writing for the market are higher. In consequence, the serious writer will meet with more competition from those who see in writing merely and solely an opportunity for the big money. But greater competition does not change the problem in its essentials. For some time to come al least, this problem will remain posed for the writer as it is at the present moment. In meeting it his own decisions constitute a factor of great importance. This point cannot, be over-emphasized. The writer is an active not a passive agent in his situation.
Long ago when discussing the question of freedom of the writer, Karl Marx remarked: “Is a press which degrades itself to a trade free? A writer must certainly earn money in order to exist and write, but he should not exist and write in order to earn money. [...] The first freedom of the press must consist in its emancipation from commerce. The writer who degrades the press to a mere means of material livelihood deserves as a punishment for this inner slavery that outer slavery called censorship, unless his very existence is already his punishment.” After quoting this, Marx’s biographer Mehring stated: “All his life Marx lived up to these principles and to the same standard which he demanded from others: a man’s writing must always be an end in itself. Far from being a mere means for himself and others, he must, if necessary, sacrifice his own existence to his writing.”
Marx was a great revolutionary. But creative artists have written and clung to this same principle. Tolstoy did. Joyce did. And we love the memory of these men, not only for their literary greatness but also for their artistic conscience and honor. Decidedly the time has come for writers to speak up, to assert themselves, to take a stand on the future of books. The time has come for them to say, and with scorn in their voices, that they will not be hacks. The field of the future is theirs. Year in and year out bestsellers have come and gone. Real books will not go like that. They will stay. For we know that the future of books is involved in the future of culture. And the future of culture is a not insignificant part of the future of mankind. We have not lived through the last mass revulsion in taste in history. We have not lived through the last change in history. We have not lived through the last revolution. Now less than ever should the literary artist surrender to the Philistines and to commerce. The future is more important for writers, for the new generation, than the bombast and glamor which so many now call culture. A half-monopolized culture can only reproduce worn-out and wretched formulas, patch them up with cellophane, and let the press agent do his job. You can saturate humanity with everything including this sentimentality. Clear and honest work will stand out against such saturated sentimentality. Years ago, Zola boldly proclaimed: “The truth is on the march.” That is the role of the writer – to try to make that truth march.
JAMES T. FARRELL [Copyrighted, 1947]
 

 T. Farrell: A Portrait of James Connolly (Part 5)




Portrait  |  James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
A Portrait of James Connolly
* * *
V. The Link Between Connolly’s Catholicism and Marxism
New International, Vol. 14 No. 4, April 1948
R.M. Fox, in his biography James Connolly: The Forerunner (which has led me to write this essay), remarks:
“He [Connolly] was a man of great individuality, combining an acceptance of the Marxian view of economics and of history – as a record of social struggles – with the Catholic outlook which emphasized the value of the human soul. Connolly is not by any means the first man to realize the revolutionary implications of Christianity. If a man is simply a bubble of gas, a product of chemical action, he may be used as a machine or as cannon fodder without any question of the degradation of humanity. But once admit his possession of a soul and the case against human degradation becomes infinitely stronger.” [1]
Here it is clear that Fox is seeking to explain the fact that Connolly was both a Marxist and a Catholic. And while this explanation is, in a sense, true to the spirit of Connolly, it is, I think, unnecessary.
The revolutionary implications of Christianity need to be seen historically. The Christian idea of the immortality of the soul – even though it be the soul of a slave – was, in the humane sense, an advance over the ideas of the pagan world. The concept and the practice of charity, the ideas of love and of brotherhood of Christ and of the early Christians – these also should be seen as attitudes which signified moral progress.
But even so, we shouldn’t regard the pagan world and pagan ideas in a monolithic sense. It is a well-known fact that the Greeks laid the basis for western civilization. Also, prior to the rise of Christianity, the ideas of the Greek materialists had already been exhausted, and the main streams of Greek thought had been given their course by Socrates, Aristotle and Plato. Lange, the nineteenth-century scholar, in his History of Materialism, points out that when the great progressive ideas of an age wear out, become exhausted, insight and observations are then linked up with regressive ideas, so that inasmuch as human beings do constantly have good insights, they tend to believe that these are necessarily related to regressive ideas, if these regressive ideas are the dominant ones of an age.
Lange here was criticizing Socrates, Plato and Aristotle; he defended the early Greek materialists. One of his arguments was that materialism had produced a high conception of morality. This is true for all ages. Philosophical materialism – as distinguished from the crude materialism of money-grubbing – has given voice to the most noble moral sentiments and ideals, and it stands in no need of apologizing before the bar of anti-materialist criticisms. Many examples could here be cited, but I shall merely refer to the nobility of expression of Lucretius.
At the same time that we realize this fact, we need also to see that Christianity and its contributions to western civilization cannot be taken merely on the level of philosophical discussion and criticism, as the anti-materialists so often tend to take it when they attack materialists. Socially, Christianity made a major contribution to civilization. It advanced a broader idea of the dignity of man. This relates to the positive side of Christian ethics. The negative side is to be seen in the doctrine of Christian meekness.
Christianity cannot, then, be seen as a unified and strictly logical and intimately consistent body of ideas. And our consideration of Christianity here is not a philosophical one. The above remarks have been made merely in order to try to clarify issues.
Just as Christianity registered an ethical advance for mankind, so did the philosophy of political democracy. The best of Christian ethics was absorbed by democracy. There is a direct connection between the idea of the equality of the soul of man and the ideas of such great democrats as Thomas Jefferson. Thus: “We hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights; and among these rights are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.”
At the same time, we should observe that mankind has advanced in the realm of ideas much more than it has in the realm of overt action. In all ages, we can observe that, on the one hand, there is a wide and frightening difference between the ethical conceptions of conduct of the noblest thinkers of the age, and, on the other, the gross realities of day-to-day living. The entire history of civilized mankind is a history of exploitation, slavery, cruelty, war and injustice.
I have quoted from Swift’s Modest Proposal concerning conditions in Ireland in the seventeenth century, and I have, mainly with references from Connolly’s own writings, given additional quotations which indicate the injustices from which the Irish people have suffered. Readers of this essay will be sufficiently familiar with the story of the injustices in advanced capitalist countries, in the past and in the present, so that I need not document these facts here. Suffice it for me to point, in modern America, the freest and the richest country in the world, to the phenomenon of Jim Crow, of lynchings in the South, and of the slums of all of our major cities.
At the present time, various Christian and especially Catholic thinkers deal with the phenomenon of modern injustice, cruelty and slavery from the standpoint of Christian moral precepts. They argue on this basis that inhumanity in capitalist countries flows from the principle of bourgeois liberalism, and that the inhumanity of Stalinism [2] flows from the principles of socialism as a continuation of bourgeois liberalism. Later on, I shall have more to say on this point. Here I shall only suggest to the Christian critics of liberalism, socialism and materialism that they consider the history of men in society since the advent of Christianity. I shall offer merely passing reminders to them.
On the opening page of the first volume of Henry Charles Lea’s great scholarly work, A History of the Inquisition of the Middle Ages, we can read:
“History records no such triumph of intellect over brute strength as that which, in an age of turmoil and battle [the twelfth century and the early thirteenth], was wrested from the fierce warriors of the time by priests who had no material force at their command, and whose power was based alone on the souls and consciences of men. Over soul and conscience this empire was complete. No Christian could hope for salvation who was not in all things an obedient son of the Church, and who was not ready to take up arms in its defense; and, in a time when faith was a determining fact of conduct, this belief created a spiritual despotism which placed all things within reach of him who could wield it.” [3]
And Lea also writes of the priest:
“Not only did the humblest priest wield a supernatural power which marked him as one elevated above the common level of humanity, but his person and possessions were alike inviolable ... The man who entered the service of the Church was no longer a citizen. He owed no allegiance superior to that assumed in his ordination.” [4]
Here we can see some of the historical factors which served as a basis for the Inquisition. And Lea shows that the development of the Inquisition “was ... a natural – one may almost say an inevitable – evolution of the forces at work in the thirteenth century ...” Lea documents statements such as these with the most minute detail. He shows that the Inquisition was a development of the social struggles of the times. The punishment of heretics, the burnings at the stake, the tortures, all of this was part of a complicated historical evolution in the process by which Rome emerged triumphant over local interests. Writing of the rise of the mendicant orders – one of which was founded by the great and lovable St Francis – he concludes that even though their work was not lost “they soon sank to the level of the social order around them.” [5] This social order was marked by cruelty, pitilessness, misery. Heresies, called forth by the wretchedness of the poor and by their desire to find the early Christ, were mercilessly crushed. Out of such social conditions, the Inquisition was founded.
The life of mankind goes on, as it were, on both the material and the moral level. The written history of mankind reveals to us, in a confused way, the growth of moral ideas which are, however, constantly contradicted by actual practice. Moral realities and moral statements do not harmonize. And yet moral and ethical ideas do have their influence. They have given even a sense of dignity to slaves, to the poor and ignorant. The story of the growth of moral ideas is as elevating as the story of their repudiation and betrayal is in practice odious and frightening.
The continuity in ideas and ethical conceptions in our society is one which stands in the background of Connolly. From Christianity he absorbed its moral values, and in his mind there was no apparent contradiction between his Catholicism and his socialism. This is, I think, an important point to keep in mind if we study his life.
In the previous parts of this essay, I have indicated that there were circumstances in the history of Ireland which easily led Irishmen to see the Reformation differently than did European Continentals. On the European continent, the Reformation was a major revolutionary development leading to the breaking of the chains of spiritual despotism. Early voices of the Reformation, such as Martin Luther, were spiritually revolutionary and socially conservative. The Reformation was part of the complex historical development which saw the rise of capitalism.
As Tawney says in Religion and the Rise of Capitalism, “The storm and fury of the Puritan revolution has been followed by a dazzling outburst of economic enterprise ...” [6] This economic enterprise, with all the suffering entailed, led men a step nearer to that emancipation of which they still dream and from which they are still so far away. But Ireland, as we have already noted, was part of the underside of this development. As Fox states, the Reformation was to Connolly “the capitalist idea appearing in the religious field.” He quotes Connolly:
“As capitalism teaches that the social salvation of man depends solely upon his own individual efforts, so Protestantism, echoing it, taught that the spiritual salvation of man depends upon his own individual appeal to God.” [7]
Fox further remarks on this conclusion of Connolly’s that capitalism is the parent, the Reformation is the child, and that it is irrational to condemn only the child.
In Connolly’s mind, ideas of the dignity of the individual and of community were linked together. “We are all members of one another,” he declared in The Reconquest of Ireland. And in his conclusion to this same book he declared:
“The objective aimed at is to establish in the mind of the men and women of Ireland, the necessity of giving effective expression, politically and socially, to the right of the community (all) to control for the good of all, the industrial activities of each, and to endow such activities with the necessary means.” [8]
Here is one of the ways in which Catholicism was tied in with his thinking. He linked up ideas of community and conceptions of the dignity of the individual. The link, historically, in the chain of political and moral ideas in Connolly’s mind was political democracy. [9] This is important. He absorbed, largely through his Irish predecessors like Lalor and others as well as from Marx, the political ideas of the Great French Revolution.
He did this as an Irishman. The differences in the historical experiences of the Irish and of the English and the continental Europeans here tell in the whole outline of Connolly’s ideas. To him, individualism was moral and it was also political – political democracy. As a moral doctrine, it found its source in his feelings and beliefs as a simple Catholic. He believed in the equality of souls. The ideas of community flow into the ideas of the nation. The struggle for a free Ireland was, for Connolly, the idea of a free Irish community. Among the Irish, the race is often seen as a family. The Irish nation, the Irish community, the Irish as a family, these ideas touch on one another. [10]
Connolly’s ideas about the Irish nation and his views on democracy are similar to the view of the nation as the republic of virtue held by the earlier French revolutionaries, particularly the Jacobins. In the Abbé Sieyes’ pamphlet – The Third Estate – What Is It? – which was so influential in the Great French Revolution, the author’s emphasis was on the legal and political arguments which would justify and show the rights of the third estate to constitute itself the nation. In their thinking, Jacobins like Robespierre and Saint-Just went a step further than this. They envisioned the nation not only in terms of popular will and sovereignty but also in terms of the individuals who would be the members of the nation.
In their thinking, one finds an austerity suggestive of Protestantism. And the dignity of man, to them, was not associated with Catholic thinking. Reason and republicanism provided them with their basic premises. To them, the foreign foe was outside the country. The enemies within were the aristocrats. This suggests a difference in the outline of their political ideas as compared with the outline of political ideas in the mind of Connolly, who was, in a sense, one of their heirs.
Speaking of religion and theocracy in his Esprit de la Révolution, Saint-Just expressed the opinion that if Christ were reborn in Spain – in the time of the French Revolution – he would be crucified again by the priests, on the ground that he was a factious man who, under the signs of charity and modesty, meditated the ruin of church and state. He argued that a reign of virtue, patience and poverty would be a danger to monarchy, and also that the Christian churches had lived most purely in countries that had become republican. He thought that the people of Spain – a Catholic country – would be the last to conquer their liberty, and he contrasted Spain with England where the hand of the priests did not lie heavy on the people as it did in Spain. Historically, of course, Saint-Just is a predecessor of Connolly. But he serves as a good concrete illustration, nonetheless, to suggest more clearly the historical features of Connolly’s own thought.
France was the cradle of modern liberty in Europe. The progressive features of national ideas, of ideas of the nation, come from France. The French Revolution would inevitably have influenced the Irish, as it did, and its political features and ideas would be absorbed by the Irish. The Irish did not pay a price for the French Revolution; they did for the earlier English Revolution – the price of the Cromwellian invasion of Ireland. From France, the Irish could get ideas of the politics of liberty; from England, they got the economics of capitalism. Along with the latter came the Puritan invader with gun and cannon.
A man as deeply sincere as Connolly, a self-educated Irish working lad, a man devoted to the struggle of his own people like Connolly, most obviously would not see the Reformation as a Continental would see it. The so-called peculiarities in historical developments register not only in social and economic relationships, but also in the outlines of the thought of men and in their feelings. Connolly’s own thought was one such register of the peculiarities of Irish history.
R.M. Fox quotes an article of Connolly’s in which he replied to a priest, Father MacEarlen, who had criticized socialist thought. In this reply, Connolly wrote:
“I admit unquestioningly the obligation resting upon the Holy See to recognize the de facto Government and the de facto social order in any given country or age. But side by side with, part and parcel of, that admission, and not to be divorced from it, I insist upon the right of the individual Catholic to disregard that obligation and to be a reformer of, or a rebel and reformist against, the Government which the Holy See is compelled by its international position to recognize.
“Without this right, Catholicity would be synonymous with the blackest reaction and opposition to all reforms. As an example Ireland is illuminating. For the greater part of seven centuries, the de facto Government of Ireland has been a foreign Government imposed on the country by force, and maintained by the same means. The Holy See was compelled by its position to recognize that government, but the holiest and deepest feelings of the Catholics of Ireland were in rebellion against that government, and, in every generation, the scaffold and the prison and the martyr’s grave have been filled in Ireland with devout subjects of the Holy See, but with unrelenting enemies of the de facto government of Ireland. The firm distinction in the minds of Irish Catholics between the duties of the Holy See and the rights of the individual Catholic has been a necessary and saving element in keeping Ireland Catholic, and he, by whatever name he calls himself or to whatever order he belongs who would seek to destroy that distinction, or make acquiescence in the political obligations of the Papacy, a cardinal article of Catholic faith, is an enemy of the faith and the liberties of our people.” [11]
And also in the same article, he declared:
“As individual Catholics, we claim it as our right, nay, as our duty to refuse allegiance to any power or social system whose authority to rule over us we believe to be grounded upon injustice.” [12]
Connolly then fused in his thought Christian and democratic ideas of the past. He was not, however, fighting the battles of the past, but those of his own present. As he indicated, he considered these to be battles against injustice. He believed in economic justice, and he wrote: “Socialism is neither Protestant nor Catholic, Christian nor Freethinker, Buddhist, Mohammedan, nor Jew; it is only human.” [13] It was his idea of what was human, of human dignity, which was central in all of his thinking.
 
Top of the page
Notes
1. Fox, James Connolly: The Forerunner, p. 131.
2. Farrell’s Note: In passing let me observe that Stalinism has even abrogated those rights which man had in feudal society. Morally it represents a backward swing of history which goes beyond the abrogation of the rights of man attained through the rise of political democracy and bourgeois liberalism.
3. Farrell’s Note: It is my opinion that Aquinas’ conception of God can be correlated with spiritual despotism: “God is not only His own essence ... but also His own being ... God is the first efficient cause ... There can be nothing caused in God, since He is the first cause ... God is absolute form, or rather absolute Being ... God is His own existence.” These and many other sentences could be culled from Aquinas to show that God, as conceived by this scholarly saint, is completely and totally independent of man and of all the laws of matter. He is utterly sufficient unto Himself, a principle above all principles. God, demonstrated as a self-evident existence and proved by the principles of Aristotelian logic, is so above humanity that I would consider Him here to be unapproachable. Face to face with God as He is verbalized in the cold pages of Aquinas, humanity becomes totally dependent. I would suggest that the interested reader compare Aquinas on God with Augustine, who was a poet and an artist as well as a theologian. The conception of God as a logical principle, in my opinion, offers the best possible source for, and rationalization of, spiritual despotism.
4. Henry Charles Lea, A History of the Inquisition of the Middle Ages, 3 vols. (New York: Harper, 1888), 1 : 2.
5. Ibid., 1 : 304.
6. R.H. Tawney, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1926), p. 197.
7. Fox, James Connolly: The Forerunner, p. 133.
8. Connolly, Labour in Ireland, p. 333.
9. Farrell’s Note: Connolly also wrote in The Reconquest of Ireland, “As Democracy enters Bureaucracy takes flight.”
10. Farrell’s Note: An interesting illustration of this is to be seen in Frank O’Connor’s great short story Guests of the Nation. This story, told in the first person, recounts how members of the IRA, during the Black and Tan struggle, hold two Limeys as hostages. They become fond of the Limeys, who, in turn, regard these Irish boys as friends. Then the Irish lads are ordered to execute their prisoners. The human sentiments of the narrator are wrenched as a result of the execution. Heretofore he had felt that “disunion between brothers seemed to me an awful crime.” These are the words with which he translated national spirit into personal emotion. This feeling was, however, shaken by the execution of these English guests of the nation.
11. Fox, James Connolly: The Forerunner, pp. 135–36.
12. Ibid., p. 135.
13. Ibid., p. 132.
 
Top of the page

Marxists’ Internet Archive  |  Encyclopedia of Trotskyism  |  Document Index Page
Last updated on 20 July 2018



 T. Farrell: A Portrait of James Connolly (Part 4)




Portrait  |  James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
A Portrait of James Connolly
* * *
IV. The Politics of Connolly’s Catholicism
New International, Vol. 14 No. 3, March 1948
The historic experiences of Ireland as a subject and
exploited nation can be described as the other and non-progressive side
of the rise of English capitalism and the Industrial Revolution.
If we look at England, without in any way minimizing the horrors of
the new industrialism, we can see the advances made with the rise of
capitalism. There was an enormous economic development and, in
addition, there were real political gains of a democratic character.
England became one of the most democratic countries in the world.
But if we look at Ireland, it is much harder to see these advances.
Here was a nation invaded and despoiled by foreigners. Its industry was
smashed. Its people were driven off the land and out of the country.
Its clan system was broken up. The faith of its fathers was ruthlessly
abused by the despoiling invaders who were also the professors of an
antagonistic religious creed.
Consider these facts – which are but roughly and hastily generalized
here but which were vivid, concrete and intimate to generations of the
Irish – and it should not be difficult to understand how and why
Catholic Irishmen would not see the progressive side of the
Reformation. That liberty of conscience which has historically been so
influenced by the rise of Protestantism had to be defended and fought
for by Catholics. In their own country, Irish Catholics lost their
citizenship. They were exiles in their own country, and in fact it can
be said that here are the historic roots of that melancholy sense of
alienation which is to be found, even to this day, in so many Irish and
even in Irish-Americans who are far removed in space and time from
remote and oppressed Catholic Irish ancestors.
Sean O’Faolain, in his biography of Daniel O’Connell, King
of the Beggars, writes of Catholic relief bills prior to the
rise of O’Connell as a political leader: “After 1771 an Irishman might
lease a bog for a brief period, if it was a mile from a town ... and if
the lessee guaranteed to reclaim at least half of his bogland within
twenty-one years.” And after 1782, as O’Faolain also wrote:
“A Catholic, i.e., one of the people was suddenly
acknowledged as a species of citizen, if a very inferior species of
citizen; so inferior that our historians of Dublin under the Georges
have been unable to find a single detail about the people, and all we
can gather about them is to be inferred from the contemporary theatre
in which they begin to appear as the faithful, if rather foolish,
servant ... every office was closed to the native – unless he
apostatized – the army, the law, and the civil service – though he
could become a doctor in private practice, or open an apothecary’s
shop. Not until 1793 ... could a native Irishman enter the army ... But
he could take neither hand, act, nor part in the government of his
country ... He walked with the word Pariah branded on his forehead.” [1]
One could add many details concerning the persecution of
Catholics, including the clergy, and the ways in which religious
persecution was linked with national and social oppression. Connolly
himself, in Labour in Irish History, wrote:
“War, religion, race, language, political reform,
patriotism – apart from whatever intrinsic merits they may possess – all serve in the hands of the possessing class as counter-irritants,
whose function is to avert the catastrophe of social revolution by
engendering heat in such parts of the body politic as are farthest
removed from the seat of economic inquiry.” [2]
England is noted in the history books for having
perfected the technique of divide-and-rule in modern times. The policy
of ruling an oppressed nation or race by dividing it was worked out, as
it were, in the terrible empirical-historical situation of Britain’s
seven-century rule of Ireland.
The Irish were, then, beggared and oppressed for a long period. The
horrible conditions of life in Ireland in the eighteenth century were
revealed in Swift’s masterpiece of irony and sarcasm, A Modest
Proposal for Preventing the Children of the Poor People in Ireland from
Becoming a Burden on their Parents or Country, and for Making them
Beneficial to the Public. This began:
“It is a melancholy Object to those, who walk
through this great Town [Dublin], or travel in the Country, when they
see the Streets, the Roads, and Cabbin-Doors,
crowded with Beggars of the female Sex, followed by three,
four or six Children, all in Rags, and importuning every
Passenger for an Alms. These Mothers instead of being able to
work for their honest livelihood, are forced to employ all their time
in Strolling, to beg Sustenance for their helpless Infants,
who, as they grow up, either turn Thieves for want of work,
or leave their dear native country to fight for the
Pretender in Spain, or else sell themselves to the Barbadoes.”
[3]
Swift proposed to find “a fair, cheap and easy method of
making these Children sound and useful Members of the commonwealth.”
And he found a way whereby these children could be used to “contribute
to the Feeding and partly to the Clothing of many Thousands.”
Calculating that there were about 120,000 children of the poor born
annually, Dean Swift pointed out that this number could not all support
themselves by agricultural and handicraft work or by thievery. Thus the
children, when they reach the age of one, would become “a most
delicious, nourishing, and wholesome Food, whether Stewed, Roasted,
Baked, or Boyled, and ... it will equally serve in a
Fricassie, or a Ragoust ...” One hundred thousand of
these children could be so disposed of, and since as food they would be
dear, they would be “very proper for Landlords, who, as they
have already devoured most of the Parents, seem to have the best Title
to the children.” [4]
This enterprise would be profitable all around, it would even give
the mothers a profit, and Swift also suggested that “Those who are most
thrifty ... may flay the Carcass; the Skin of which,
artificially dressed, will make admirable Gloves for Ladies,
and Summer Boots for fine Gentlemen.” Swift, with his
melancholy and savage genius, revealed the essential features of the
Irish problem. Ireland was despoiled as a cognate part of the
capitalist advance of England. Swift’s sarcasm draws this out with a
genius that has been, to my mind, unmatched in centuries.
At the same time that we consider this long historic oppression, it
is necessary to remember that even in national oppression there were
class differences. Connolly pointed this out. He noted that the poor
Protestants as well as the poor Catholics were oppressed and exploited
in Ireland, and he declared, in Labour in Irish History,
that the Penal Laws against the Irish
“did indeed make the life of propertied Catholics
more insecure than would otherwise have been the case; but to the vast
mass of the population the misery and hardship entailed by the working
out of economic laws were fraught with infinitely more suffering than
it was at any time within the power of the Penal Laws to inflict. As a
matter of fact, the effect of the latter code in impoverishing wealthy
Catholics has been much overrated. The class interests which at all
times unite the propertied section of the community operated, to a
large extent, to render impossible the application of the power of
persecution to its full legal limits. Rich Catholics were quietly
tolerated, and generally received from the rich Protestants an amount
of respect and forbearance which the latter would not at any time
extend to their Protestant tenantry or workpeople.” [5]
In 1763, a bill was even introduced “to give greater
facilities to Protestants wishing to borrow money from” Catholic money
lenders. Though this bill was defeated, Connolly suggested that its
mere “introduction serves to show how little the Penal Laws (against
Catholics) had operated to prevent the accumulation of wealth by the
Catholic propertied classes.”
Connolly’s historical thesis was, as R.M. Fox has indicated, “that
England was the exponent of the feudal-capitalist system in Ireland.”
The peculiarities in Irish history are not to be found only in the
modern period. They are to be found in Ireland’s long history, and most
especially during these seven centuries of English oppression. Let me
repeat, then, that Ireland under English rule reveals the cost, the
other side of progress. [6]
In this context, Connolly observed that one of the “Slave
birthmarks” in Ireland was “a belief in the capitalist system of
society: the Irishman frees himself from such a mark of slavery when he
realizes that truth that the capitalist system is the most foreign
thing in Ireland.” [7]
In Ireland, then, the role of the Church was different from that
which it played on the continent. There it was bound up with the feudal
system and was a rich landowner in its own right. Involved in the
bourgeoisie’s attack on the feudal aristocracy was its attack on the
Church. The ideology of feudalism is penetrated through and through
with that of Catholic thinkers. Not only on the planes of politics and
economics, but also on that of ideology, the Church was attacked. In
France the desire of the peasantry for land and for freedom from many
remaining feudal restrictions over-weighed (in many parts of the
country) their loyalty to the Church.
Briefly, the Church was not bound up with the system of oppression
in Ireland as it was in feudal Europe. Even though Connolly did observe
that propertied Catholics in the eighteenth century did not suffer as
did the poor, it does remain true that they were discriminated against.
In addition, the alleviation of the operation of the Penal Laws, in the
case of the rich Catholics, was not a matter of law. The Irish were
penalized by the foreign invader and ruler because of their religion.
Catholicism and nationalism became bound together in the minds of many
Irishmen. The consciousness of individual Irishmen was not divisible
into compartments so that Catholicism would be fitted into one
compartment while hatred of an oppressor and desires for freedom would
be placed in another. To be Irish and to be Catholic were, in effect,
synonymous.
For an Irishman under these conditions to be free meant to escape
from penalization because of his religion as well as his nationality.
The logic of this attitude runs through the entire O’Connell movement
in the nineteenth century. In fact, Daniel O’Connell is often referred
to as the Great Emancipator. The victory of Catholic Emancipation in
1829 and 1830 was a signal step forward in the Irish struggle; and yet,
as Connolly observed and as is well known, it was achieved at a time of
marked miseries and destitution. Connolly, in fact, described the
period between 1830 and 1848 in Ireland as “A Chapter of Horrors.”
And he wrote about the tithes imposed on the peasantry by the clergy of
the Episcopal and Catholic Churches as follows:
“The fact that this was in conformity with the
practice of the Catholic Church in countries where it was dominant did
not, of course, make this more palatable to the Catholic peasantry of
Ireland, who continually saw a part of their crops seized upon and sold
to maintain a clergy whose ministrations they never attended and whose
religion they detested.” [8]
When the discontent of the peasants flared in rebellion,
“The Episcopalian clergymen called on the aid of the law, and, escorted
by police and military, seized the produce of the poor tenants and
carried them off to be sold at auction.” And what aid did the peasants
get during the period of rebellious struggles which were carried on
under the leadership of secret societies? Connolly’s answer to this
question reads as follows:
“The politicians gave neither help nor countenance
to the fight, and save for the advocacy of one small Dublin newspaper,
conducted by a small but brilliant band of young Protestant writers, no
journal in all Ireland championed their cause. For the Catholic clergy
it is enough to say that while this tithe war was being waged they were
almost universally silent about that ‘grievous sin of secret
conspiracy’ upon which they are usually so eloquent. We would not dare
say that they recognized that as the secret societies were doing their
work against a rival priesthood, it was better to be sparing in their
denunciations for the time being; perhaps this is not the explanation,
but at all events it is noteworthy that as soon as the tithe war was
won all the old stock invectives against every kind of
extra-constitutional action were immediately renewed.” [9]
With Emancipation, the ground was cut from under
O’Connell’s feet. As O’Faolain, his biographer, says, he “could not
form a solid block of Irish votes, an Irish Party, immediately after
Emancipation, as Parnell did later.” The Emancipation Act was, in
reality, only a partial emancipation. And it only tended to open up
some eyes more clearly to the social question. The Young Irelanders of
’48 and James Fintan Lalor opposed O’Connell and O’Connellism.
Connolly, in Labour in Irish History, justifies their
criticism of and opposition to O’Connell. They, and Connolly later,
moved in the direction of social emancipation. They – and Connolly
after them – were advocates of extra-constitutional action, of
rebellion.
The foregoing should reveal that Catholicism is not a separate
question in Ireland. In fact, religion is never a separate question,
divorced from all of the political questions and struggles of a period.
O’Faolain quotes Balzac’s remark about Daniel O’Connell: “he
incarnated a whole people.” And then O’Faolain also pointed out how
O’Connell, a Tory, frightened by the French Revolution, became a
“Radical.” He goes on to say that O’Connell
“toppled on the brink of Atheism. He recovered as a
Deist. He ended not quite as a Catholic, but as an Irish Catholic,
which among Irish intellectuals is so often little more than two words
for one. I doubt if there were more than one or two Irish patriots who
did not run a similar course in relation to religion – Tone, Emmet,
Lord Edward, Davis, Mitchel, Parnell, Stephens and most of the Fenians,
Collins, Clarke, Connolly, almost all wavering in a typically ambiguous
way barely stopping short on the edge of complete revolt from
orthodoxy.” [10]
Rebellion in Ireland was not rebellion against
orthodoxy. It was national rebellion. In some instances it was purely
national, in others it was both national and social. In the case of
James Connolly, he was both nationalist and socialist.
Leftists have criticized him as a nationalist whose socialism was
either impure or else abandoned in his last days. Sean O’Casey’s first
writing was a pamphlet, The Irish Citizen Army, in
which he declared that Connolly died not for socialism but for
nationalism. To discuss Connolly in such terms is to become formal,
abstract; it results in the posing of formal questions which can only
lead us away from insight. The foregoing parts of this work have
offered more than sufficient evidence on the character of Connolly’s
socialist views. Abstract purists usually see the politics of a man as
though they were completely separated from that man just as they
fail to see Connolly’s nationalism as bound up with his socialism, so
do they see his socialism as in flagrant contradiction with his belief
in Catholicism. But his works, and the accounts of his life with which
I am familiar, would reveal no such glaring contradictions. Connolly as
much as O’Connell, or as much as any other Irish patriot or rebel, can
be called the incarnation of a people – to the degree that any one man
can be so characterized. His writings show to what degree the Irish
tradition was fused in his ideas. He studied this tradition and
evaluated it, made distinctions, and consciously made choices. At the
same time his emotions, his consciousness was molded out of the life of
Ireland. His personal religious beliefs were deeply felt and genuine.
To assume that he pretended to a belief he didn’t hold is really to
slander the memory of a great and honest man.
 
Part 5

Top of the page
Notes
1. Sean O’Faolain, King
of the Beggars (London: Thomas Nelson, 1938), pp. 54–55.
2. Connolly, Labour
in Ireland, pp. 5–6.
3. Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels and Selected Writings, ed. John Hayward (New York:
Random House, 1934), p. 512.
4. Farrell’s Note:
Swift also argued that this reform plan would have the added advantage
of “lessening the Number of Papists among us.”
5. Connolly, Labour
in Ireland, pp. 20–21.
6. Farrell’s Note:
In Capital, vol. 1, Marx has many illuminating
observations on Ireland and these tend to give substantiation to this
generalization of mine. Cf. Capital, 1: 767–83. The
Correspondence of Marx and Engels also contains interesting
comments and observations about Ireland.
7. Connolly, Labour
in Ireland, pp. xxxiv.
8. Ibid., p. 146.
9. Ibid., p. 146.
10. O’Faolain, King
of the Beggars, pp. 40, 74–75.
 
Top of the page

Marxists’ Internet Archive  |  Encyclopedia of Trotskyism  |  Document Index Page
Last updated on 20 July 2018



s T. Farrell: A Portrait of James Connolly (Part 2)




Portrait  |  James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
A Portrait of James Connolly
* * *
II. Connolly as Nationalist and Internationalist
New International, Vol. 14 No. 1, January 1948
Connolly was not only a brave and bold fighting man, he
was also a bold and stimulating thinker. One of the reasons which helps
to explain why many American Marxists have often been rigid and
schematic is that they have not sufficiently grasped the problems of
capitalism from the standpoint of a backward country with an
undeveloped economy, in contrast to those of an advanced country with a
modern economy. Because of this, I think that Connolly should have an
especial interest and significance for Americans. He was a Marxist who
came from the depressed working class of a backward country, a nation
which had not won national sovereignty.
Once we realize this fact, seeming contradictions in his work and
his beliefs can be explained. Connolly, besides being a Marxist and a
revolutionary leader who came from the working class, was also a
nationalist and a believing Roman Catholic. He was born amidst
conditions of life which feed discontent: the alternative to discontent
in conditions such as those of his childhood is an attitude of
submissiveness. Rebellion and discontent became for Connolly the road
for the development of his own personality, his individuality.
He was but one of a mass oppressed by capitalism; at the same time,
this mass bore most heavily the burden which was imposed as a result of
English control of Ireland. As Connolly studied and matured, he came to
see that a complicated series of burdens lay on the back of the common
people of Ireland: there was more than one oppressor. He was able to
understand with lucidity the complicated nature of the problems which
were involved in the Irish problem.
Reading his work, or the accounts of his life, one is struck by the
fact that there was little subjective blockage in Connolly’s nature. He
was direct and simple. He was capable of drawing clear and warranted
correlations. He was able to measure actions, large and small, in terms
of his ultimate aim – the aim of a democratic and socialist world. His
own personal experiences and observations were drawn into his thought;
and on the basis of these he was able to grasp facts from his studies
with amazing lucidity and to arrive at firm theoretical conclusions.
There was considerable variety of experiences in his own life. He
saw at first hand the conditions of life of workers in Ireland, in
Scotland, in America. He was clearly aware of differences between
Ireland and America. Even before he came to the United States he had
studied economics by himself and had written about the differences in
methods of agricultural production in Ireland and in the United States.
Thus he wrote:
“The agriculture of Ireland can no longer compete
with the scientifically equipped farmers of America, therefore the only
hope that now remains is to abandon competition altogether as a rule of
life, to organize agriculture as a public service under the control of
boards of management elected by the agricultural population (no longer
composed of farmers and laborers, but of free citizens with equal
responsibility and equal honor), and responsible to them and the nation
at large, and with all the mechanical and scientific aids to
agriculture the entire resources of the nation can place at their
disposal. Let the produce of Irish soil go first to feed the Irish
people, and after a sufficient store has been retained to insure of
that being accomplished, let the surplus be exchanged with other
countries in return for those manufactured goods Ireland needs but does
not herself produce.
“Thus we will abolish at one stroke the dread of
foreign competition and render perfectly needless any attempt to create
an industrial hell in Ireland under the specious pretext of ‘developing
our resources.’
“Apply to manufacture the same social principle. Let
the cooperative organization of the workers replace the war of the
classes under capitalism and transform the capitalist himself from an
irresponsible hunter after profit into a public servant, fulfilling a
public function and under public control.” [1]
And speaking along the same line, he discussed the
proposal to create peasant proprietors instead of a landlord class. He
wrote:
“Have our advocates of peasant proprietary really
considered the economic tendencies of the time, and the development of
the mechanical arts in the agricultural world? The world is
progressive, and peasant proprietary, which a hundred years ago might
have been a boon, would now be powerless to save from ruin the
agriculture of Ireland.” [2]
The small farmers could no longer compete with the
mammoth farms of America and Australia, and he continued by pointing
out how the American farmer, with his thousands of acres and his
machinery could outsell the Irish farmer in the English market.
Economic backwardness is a phenomenon which needs to be evaluated
relativistically. It must be gauged from the standpoint of the world
market. At the present time the phenomenon of backwardness is more
complicated than it ever was in the past. Advanced countries such as
England are being placed in a position that is at least remotely
analogous to that of the Irish farmers in Connolly’s time. British
workers must work harder and get less than the American workers. This
is a consequence of competition on the world market. It is to
Connolly’s merit that he grasped this fact and stated it simply and
clearly in his very first years as a socialist.
Without the formal academic training of many economists, Connolly
saw the relationship of the Irish problem to the problems of the world
market. In simple language he was able to state the nature of the
impact which the world market made on Ireland, on its farmers and also
on its workers. His political nationalism was not turned into an excuse
for “economic” nationalism. He wanted Irishmen to be free men, free and
proud and dignified: he did not believe in the development of national
resources in a backward country at the expense of the moral and social
development of the people of that country.
In this sense he may be contrasted with Joseph Stalin. Connolly
advocated democratic collectivization as a means of feeding the Irish
people and of organizing Irish economy in a rational and just manner.
Stalin’s forced collectivization was diametrically opposite to that
proposed by the young Connolly. [3]

Connolly here had a very clear insight, one which should be carefully
considered by those who have argued that he was too nationalistic to be
a socialist. His nationalism was, in reality, consistent with his
internationalism. And both were consistently developed not only in
political but also in economic terms. [4]
Connolly absorbed the democratic national tradition of Ireland. When
he released the first issue of his paper, The Workers Republic,
in Dublin on August 13, 1898, he stated:
“We are Socialists because we see in socialism not
only the modern application of the social principle which underlay the  Brehon  laws of our
ancestors, but because we recognize in it the only principle by which
the working class can in their turn emerge in the divinity of FREEMEN,
with the right to live as men and not as mere profit-making machines
for the service of others. We are Republicans because we are
Socialists, and therefore enemies to all privileges; and because we
would have the Irish people complete masters of their own destinies,
nationally and internationally, fully competent to work for their own
salvation.” [5]
Spiritually or intellectually, he was a product of the
great French Revolution, of the Irish tradition of rebellion, of the
Marxist international movement, and also of the Catholic Church. And,
as we have noted, he himself lived the hard life of the workers. He
arrived at his ideas by patient and methodical study. And the aim of
his thought and activity was to work for genuine freedom. Once when a
lady was disturbed by a speech he had delivered, he answered her
remarks by declaring: “Revolution is my business.” His total life
experience led him forward to revolutionary action. He saw this action
as taking place in Ireland. But he linked it with the idea of an
international struggle for socialism and democracy.
When away from Ireland he participated in the socialist movement in
Scotland and in America. When the First World War broke out, he called
for action not only in Ireland but elsewhere. He saluted Karl
Liebknecht. And when there was a false rumor that Liebknecht had died,
he wrote:
“We cannot draw upon the future for a draft to pay
our present duties. There is no moratorium to postpone the payment of
the debt the Socialists owe to the cause; it can only be paid now. Paid
it may well be in martyrdom ... If our German comrade, Liebknecht, has
paid the price, perhaps the others may yet nerve themselves for that
sacrifice ... All hail, then, to our continental comrade, who, in a
world of imperial and financial brigands and cowardly trimmers and
compromisers, showed mankind that men still know how to die for the
holiest of all causes – the sanctity of the human soul, the practical
brotherhood of the human race.” [6]
Connolly worked on Labour in Irish History
for many years. During this period he was also engaged in many other
activities, editing, lecturing, organizing, leading strikes,
participating in anti-British demonstrations, traveling from Ireland to
America and back to Ireland, and at the same time earning a modest
living for himself and his family. This work, along with The
Re-Conquest of Ireland, offers an economic and social history
of Ireland. Connolly claimed that capitalism was a foreign importation
brought to Ireland by the English. With capitalism, feudalism was also
introduced into Ireland. The life of the Gaelic clans, where property
was owned by the clans, was in consequence broken up. In clan life a
rudimentary form of democracy had been practiced. Then he traced the
course of the development of capitalism in Ireland, a subject nation.
He related this development to the successive struggles for national
independence. These struggles he evaluated and interpreted from a
socialist standpoint. Early in Labour in Irish History,
he quoted, as a premise, the following passage from Marx:
“That in every historical epoch the prevailing
method of economic production and exchange, and the social organization
necessarily following from it, forms the basis upon which alone can be
explained the political and intellectual history of that epoch.” [7]
He traces the alterations in the prevailing method of
production in Ireland through feudalism to capitalism, and he describes
the class character of every movement which struggled for Irish
freedom. The tradition of social struggle in the Irish national
movement is here outlined step by step, generalized, evaluated and in
this way ordered in terms of a coherent analysis and doctrine. The
lesson which he persistently draws from the analysis of Irish struggle
is that the social question is inseparable from the political question.
He reveals that one of the factors involved in the failure of Irish
rebellion is the fact that there was always more than one class. This
lesson is presented in his first chapter, and it is then illustrated by
a series of lucid analyses which are concerned with every important
movement for liberation in Irish history. He wrote:
“During the last hundred years every generation in
Ireland has witnessed an attempted rebellion against English rule.
Every such conspiracy or rebellion had drawn the majority of its
adherents from the lower orders in town and country, yet under the
inspiration of a few middle class doctrinaires the social question has
been rigorously excluded from the field of action to be covered by the
rebellion if successful; in hopes that by each exclusion it would be
possible to conciliate the upper class and enlist them in the struggle
for freedom ... The result has been in nearly every case the same. The
workers, though furnishing the greatest proportion of recruits to the
ranks of the revolutionists, and consequently of victims to the prison
and the scaffold, could not be imbued en masse with the revolutionary
fire necessary to seriously imperil a dominion rooted for 700 years in
the heart of their country. They were all anxious enough for freedom,
but realizing the enormous odds against them, and being explicitly told
by their leaders that they must not expect any change in their
conditions of social subjection, even if successful, they as a
body shrank from the contest, and left only the purest minded and most
chivalrous of their class to face the odds and glut the vengeance of
the tyrant – a warning to those in all countries who neglect the vital
truth that successful revolutions are not the product of our brains,
but of ripe material conditions.” [8]
Connolly’s conclusion to his study affirms the view that
labor must take the lead in the liberation of Ireland. It must be the
most forward, the most daring champion of both national liberation and
social justice in Ireland; it must assemble all discontented Irishmen
around it. This is the road to the re-conquest of Ireland. Thus:
“As we have again and again pointed out, the Irish
question is a social question, the whole age-long fight of the Irish
people against their oppressors resolves itself in the last analysis
into a fight for the mastery of the means of life, the sources of
production, in Ireland. Who would own and control the land? The people
or the invaders?” [9]
Here in Connolly’s view was “the bottom question of
Irish politics.” But:
“It is undeniable that for two hundred years at
least all Irish political movements ignored this fact, and were
conducted by men who did not look below the political surface. These
men to arouse the passions of the people invoked the memory of social
wrongs, such as evictions and famines, but for these wrongs proposed
only political remedies, such as changes in taxation or transferences
of the seat of government (class rule) from one country to another....
The revolutionists of the past were wiser, the Irish Socialists are
wiser today. In their movement the North and South will again clasp
hands, again it will be demonstrated, as in ’98, that the pressure of a
common exploitation can make enthusiastic rebels out of a Protestant
working class, earnest champions of civil and religious liberty out of
Catholics, and out of both a united social democracy.” [10]
Connolly’s basic lines of thought were continued from Labour
in Irish History to The Re-Conquest of Ireland.
The first sentence of the foreword to this volume expresses its guiding
thought:
“The underlying idea of this work is that the labor
movement of Ireland must set itself the re-conquest of Ireland as its
final aim, that their re-conquest involves taking possession of the
entire country, all its powers and wealth-production and all its
natural resources, and organizing these on a co-operative basis for the
good of all.” [11]
Following a historical account of the conquest of
Ireland, Connolly describes the conditions of life of the Irish masses
in the early twentieth century, in Dublin and Belfast; he discusses
problems and questions of democracy and of political morale and of
morality, quotes statistics and otherwise reveals in a voice of
eloquent and passionate indignation the moral and physical consequences
of exploitation; he deals with the problems of education, describes the
position and fate of women, and analyzes the value and the possibility
of the cooperative movement. His book embodies vision and idealism, and
at the same time no detail concerning the misery and wretchedness of
the masses is too small for his attention. At one point in the book, he
states: “For the only true prophets are they who carve out the future
which they announce.” [12]
Connolly here announced a future for Ireland. This ideal future – a
socialist commonwealth – was the standard by which he measured the
Irish present, and it was the basis of his political faith. In action,
he sought to lead Ireland toward the realization of that ideal; in his
writing, he sought to implant this faith and this ideal in the minds of
Irishmen. He wrote:
“A people are not to be judged by the performance of
their great men, nor to be estimated spiritually by the intellectual
conquests of their geniuses. A truer standard by which the spiritual
and mental measurement of a people can be taken in modern times is by
that picture drawn of itself by itself when it, at the ballot-box,
surrenders the care of its collective destiny into the hands of its
elected representatives.
“The question whether such elected persons have or
have not the power to realize the desires of their constituents
scarcely enters into the matter. It is not by its power to realize high
ideals a people will and must be judged, but by the standard of the
ideals themselves.” [13]
This quotation furnishes a suggestive insight into the
thought of Connolly. His thinking was both practical and visionary; it
gave energy and direction to a fighting faith and a concept of a free
future.
 
Part 3
 
Top of the page
Notes
1. Quotation from
Connolly’s Erin’s Hope: The End and the Means (1901)
in Fox, James Connolly: The Forerunner, p. 231.
2. Ibid., p. 232.
3. Farrell’s Note:
As Manya Gordon demonstrates factually in her book Workers
Before and After Lenin (New York: EP Dutton, 1941), the
Russian people as a whole got less food after collectivization than
they did before it. Collectivization provided Stalin with a labor
supply needed for industrialization. The development of natural
resources was implicit in the implementation of the theory of
“socialism in one country”; but all this, we know, was done at the
expense of the Russian people.
4. Farrell’s Note:
A good way of testing Connolly’s clarity would be to contrast his ideas – such as those quoted above – with the ideas of the Irish Stalinist, Brian O’Neill, in The War for the Land in Ireland.
Both here and in his book Easter Week, O’Neill pays
tribute to Connolly.
Writing in the 1930s, O’Neill dealt with the world
agrarian crisis, and he had no trouble demonstrating that the Irish
farmer was the victim of the world market and produced at a grave
disadvantage in competition because of the development of farming in
advanced countries. Attempting to point the way out, O’Neill quoted the
passage of Connolly which I have cited above. And the way out proposed
by O’Neill is described as that taken by the Soviet Union, with planned
economy and collectivized agriculture. As part of his proof O’Neill
offered culled statistics from the various Soviet sources, but he did
not compare and evaluate them. He may well have been sincere, but from
the standpoint of the present it is clear that he depended on the usual
bureaucratic generalities and abstractions. The Irish problem was
treated as though it were the Russian problem: win a “third-period”
revolution on paper and then Ireland could be modeled after the Soviet
Union. Without any real relevance to his argument, O’Neill insisted
that the increase in the number of tractors and harvesters in the
United States from 1910 to 1930 should have permitted American
agriculture to double its sowing. This did not happen; American
agricultural production increased by only 13.5 percent during this
period. Needless to say, I am not an economist or a statistician. But I
can see the utter shabbiness of arguments of this kind.
I mention this fact because, when I originally read
O’Neill’s book in 1936, it fooled me. And the way that Stalinism fools
persons untrained in economics and statistics can thus be suggested.
Isolated statistics are used falsely. By a meaningless comparison of
abstracted statistics, a false conception of production in the Soviet
Union relative to the United States is indicated. We now know that the
Irish workers and farmers, bad as was their lot, fared better than did
the Russian workers and farmers during the period of forced
collectivization. After the famine in Russia in the early 1930s, the
Russian government was forced to make concessions: it permitted a
certain portion of the agricultural product produced on collective
farms to be sold directly on the market. Here is the way O’Neill
described this:
“The produce of farms is disposed of in two ways. It
can be handed over entirely at a fixed price to the cooperative
organizations, to be distributed by them to the consumers, or twenty
percent can be sold direct (a method introduced in 1932 to induce the
collectives to market more of their produce). The advantages of this
latter modification are that larger supplies are available at lower
prices due to the more direct path from the producer to the consumer,
while the collectives are often able to receive more for their produce.
Vegetables grown in the garden may also be sold direct to the consumer,
but no middleman is permitted to step into the transaction.” (Brian
O’Neill, The War for the Land in Ireland [New York:
International Publishers, 1933], p. 173.)
This last sentence is further suggestive. O’Neill
introduced this reference to the middleman as an obvious appeal to
prejudice and as a rationalization. In general, he gave no clear
picture of Soviet agriculture; at the same time he stressed the chaos
of capitalist agriculture. He threatened to outdistance American
agricultural production with a minimum of percentages. And here is a
sample of his general style and method of Stalinizing the tradition of
Connolly:
“By 1926 it could be said that agriculture had been saved [in
the Soviet Union] ... But hand in hand with this development, there was
not only an increased prosperity for small and middle farmers; the
wealthiest peasants and the kulaks – the hated gombeen men of the
village, who worked their farms by hired laborers and who were often,
in addition, shopkeepers, money-lenders or publicans – had their
position strengthened, with a corresponding hardening of their
capitalist psychology. And while agriculture had been restored, it had
not developed on the new social basis, in the sense that while in the
towns the means of production were long since socialized, agriculture,
in which the ownership of the land and the implements was not
centralized, was relatively much more backward.” (Ibid.,
pp. 171, 172.)
The reader can learn about the real situation which was
masked by this double talk by reading Manya Gordon’s study cited above
[n.3].
A contrast between Connolly and O’Neill will show the
difference between a real socialist and a Stalinized intellectual. In
Connolly’s heated passages, there is indignation, indignation over the
condition of the Irish masses. Contrast this with the way that O’Neill
uses phrases like gombeen men, money-lenders and publicans in order to
create Irish enthusiasm for Stalinism, which drove the gombeen men out
of Russia just as truly as St Patrick drove the snakes out of Ireland.
Also, Connolly studied conditions outside of Ireland in a critical
spirit, and in order to draw a lesson from them; O’Neill merely applied
Russian solutions to Irish conditions in a literal-minded manner.
5. Quoted in Fox, James
Connolly: The Forerunner, p. 46.
6. Ibid., p. 239.
7. Connolly, Labour
in Ireland, p. 15.
8. Ibid., p. 214.
9. Ibid., p. 214.
10. Ibid., pp. 215–16.
11. Ibid., p. 219.
12. Ibid.
13. Ibid., p. 251.
 
Top of the page

Marxists’ Internet Archive  |  Encyclopedia of Trotskyism  |  Document Index Page
Last updated on 21 July 2018



 T. Farrell: A Portrait of James Connolly (Part 3)




Portrait  |  James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
A Portrait of James Connolly
* * *
III. Connolly’s Democratic Views
New International, Vol. 14 No. 2, February 1948
Writing about Dublin in the early twentieth century in The
Reconquest of Ireland, James Connolly declared:
“It is, indeed, strange that the people of a nation
which has known indomitable determination in its struggle for
possession of the mere machinery of government should exhibit so little
capacity to breathe a civic soul into such portions of the machinery as
they had already brought under their control.” [1]
This quotation is but one of many which could be taken
from Connolly’s writings in order to suggest the thoroughgoing
character of his democratic views. It was Connolly, the Socialist, who
explained and developed democratic views perhaps more fully than any
Irish political figure of his time. A working-class and trade-union
leader, Connolly brought democratic ideas of leadership and democratic
conceptions of a rank and file into the Irish rebellion.
The difference between the Fenian Brotherhood of the nineteenth
century and the Irish Citizen Army would indicate this. The former was
organized along the lines of a secret society, and the reins of control
were centered in the leadership. When the Fenians were ready to strike
a blow the leadership hesitated in making a decision; the Fenians
missed their opportunity and disappeared from history. [2]
We have already noted that before the Irish Citizen Army went
through with the Easter Rebellion, Connolly gave every member an
opportunity to decide on whether to go along in the struggle or drop
out. The Irish Citizen Army, despite its democracy, disappeared from
history as did the Fenians. But it left an addition to the legacy of
the Fenians and to the entire tradition of the Irish national rebellion – a legacy of democracy in thought and practice.
At the present time many socialists think of democracy mainly in
relationship to a democratic party organization and to the ideal of
developing a democratic internal life in left party organizations and
movements. This is important. But democratic socialist thinking should
require a broader interest, and at the same time it should dictate a
concern with those small practical details of organizing life which are
now viewed in a routine manner, if not with outright cynicism.
Socialism should sponsor ideas of a genuine civic consciousness which
is preached but not practiced in our own time. Connolly’s remarks in
the above quotation reveal his own sense of civic consciousness – of
municipal patriotism, if one will.
At the beginning of this essay [see earlier articles], I spoke of
the recurrent division in the history of the Irish national revolution,
a division on the question: Does the political or the social question
come first? Connolly, as we know, belonged to the tradition of Irish
rebels who stressed the social question. But his stress was not made
merely in large and broad terms. He drew conclusions from his social
position which he applied in small matters as well as in large ones.
His ideas on civic consciousness derived from his social views. They
were expressions of his socialist position.
Connolly valued all rights and liberties too sincerely to want to
see them wasted. He observed that after the Irish had gained democratic
rights in municipal affairs, they did not use these rights; they
demonstrated a lack of civic consciousness. Wanting national
sovereignty, they were badly utilizing the voting rights which they had
already gained. And Connolly’s discussion and criticism here served as
a means for an illuminating socialist discussion of democracy.
Connolly, let me repeat, was most thoroughgoing in his democratic
thoughts and ideas. Thus, in writing of ‘the function of public bodies
as a governing factor in Irish municipal politics,’ Connolly emphasized
that these functions of public bodies should be seen and used not
merely as offensive political weapons to be won from an enemy, but also
as “effective tools to be used in the upbuilding of a healthier social
edifice in which to give effect to the needs of the citizens for
associative aids to their individual development and culture.” It is a
commonplace to remind readers that Marx’s real starting point was the
ideal of a society which would permit the fullest and freest
development of the human personality. Such an ideal was central in the
mind of James Connolly. He would use every democratic gain as a means
of contributing toward the development and culture of the Irish people.
All political action was a means to be used in creating a freer society
in which the individual could live and develop in dignity. During the
First World War he wrote:
“We believe that in times of peace we should work
along the lines of peace to strengthen the nation, and we believe that
whatever strengthens and elevates the working class strengthens the
nation.
“But we also believe that in times of war we should
act as in war. We despise, entirely loathe and despise, all the
mouthings and mouthers about war who infest Ireland in times of peace,
just as we despise and loathe all the cantings about caution and
restraint to which the same people treat us in times of war.” [3]
Connolly did not see violence as an end, nor did he love
violence as some rebel spirits seem to love it. Likewise, he did not
see power as an end in itself. He visioned a nation, a society, a world
in which men and women, living with dignity, would be healthier than
they are, better fed, better educated, more cooperative.
This vision was neither Utopian nor millennial. He would not
compromise with the principles on which this vision, this ultimate aim,
was based. But he would not, at the same time, scorn any immediate
rights and advantages that could be gained. Immediate democratic gains
were means toward greater gains; and they could also become tools for
trying to lift the cultural level of the people immediately. In times
of peace, he did not scorn means of peace in order to talk of weapons
of war which he did not yet possess.
Thus, ideas of civic consciousness and municipal patriotism were no
mere platitudes to him. They were integral in his broader social and
human attitudes which embodied a clear conception of social
responsibility. Thus he wrote that “We require in Ireland to grasp the
fact that the act of voting at the ballot box is the one act in which
we get the opportunity to give expression to the soul of the race ...
The ballot box is the vehicle of expression of our social
consciousness.”
Like almost all, if not all, great revolutionaries, Connolly was an
educator. And he saw in the practices of democracy a means of educating
the people. In effect, his political teaching on democracy served as a
way of preparing the people for the exercise of power. Just as he
studied revolutions of the past and wrote articles on these in order to
teach Irish workingmen how to prepare for the rising which came in
1916, so at an earlier period he tried to teach the Irish masses how to
exercise democratic rights, how to use these rights in order to provide
for and improve the conditions of their own welfare.
He knew too well the price of liberty to be cynical about any
liberties which had already been won. Thus, he wrote in The
Re-Conquest of Ireland:
“Assuredly it was within the realm of probability
that a people suffering under the smart of intolerable conditions
caused by a misuse of political power and social privilege should at
the first opportunity set itself to the task of sweeping away such
conditions by a public-spirited use of their newly-acquired control of
municipal powers.” [4]
But such did not happen when the Irish gained democratic
rights.
“If today the cities and towns of Ireland are a
reproach to the land and a glaring evidence of the incapacity of the
municipal rulers of the country, the responsibility for the failure
lies largely with those who in the past had control of the political
education of the Irish masses and failed to prepare them for the
intelligent exercise of those public powers for which they were taught
to clamor.” [5]
And need we emphasize that observations of such a
character lead to the basic conclusion which Connolly repeated over and
over again – labor must take the lead in the Irish struggle.
In April, 1916, shortly before the Easter Rebellion, he declared:
“The cause of Labor is the cause of Ireland, the cause of Ireland is
the cause of labor.” [6] And that
cause was one to bring dignity into human life. The general welfare,
the dignity of man, this was the cause of socialism. It was at the same
time the cause of democracy. The democratic tradition of the French
Revolution, which was inherited by predecessors of Connolly, Tone,
Emmet, the Young Irelanders of ’48, Lalor and Davitt, was absorbed by
Connolly.
And no matter what aspect of Connolly’s social and political
thinking we take, we see how it was always admirably consistent.
However, his was not the formal consistency of a sectarian who disdains
all struggles for immediate gains on the ground that such gains will
not necessarily mean socialism; nor was it the consistency of a
critical theoretician who was never forced to act, to take decisions
involving the greatest risks. It was the consistency of a dedicated and
devoted man who had committed himself to go the long, hard and
dangerous road that is demanded of all who want men really to be free.
At the same time we can see, in Connolly’s consistency, his love of
the people. Connolly’s indignation always flared when he learned of
injustice, of indignities heaped on the people. And his was an
indignation different in quality from that of some contemporary
Marxists whose greatest anger seems to come when they discover a
theoretical error in the writings of an adversary. Unlike Connolly’s,
theirs is an indignation of self-love. It has contributed toward
poisoning the streams of modern socialist thought. Connolly’s
consistency is a consistency based on love, on a realization of common
identity between himself and the workers whom he led. It is this
feeling of common identity which further motivates his conception of
democracy.
 
Part 4
 
Top of the page
Notes
1. Connolly, Labour
in Ireland, p. 249.
2. Farrell’s Note:
See Recollections of an Irish Rebel: The Fenian Movement,
by John Devoy (New York: CP Young Co., 1929) for an account of the
Fenians, their internal life, and their organizational character.
3. Quoted in Fox, James
Connolly: The Forerunner, p. 242.
4. Connolly, Labour
in Ireland, pp. 252–53.
5. Ibid., p. 253.
6. Quoted in Fox, James
Connolly: The Forerunner, p. 219.
 
Top of the page

Marxists’ Internet Archive  |  Encyclopedia of Trotskyism  |  Document Index Page
Last updated on 20 July 2018



 T. Farrell: A Portrait of James Connolly (Part 1)




Portrait  |  James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
A Portrait of James Connolly
* * *
I. The First Irish Marxist
New International, Vol. 13 No. 9, December 1947
The Irish national revolution can be viewed as a
historical laboratory of the so-called national question. As the Irish
rebelled, or threatened to rebel again and again during the nineteenth
century, the movement included elements from various classes and groups
within the country. To be sure, it is a commonplace to state that a
national revolutionary movement comprises elements from more than one
social class; nonetheless, this commonplace must be stressed in any
study of the Irish national revolution. Just as there has been unity,
there has also been disunity. Differences within the Irish movement
have often been focused in terms of an opposition between the social
question and the political question, interpreting the latter to mean
the central aim of achieving national sovereignty or independence.
The Irish movement was energized by the Great French Revolution. The
United Irishmen, organized at the end of the eighteenth century, were
directly influenced by the men of the Great French Revolution. Wolf[e]
Tone, a leader of that period, would serve as but one illustration of
this fact. John Mitchel, one of the strongest and bravest figures of
1848, was condemned as a felon and deported to the far Pacific. Even
though there was a strong conservatism and aristocratic feeling in his
nature, even though he defended the South against the North in the
American Civil War, he nevertheless showed a Jacobin streak. One might
say that Mitchel suggested both the tory socialist and the Jacobin.
Michael Davitt, one of the leaders of Parnell’s party, continued the
tradition of these rebels. James Fintan Lalor, the hunchback, who was
one of the most fiery and eloquent of all nineteenth-century rebels,
based his thinking on the events of the Great French Revolution. And he
was also encouraged by the revolutions of 1848 on the continent, as
when he wrote:
“Mankind will yet be masters of the earth.
The right of the people to make the laws – this produced the first
great modern earthquake [the great French Revolution] ... The right of
people to own the land – this will produce the next. Train your hands,
and your sons’ hands, gentlemen of the earth, for you and they will yet
have to use them.” [1]
Men such as Lalor and Davitt did not separate the social
and the political question. Involved in the thinking of the major Irish
rebels was an acceptance of the dignity of the individual which flows
out of the traditional ideas of individualism. The Irish rebels were
painfully aware of the degradation of the Irish people: they saw and
knew the conditions of squalor and misery which were forced upon them.
Mitchel saw the corpses of those who starved in the famine; he saw the
wretched laden famine ships leaving for other lands. In Ireland, we can
clearly see one of the psychological derivations of conditions of
oppression and injustice. Poverty and a lack of sovereignty in a poor
nation create attitudes of dependency. Except in rare moments of
revolutionary momentum, the poorest sections of the masses of the
people usually develop dependent attitudes. Robespierre, in one of his
great speeches, declared that the Jacobins desired to create a nation
in which men would rise “to the full stature of humanity.” The poor
usually fail to attain anything approximating that full stature. And
the Irish rebels did not need to indulge in psychological theorizing in
order to know about facts such as these. They grasped truths like these
in their direct contacts with the Irish people. In this way, the notion
of attaining manhood was linked with the idea of rebellion. In other
words, rebellion offered them the road to manhood, not only for
themselves, but also for the Irish people as a whole. On the one hand,
they wanted to lead the Irish on the road to freedom; on the other
hand, they saw the differences between themselves and the great masses
of their fellow Irish. By rebellion, they were finding the way to the
fullest possible attainment of their own manhood: feelings such as
these served to link their personal experiences with their reading of
Irish history. And those who saw most clearly realized that the
attainment of their ends required consideration of the social, as well
as of the political question.
At the present time, there are endless discussions of the question
of personality and politics. Such discussions can often be interpreted
as a consequence of the revolutionary defeats and failures of recent
decades. A concept of personality was implied in the thinking of some
of the outstanding Irish rebels of the nineteenth century. This is seen
in the idea of the nation in Irish culture which was held by some of
the nineteenth-century Irish rebels. The Young Irelanders saw in
culture – in poetry, balladry, literature – a means of whipping,
lashing, encouraging the Irish into a feeling of pride and dignity in
their own manhood. [2] Such a
conception is unmistakable in the writings of Thomas Davis, or in the
cultural writings of John Mitchel. A clear illustration is the
introduction which Mitchel wrote to the poetry of James Clarence
Mangan. Briefly, these men desired a nation of men, men in a
qualitative sense of that word. Their desires motivated a trust in the
potentialities of their fellow countrymen. And their trust was not
confined to their ideas on culture, but was also integral in their
political words and deeds. This trust underscored their lack of fear of
violence and force. They tried to use all the means at their command to
rouse the Irish people. When arrested, Lalor proudly flung the word,
“felon” back into the faces of his jailers. After his arrest, and just
prior to his deportation, John Mitchel refused to sign a statement
urging his followers not to attempt his rescue from jail. The aim of
national independence signified a nation of individuals with dignity;
it envisaged an Ireland in which Irishmen would attain “the full
stature of humanity.” Samuel Johnson once remarked that “Patriotism is
the last refuge of a scoundrel.” This is often true, yet it is
sometimes false. In nineteenth-century Ireland, patriotism was a first
step on the road to manhood.
These comments should suggest aspects of the tradition which James
Connolly represented in the Ireland of his day. The first Irish
Marxist, he was the heir, the continuator and the expositor of this
tradition. His real predecessors were those who did not sacrifice the
social question for the political question; he fused both aspects of
the Irish national tradition in his own works and in his own political
life. He was an extraordinary figure during the early years of the
twentieth century, not only in the Irish movement, but more broadly in
the world movement for workers’ emancipation. The intellectual fruits
of his life are to be found in his work Labour in Ireland.
This book is not only fundamental for a study of modern Irish history,
it is also a contribution to the world library of socialist thought.
James Connolly has been the subject of a recent biography by R.M.
Fox, an English socialist. Mr Fox has lived in Ireland for years, and
is widely read in the history and the literature of Ireland. Besides
this recent book, James Connolly: The Forerunner, Fox
has written other books on Ireland. His volume Green Banners
is a story of Irish struggles, valuable for its assemblage of facts and
material. His work The Irish Citizen Army is valuable
for similar reasons, and, also, because it serves as a reminder of the
significance of this organization, the first army of the working class
in the twentieth century. It was written at the request of the
organization of veterans of the Irish Citizen Army. Relatively few
Englishmen are capable of writing objectively about Ireland and about
the personalities of the Irish movement. Mr Fox, like Raymond Postgate,
author of an excellent biography of Robert Emmet, is something of an
exception. He brings sympathy, energy, command of the facts, and
knowledge of the history of the British and the European socialist
movements to his work. At the same time, I feel it necessary to note
that he sometimes succumbs to that parochialism which is fairly
pervasive in Irish political thinking. (I would add parenthetically
that there was no parochialism in Connolly.) His sympathy seems to fall
over into an emotional identification with the Irish which, at times,
is not devoid of localism and even sentimentality. And with this, his
identification is part of the process whereby he establishes Irish
nationalism as a criterion of judgment. Unlike Connolly, his biographer
has not “fused” his socialist ideas with his adopted Irish nationalism.
However, it seems to me that there is an integral connection between
Fox’s virtues and his deficiencies. His writings can help to revive
interest in the social side of the Irish tradition. He is retelling the
story of the Irish struggle, refreshing memories concerning Connolly
and the Irish Citizen Army, and emphasizing the best elements in the
Irish tradition.
Fox’s lucid account of the life of Connolly is based on the best
sources, On the one hand, Fox offers paraphrases of Connolly’s ideas,
and gives full quotations from his writings; on the other hand, his
recitation of the events in Connolly’s life definitely conveys a sense
of the man. Fox writes: “The story of the poor boy who becomes rich and
successful has always made a strong appeal. But this is a story of far
greater splendor – of a boy who did not become rich and yet his career
remains an inspiration to all who strive for social justice.” [3] It is the story of James
Connolly. The son of poor parents, he was a self-educated worker.
Forced emigration from Ireland was no hearsay tale for him. Both
Connolly and his father could find work in England or Scotland, but not
in Ireland, where, before their time, the English had seen to it that
manufacturing could not exist. His own family story was but part of the
general story of forced emigration from Ireland. He was born in a
gloomy Irish cabin in 1870. [4]

His father was a farm laborer. The family had to leave Ireland for
Scotland. There, he became a child laborer. At one time, he was placed
on a box in the factory in order that he might appear to be taller than
he was when the factory inspector came around. While still a youth, he
worked at many jobs. He did work of the type which destroys the health
and morale of men and women, let alone boys. He studied history,
politics, literature, by candle light in an Irish cabin, or in a city
tenement after harsh hours of work. He studied Marx, and his economic
views were based on Marx, particularly on Capital. He
became a Socialist in Scotland while still in his teens. But in his
first period as a Socialist, he was quiet and did not thrust himself
forward. He listened, observed, studied, learned what he could from
older comrades before he came forth to assert and express his own
views. When, in his youth, he did step forward, he became one of the
leading Socialists in Glasgow. He married, worked as a Socialist,
shared the hard life of the workers. In 1897, Connolly returned to
Ireland to organize for Socialism. He lived there as did the exploited
workers, and founded the Irish Republican Socialist Congress. As early
as 1900, he participated in international socialist congresses, and at
these meetings he generally supported the left wing. In Dublin, he
played the role of an agitator, an organizer and an editor. He shared
in the organization of the famous anti-British demonstrations in the
year of the jubilee of Queen Victoria. In 1904, he came to America.
Here, he worked at various jobs including that of an insurance agent,
and he participated in the activities of the American labor and
socialist movements. He was associated with Daniel De Leon, with the
Industrial Workers of the World, and later, with the Socialist Party in
the time of Eugene V. Debs. He had political disagreements with De Leon
and these were exacerbated because he was a practicing Catholic. His
experiences in America were of prime importance in his later career.
Here, he saw, at first hand, the capitalism in an advanced country.
This helped him to see the problems of Ireland more clearly than could
many of his contemporaries. Here also his association with the IWW
showed lasting influences. His own conceptions of industrial unionism,
as well as of strike tactics and agitational methods, were all
influenced by the Wobblies.
Connolly returned to Ireland in 1910 and became an organizer in
Belfast for the Irish Transport Workers Union, playing a major role in
the organization and the development of the Irish Labor movement in the
North of Ireland. He became associated with Jim Larkin, and went to
Dublin to participate in the leadership of the Dublin transport strike.
He helped to organize the Irish Citizen Army, led it in the Easter
Rebellion, was wounded during the fighting, and was one of the leaders
who was executed. He was carried to his execution in a chair because of
his wounds. When his wife visited him for the last time, he tried to
comfort her. Telling her not to cry, he added: “Hasn’t it been a full
life? And isn’t this a good end?” On learning that his son had been in
jail, his face lit up, and he remarked: “He was in the fight ... He has
had a good start in life, hasn’t he?” [5]
In most of the photographs of Connolly, he looks like an ordinary,
almost an undistinguished, man. Judging from these pictures, he might
be any Irish bar tender, small business man, craftsman. He was a
simple, quiet man, careful, precise, thoughtful and determined. Capable
in theory although self-taught, he was also highly practical. No Irish
contemporary of his could match his qualities, his strategical
understanding and his extremely clear sense of tactics. He studied with
the most practical of aims: in order to learn how best to carry forward
the Irish struggle. And, in turn, he saw the Irish struggle as part of
the struggle of the workers all over the world. He studied the
revolutions of the past in Ireland and on the continent in order to
teach himself, and the Irish, how they might strike their own blows for
freedom most effectively. In various articles, he tried to bring the
experiences of other countries to the Irish. Democratic, both in theory
and practice, he asked every member of the Irish Citizen Army if they
wanted to go through with the fight they were going to make in the
Easter Rebellion. They did.
A few personal anecdotes and stories about Connolly will perhaps
best give a sense of the man. These are taken from Mr. Fox’s book and
from other sources. Connolly’s daughter, Nora Connolly O’Brien, wrote a
moving personal account of her father, Portrait of a Rebel
Father, which well might be read in conjunction with Mr. Fox’s
biography. It is personal and intimate, and the emotions motivating it
are truly beautiful. In Portrait of a Rebel Father,
Nora Connolly O’Brien tells how once at Mass, the priest violently
denounced Connolly in a sermon. Although Connolly was not mentioned, it
was clear to him and to his daughter, and also to many others present,
that he was the object of this attack. The daughter was disturbed and
distressed; she wanted to squirm, to do something. But Connolly sat
unruffled, listening with no sense of strain or agitation showing on
his face. Afterwards, she asked him why he had not done anything, why
he had not at least walked out of the church? He answered: “Well, Nora,
because they lose their dignity, we don’t have to lose ours.”
In 1915, during the course of a strike on the Dublin quays, the
police were harassing the strikers. Clerks had been forced to work as
scabs. Connolly, on learning of the continued police treatment of the
workers, declared that this would have to stop. He called out a squad
of the Irish Citizen Army. They reported for duty wearing their dark
green uniforms, and armed with rifles and bayonets. They marched to the
picket line in formation; there, they marched along at the side of the
pickets, informing the police that they had come to protect their
striking class brothers. The pickets were no longer molested; the
clerks inside fled. Soon after this incident the strike was settled.
Not long before the Easter Rebellion, the British sent the police
out to raid rebel papers, and to confiscate copies of these and the
equipment used in printing them. The police arrived at Liberty Hall,
headquarters of the Irish Transport Workers, and, also, of the Irish
Citizen Army. Connolly asked them if they had a warrant. They had none.
He drew his revolver and declared that they would not be allowed to
search the hall. When they returned with a warrant in order to search
the premises for copies of nationalist papers, Connolly, revolver in
hand, stood by the door leading into the room in which was printed the
paper that he edited. He told the police that he would shoot the man
who entered this room, insisting that the warrant did not apply to it.
The police searched the rest of Liberty Hall, found no nationalist
papers, and departed. Connolly’s paper was, at that time, not
suppressed. Following this raid, Connolly sent out orders for the
mobilization of the members of the Irish Citizen Army. Irish workers
downed their tools, left wagons in the streets and rushed to Liberty
Hall. Some even swam the Liffey to get there. They reported in working
clothes, rifles in hand.
Connolly was arrested during the labor battles of 1913. He went on a
hunger strike, and was released from prison, weak from want of food.
Once when he was lecturing in America, he was interviewed by a
reporter. This journalist had questioned other Irishmen, and many had
claimed that they were descended from the kings of Ireland. More
generally, the journalist had a fixed notion that Irishmen always
boasted of the grandeur of their country and of their own ancestry. He
asked Connolly a question about his ancestors, and added that he wanted
to know if they had owned estates or castles in the old country.
Connolly answered: “I have no ancestors. My people were poor and
obscure like the workers I am speaking to now.” [6] Recalling his youth and his early readings, he once
said: “I always remember the first time I sent ... for a bundle of Penny
Readings and how delighted I was when they came ... It was
always so difficult for me to get to read as a boy that I thought it
wonderful to receive a parcel like this.” [7]
When he led the Irish Citizen Army out for the Easter Rebellion, he
told the members that they would be given the post of honor: they would
attack. And he also told them to keep their rifles because some of
those (the Nationalists) with whom they were joining to fight, would
not be willing to go as far as the workers must go: they might need
their rifles again.
Connolly was a man of genuine simplicity and of deep humanity. No
problem of the Irish workers was too small for him to give it his
attention. No sacrifice was too great for him when his ideas were at
stake. His writings were clear, simple, direct, and marked by flashes
of genuine eloquence. Labour in Irish History and The
Re-Conquest of Ireland were written over long periods of time
under conditions of great difficulty. He had to work for his own
living, and to carry on his practical political activities. He had none
of the leisure of the trained scholar or the professional intellectual.
The completion of these works was, in fact, a triumph of his own will,
a revelation of his persistence and determination. And these books are,
as Robert Lynd stated, “of infinite importance to Ireland.” [8] Their importance is not solely to
Ireland, but to the whole world.
 
Part 2
 
Top of the page
Notes
1. From Lalor’s Faith
of a Felon, as quoted in James Connolly, Labour in
Ireland (Dublin: Maunsel & Co., 1917), p. 188.
2. Farrell’s Note:
I am well aware that this statement can raise (all over again)
questions concerning literature and propaganda. Inasmuch as I have
dealt in detail with these questions in A Note on Literary
Criticism and in other writings, I shall not go into them here
where the discussion would raise side issues. It might be said,
however, that men such as Mitchel and Thomas Davis revealed the best
taste of their times. To criticize their taste, ex post facto,
is merely to quarrel vainly with history and to raise sterile
questions. The concept of the nation in Irish culture has remained to
the present day, although this concept has gone through various
permutations. But it should be added that taste does not flow directly
out of concepts. The fact that Irish rebels such as John Mitchel had a
political conception of culture in Ireland does not mean that they were
crude in their reading habits.
3. R.M. Fox, James
Connolly: The Forerunner (Tralee: Kerryman Press, 1946), p. 16.
4. A common
misconception at the time, he was actually born in Edinburgh, Scotland.
5. Ibid., pp. 215–15.
6. Ibid., p. 58.
7. Ibid., p. 27.
8. Connolly, Labour in Ireland, p. xxvi.
 
Top of the page

Marxists’ Internet Archive  |  Encyclopedia of Trotskyism  |  Document Index Page
Last updated on 20 July 2018



s T. Farrell: Discussion of a First Novel (April 1947)




James T. Farrell   |   Trotskyist Writers   |   ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
Discussion of a First Novel
Comments on Rosenfeld’s Passage from Home
(April 1947)

From New International, Vol. XIII No. 4, April 1947, pp. 111–114. Copyright, 1947, James T. Farrell. Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In an earlier article in these pages, A Comment on Literature and Morality (May 1946), I discussed morality as it was treated from the standpoint of personal experience, and reflected in some types of literature. I selected as an example of a current tendency, Lionel Trilling’s short story, The Other Margaret (Partisan Review, Fall 1945), and after an analysis I concluded such a story shows us “the high road that leads to the realms of the most cultivated banality.” Isac Rosenfeld’s first novel, Passage from Home, provides an example that permits me to carry my earlier analysis a few steps forward.
In A Comment on Literature and Morality I remarked on how moral questions were being discussed in so many fields at the present time, a time in which the entire world system has fallen into a moral abyss. The alarming signs of moral bankruptcy in the present period are constantly being revealed, directly or indirectly, in current writing. American writers have, in increasing numbers, lost all sense of any perspective, any guiding aim. There is a loss of vigor, a loss of breadth, a loss of depth and curiosity among writers. At the same time, there have been constant, though unclear, attacks on what is loosely called realism or naturalism. Most of these attacks have been over-generalized and abusive. Others have served as a means of projection of some state of dissatisfaction on the part of critics who have not made a sufficient effort to understand the causes for their real dissatisfaction(a) in themselves and in their own views, and (b) more generally by seeking rigorously to establish warranted co-relations between the condition of literature at the present time and the state of present-day society out of which this literature comes. This dissatisfaction further takes the form of a retreat into the self. This retreat into the self is variously expressed, but one form of it is found in the conception of the artistic self as cultivated, as complex, as especially perceptive. In analyzing Lionel Trilling’s story, The Other Margaret, I noted that the major character was presented merely as the moral spectator, and that this moral spectator regards moral questions in a way much similar to that in which he regards esthetic objects. The moral problem posed in the story does not call on him to act, to make a decision. His moral sense seems to deepen his wisdom, and in this way induces a mood of contemplation. And for this moral spectator, morals and manners are involved and bound together in such a way that they tend to become a kind of personal stylization.  
The Critics of Naturalism
It is noticeable that various of our urban intellectuals, who in a greater or lesser degree, reflect this tendency in their writing, are among the persons more or less dissatisfied with what is so loosely called naturalism. Too much realism is not fashionable. Now realism and naturalism in literature cannot be seen as one monolithic tendency, and a diicussion of it is better to be reserved for another time when it can be dealt with more fully than can be done here. Hence, I merely wish to suggest that in the nineteenth century, and in America in the earlier part of the twentieth century, those writers who were called realistic or naturalistic, were often vigorous, productive, curious and broad in their sympathies and their interests. In many cases one found a tremendous love of life itself in the works of many realistic writers. Tolstoy was, perhaps, the master realist of the nineteenth century, and his great novels contain what almost amounts to an intoxication with life. Zola, who is sometimes mistakenly considered as the father of so-called naturalism, possessed a zest for life, a breadth of interest, a probing curiosity.
Some critics deal superficially with this phenomenon by stressing the point that realists have sometimes wanted mere experience for its own sake, and have not been discriminating, nor have they evaluated with discernment. A sense of intoxication with life, a curiosity motivated by an interest in life, an exercise of an active sensibility and an active mind on nature, on society, on characters and events; all this in itself reveals a positive value. In an epoch such as the present one, when there is such admitted intellectual deadness, such complaining, such lack of effort and energy in the literary world, we should be the more able to see the positive value in the mere love for and interest in life which so many earlier novelists expressed. One might, for the sake of argument, grant to critics of Zola, for instance, many of the false criticisms they make and then still say – it is better to have been Zola than it is to be half dead, and to find that experience narrows, that curiosity declines and that one outlives oneself creatively.
It would be unfair to treat Isac Rosenfeld’s novel as a clear-cut example of this general approach: likewise, it would be improper to make this book the sole representative of a tendency. However, this novel can be related to these foregoing remarks; also, it is not the only work of recent times which suggests such a tendency in formation among writers. But, before generalizing about this first novel, let us first see what is in it.  
II
Passage from Home is the story of a fourteen-year-old Jewish boy named Bernard who lives on the West Side of Chicago. The time of the story is more or less that of the depression, the early 1930s. It is written in the first person and told in the words of the character himself, but told after the fact, so that in the story one cannot guess the age of the narrator as he tells of a period of growth in his earlier life. The boy lives with his father – whom he does not feel close to – and a step-mother. The father is a small business man who is getting on economically in a small way. Bernard is an unusually precocious boy and he appears in these pages as a lad with a sharp insight into the motivations of adults. The story deals with his relationships to adults.
This novel is, thus, an unusual one about boyhood. The boy here has no significant contacts with those his own age; we do not see him in association with any companions, nor do we meet him at a period when he is shown in love with any girl of his own generation. He seems to read a lot, but his reading matter is referred to as “books” and we don’t learn much concretely about his reading. He attends school, but school is only mentioned passingly or else referred to in a few sentences here and there in the thoughts of the character. He does not play with those of his own age. We can assume that he is superior to his own generation, but this must remain an assumption; other than in a passing scene with a cousin, he is never set against his generation. He is set off against adults. This makes the book additionally unusual as a story of boyhood, for the boy is intellectually superior to the adults with whom he comes into contact; he usually has greater insight into their motives and actions than they have themselves. Another striking fact concerning this as a novel of boyhood is that while the boy-hero is so precocious, so strikingly perceptive, he has little temperament and he has a very weak spirit of rebellion. For not only does he often appear superior to adults, but, also, he seems older than they. Thus, he sometimes doesn’t seem like a gifted boy of fourteen who wants to act as though he were, let us say, twenty-one or twenty-five: rather, he appears as though he were acting like a man of forty. Also, he is as much the spectator as he is the actor in the events of the story. A considerable part of the book deals with the affairs of the adults. These are seen through the eyes of the boy and they are presented analytically. Their words, their gestures, their movements, their quarrels are analyzed for hidden motives.  
Bernard’s Family
Bernard is attracted to the hill-billy character, Willy. The latter had married a member of Bernard’s family who died. Willy seems to come and go in the family circle, where he is considered as a cousin. Bernard’s father does not like Willy. Temperamentally, they are opposites. The father is not expressive and is even possibly neurotic; Willy is meant to be natural, expressive, outgoing. Also, Bernard is attracted to an aunt, Minna. Because of a family feud, Minna does not see the family. The antagonism of the family to Minna is focused in the father, and there are contradictory stories as to why these two hate each other. One story holds that Minna wanted to marry the father when Bernard’s mother died, and that she even kidnapped Bernard as a baby. The counter version holds that the father wanted her to be his mistress. Minna, in her way, lives a free life, just as Willy does. Willy is a Gentile. Minna associates with Gentiles and observes none of the Jewish rituals. Willy has love affairs. So does Minna. Neither is married, it appears in the story, until the end, when it is divulged that Minna has been secretly married to a strange, older man, named Mason. The greater part of the story involves an account of how Bernard tries to live in and through Minna and Willy.
Bernard’s father doesn’t want the boy to see either Willy or Minna, but he sees them both. Willy lives at the YMCA and Bernard often visits him there. Bernard doesn’t like Willy’s sloppy habits of dress, his carelessness in speech, his bad manners; he tries by the force of example to correct these lapses of etiquette. He brings Willy and Minna together and, in fact, he engineers a love affair between them. He lives vicariously in them, and he watches them and analyzes their motives in a sophisticated manner. His “passage from home” consists of his leaving to live with Minna: she is at the time living with and supporting Willy. At a birthday party on the father’s fortieth birthday, Minna comes to the house; there is a violent scene. When Minna leaves, the party breaks up and Bernard goes with her. He is disillusioned, guilty; Willy is humiliated by Minna; and then Mifina is humiliated by Willy.
Behind the observations and analyses of the boy-protagonist, there are the phenomena of guilt and shame; these are related to the Oedipus relationship. Minna and Willy become substitute father and mother images for Bernard, and at one point the boy consciously realizes this. Willy and Minna bust up in a fashion that has a touch of the sordid, and then Bernard’s passage from home ends by his return. In the scene with his father that takes place upon his return, he manages to shift his guilty feelings; his father also feels guilty. Bernard perceives that fathers and sons carry a common load of guilt, and that before they were fathers, fathers were sons; also, he now accepts his stepmother as his mother.
Bound up with this theme is the loneliness of the individual in the world, the world which is “life’s vast meaningless profusion.” There is no way out against this unless one “fought against it; fought against it by never sparing a moment of the true life and the true human beauty ...” And concerning the individual in this jungle “Our lives contain a secret, hidden from us. It is no more than the recognition of our failing: but to find it is all of courage, and to speak of it, the whole of truth.” Father and son more or less recognize failure in the final pages. The act of courage here is personal, and is not completely expressed in the talk between Bernard and his father. It is, rather, an act of self-recognition. And the story is, further, one of the boy’s efforts at self recognition, a self recognition which comes from his observations of adults with whom he is in a relationship, and some of whom he is trying secretly to manipulate. This development toward self-recognition becomes a psychological mystery story. And the mystery ends in Freudian generalities, coated with pseudo-moral conclusions.  
III
It is of significance that this novel is written in the first person and in an autobiographical manner. It is written as by the main hero of the story himself, but the story contains more revelation about others than about himself. The motivations of Minna, Willy, the father, the stepmother, for instance, are explored as fully as those of the “I” of the book, although by its very form this “I,” Bernard, is excluded from knowing surely whether or not he is correct in his analyses of these other characters. But neither are the readers. In this instance, the first person form prevents us from having any clear check on the writer himself as he tells his story. Bernard’s consciousness controls everything within the framework of the book. When other characters appear, and when they have collisions with one another, these collisions are reflected through Bernard’s eyes. In the story, then, Bernard tries to manipulate adults: and the form of the story is, in addition, a form of manipulation. At the same time, the novel is a fairly long one, 280 pages. But it is rather meager in its details. It is analytical, but the analyses are highly generalized. These analyses are sometimes shrewd, and they throw off many interesting observations; but also, they become pretentious. The narrator hero steps out of character, and the superiority which he possesses, by the very form of the novel which presents him as a manipulator, is revealed in even trivial ways. Thus, concerning the break up of the love affair of Willy and Minna, he tells the reader, apparently without realizing how empty and pretentious he sometimes becomes, that “It is impossible to observe the exact moment when the desire to be loved, like love itself, changes into its opposite.” Were this a comment on himself, it would be in keeping. But the comment, presented as that of a boy of fourteen about a man and a woman who have had a love affair, strikes one differently. It suggests the pretentiousness of the book. It reveals how the author has used Freudian commonplaces and pseudo-analysis as a substitution for real detail which conveys a sense of reality of life to the reader.  
The Heart of the Story
The form of the story is further one which attempts to establish psychological suspense: Rosenfeld has apparently been influenced by James and Proust. The boy’s passage from home, that is, his step toward maturity is, in turn, a search for hidden motives. These hidden motives are the secrets of adults. The growth of the boy is charted by his ability to penetrate these motives. This in tum reveals another concealment, the concealed narcissism at the heart of this novel. The narration presents a character who tells his own story, and his own story is really the story of what he saw and discovered about others. And by being able to tell this story and to reveal the hidden motives of others, he remains superior to these others. In this way, the hero is revealed as a person having specially fine perceptive powers. Although the boy does not use cultural allusion, these faculties are cultivated ones, faculties which have been given a traditional character in the work of great and gifted writers, such as Proust and James.
The concealed cultural narcissism of the story is what links it with other writings, including that of Trilling, as part of what is developing into a contemporary literary tendency. This tendency presents as the hero or chief protagonist, the observer rather than the actor. The quality of the hero to observe is an outstanding trait. At the same time that the hero or protagonist has such faculties of observation, he does not match these with capacities to act or to experience. The experiences of such a hero are narrow in range. But, at the same time, his reflections, his observations and his conclusions are inversely broad and sweeping. In these observations, society sometimes becomes life – life’s jungle. Thus, the experiences of this type of hero, and especially when he is cast in the role of the observer or the spectator, are then used as the basis for glittering and pretentious conclusions about life. These conclusions do not carry the hero out into the world to perform his acts of wisdom and courage in public struggles. Rather they deepen his sense of himself, his confidence in his own powers of penetrating observation. Here we have suggested to us, courage and responsibility when there is no real responsibility. Thus we see what is the real significance of this type of writing. It is escapist. And the escape is one into cultural narcissism. Cultural narcissism in this way becomes “responsibility.”  
IV
This tendency toward moral and cultural narcissism in literature threatens to become the genteel tradition of the 1940s. It is now promising to produce a hot-house literature. This hot-house literature will have, as a hero, the spectator who looks at other people and who has the wisdom, the knowledge and the analytical capacity to dissect their immoralities and to uncover the hidden motives of their actions. Set against the spectator here are the human mannikins whom the same hero can understand, analyze and criticize. Such writing in tum has its esthetic and stylistic traits. The style of such writing is banal on a high level. The form of such writing is one in which there are relatively few incidents. The incidents that are used are often presented in a reflected form: they are described by someone who saw them, or they are, as in the case of this book, told by an “I.” Further, there is here a self-conscious effort to produce an idea in literature. And this only ends in commonplaces expressing a turgid style that some critics call good writing. Above all else, such writing is weak in characters who are real and credible. This is true of Rosenfeld’s novel. His manner of presentation itself almost demands that his characters be mannikins. A formula of cultural narcissism demands mannikin characters. For the spectator is superior to his characters, and he is observing and analyzing them in the manner that we have already noted. These characters are, thus, precluded from coming before our eyes as real human beings with their own dignity and weaknesses. They are dangled on literary strings, turned into verbal puppets. The very form of the story is one of manipulation: the characters are manipulated: the boy here is, himself, a manipulator. This all should help to reveal to us the process of the new literary snobbery which is to be found in advanced intellectual circles of the present. This is the symptomatic significance of Passage from Home. And also, this is the type of writing which is being advanced as an alternative to realistic and objective novels that seek to explore the nature of experience.
 







The following excerpts from James T. Farrell’s article, Canada Bans Another Book, is reprinted with the permission of the author, it appeared originally in the i>Canadian Forum for November, 1946. The banning of Farrell’s book by the Canadian government calls attention to the long-standing practice of that country in banning books, periodicals and papers not to the liking of its censors, especially those representing the socialist and labor point of view. Only a short time ago the Canadian government banned Labor Action and The New International. Such censorship is a device of reactionary government. To permit it to go by without protest is to guarantee its continuance. The fight against the Canadian version of censorship is as important as the fight against censorship in this country, or anywhere else. We call upon our readers to write letters to the Canadian government of MacKenzie King protesting the banning of Farrell’s book, demanding at the same, time right of the free circulation of all books, periodicals and newspapers.



*
MY novel, Bernard Clare, has been prohibited entry into Canada for the past four months. This act of censorship was authorized last May. A Memorandum, dated May 31, was sent by the Canadian Customs Division of the Department of National Revenue to the Vanguard Press, of New York City, publishers of my novel. This Memorandum contained the bare information that Bernard Clare would not be permitted entry into the Dominion of Canada. The justification of this action was cited as ”Section 13 and Item 1201, Schedule ‘C’ of the Customs Tariff.” This document was signed by Mr. D. Sim, Deputy Minister of National Revenue, Customs and Excises.
When I learned of this action, I addressed an Open Letter of protest to Prime Minister Mackenzie King, stigmatizing it as unjust, and asking that the ban be removed, and that public responsibility for this banning be fixed. In my open letter to Mr. King, I also stated: “I regard it as my duty to protest this banning, to call it to the attention of the writers and the readers of both the United States and the Dominion of Canada, and to call upon them to give me public support in my effort to have this ban rescinded.”
I have tried to the best of my ability to do this, and I have received an encouraging public support from representative figures in the United States. In addition, students, private citizens, ex-soldiers and others from the United States and other countries have sent protests to Mr. King. Some of these letters have asked that the ban be removed; others have requested that this case be re-opened. These letters have been formally acknowledged, but for the rest, ignored. Likewise, I received a cold formal acknowledgment of my open letter. No other communication has been addressed to me. Neither Mr. King, nor Mr. Sim, has taken the trouble to send me any specific information concerning the precise reasons for this act of censorship. Time Magazine of June 24, 1946, however, quoted Mr. Sim as having stated: “I discovered at least two chapters, which I consider indecent. There was nothing else I could do about it but slap on the ban ... We’re not on a witch hunt. The fewer such decisions we have to make the better we like it.” [1] I call attention here to the fact that Mr. Sim states that he considered these two unspecified chapters “obscene.”
*
It is clear that high Canadian officials refuse to take this situation seriously. Such ah interpretation is warranted by the manner in which they have consistently ignored protests calling for a removal of the ban on Bernard Clare. And my statement is further confirmed by an item on the case, published in The Montreal Gazette for August 23 under the heading of Bernard Clare Still Banned. [2] This report declared that officials of the customs department indicated that the formal acknowledgment sent to me, in response to my open letter, “didn’t mean very much.” This formal letter told me that my protest had been brought to the attention of Revenue Minister McCann. Although this is a small detail, it is revealing of the attitude of Canadian officials. One can only state baldly that their attitude concerning protests here is merely cynical. If the Prime Minister or one of his assistants writes an American author concerning an act of censorship, it doesn’t “mean much.” On the basis of this, I ask if Canadians may think I am unfair, if I say it doesn’t mean much the next time I read in the press of the United States a statement by a Canadian official which affirms the principle of freedom of speech. Also, this same news story indicated that Mr. Sim had told the press that “the ruling still stands and further than that I don’t care to comment on the affair.”
*
The banning of Bernard Clare and other books by Mr. Sim and his subordinates has very practical implications for Canadians. Culture is now and has long been international. At the same time, cultural development in different countries has been uneven. The uneven character of the development of culture in Canada and the British Dominions as a whole, as contrasted with cultural development in England and the United States, is a commonly known fact. It is referred to or implied in many articles dealing with these questions. Readers of this magazine can recall such references in articles on the state of Canadian literature. There are, at the same time, signs of cultural ferment in the various dominions. However, other tendencies in the world are such as to constitute a possible threat to the native tendencies which may develop out of this new and growing ferment in such dominions as Canada, New Zealand and Australia. The cultural industries of both England and the United States are far richer and more powerful than those of Canada, and of the other dominions. American and English culture plays a dominant role in the dominions.
This fact has a singular importance at the present time, an importance which is integrally related with the fact that culture is now international. For in the English-speaking world in particular, and in many other countries as well, the process of the Americanization of world culture has been accelerated. Canadians are familiar with the fact that in the United States culture has been highly commercialized, and that there now exist huge American cultural monopolies and near monopolies. This is seen most clearly in the case of motion pictures and radio. It is also evinced in the mass circulation magazines. Now, the American publishing business has expanded, and it has reached the stage of combinations. With this, there is expanding in the United States a vast, a grandiose, and a wholly counterfeit popular culture. And it is this counterfeit that is involved in this developing Americanization of world culture. Shoddy motion pictures and shoddy novels which reflect a best seller culture are not usually banned by Canadian and other customs officials. In consequence, it is these works which form too often the concepts that Canadians (and others) hold of life in the United States. And more serious works are banned. They are banned by Mr. Davis Sim. He says they are obscene, but he won’t say any more about it. But what are the potential consequences of actions like this one? Such actions help to accelerate the process of the Americanization of culture. The customs officials, prime ministers and others who, thus, approve policies such as that pursued in the case of my own novel, are doing their little bit to help further the spread of this counterfeit and Hollywoodized culture. By doing this, they are helping to clamp down the lid on cultural and literary ferment in their own countries. They are, thus, helping to preserve the unevenness of cultural development in the dominions. They are helping to preserve the parochialism which the best elements in the dominions want to slough off once and for all.
(To be concluded next week)
*
Footnotes
1. If Mr. Sim does not like these cases, the remedy is simple. All that he needs to do is to stop censoring books this way. and to instruct his subordinates to do likewise.
2. In this report, The Montreal Gazette mistakenly printed my name as John Farrell, and also declared: “Ever since the book Bernard Clare which uses many four-letter words no longer considered polite in English ...” If this newspaper means the four-letter words usually referred to in this context, it is factually wrong. Bernard Clare does not contain “many” four-letter words of this kind. Either this esteemed Canadian newspaper was ignorant and careless, or else the conception of polite four-letter words is different in Canada than it is in other countries. While I am not familiar with local usage of four-letter words in Montreal. I can hardly believe that words such as “many,” “moon,” “they,” “them” and the like are impolite in this city. However, it is four-letter words of this type which are used in many instances in my novel.>

 

s T. Farrell: [Response to "Note on 'The Open City'"] (January 1947)




James T. Farrell   |   Trotskyist Writers   |   ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
[Response to Note on The Open City]
(January 1947)

Originally published in New International, Vol. XIII No. 1, January 1947, p. 31.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

If one dismisses a few irrelevancies in Meyer Schapiro’s A Note on The Open City, one is likely to be surprised by the discovery that he disagrees with my interpretation less than he realizes, and that his criticism of my article contains little point. His comments on how the film “assumes the pattern of a familiar Christian legend” are, to me, utterly without significance. Here he was trying to write a political article but the art historian overcame the man of political interest. It is surprising to read in the opening of his note that he is going to write a more political analysis of the film than I did, and then to read that the character of the priest, Pietro, suggests Saint Peter because of the fact that Saint Peter was crucified upside down, and, in the film, the priest was shot in the back. And how does the connection of Manfredi with Saint Paul add to our political understanding of this film? Also, at one point in his note, he disproves me by pointing out that reviews of the film in Italian and American magazines do not agree with my review. This is merely an irrelevant appeal to authority.
If we strip aside such features of his note, the real question becomes the following: Is or is not what Meyer Schapiro writes consistent with my analysis? Those who have read my review, his note, and have seen the film will be able to answer this question themselves. I venture to remark that a number of them may be surprised to discover that there really isn’t much of an issue here. Meyer Schapiro says that I insist “that the film neither contains nor implies a political program.” He must have misread my article. At one point I stated: “Formally, the film embodies the idea of national unity: more intimately, it establishes the leadership principle.” At another point, I wrote that for its interpretation, the film “relies on historic events in terms of their presentation and interpretation from the standpoint of an all-class, Popular Front, National-Liberation conception of fascism.” I was writing for an audience of Marxists, which, I assumed, understood the character of the Popular-Front, National-Liberation, politics as well as I might. Hence, after indicating that the film had this as a general character, I attempted to analyze it by emphasizing what I considered to be the significance of the main protagonist, Manfredi. He is a Stalinist and a leader. The worldwide Stalinist movement is hierarchically organized in terms of leadership. The zigzags of the Stalinist line are familiar political events. But at the same time, their leadership remains and this leadership is constantly built up in the public eye. For years, in fact, Stalinists in America and elsewhere, have striven to have Stalinist heroes, leaders and apparatus men, introduced into art, I don’t know why Schapiro should be surprised that I discussed this phenomenon when it occurs in a motion picture.
Meyer Schapiro raised the question – who made this film? While interesting in itself, this is a question to which I am indifferent insofar as my analysis is concerned. We must judge here not by the intentions of the film makers, but by the content of what they do. And except for the points I have made above, as well as for one or two small details, what Schapiro writes is interesting in itself, and not at all a contradiction of my analysis.
James T. Farrell
 




THE film, The Bells of St. Mary’s, has been widely praised. It has been recommended as a picture which should be seen by youth. Many Catholics have lauded the film because of its religious tone. In a recent public controversy between Mr. Darry F. Zanuck and Mr. Samuel Goldwyn, concerning the quality of Hollywood films, Mr. Zanuck cited this film as one of which the American motion picture industry can be proud. The film has been seriously regarded as one of a fine moral quality, and, at the same time, as one which is deeply human. It seems to me that a brief discussion of this picture is, in consequence, decidedly pertinent.
The Bells of St. Mary’s is the story of a priest, played by Bing Crosby, a nun, played by Ingrid Bergmann, and a school. St. Mary’s school is old and run down. The young priest comes to his new assignment at St. Mary’s. His predecessor has had a bad time of it with the nuns. It is expected that this new young priest will not fare well, and that the nuns will run him, and give him a good and steady nagging. The plot unfolds from the beginning, and there are two connected plot threads which definitely relate to questions of morality. One is the relationship between the young priest and the beautiful nun. The second is concerned with the desire of the nuns for a new and better school building. A crabbed and almost apoplectic old rich man owns a building next to the run-down edifice of St. Mary’s. This rich man wants to get the St. Mary building. The nuns, in turn, want the rich man to give them a building which will permit the nuns to run a better and more up-to-date school. In addition to the above, there is a girl whose parents are separated (if I recall the story correctly months after having seen it). The priest and the nun exercise their good offices in the interest of the girl: there are misunderstandings which threaten to be serious and to prevent her from graduating, but these are straightened out in the end and the girl’s parents even come together.
The morality of this film needs to be commented upon. For the praise which so many Catholics have showered on this film is strongly suggestive of the growing hollowness of conventional morality in our time. In the film, the children are presented mainly as existing for the school. Again and again, in little details, we see that this is the case. The new building is more important in the plot than are the children who are to be educated and trained for life in this hew building. The nuns and the priest are so presented that in the context of the story itself they act on this premise. The direct actions and the words of the priest and the nuns show them more decidedly to be concerned with the building than with the children. The children, thus, are seen as existing principally for the building. An object here is more important than young and malleable human beings. Behind the formulas of conventional morality and religious high-mindedness and dedication, we see religious instruction and parochial education as emphasizing a building, and as treating the children to be educated as secondary to that building. This unmistakable feature of the film shows that underneath the forms of morality there is moral density.
 
The Hollywood Plot Structure
A Hollywood film seems to demand that there be an attractive male and female at the center of every plot. In this film, the male is a priest and the female is a nun. There can, thus, be no love interest. And yet, as I sat in the theatre and looked at this picture, it became clear to me that the habits of concocting plots in the film industry were such that love interest could not be kept out of the story. Thus, the relationship between the priest (Bing Crosby) and the nun (Ingrid Bergman) is one of indubitable flirtatiousness. The priest and the nun develop, between them, a rivalry in which they want to outdo and outwit one another in little incidents and episodes which are witty in the way that Hollywood is usually witty. Wit and humor are here aggressive. The aggressiveness is expressed in rivalry. The rivalry has a concealed sexual character. The priest and the nun come very close to behaving like the usual boy and the usual girl in a film when they are thrown together, and when they engage in the efforts and actions of the selection of any love object as these are endlessly mirrored on the screen. The Hollywood film demands that the masculine and feminine star stand out above all others. The priest and nun stand out in the typical way. They are thrown together again and again for the purposes of the plot. They are continuously teasing one another. The children are as incidental to this teasing and platonic rivalry as they are to the aim of getting a new building.
One incident concerning the children will, perhaps, here suggest the quality of this picture. One of the boys is beaten up by a little bully. The little bully more or less becomes the champion of the priest. The nun champions the boy who has been beaten up. She does this in order to outdo the priest. She buys some manuals which contain instructions on how to fight. She reads these manuals, shadow boxes, and then teaches her little champion how to fight. Her champion then beats up the bully. The priest is outdone by the nun, and she, as it were, has beaten him at his own game. This little incident seems to be amusing and harmless. And yet its moral implications are far from harmless or merely funny. For here we see a nun and a priest using two boys as expressions of their own teasing rivalry, a rivalry which, in the context of the film, throws a man and a woman in opposition to one another. Just as the children exist for a building, so, in this way, they exist as supernumeraries for the rivalry of a priest and a nun. The fact that the administrators of the Production Code, that critics, priests, Catholic laymen and others could approve of this representation of the children is significant. One can pertinently ask them if in their praise and approval of this film, they examined its moral implications? One can, in addition, ask if they favor schools, educational practices, pedagogical instruction which would be in line with a view such as the one definitely implied in the total representation of the children in this film?
In the end, the nuns gain their aim. They get the building from the crochety rich man. But his aim is accomplished by a little trick. The man’s doctor is a Catholic. The priests and the nun participate in the trick which the doctor plays on his patient. He tells the rich man that he is likely to live longer if he becomes generous rather than stingy. He is, thereby, frightened into becoming a generous man. He helps unfortunate people on the streets, and he gives away a building. Here, a doctor is represented as treating a patient in such a manner. Apparently this rich man is a cardiac case, and also, he shows signs of having hypertension. What do doctors, Catholic and otherwise, think of this form of advice given to patients? This amusingly presented part of the plot also raises moral questions.
In addition, the nun develops tuberculosis. And she is not told what her condition is. The doctor and the priest both participate in this concealment. The concealment of this information introduces the threat of tragedy into the plot. Illness is misrepresented here. But this is a feature that has also been mentioned and attacked. In fact, New Masses has been making hay against Hollywood on precisely this point. And in this instance, New Masses is correct, not wrong.
 
Some Moral Implications
In addition to the moral implications involved in the above comments, there is another point which can be mentioned. In general, this is one of those films which gives the impression that good cheer, good will, the babying of human beings with a hollow goodness, will lead to valuable human results. This all amounts to the expression of banal and empty sentimentalities about doing good. The moral level of such sentimentalities is the same as that expressed in the popular songs which ooze optimism, and the commercial advertisements which promise the good life to customers who will be smart enough to buy the right products. It is a sentimentalization which tells us that there is a silver lining in every cloud. This is considered, in our day and age, to be affirmation of life, an expression of faith in humanity. In the name of such optimism and sunshiny goodness, serious writers are attacked as cynics, and they are denounced as nothing less than enemies of the human race. To try and present images of human beings in terms of the torn, tragic and ambivalent emotions which human beings feel and express in real life is immoral: to present goodness in the way that it is represented in The Bells of St. Mary’s is moral.
The representation, of the children in this film is symptomatic and significant. Children are immature and need to be guided. They are, in a sense, at the mercy of adults. Children can be guided and educated either for their own good or for the good of the significant adults who have authority over and influence upon them. Here, the children exist – I repeat – for the benefit of the adults and because they are needed as objects of instruction in a new school building. When the nun becomes ill, she is treated like a child by both her doctor and the priest. She is not told what is really wrong with her. She, whose duty it is to guide the young, cannot be trusted to face the realities of life and death when these concern her. In pictures such as this, the motion picture industry, in turn, really tells us of a predominant moral attitude current in Hollywood. It is an attitude which treats the audience like children. The realities of life and death cannot be clearly and seriously mirrored on motion picture screens because the audience cannot be trusted to face the realities of life and death which they must face day in and day out in their actual lives. The moral pattern in film then, suggests what are probably the moral attitudes of the picture makers. For, let me repeat, important personages of the film industry have praised this film precisely because of its alleged high moral tone. And at the same time that moral films of this calibre are produced, callousness and cynicism develops by leaps and bounds all over America. One asks here: might there be any connection between this kind of film morality and the real callousness we find all around us in our daily lives. An investigation, seeking to answer this question, might be very illuminating.
(Copyright by James T. Farrell, 1946)
 

 T. Farrell: The Politics of Psychoanalysis (January 1947)




James T. Farrell   |   Trotskyist Writers   |   ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
The Politics of Psychoanalysis
(January 1947)

From New International, Vol. XIII No. 1, January 1947, pp. 20–23.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

I should like to begin my critical comments of Robert Stiler’s article, The Politics of Psychoanalysis (printed in The New International, August 1946) with a few personal remarks. A little more than twenty-two years ago, I read the first books which helped open the way to what emotional and intellectual liberation I have attained in life. These books were, The Psychopathology of Everyday Life by Freud and An Introduction to Psycho-Analysis by Brill. I was then twenty. I did not gain a great understanding of Freudianism from these books. I was somewhat resistant; in fear of being too disturbed, I read these books with a certain defensive dishonesty of mind. Their implications carried too much threat for me. Yet, these books ate their way into my thinking, and even in periods when I have expressed anti-Freudian arguments, I have never been free of their influence.
I would say that the thinkers who have most influenced me have been Freud, Nietzsche, Dewey, Mead, Marx, Lenin and Trotsky. The first of these was Freud. On and off for years, I have come back to various Freudian ideas. Frequently, I have struggled to find arguments which would limit their scope of application, refute them, reduce them to the point where they were pleasingly domesticated in my own mind, and thereby, shorn of their painful personal menace. Of all the ideas in the world today, the ideas of Freud and the ideas of Marx are the ones which meet with the most resistance. I doubt that any other thinkers have been subjected to as many attempts at ”revision” as is the case with these two great minds. The ideas of both demand their own relevant kind of praxis. In order to come to terms with the ideas of either, one must change oneself. The beginning of understanding in the modern world – if this understanding is to have any truly systematic character – must be found in coming to terms with Marxism and with Freudianism. Here are the roads to insight in our time concerning the problems which have such a disturbing and agitating character.
There is a peculiar character to the inner resistance which grows up when one first encounters the ideas of Freud. Analysts speak of this resistance when they treat their patients. But that resistance grows up in almost every reader of Freud, if not every reader. This fact is sufficient to suggest what I mean when I say that Freudianism demands some kind of praxis. One cannot merely read Freud and assimilate his concepts. If one does not submit to analysis, then one needs at least to go through the exceedingly painful and bewildering process of testing Freud’s ideas on oneself. The assimilation of Freud demands that one try fearlessly and objectively to confront oneself with his ideas. No article, such as that of Robert Stiler’s, can give readers any idea of the character or significance of Freud. It is an article which can only increase an already alarming condition of smugness among Marxists. It is an article which strongly suggests to me that the author fears to put his Marxism to the test by placing it face-to-face with Freudianism and it can only be, therefore, of disservice to the body of Marxist thought. If this were the best that Marxism could offer in relationship with Freud, then, Marxism is in a serious danger. The least a Marxist can do in discussing Freud is to exercise that same caution, care, strictness and methodological conscience which is so marked in all of Freud’s writings. When one reads an article such as Stiler’s one can only become embarrassed.
 
The Universality of Freudianism
Basically, the work of Freud is therapeutic; it is directly concerned with discovering the genesis and the cure of psychoneurosis. It is based, primarily, on clinical observations. It has, however, implications which range over a wide field, and which relate, among other things, to art and politics. However, Freudian doctrine does not stand or fall on its relation to art or politics. It stands or falls on its diagnosis of psychoneurosis, and its therapeutic methods of cure. Stiler, however, would more or less create the impression that this is not the case. The heart of Freud is, to him, merely a crudely stated class phenomenon. In a sentence which violates the historical conceptions of Marxism, Stiler would tell us that Freud’s conception or hypothesis of universal instincts, a basic premise, was “arrived at by assuming that the various characteristics which he (Freud) correctly observed in the upper middle class in a particular time and social milieu, were inherent in all human beings, in all times, and in all social milieu.” Freud did not observe universal instincts in a particular time, and a particular social milieu. No one can make such observations. Freud assumed and deduced instincts, and used this assumption as a hypothesis to aid in explaining what he observed. What he observed were traits of psychoneurotic behavior, the formation of symptoms, and with this, the same types of behavior in normal people, but in a different degree of intensity and significance. When Stiler, however, restricts the application of Freud’s observations and conclusions to the bourgeoisie of a certain time, he really distorts and caricatures Marxism. The clinical observations of psychoanalysis are, largely, observations mainly concerned with the conduct of persons of the bourgeois strata. This is inevitable because the social system, both at the time of Freud and at present, is of such a character that only a few can afford to be treated psychoanalytically. As with many other things, the masses are also deprived of the benefits of psychoanalysis. However, the deprivation of the masses does not warrant the assumption that it is only the bourgeois who becomes a psychoneurotic, or a psychotic. Mental illness knows no class, no race, no creed.
The patterns of symptom formation in mental illness are universal, insofar as anything can be universal. There are general characteristics in dreams which do not change from class to class, and even the dreams of a Marxist will reveal those characteristics. The wealth of clinical observations which have been made by Freud and his successors leads to the necessity of forming some conclusions concerning “human nature.” This is especially demanded by one of Freud’s major contributions, his theory of infantile sexuality. If one takes specific traits or actions which Freud has explained, one will readily see that it is impossible to reduce the observations of Freud to a specific time and to a specific class. An example is infantile masturbation. Francis H. Bartlett, writing an article, The Limitations of Freud, in the Stalinist magazine, Science and Society (Winter 1939) attempted to prove precisely what Stiler asserts in making his central (and crucial) mistake. The alleged limitations cited are that Freud’s observations were based on the bourgeois, and that they have a bourgeois application, rather than a universal application in the sense that science teaches us what a universal application is. However, after attempting to clinch this criticism, we find Bartlett granting that infantile masturbation is an almost universal practice. Similarly, the behavior of children will reveal other practices which have a character that ranges beyond class. Further, we know really nothing as yet of the psychological implications of pre-natal development, but we can safely assume that these are also universal.
However, a dynamic conception of the human organism and its personality, demands that we credit significance to this period of our physiological and psychological biography. Here, we have an experience which is indubitably universal in character.
In addition, the human organism has certain universal structural characteristics. It lives in a common world. Its habits of perception have also a universal character. The sexual drive, instinct, aptitude, need is also universal. These facts are more than sufficient to warrant an assumption which would grant that we have “instincts” in some sense or other. [1] The observations which Freud made, at a particular time, in a particular social milieu, and of particular people of a particular class led him to make other observations concerning sexual life in infancy. It also led him to make a number of other generalizations which compose a series of psychological constructions having a scientific status similar to that of Marx’s abstractions concerning capitalism, i.e., “pure capitalism.” Methodologically, Freud had the same kind of marvelous imagination as Marx; both were fertile in the use of abstractions and constructs. Finally, Stiler is wrong factually. For a few of Freud’s observations concerned the dreams of non-bourgeois. There are a few dreams, for instance, in his book, The Interpretation of Dreams, of working class people, and these dreams do not reveal characteristics different from those of the bourgeois.
Stiler on the one hand asserts that the workers should study this new science, and that, on the other hand, he limits its scientific status by telling us that it is really only relevant to the bourgeois, and that it has a specific historical location in time. He would have us believe that Freudian “human nature” is merely “bourgeois,” and then, he would tell us, that this is not so, and that Marxists, if they free Freudianism from bourgeois limitations, will add it to the long list of man’s conquests of nature. Thus, it is not solely bourgeois. It is a scientific contribution tpward our understanding of the functions of the human mind. How can anyone – even a person who has not acquired the great benefits of Marxist “science” – be guilty of such a flagrant and confusing contradiction?
Stiler’s article seems to rest on the assumption that there is, in contradistinction to a Freudian human nature, a ”Marxian” human nature. His unstated assumption would seem to me to help explain his failure to understand “repression.” Thus, he seems to equate the repression of capitalist society with ”psychological repression.” The repression practiced in capitalist society is based on force, and it is applied through deprivations which are made possible by the exploitation of man by man, and by the fact that, in the last analysis, the state is an instrument of force which can be used for class ends. Psychological repression is not at all the same thing. It is independent of these factors, and it has a dual character. On the one hand, the child represses on its own. “Infantile amnesia,” which Freud describes in his Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex, cannot be reduced to the status of being merely a class phenomenon. [2] Even Marxists will find this happening in the case of their own children. On the other hand, it can be added quite flatly that Freud is correct in telling us that children must be repressed. The repression of children in a socialist society will be an absolute necessity. On the basis of Freudian psychology, we can assert that one of the aims of socialism is that of creating a society which permits the best possible and the most civilized manner of socializing aggressiveness. This statement can be connected further, with Trotsky’s ideas. In Literature and Revolution, Trotsky speaks of socialist society in which the competitiveness between men will be raised to a higher level. To raise competitiveness to a higher level means that it must be made more social, that the consequences of competitiveness must not be those of increasing social miseries as is usually the case in capitalist society. But socialism gives no promise of eliminating the aggressiveness which we find so constant in the human animal. Connected with this same necessity of repression, it is essential to point out that the infant and the young child is egocentric. The child must learn, must acquire a social nature. The child must learn to act cooperatively by being taught. Without some repression how can this be accomplished?
However, the need of repression in children relates more directly to the sexual life. Freud points out, also in his Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex, that if the child is over-stimulated sexually, the dangers of neuroticism are likely to be increased. Sexual over-stimulation of children is very dangerous, and this is, in itself, sufficient to point out the need for, and the sense of, Freud’s point that the child must be repressed. But this repression is different in character from the social repression practiced in capitalist society. Stiler’s “dialectic” cannot explain the difference, and synthesize them as he imagines. For we do not have a problem in “dialectics” here, as Stiler would seem to believe.
In line with the above, Stiler also overstates the meaning of adjustment as this really applies in analytic therapy. To cure a psychoneurotic by analysis, to “adjust” him to society, does not mean that you adjust him to all of the facts of capitalism; to war, to imperialism, to “the peaceful warfare of competition.” It means that you adjust him to himself, that you help him to release himself from the driving neurotic tendencies which cause him to act with a kind of compulsive stupidity. Similarly, to speak of psychoanalysis as an education does not at all, and with any logical necessity, imply that this education must be a substitute for the acquisition of knowledge of society, and of its mechanisms. The intimate part of the education produced by psychoanalysis is self-education. The patient’s own past is brought to light in such a way that he is released from acting out symptomatically and on a neurotic plane, the fears and traumatic experience of an earlier age. One can say that the psychoneurotic acts in the present and toward significant people of the present with the same emotions, but symptomatically, as he acted toward significant people of the past.
 
Psychoanalysis and the Revolutionist
While he overstates the scope of “adjustment” here, Stiler also more or less implies that Marxism, the Marxist movement, the Marxist party, is a better cure for psychoneurosis than is analysis. This is dangerous. It can be asserted most emphatically that in most cases, a psycho-neurotic cannot be a good revolutionary leader. If a person has a clear cut illness of a psychoneurotic character, and he is told to try and cure it by becoming a Marxist, the person who offers such advice is both playing with fire and tampering with human destinies. In the present world of Marxist lethargy, of the decline of Marxist theory, of the consequences of many defeats of socialism, where endless people are finding that they have personal problems, views of this kind are truly dangerous. Realizing this, one might suggest that Trotsky’s friend and comrade, Joffe, knew better than this, and that he did not assume that the Russian revolutionary movement would relieve him of his inner disturbance; he went to a psychoanalyst. The result was that, even though he eventually committed suicide, he first found years of fruitful political activity.
A Marxist does not criticize a doctor for performing an operation which saves the life of a capitalist. He should no more criticize a psychoanalyst for treating a bourgeois, and helping that bourgeois to become cured of a psychoheurosis. Any contribution towards health must be assumed as a potential good. The healthy man is, at least, more amenable to reason that is the mentally sick man. The demand that the psychoanalyst take unto himself the functions of the Marxist is both a dangerous and a politically inept one. The patient must free himself not only of the thraldom of his personal past: he must, before he is cured, free himself of dependency on his analyst. If the analyst halts that cure midway by making the patient into a revolutionist, it is likely or possible that he may only be giving an uncured psychoneurotic to the revolutionary movement. The Marxist making this demand is asking the doctor to do what he ought to do himself: he is mixing up frames of reference and creating confusion.
These criticisms should suggest that Stiler approached psychoanalysis from the wrong end. It must be seen first not as a basis for politics, not as a basis for a world view, but as a branch of medicine which is rooted in clinical practice. The clinical features of psychoanalysis are central. Freudianism is, first and foremost, clinical. It stands or falls on its clinical successes.
The vogue of Freudian thinking in many fields at the present time cannot be blamed on Freud, and many distinctions must be made. Any intellectual tendency – even Marxism – can be turned into a means of escape. The use of psychoanalysis for reactionary purposes is not necessarily the result of Freud’s work and thought. Historical conclusions of Freud, himself, do not always and necessarily have the same status as Freud’s clinical conclusions. But Stiler turns all of this around. He writes of the politics of psychoanalysis with the same crudity as Stalinists have: in fact, he shows even less breadth than one will sometimes find in Stalinist discussions of Freud and Marx. A Marxist implicitly proves that he has less than adequate confidence in his Marxism if he fears to put his ideas to the test by placing them against the ideas of all others. In doing this, he need further to state fairly, clearly and with discrimination, the ideas against which he is testing his own Marxism. This, Stiler does not do.
Finally, I would suggest that the reader compare Stiler’s entire tone with what Freud said of his own contribution in his Autobiography.
“Looking back, then, over the patchwork of my life’s labors, I can say that I have made many beginnings and thrown out many suggestions. Something will come of them in the future, though 1 cannot myself tell whether it will be much or little. I can, however, express a hope that I have opened up a pathway for an important advance in our knowledge.”
One needs to approach Freud’s ideas with something of this same spirit. For it is the true scientific spirit. It is far removed from the spirit of Stiler’s article.

Footnotes
1. “Instinct in general is regarded as a kind of elasticity of living things, an impulsion toward the restoration of a situation which once existed, but was brought to an end by external circumstances.” Freud thus comments on his conception of instinct in his book, Autobiography.
2. The category of society includes the category of classes. In other words, classes exist in society, and they mutually influence one another. One cannot understand class phenomenon if one does not see it as the data of class society in which classes are opposed to one another, and, at the same time, influence one another. Stiler here is crude and rigid in a way parallel to the crudity and rigidity of third period Stalinist discussions of literature. Similarly, human beings influence one another. This influence is not a purely formal or intellectual one. In this context. I would like to recommend to interested readers, Dr. Paul Schilder’s book, The Image and Appearance of tne Human Body, London 1935. Schilder deals with the problem of the body image, and he studies this problem neurologically, psychoanalytically and sociologically. In this way, he brings Freudian ideas very close to the psychological implications of Marx. These implications would lead to a social conception of personality. At one point in his study, Schilder quotes Bukharin in this context, and shows how Bukharin has stated only an incomplete truth. Marxists, too often, state only incomplete truths when they discuss the social character of personality. Stiler formalizes an incomplete truth. In this way he is rigid and abstract.
 




My books have never had a large sale in Canada. The number of Canadian readers who have been prevented from reading Bernard Clare is very small. At the same time, Mr. Sim has told many readers that if they can get hold of my works they will get something which actually they won’t find in these same books. Some Canadians have gone across the border into Buffalo looking for this in Bernard Clare. If those Canadians who have smuggled my novel across from Buffalo are disappointed in not finding “obscenity,” and feel defrauded, they must blame Mr. Sim, not me. He is the man who had told them that Bernard Clare is “obscene.” All this does not contribute toward helping Canadians in the real moral problem posed by a book, that of handling one’s emotion, On the contrary, this only tells people where to look in order to find so-called pornography. And it further contributes toward the conception of books as a means of sexual gratification via fantasy. The censors have been doing this for decades now. As such, the censors have made a major contribution toward deforming literary taste. As long as there is a marriage, a pretty girl, a young man in the novel, the results are the same in fantasy. Readers are coached and helped to find sex in books. Puritanical customs officials are not achieving their avowed purpose. And this being the case, they don’t stop the entry of American motion pictures. The American films of glamor boys and girls are sufficient for those who wish to gain sexual gratification via fantasy in cultural products. In terms of Mr. Sim’s own assumed morality, he is achieving the opposite of what he wants.
If we wish to apply realistic tests to men and to governments, we must judge them by what they do, not solely by what they avow. And what men and governments do in small things is a forecast as to what they are likely to do in larger matters. The silence of Canadian officials, their refusal to answer questions, to meet arguments and protests, their refusal even to specify precisely what chapters Mr. Sim considers “indecent” – all this constitutes a forecast. It reveals the attitude of Canadian officials on books and on the question of the artist’s right to freedom of expression. If they will ban my book without a hearing, if they will uphold officials who ban Balzac, Trotsky, Joyce, Lawrence and others, they will be likely to ban still further books. If they do not trust Canadian readers to judge these books themselves, they will not trust them in other cases. Mr. King and Mr. Sim have, in this way, revealed what they can be expected to do in the future on important questions of free speech, on questions of the right of the artist to free expression as this is interpreted by the civilized reading public of civilized countries. An American such as the author of this article can well know how to interpret such action from his own standpoint. It is, however, less menacing to him than it is to Canadians. In this sense, the banning of Bernard Clare is a Canadian problem, and possibly, a warning to Canadian citizens, especially to those who are concerned with the new cultural ferment in Canada, and with the hope of once and for all ending the parochialism in Canadian culture. And regardless of who was originally responsible for this banning, the officials now responsible are Mr. Sim and Mr. King. It is they who refuse to rescind this decision. It is they who refuse to heed the protests of many representative citizens of the United States. It is they who now are enforcing this ban.
And their act of censorship comes at a time when the reactionary book burners are straining at the leash. In America, the book burners have now been seeking precedents for several years. If they use this precedent set by Mr. King and by Mr. Sim, and if, as a result, the Canadian banning of Bernard Clare has further censorial consequences, then, it is clear that Mr. King and Mr. Sim can be charged publicly with responsibility for such consequences. The iron curtain has not yet been hung over this continent. And before it can be, there must be many smaller acts of censorship. The Bernard Clare action is just such an action. If it is followed up by others, then we can well have our own iron curtain.
(Copyright. 1946, James T. Farrell)>

 

s T. Farrell: Lest We Forget (March 1947)




James T. Farrell   |   Trotskyist Writers   |   ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
Lest We Forget
Jim Larkin, Irish Labor Leader
(March 1947)

Originally published in New International, Vol. XIII No. 3, March 1947, pp. 86–89.
Revised in 1961. [1]
Copied with thanks from the Workers’ Republic Website.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

One
Jim Larkin died in Dublin on January 30, 1947, at the age of 69. Along with his associate, James Connolly, he was one of the outstanding leaders of the Irish working class in the early years of this century. He and Connolly played major roles in the organization and development of the Irish trade union movement. He reached a great peak of his career in the great Dublin transport strike of 1913 and in the lockout which followed it. [2] Thousands of Irish workers lived in misery and squalor, scarcely different from the conditions of life of the workers during the time of Marx and Engels. Larkin was intimately associated with the militant struggles to better the workers’ lot. With the aid of his inspiration and example they lifted their heads, and they set out to act like men rather than slaves. Under his leadership, the militant Irish Transport and General Workers’ Union became a menace to the Dublin employers. The year 1913 was a period of labor unrest all over Europe. In Dublin there were at least thirty strikes from January to August, 1913. The climax of labor militancy and unrest was reached in August 1913.
William Martin Murphy, head of the Dublin employers group, and the bitterest enemy of Jim Larkin, informed dispatch workers of The Irish Independent that they must choose between Larkin, “the strike organizer,” and their jobs. A similar ultimatum was given to the tramway workers. During Horse Show Week in August – the time when the biggest social events of Dublin are held – the tramway workers went out on strike. The employers began a war of extermination against the unions, and against Larkin. The most bloody and bitter class warfare in the history of modern Ireland broke out. Connolly came down from Belfast to participate in the leadership of the strike. On August 29 a big mass meeting was held – in Dublin. Larkin was one of the speakers. He burned a proclamation which forbade a meeting, planned for the coming Sunday, and at which he was to speak. He talked, and he sang to the Workers. He declared that if Carson in the North could organize volunteers, then also, Irish workers could organize their own army for self-defense. This was one of the first public calls for the organization of a workers’ army in Ireland. During the strike, the Irish Citizens’ Army was organized by Connolly, Larkin and others. Jim Larkin was the first leader of this organization, the first army of the working class in the twentieth century. In this same speech Larkin also promised that if force were used against labor, labor would reply by force. He declared that if he were alive on the following Sunday, he would speak, regardless of the police order prohibiting a meeting.
Larkin hid out at the home of the Countess Markievicz. She reserved a room at the best hotel in Dublin for her “country cousin” who was, presumably, a parson. This hotel was owned by William Martin Murphy. On Sunday, August 31, the workers and their wives poured into O’Connell Street, then, I believe, named Sackville Street. A large force of Peelers was on hand. Larkin, disguised and wearing a false moustache, passed through the police lines unnoticed. Suddenly and dramatically, he appeared at one of the windows of the hotel, and pulling off his false moustache, he began to speak. The Peelers charged the workers with batons. There were at least five hundred casualties in Dublin. This day has been commemorated as Bloody Sunday in modern Irish history.
Larkin was arrested but soon released. Murphy and the other employers took the offensive against the workers. The Federated Employers issued a document in which they demanded that the employees of 404 firms sign. It read:
“I hereby undertake to carry out all instructions given to me by or on behalf of my employers and, further, I agree to immediately resign my membership of the Irish Transport and General Workers Union (if a member), and I further undertake that I will not join or in any way support this union.”
The Irish workers refused to sign this document. Many who were unaffiliated with the union, and who were not even interested in the union, came to the defense of the union. The Great Dublin Lockout began. William Martin Murphy and other Dublin employers set out deliberately and cynically to starve about a hundred thousand workers with their wives and children into submission. And they called this lockout “The Larkin Conspiracy.” Thirty-seven Dublin unions supported Larkin. The heroism of the Dublin workers and their wives during this lockout constitutes one of the noblest chapters in the story of the labor movement anywhere in the world during this present century. Half-starved, without funds, they held out for eight months. They asserted their manhood and their womanhood at a terrible personal cost. They pawned everything they owned for food. They stood on the streets and the corners of Dublin, pasty-faced, hungry, miserable, wretched and shivering. They waited day after day for a settlement. But the employers remained adamant. When representatives of the British labor unions attempted to negotiate a settlement, the employers broke off negotiations. Similarly, the efforts of the Archbishop were in vain. But the Dublin workers stood hard and firm. Those workers who joined the Irish Citizens Army, at this time, marched and drilled on half-starved stomachs, and with broomsticks and hurley sticks. The literary men of Ireland rallied to the support of the workers. Meetings were held in England, and both Connolly and Larkin appealed to British labor for aid. They secured help from British labor in the form of food ships, but the sympathetic strikes which they wanted and needed didn’t materialize. Only sympathetic strikes in England could have secured the victory of the Irish workers. Larkin campaigned up and down England in the interest of the strikers. His speeches were acidulous and violent, but justice was on his side. In December 1913, a Special Trade Union Congress was called in England in order to deal with the demands that the British workers come to the support of their class brothers by strikes and/or by a blockade of Dublin. The officials of the British trade unions turned this Congress into an effort to defeat Jim Larkin. Smarting under the lash of his tongue, speaker after speaker rose and denounced him as a disruptionist. He replied with equal fire. He rose to answer the attacks on him, and began: “Mr Chairman, and human beings.” He delivered a scorching speech. At one point, there was a shout from the floor. “You said we were human beings.”
“Yes, but you don’t give much evidence of it,” Larkin answered.
James Connolly also spoke. He declared that the conference was called to help Dublin. He said: “Remember the workers of Dublin have been locked out for months. They are hungry and desperate.”
A hostile delegate jeered at Connolly, telling him that he should have thought of all this before the Dublin workers had been driven to such a plight. Connolly answered by declaring: “If you think we are ready to withdraw a single word of criticism of your inaction, you are wrong. We will raise this at the proper time and place. We want you to concentrate on helping Dublin.” He stood with Larkin.
The workers lost; they were driven back to their jobs by hunger. They were laughed at, scorned. But the victory of the employers was not complete. The union was not broken. However, the Irish workers of that time never fully recovered from the effects of this struggle. The story of the Easter Rebellion in 1916 might have been much different, but for this defeat.
Larkin came to America in 1914. He was associated with The Industrial Workers of the World. He was active in strikes in America, and he was one of the founders of the American Communist Party. Along with Ben Gitlow, he was sentenced to Ossining prison in New York State on charges of criminal syndicalism. He was subsequently pardoned by the late Governor Al Smith, and was deported to Ireland. He returned to Ireland about 1924. After that time, he did not play the same role as he had in his younger days. He could not regain control of Liberty Hall and of the Transport Workers Union. The Irish union movement had slid into the same pattern as that of the British. Larkin was a great agitator. But he was not the type of leader to be at the head of a movement in retreat or in stabilization. He was still feared and hated in Dublin, and I am sure that when he drew his last breath, he was, equally, the object of fear and hatred. He was head of some unions, among them clerks, butchers, abbatoir and hospital workers.
 
Two
I saw Jim Larkin in Dublin in August of 1938. At that time he was sixty-two or sixty-three. Jim was a broad-shouldered giant. When I first went to his union headquarters, the building was being remodeled. Inside of it there were stone pillars. Work was going on. As I entered, I saw a huge gray-haired man in a spotted unkempt blue suit, swinging a sledge hammer. It was Jim. He used the sledge hammer with more force and power than many a younger man could.
He was very cordial and hospitable. He wanted to know what he could do for me, what he could show me. It has often been remarked that Dublin is a whispering gallery. It is. Jim knew that I was in Dublin. He knew something about me. He knew that I was an anti-Stalinist, and we had only talked for a few moments when he called me a Trotskyist. Subsequently he introduced me to his son: he told me that he wanted to introduce his friend, Farrell, but that he should beware of him because he was a Trotskyist. He expressed disappointment that I had not come over to see him sooner. He offered to take me around and show me various features of Dublin. We left his office, and entered his car. He asked me if I wanted to see the monument to the Invincibles. (The Invincibles were a group of Irish terrorists, mainly working men, active during the time of Parnell. They assassinated a British official, and most of them died on the gallows, isolated and scorned. Their memory is held sacred by some Irish patriots.) Jim’s chauffeur drove us out to Phoenix Park. I imagined that I was going to see a statue, but this did seem passingly curious. The idea that there would be a monument commemorating the Invincibles in Dublin didn’t make sense. We stopped in Phoenix Park, just opposite the Archbishop’s palace. This had, in the eyes of Parnell, been the headquarters of the British rulers of Ireland. We got out. Jim walked along a path, looking down at the grass. I was bewildered. Jim became nervous, and he stared on the ground with some concern. Then he pointed. There it was. I saw a little hole where grass had been torn up. A cross had been scratched in the earth with a stick. I gathered that many Dubliners did not know of this act commemorating the Invincibles. Jim’s boys always went out to Phoenix Park, and marked this cross in the earth. No matter how often grass was planted over it, it was torn up. The cross was marked in the earth.
He drove me around Dublin, and out to Howth, the sight of the famous gun-running episode in 1914. His home was near Howth. We went there, and Jim cooked lunch, scrambling eggs and frying bacon. He talked continuously, incessantly. His conversation was chaotic, rambling. Flashes of the Jim Larkin of his earlier days would constantly enliven this old man’s talk. He would suddenly burst out in sudden indignations and denunciations, describing his adversaries and his enemies as “twisters.” This was the splendid style of his past. Jim seemed bitter and disillusioned. He had stood for the Dáil, and he had not been elected. He felt that he had been let down by the Irish workers. He said that they didn’t remember their own. He was interested in housing. He drove me about and showed me the new houses that were being built in the slums of Dublin. I had wandered the streets of these slums fairly frequently during my stay in Dublin, and I had visited some of the rotting old houses, and had talked with those who lived in them. They were beaten and cowed people. [3] Jim spoke at length of the new houses, of his hopes that they would do some good. He showed me various ones which were in the process of being built. He knew that these would not at all be adequate, but he was very proud of them. I also met him at a hospital where members of his union worked. He was having difficulties, and he spoke of those with whom he was dealing as “his lunatics.” He described the hospital as a lunatic asylum. There was some trouble concerning a girl. It seemed that she was having a child out of wedlock, and an effort had been made to discharge her. Jim prevented it. He had mingled humor, argument, threat and castigation in his successful defense of the girl. He introduced me to various people at the hospital, but always in the same way. “I want you to meet my friend, Farrell. He has written great psychological novels, but you dare not read them for fear of losing your immortal soul.” (He had not, of course, then read my books.)
As we walked around, Jim was recognized by almost every one we saw. Now and then, he would nudge me, and he would tell me to look at some one. He would make some remark such as, “Now, there’s a twister.” And he would launch forth. And then, he would ramble on. He said that he had never smoked nor drank, and he attributed his health and strength to this. He, at one minute, lamented the condition of Ireland, and the next, he spoke hopefully, with pride. I spoke of the Moscow trials. He didn’t commit himself, other than to say: “The trouble with Trotsky is that he doesn’t know how to work with anyone.” This criticism was often and justly made of Larkin himself. He spoke warmly of Bukharin, and remarked that he had told Bukharin once that Trotsky was unable to work with any one. This was just about the substance of what he had to say of international affairs or politics.
He spoke of the Corporation of Dublin with irony. He liked to needle the city officials. In fact, he didn’t fancy the Corporation at all. Jim was a Catholic, and he was proud that Ireland had a Christian civilization. The world needed (he said) a Christian civilization, based on the sanctity of the family. He spoke with pride of his own family life. He had almost no respect for the literary men and the Abbey crowd in 1938. He asked me about some of those whom I had seen, and when I mentioned them, he was sharp and ironical. Of the IRA (Irish Republican Army), he was somewhat ironical, also, but he seemed to have admired them. But he remarked that they had done little for labor. At the hospital, we ran into a doctor who had been one of the IRA diehards in the days of “the Troubles.” I had met him and some of his old comrades-in-arms. I observed that he and this doctor greeted one another coolly.
When Jim took me to the abbatoir, he explained the work there in detail. In fact, he described it with some pride. An air gun was used to kill the sheep. It permitted humane slaughter, and this was what struck Jim. With all of his fire, his wild angers and indignations, his bitter struggles, he was warmhearted, sentimental, hurt by cruelties to others.
The last time I saw him, we spent a number of hours together. We went to his sister’s home in Dublin. No one was home. He scrambled eggs and made tea for our meal. He wanted to give me some of the James Connolly papers. Many of his books and papers were kept at his sister’s house. After eating, Jim spent an hour looking for papers of Connolly and for some Irish books. One of them was The Labour Leader, a play by Daniel Corkery. Jim was the model for the hero of this play. His books were in dusty cabinets along the floor. He bent down on his knees, and grumbling and muttering to himself, he kept pulling out books and spreading them all over the floor. Nothing was in order. He found everything but what he wanted to find. He flung out piles of books. One’s throat became dry and one almost choked because of the dust in the room. And Jim kept looking, wondering where he had put Connolly’s papers, and where he had put the Corkery play, and some plays of Boyle which he also wanted to give me. This seemed to go on endlessly. Finally, he grunted with pleasure. He had found the books. He gave them to me to take back to America. But he couldn’t find Connolly’s papers.
When we shook hands in farewell, he told me that he would always like to hear from me. He said:
“Write to me, Jim Larkin, Dublin. Everybody knows me.”
Jim Larkin became a legendary figure in his own lifetime. Stories and anecdotes about him are endless. Many of them are true. At Ossining, he was popular with both the guards and the prisoners. One of the stories about Jim at Ossining was told to me by a class war prisoner who served time at a later date. Most of the guards (called hackies) were Irish. On St Patrick’s Day, they asked Jim to make a speech, and he got up on a table. Jim’s speech began: “St Patrick drove the snakes out of Ireland. They all came to America and they became hackies and warders ...” This was the beginning and the end of Jim’s St Patrick’s Day speech in Ossining.
An anecdote told of him in Dublin may or may not be true. But it suggests the contradictions in his character. Jim was once on the way to an important meeting. He noticed a bird trapped in some telephone wires. He was moved by the plight of the bird, and he became indignant with the Corporation. He telephoned immediately, said that it was Jim Larkin speaking, and that a bird was trapped in some electric wires, and that it might be electrocuted unless it were quickly rescued. He demanded that men be dispatched immediately to save the bird. Jim kept calling back, demanding, expressing indignation, threatening. He waited on the spot until men did come and saved the bird. In the meantime, his important meeting was delayed.
Another anecdote concerns the time when he returned from America. He went to Liberty Hall, and ensconced himself. He had been leader of the Irish Transport Workers Union. He was back. He took over. His adversary, O’Brien, went to court. During the court case, Jim had a quarrel with his lawyer. He fired him and then appealed for a delay. The court ruled against Jim remarking that it was not responsible for the defendant’s difficulties with his solicitor. Jim declared that he would defend himself. And he did. He put his adversary on the stand and asked all kinds of questions. He was very dramatic, and his gestures were magnificent. He would point a wagging and accusing forefinger at his adversary and ask him, with a glint in his eyes, if it were or were not true that the defendant had been guilty of peculations when he was in (let us say) the milk wagon drivers union? This went on for several days. There was a fine and a very appreciative gallery. But Jim lost his case.
Michael Gold used to tell a story about Jim in America. A unity meeting was called among various of the Irish in New York. Jim brought Michael Gold to the meeting. (I might add that he was very fond of Gold, and called him Mickey. While he spoke sharply concerning many of those whom he’d known in America, he talked most warmly of Mike Gold.) Jim started to deliver his “unity” speech. As he got warmed up he began pointing around the room, telling those in the audience that so-and-so who was sitting in this or that place was a “twister,” and a double-crosser, and not to be trusted, telling someone else what Jim Larkin thought of him, and that this went on until the unity meeting agreed on one proposition: it was a good idea to have a riot. Heads were cracked, blows exchanged, chairs broken. Thus ended the unity meeting at which Jim spoke.
In one of his flaming speeches during his stormiest days in Dublin, he bared his chest to the Peelers, and challenged them to shoot him, then and there.
Stories and anecdotes about Jim could be recounted almost endlessly. The ones which I have given are typical.
Larkin was almost the polar opposite of his associate, James Connolly. Connolly was precise, methodical. He thought and planned ceaselessly. He tried to take everything into account in advance. He studied the revolutions of the past in order to draw lessons which he might apply in the Irish struggles which he anticipated. He had deep indignations, but he was usually controlled. Larkin was more emotional, impetuous, violent, extravagant. In his speeches and in his actions, he was an improviser. He did not stop to reason or to plan. He spoke with a rapid flow, with sweeping gestures. His speeches were filled with hyperbole, with castigation, with acidity, with sentimentality, and with rousing appeals. In one speech he declaimed that it was his divine mission to preach subversion and discontent to the working classes. This more than suggests his style. He was brave to the point of foolhardiness, and he was self-sacrificing. Again and again, he was ready and willing to give up his life and to be a martyr of the working class. In his great days as an organizer and an agitator, he lived a life of danger. He flung challenges into the teeth of the police of the British Crown. He flung bold and insolent challenges into the face of Martin Murphy and the other employers of Dublin. He gave his services to the struggle for the emancipation of the working class of the world: at the same time, he refused to appear on the same platform with an American Socialist of international repute because this man was divorced! In a period when the most depressed sections of the Irish working class were militant, he was peculiarly fitted to play the role of agitator. His ability to lash their enemies, and to rouse and stir them, enabled him to appeal to their manhood, to the will to freedom which slept within their hearts. He added his own daring example to the appeal of his words. And when he led these workers in strikes he was adamant, uncompromising, and in the forefront where danger lurked. His bravery and daring were as extravagant as his foibles. But in a period of letdown, of retreat, of the sodden rule of the middle classes and the clergymen in Ireland, he was like a lost child. In the slums of Dublin after “the Troubles,” he could not repeat what he had done in this same area in the early days of this century. This was apparent when I saw him in Dublin in 1938. He was embittered.
Now this man is no more. When Larkin’s associate, the wounded Connolly, was carried in a chair to face the guns of his executioners, he was asked if he wished to say a prayer. He answered: “I will say a prayer for all brave men who do their duty.” We, who do not pray, might alter this fine statement. We will pay our last respects to all such brave men. And Jim Larkin was such a brave man. He was a brave soldier of the working class. He was a great agitator. He gave his spirit, and the best years of his life in their service. Karl Marx spoke of the great heart of the proletariat in his pamphlet on the Civil War in France. Jim Larkin came from this great heart. One bows one’s head in memory of this brave Irish labor leader.

Notes
1. This essay has appeared in slightly different form as Jim Larkin, Irish Revolutionist: Fighter for Freedom and Socialism, New International, Vol. XIII No. 3, March 1947, pp. 86–89. The present version incorporates some manuscript revisions by Farrell in 1961 which did not appear in the Thought version.
2. Farrell’s Note: I have drawn on R.M. Fox’s James Connolly – The Forerunner (Tralee: Kerryman Press, 1946), for some of the facts cited here.
3. Farrell’s Note: In my story A Summer Morning in Dublin in 1938, When Boyhood Dreams Come True (New York: Vanguard Press, 1946), pp. 164–73, I have tried to describe the conditions of life in the slums of Dublin. These suggest the conditions of life for the workers of Dublin in the days when Larkin and Connolly led them in great strikes.
 

s T. Farrell: “Don’t Shoot the Piano Player, He’s Doing The Best He Can!” (24 June 1950)




James T. Farrell   |   Trotskyist Writers   |   ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
“Don’t Shoot the Piano Player,
He’s Doing The Best He Can!”
(24 June 1950)

From New International, Vol. XVI No. 4, July–August 1950, pp. 254–255.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.




The following is the COMPLETE text of an article which appeared in the June 24 New Leader, called Speaking of Trotskyites, by James T. Farrell. James T. Farrell is the author of the Studs Lonigan trilogy and The League of Frightened Philistines. – Ed.



*
A friend of mine has told me an anecdote concerning a fairly recent discussion with a leader of the Shachtmanite-Trotskyite movement. This leader was close to a state of depression: he almost admitted that his own organization might not know all the correct answers to the questions posed by the current crisis. However, just when this leader was at the point of making his despairing admission, he began to speak positively and dogmatically: he stated that if the masses didn’t agree with the Shachtmanite program, then the masses were wrong.
This anecdote brings to mind a second one. About five years ago in the Midwest, I was with a group of Trotskyites. I remarked to them that they all seemed to me to be generals. One of the group was then in a state of dialectical suspension between Cannonite Trotskyism and Shachtmanite Trotskyism. Taking offense at my remark, this man angrily attacked me on the grounds that I understood neither Arthur Koestler nor literature.
Then I remember the time a Cannonite functionary solemnly told me that the leaders of his party constituted the advance guard of the human race, and that the fate of humanity literally depended on the political decisions which these leaders would make.
And speaking of the American Trotskyites, I recall a Greenwich Villager I knew some years ago. During the worst days of the depression he made a fabulous fortune, millions on millions of dollars, by playing the stock market – solitaire. Every morning, his wife got up and cooked breakfast for both of them. Then she went to work in an office, where she earned something like twenty or twenty-five dollars a week. This lad did his daily work at home. He sharpened pencils. He arranged sheets of paper on the table in an orderly manner. Some of these sheets had numbers and dollar signs on them, some of the sheets were blank. He opened the newspaper to the pages containing the stock market, news and reports. He added up the sums he had won investing, in solitaire, on the previous day. Then he made his daily investments of thousands and even mil
lions. He worked at this game all day. At about six o’clock, his wife came home with the groceries and cooked supper. He usually enjoyed his meals, especially because of his success with his investments for the day. He rarely made a bad investment.
All of these anecdotes cause me to wonder about tragedy and comedy. And in his introduction to the second and third volumes of The History of the Russian Revolution, Trotsky wrote that “A failure of correspondence between subjective and objective is, generally speaking, the fountain-source of the comic, as also the tragic, in both life and art.” because of this failure of correspondence in 1792, the Girondins were, according to Trotsky, “pitiful and ludicrous beside the rank-and-file Jacobins.” Also, declaring that “People and parties are heroic and comic not in themselves but in their relationship to circumstances,” Trotsky compared the Jacobins of 1792 and the Bolsheviks of 1917. In his opinion, both groups “were adequate to the epoch and its tasks: curses in plenty resounded in their direction, but irony would not stick to them – it had nothing to catch hold of.”
Well, I wonder how all of the foregoing relates to the Shachtmanites and the Cannonites? Are they like the men of 1792? Or the Bolsheviks of 1917? Or are they like my Greenwich Village friend who played the stock market, solitaire, with such success?
It is obvious that here, in the American Trotskyites, we have a question in correspondences.
 




Dear Friends:
I wish briefly to state my own view on the Marshall Plan. I am in favor of it. I support ERP with the proposal that one should demand trade union representation in the administration of the Plan (this is provided for) and the dispatch of aid to countries with a free labor movement and constitutional liberties. I think that aid to Western Europe is a prerequisite for any development, politically and economically. There is no practical alternative for the dispatch of aid other than that provided for in ERP. The proposals of Wallace, for aid through the United Nations, are merely demagogy which helps Stalinism. The so-called Molotov Plan is an economic equivalent for NKVD rule. There is no immediate possibility of aid on a socialist basis. And if conditions further deteriorate in Western Europe, only Stalinism will gain. A deterioration of conditions will not, further, postpone war: it will hasten war.
I do not see the Marshall Plan as a purely military measure. It is, in my opinion, a plan for the capitalist reconstruction of Western Europe. The capitalist reconstruction of Western Europe is far, far better than no reconstruction. I also think that if the Marshall Plan can be partially successful, war might be postponed. I do not, therefore, think that the Marshall Plan at all makes the danger of war necessarily more imminent. The simple fact is that today, only American wealth and power stands in the road of Stalinist expansion. Stalinist expansion will not postpone war; it will, if anything, hasten it.
I think that the motives behind the Marshall Plan are secondary to this question – what will happen if there is no American aid for Western Europe? And is there any practical way whereby aid is likely to go to Europe other than through ERP? Also, there is the question – who will gain most if the Marshall Plan fails? Will it be socialism, or Stalinism? To ask this question is really to answer it. If the Marshall Plan fails, only Stalinism will gain. If anyone can convince me that I am wrong here, I will reject this view. But in the meantime, I am for support of ERP in the sense that I have stated it in this letter.



 


James T. Farrell
April 29, 1948



 




The following letter has been sent by James T. Farrell to the Greek Ambassador.
Mr. Basil Denramis
Greek Ambassador to U.S.
Greek Embassy
Washington, D.C.
Dear Mr. Ambassador:
As an American writer who has long been seriously concerned with defending and advancing the principles of freedom of the press, I request that you transmit my letter to your government.
It has been brought to my attention that under a new law passed by the Sophculis-Tsaldaris Government on October 18, freedom of the press has been dangerously and seriously restricted in Greece. I have been told that this decree prohibits the publication of newspapers and magazines and imposes severe penalties upon papers which are even slightly critical of governmental policy. The staffs of such publications are subject to arrest and court martial with possible death sentences. Facilities used in connection with the publication of any such newspapers can be confiscated.
If a publication must meet the strict requirements of a Press Ministry, then freedom of the press is not even a mockery. My information is that this law is primarily directed against opposition newspapers, particularly working class ones. I have been given to understand that The Workers Struggle, organ of the Internationalist Communist Party (Trotskyist) had been prohibited from publication. Also, the publications of the Communist Party have been suppressed. I do not necessarily agree with political views expressed in these, or in other suppressed papers. However, I wish to protest this action on principle. Any and all governments which cannot or dare not permit freedom of expression can only be characterized as tyrannical. Any and all governments or individuals who in the year 1947 contribute to the suppression of freedom of speech and freedom of the press are contributing toward turning the entire universe into a dungeon, into a torture chamber. I am firmly convinced of the truth of these statements, and I take the liberty of asking that your government repeal its arbitrary press law and restore freedom of publication to all papers in Greece.
James T. Farrell
 




The Editors
The New Masses
Dear Sirs:
Please allow me to send you my congratulations. I have been waiting a long time for the day when your magazine would be no more. It has come. Your decision to fold up is the first contribution which you have made to a free American culture in more than ten years. Independent, free thinking American writers will hail the end of theNew Masses.
Best wishes for a long silence.
James T. Farrell
 

inneapolis Case - A Statement by J.T. Farrell (December 1943)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
The Minneapolis Case —
A Statement by J.T. Farrell
(December 1943)

From Labor Action, Vol. 7 No. 49, 6 December 1943, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





Following the denial of the U.S. Supreme Court on November 22 to hear the case of the eighteen members of the Socialist Workers Party and Minneapolis Motor Transport Workers Local 544, CIO, James T. Farrell, noted novelist and chairman and the Civil Rights Defense Committee, issued the following statement:





We do not judge men merely by their avowals of faith and good will. Neither do we judge institutions by the descriptions of their authority and functions contained in written constitutions. We judge men and we test institutions by their actions.
The Supreme Court of the United States has given us the material whereby we can test it. When it refused to hear the appeal of the eighteen defendants in the Minneapolis case, it administered a blow to the cause of free speech; it showed itself more than inattentive to the provisions of the very Constitution which it has sworn to uphold.
It is the opinion of serious persons in the labor and liberal movements that the Smith ‘Gag’ Act is in flagrant violation of the Bill of Rights. This case is the most important one which comes under the provisions of that act. The Supreme Court has even refused to hear an appeal which will test the constitutionality of that law. The authority of the court is largely based on the decision of Judge Marshall in the case of Madison vs. Marbury, when he contended that we must have a government of laws rather than of men. Apparently we now have that, and one of these laws is the Smith ‘Gag’ law. According to its provisions, it is possible for a man to be jailed if he publicly quotes the Declaration of Independence or Lincoln’s Second Inaugural Address.
This is Thanksgiving Week. In the motion pictures and newspapers and on the radio we are being told over and over again that we should be thankful for being free. But there is less freedom in this country today than there was last week or in Thanksgiving Week, 1942. We know that this week the Supreme Court of the United States is less of a guarantee of our liberties than many people have believed it to be.
Although the two most illustrious and liberal figures of this Court during the present century, Holmes and Brandeis, promulgated the doctrine of “clear and present danger,” their successors have totally disregarded it. What is the real illustration of this doctrine? It is the Japanese idea of “dangerous thoughts.” Once this idea becomes the law of the land, all thinking becomes a dangerous and potentially criminal activity.
One of the simplest lessons of history is that no government and no court can, in the long run, stop people from thinking. This action of our highest court will not do that which cannot be done; it will only encourage all who want to be free to defend their freedom.
Liberal and labor opinion should now mobilize to prove that it is one hundred per cent more attentive to freedom than is the Supreme Court. We must continue to defend the eighteen victims in this case. We must press our attack against the Smith ‘Gag’ Act.
One of the first free speech cases in history was that of Socrates. When he was on trial for his life, he told his judges that the unexamined life is not worth living.
Let us now reaffirm that noble statement.
 

 T. Farrell: The Frame-Up Against Kelly Postal (August 1943)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
The Frame-Up Against Kelly Postal
(August 1943)

From Labor Action, Vol. 7 No. 31, 2 August 1943, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Today Kelly Postal, secretary-treasurer of Minneapolis Teamsters Local 544-CIO, is in the State Penitentiary at Stillwater, Minn., serving a five-year prison term. He is the victim of one of the most vicious frame-ups and campaigns of persecution in American labor history.
For ten years Kelly Postal has been a leader of the Minneapolis Teamsters. He helped organize them during three severe strikes in 1934. He fought with them on dozens of picket lines. Postal was first chosen secretary-treasurer of Local 544 in 1938 and has been democratically re-elected each year since.
In June 1941 a long-standing conflict over questions of trade union democracy between Local 544 and AFL Teamsters International President Daniel J. Tobin came to a head. Local 544’s membership decided by a virtually unanimous vote to disaffiliate from the AFL and join the CIO. As one of the most militant leaders in the struggle to maintain the democratic rights of his union, Postal incurred the enmity of Tobin.
 
Tobin’s Moves Against Postal
Tobin made his first move against Kelly Postal personally when Postal was indicted together with twenty-eight Socialist Workers Party leaders and 544-CIO members in the famous Minneapolis labor case of 1941. This prosecution was initiated by the Department of Justice after Tobin’s explicit appeal to President Roosevelt. Postal, however, was one of the five defendants completely cleared by the jury at the close of this trial.
Having failed to obtain a federal conviction, Tobin then pressed the Hennepin County attorney to. bring charges of “embezzlement” against Postal. Postal was never accused of misusing these funds personally. As secretary-treasurer of the local union he merely obeyed the unanimous vote of the union membership at a regular meeting to take 544’s funds with them out of the AFL and into the CIO. These funds belonged to the local union, since all per capita taxes had been paid to the international.
Postal was indicted, together with Miles Dunne, president of Local 544-CIO, and Moe Hork, organizer. The bulk of the indictments, however, were heaped upon him.
 
Postal Cleared in First Trial
In Postal’s first trial for embezzlement in January 1942, Presiding Judge Hall directed the jury to discharge the case, thus clearing Postal on the first count in the indictment against him. Judge Hall declared, after presentation of the testimony, that no criminal intent had been established by the state prosecutors.
Tobin then put pressure upon the County Attorney to try Postal for a second time on another indictment based on the same facts, differing only in the amount of money Postal allegedly embezzled. Although evidence and witnesses were substantially the same, this time Postal was found “guilty.”
On June 18, 1943, Postal’s conviction was upheld by the Minnesota Supreme Court and he entered the State Prison.
 
The Issues in Postal’s Case
The frame-up for which this union leader is now serving five years in prison is as foul and flimsy as the frame-ups against Tom Mooney and Sacco-Vanzetii. Postal is no more guilty of “embezzlement” than any other officers of the CIO who took their union funds along with them when they left the AFL. There is no basis in law or in fact for his conviction. He has been prosecuted and jailed solely because of his devotion to democratic unionism.
Bound up with the act of injustice against Kelly Postal himself are issues of vital importance to the entire trade union movement. In confirming his conviction, the Minnesota Supreme Court has set an extremely dangerous legal precedent which can be used to deprive other unions of democratic control over their own funds.
This union-freezing decision can be used to prohibit a union from quitting one international and joining another. It could enable a few individuals or employers’ agents to prevent the majority of a union’s membership from changing their affiliation as a united body. If a fountain-pen or typewriter was taken into the the new union affiliation, each individual member could be found “guilty” of embezzling union property, even though they themselves had originally paid for these things.
The importance of the issues involved in Postal’s case has been widely recognized by the trade union movement. Scores of unions already have contributed to his defense or passed resolutions condemning his conviction.
Postal’s conviction is part of the present reactionary campaign to deprive the unions of their democratic rights and to punish any leader who stands up and fights for them. That is why Postal deserves moral, and material support from every labor organization and friend of civil liberties.
 

 T. Farrell: Literature and Ideology (1942)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
Literature and Ideology
(1942)

From New International, Vol. VIII No. 4, May 1942, pp. 107–111.
Reprinted with the permission of College English, the English Journal and the author.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

What is the relationship between literature and politics? What should that relationship be? Such questions have produced major literary controversies in this country for more than a decade. About ten years ago these questions were central in the discussion of so-called proletarian literature. Today these same issues are being discussed in connection with literature and democracy and literature and the war. In current discussions the language is different from what it was ten years ago, but both those who were the apostles of proletarian literature and those who today demand that literature be politicalized in the name of democracy defend essentially the same attitude: in both instances the aim is to enforce the same attitude and the same kind of critical and political legislation upon the writer. [1]
The advocates of proletarian literature, who wrote principally in The New Masses, used to argue that literature is a weapon in the class struggle. If the writer is not on one side, he is either an open defender of the enemy or else he is giving aid and comfort to that enemy. At times it was even claimed that literature itself was on the barricades. In essence, such claims would, if successful, make literature the handmaiden of politics and the docile servant of an ideology. The writer, accepting this conception and attempting to make it operative in the actual construction of novels, would have to see politics first and then life, and he would have to deduce life from political programs. To the theoreticians of proletarian literature the theme of a book was considered to be its most important, its most essential, element; the total pattern of a novel, its unfoldment of characters and events, its insights which help to clarify for us the mysteries of man and his world, and its very style – these were all relegated to a secondary place. A true recreation of social relationships and of human beings was considered to be less important than the ideology that was implanted into a novel and openly affirmed in the last chapter. The ending was stressed as against the entire story and its legitimate meanings. Most of the great writers of the present and of the past were attacked, often severely, as bourgeois defeatists; and in their place novelists such as Jack Conroy, Arnold Armstrong, William Rollins and others were hailed as the inheritors, not only of the literary traditions of America, but also of those of the whole world.
In this article it is not necessary for me to go into historical detail or to discuss this point of view at length. Those who sponsored it have themselves abandoned all their claims. They have themselves forgotten most of the writers whom they lauded as proletarian writers, and they now laud the writers whom they then attacked – for instance, Thomas Mann. Most of the young writers who adopted this view of literature have themselves stopped writing. If a conception of literature produces no books, then it is obvious that that conception is defective. It remains sterile and formal. If the most rigid supporters of a conception abandon it, regardless of the reason, it is not necessary for me here to refute what they themselves have refuted in the most positive manner.
It is ironical to observe that some of the writers who defended the complete freedom of the writer from politics in the early 1930s are now included in the vanguard of the newest group of politico-critical legislators; they now demand that the creative artist adopt the same kind of an attitude which they once attacked, even heatedly. The popular writers whose work appears in the slick magazines and who earn large sums of money in Hollywood sales are also included in this vanguard.
(Pitfalls for Readers of Fiction, by Hazel Sample, a pamphlet publication of the National Council of Teachers of English, contains an able analysis of certain types of popular fiction and of the assumptions on which these are based. The most vulgar of those who would force literature to become official have even gone to the extent of hailing motion pictures – similar in content, basic assumptions, and in emphasis on escape values to the novels studied by Miss Sample – as greater contributions to American culture and the fight for a free world than serious works of American realism which try to describe conditions and characters truly. For instance, Mr. Strunsky, who writes the Topics of the Times column for the New York Times, has declared that serious American realists give us nothing to fight for but that the escape movies of Hollywood do give us something we can fight and die for. In other words, the simple, tragic, spiritually impoverished people described in American realistic novels are not worth fighting for; but it is proper to die for Tyrone Power and his world. Often the essential tragedy in realistic fiction is missed because of the fact that realistic writers try to maintain a tone of objectivity. They are accused of coldness. Chekhov, who was a great writer himself and a realist, remarked in one of his letters that if you want to portray suffering and sorrow it is usually necessary to be a little cold in your portrayal of it; otherwise, you fall into sentimentality. Such simple observations concerning literature are lost on many critics, journalists and others, who do not hesitate to speak on the subject with authority and, in order to derogate serious writers, even raise to a high level the most conventional and banal of novels and the most conventional motion pictures. It is with such ideas in mind that I recommend Pitfalls for Readers of Fiction.)
 
Positions of MacLeish and Brooks
A leading exponent of this tendency is Archibald MacLeish. (Cf. Archibald MacLeish, The Irresponsibles) During the height of the bitter polemical controversy concerning proletarian literature, Mr. MacLeish was moved to write in defense of complete freedom of the poet. In those days he believed that the poet should merely sing. The proletarian critics did not halt at describing him as irresponsible – they called him a fascist. Today Mr. MacLeish has reversed himself, and he sharply criticizes almost all modern writers as irresponsibles. His major charge is that, during a period of growing danger to the entire human race, they merely tried to see life truly and to create honest pictures of life. They did not defend ways of thinking, ideas and beliefs which should have been defended. They did not use the weapon of the word to storm the barricades of belief. In consequence they contributed to the demoralization of democratic forces, and this demoralization has left democracy in a weakened state when it must defend itself against a sinister enemy. In passing, it is interesting to observe that the one writer whom MacLeish excepts from his blanket condemnation is Thomas Mann. It is on the record that many of the writers implicitly or openly attacked by MacLeish took a stand on the question of fascism before Thomas Mann would openly condemn the Hitler regime. Further, there is a stream of pessimism in the books of Thomas Mann which renders the assertions of MacLeish somewhat ridiculous.
Another who has now adopted a position analogous to that of MacLeish is the critic Van Wyck Brooks (Cf. Van Wyck Brooks, On Contemporary Literature and The Opinions of Oliver Allston). Mr. Brooks believes that modern writers are cynics and that they write out of hatred and of a drive-toward-death. They have, he claims, lost the idea of greatness, and inasmuch as they themselves are not great men, they cannot write great books. Exceptions to this charge are Robert Frost, Lewis Mumford, Waldo Frank, Archibald MacLeish and Thomas Mann. Modern writers – and Mr. Brooks makes no distinctions between various modern literary tendencies, including that of realism and that of radical experimentalism stemming from the French symbolists – have lost their connection with the soil. They have no roots in the region, in the country, and in its soil. In passing, it is to be observed that this conception is, in essence, Spenglerian. Consequently it is somewhat amazing to observe Mr. Brooks, in his little book, On Contemporary Literature, charging that modern writers have been influenced by Spengler, including those – such as the author of this article – who have for years been anti-Spenglerian. Further, one of the European novelists of the soil, with roots in the soil, is Knut Hamsun, who was one of the first world-famous literary men to become a fascist.
Mr. Brooks claims that modern writers write demoralizing books because they have no attachment to the family and because they do not take an interest in public life. On both of these points he is unspecific. He does not demonstrate in a concrete manner precisely how a writer will become a better artist by transplanting himself to the country and living close to the soil, by declaring an attachment to the family (most writers are attached to their families, love them and try to support them), and by taking an open interest in public life. In addition, he is not specific concerning the manner in which a writer should become interested in and attached to public life. Should he take a political stand on issues? Should he run for an elective office? Should he abandon literature and dedicate himself to political theory or to political polemics? Should he ghost-write speeches for political leaders? And, further, some of the writers whom Brooks accuses of lacking an interest in public life have been far more politically active on many issues than he has. In essence, Brooks is adopting the same kind of a view toward literature as did his recent forebears, the apostles of proletarian literature. Like them, he and Archibald MacLeish and others are seeking to legislate for writing, to tell the writer what to do, what to write, what ideology to inculcate through his works, what conclusions to come to in a novel, and what to think.
 
Its Relation to Politics
Those who adopt such an approach toward literature do not clearly focus the problems of literature, the character of writing, the functions and purposes which literature can perform. When Karl Marx was a young man, editing a democratic newspaper in the Rhineland and working toward the point of view which he finally adopted and developed, he wrote a letter to a friend which contains some remarks which are today a pertinent and decisive answer to the claims of those who would sneak politics and ideology into literature. At that time Marx had not yet been converted to socialism. He resisted the pressure of philosophical and literary friends who took a frivolous attitude toward serious questions, and he explained why he rejected the articles of these people. I quote him:
I demanded less vague arguments, fewer fine-sounding phrases, less self-adulation and rather more concreteness, a more detailed treatment of actual conditions and a display of greater practical knowledge of the subjects dealt with. I told them that in my opinion it was not right, that it was even immoral, to smuggle communist and socialist dogmas, i.e., an entirely new way of looking at the world, into casual dramatic criticisms, etc., and that if communism were to be discussed at all then it must be done in quite a different fashion and thoroughly.
Today, as then, literary men are trying to smuggle ideology into literature. “Smuggle” is here an excellent word. They seek to consider, to discuss and to educate people in an indirect, oblique, yes, even casual, manner concerning the most serious problems which the human race faces. Instead of discussing questions such as socialism and communism, democracy and fascism, in terms of the relevant problems raised by those issues, they want to smuggle a discussion of such issues into novels, poetry, dramatic criticisms, book reviews, banquet speeches and books labeled as literary criticism. I do not hesitate to characterize such conduct as frivolous. Politics is serious. It is the arena in which the fundamental bread-and-butter struggles of men, of groups, of nations, of social classes are conducted. He who is frivolous about politics is guilty of a grave disservice to his fellow-men, especially in times of deep social crisis. The problems of politics are, basically, concerned with action and with power. Literary men have the habit of rushing into the periphery of politics, and they contribute to political struggles – not knowledge, not practical experience, not theoretical analyses, but rhetoric. Rhetoric is the one commodity in politics of which there has never been a scarcity.
My subject, however, is not the political conduct of literary men in politics. I do not criticize this per se. I merely suggest that the requisites of all responsible action, in any endeavor, are that one be serious and that one accept the obligations and duties which that endeavor imposes on one. My concern here is with the efforts to politicalize literature. The end result of the politicalization of literature is an official or state literature. The extreme example of a state or official literature in our times is that of the totalitarian countries. It need not be commented upon in this article. We know what it is and what it leads to and how it destroys literature in the most brutal and ruthless fashion. It is possible to silence writers by force; a state power can put writers into jail and treat them as common criminals; it can prevent their books from being published; it can execute them. However, it cannot make them, either by open force or by prizes, praise, awards, and academic and institutional honors, write good books. Modern authoritarian rulers are not the first ones who have been taught this elementary lesson. Often literary men fail to learn it. During the period of the Second Empire, even the great critic Sainte-Beuve was ready to play along with the idea of an official literature. The attempt to create an official literature in that period failed. The two greatest French writers of the times, Flaubert and Baudelaire (both of them friends of Sainte-Beuve), were haled into court on censorship charges. The poetry of Baudelaire was suppressed. Today we read Flaubert and Baudelaire and not the official writers of Louis Bonaparte.
Napoleon Bonaparte still remains as the greatest of modern dictators. Himself a fine writer and a man who developed literary taste through the course of his lifetime, he tried to impose an official art and literature on France when he was its ruler. In the year 1805 he wrote to Fouché:
I read in a paper that a tragedy on Henry IV is to be played. The epoch is recent enough to excite political passions. The theater must dip more into antiquity. Why not commission Raynouard to write a tragedy on the transition from primitive to less primitive man? A tyrant would be followed by the savior of his country. The oratorio Saul is on precisely that text – a great man succeeding a degenerate king.
In the same year he wrote: “My intention is to turn Art specially in the direction of subjects that would tend to perpetuate the memory of the events of the last fifteen years.” He justified expenditures on the opera on the ground that it flattered the national vanity. A year after he said this he found that his official opera only degraded literature and the art, and he demanded that something be done to halt the degradation which was caused by his own official policies and his control of the opera. Then he declared: “Literature needs encouragement.” Something had to be proposed to “shake up the various branches of literature that have so long distinguished our country.” But literature did not distinguish France during the period of la gloire. The writer was told to behave, and generally he obeyed orders. The chief of police and the ministers of the cabinet gave him instructions on what to write, and they honored him for obeying instructions. And Napoleon himself was forced – after all he was a man of taste – to show contempt for his own official litterateurs. In exile at Saint Helena, he did not read them. He did not speak of them. He remembered Racine, and he remembered Homer, but he remembered no literature that could distinguish his own period of rule. And neither do we today. Is more eloquent demonstration of the failure of this attitude toward literature needed?
 
What Is Greatness in Literature?
It is a truism to state that the test of a work of literature is not to be found in its formal ideology. The most cursory examination of a few great works of literature will prove the validity of this truism.
Many of us recognize Tolstoy as a great writer, a genius, and a thinker of the first order. Do we do this because of the formal attitudes – the ideology – in his major works? In Anna Karenina the character Levin develops, during the course of his novel, that conception of political non-resistance which became part of the gospel of Tolstoyism. Levin found reasons for refusing to take an interest in public affairs, and these reasons were Tolstoy’s own for formulating this doctrine. Because we disagree with Tolstoy’s views, represented in his characterization of Levin, will we therefore deny the greatness of Annna Karenina? In War and Peace Tolstoy presents a view of history which succeeds in atomizing history to the degree that it is impossible to distinguish between influences that are essential and of weight in the influencing of events and those which are incidental or secondary. According to this conception of history, every single human being in a period influences the history of that period. History is the result of all the actions and all the thoughts of every single human being. In a sense, this is correct. The history of man is everything that happens to man. But can we seek to explain and to understand man if we apply this conception concretely? If we do, we have no means of truly evaluating what factors are essential and important in a given historic study and what ones are non-essential. Dismissing this theory of history, which is imbedded into the very warp and woof of War and Peace and which is also presented in the novel in essay form, do we therefore destroy the value of this work?
Balzac was anti-democratic, and his formal attitudes were those of the restoration which followed the fall of Napoleon. The formal view of Theodore Dreiser concerning man in the universe is an undigested hodge-podge of crude materialism and misunderstood science. Are his books, consequently, to be dismissed? Examples to demonstrate this point are endless. If we literally adopt such a view of literature, we thereby exclude ourselves from an appreciation of many of the greatest works of the past. We cannot then appreciate the literature and the art which precedes democracy, because it is not democratic. If we are socialists, we cannot appreciate the great literature of the modern age. If we demand that literature in a direct, obvious and mechanical fashion reflect the major struggles of the period from which it springs or with which it deals, what are we to say of such a novel as Wuthering Heights? This novel – in my opinion one of the greatest of all English novels – describes characters who lived during the period when Bonaparte was at the height of his power. Withal, it has nothing to say of the danger of old “Bony” invading England. Is it therefore invalidated as a novel?
Literature is one of the arts which re-creates the consciousness and the conscience of a period. It tells us what has happened to man, what could have happened to him, what man has imagined might happen to him. It presents to us the environments, the patterns of destiny, the joys and the sorrows, the tribulations, the dreams, the fantasies, the aspirations, the cruelties, the shames, the dreams of men and women. Life is full of mysteries, and one of the major mysteries of life is man himself. Literature probes into that mystery. Just as science permits man to understand nature, literature permits man to understand himself. Just as science makes the forces of nature human in the sense that it permits the construction of instruments which can control these forces, so does literature aid in making man human to himself. Literature, by its very nature, cannot, in and of itself, solve social and political problems. Any solution to a social and/or a political problem in a work of literature is a purely mental solution. These problems are problems of action. Every problem delimits the kind of means which can, and those which cannot, be of use in its solution. This statement applies in logic, in mathematics, in the physical sciences, in the solution of social and political problems and in the problems which any artist must face in his own work. It is as absurd to assume that you can solve political and social problems with a poem as it is to call in a painter and ask him to save from death a man stricken with appendicitis by painting a picture.
 
How Much Literature Can Do
Literature generally reflects life. It limps, even crawls, behind events. This is especially so in periods of great social crisis and of historic convulsion. What is the great literary work of the Napoleonic period – one which parallels our own age? It is Stendhal’s The Red and the Black. But Stendhal did not write this novel when he was with the French army in Moscow. He wrote it some time after the Battle of Waterloo.
Some of those who take a view of literature contrary to the one which I present here demand that the writer be a prophet. His duty is to foresee what is to come, not merely to reflect what has already come, including what man has already dreamed, imagined, constructed in his own head, as well as what has happened in the sense of actual objective events happening. Let us examine this claim concretely. Prophecy is what? It is prediction. Whether one makes a prophecy or a prediction on the basis of an inner vision or as the result of a close scientific investigation, that prophecy or prediction proves nothing. It is merely a statement of probability. It must be validated by the occurrence of the events which are predicted. Further, it is obvious that when one makes a prediction one should base that prediction on the relevant evidence. I ask, therefore, Is a lyric poem the proper manner in which to predict historic events? If so, why do we not elect lyric poets as our political leaders? It is the exercise of simple intelligence not to confuse problems. We do not ask our doctors, our dentists, our scientists, our politicians, or our mechanics to confuse problems; we ask only our poets and our novelists to do this. [2]
Further, those who want to officialize literature, those who insist that the artist wear the uniform of an ideology, persist in calling writers who refuse to accept their demand skeptics and cynics. Often they use the words “skeptic” and “cynic” as if they were synonymous. These words do not necessarily have the same meaning. A skeptic doubts. A cynic is without faith. It is possible to doubt, to be critical, and still to have faith. Further, there is no necessary opposition between skepticism and faith. Without a skepticism that is sufficient to permit us to be critical of evidence, we will have a faith that is without warrant. We will then believe in something without knowing why we believe. Also, to say that a writer is skeptical or cynical does not necessarily constitute a valid ground for criticism. Was there no skepticism, no cynicism, in Shakespeare? Is there no skepticism in the Bible? Tolstoy was more than skeptical of modern capitalism and of the efficacy of political action; further, he was a pacifist. A pacifist is obviously skeptical of war. Generally speaking, it is the realistic writers who are called skeptical and cynical. Those who make this charge against realists do not, however, examine what the realistic writer has to say. They don’t examine the conditions which he describes. In many instances the realist describes injustice, misery, spiritual and material poverty. The world described by modern realists is not free of the conditions which produce these results. No less a person than the President of the United States has spoken of “one third of a nation” submerged in poverty, suffering from all the physical and mental ills which are bred by poverty. But if the realistic novelist deals with the conditions which exist, if he dares to re-create a true and revealing picture of these conditions, of the patterns of destiny of the characters who are educated and live in such conditions, he is a skeptic, a cynic. The attempt to tell the truth in a precise, concrete and uncompromising manner is demoralizing. And what is proposed as an alternative to this kind of literature? The advice to write about justice, about morality, about heroism, and about greatness in general – that is, in the abstract. To state many of these arguments is sufficient. It even becomes embarrassing to be forced to answer them in detail.
 
The Role of the Writer
He who would put literature in uniform is afraid of literature. The demand that literature conform comes from fear, not from confidence, and not from faith. Literature in the modern world cannot thrive on the basis of official control. The only result of controlling it officially will be silencing, destroying, crushing, the real talents among our writers and permitting those who are not serious, those who are not truly talented, those who have nothing to say, to come to the front. The notion that the serious literary artist is a major element in demoralizing a society is absurd on its face. No society can be demoralized by a few books. If a society is demoralized, the reasons for that condition go much deeper than the circulation of a few books. The actual spy, the actual saboteur, the actual agent of enemy governments, and so on, do not have the time – and usually they do not have the sensibility, the imagination, the intelligence, the culture, and the background – to create a work of literature. He who makes such charges against the artist makes them because he dare not look conditions in the face. And to look conditions in the face is precisely what the serious writer does. In some instances these conditions exist in society at large; in other instances these conditions are in the mind, in the emotions, in the dreams, and in the consciousness of the artist himself. In all serious art there is truth – truth of insight, of observations, truth about the social relationships of the world, and/or truth about the consciousness of men. And the truth will make men free, although it may disturb the critical legislator and the ideological smuggler.
It is inept, absurd, downright silly to argue that in a world torn by the greatest convulsions of the modern period literature can hide away in a hothouse. I make no such claims. I am not here demanding that literature exist in any ivory towers. What I do stress, however, is that literature must solve its own problems and that it cannot be turned into the handmaiden of politics and the looking-glass of ideologies. The justification of literature must be made in terms of the real functions which it performs and not by seeking to make it perform functions for which it is unfitted. When Ralph Waldo Emerson died, William James, who had known Emerson was a monist – James defended a conception of a pluralistic universe – Emerson did not suppress the facts in order to substantiate his monism. This statement provides us with the formula for tolerance and for understanding, both in the world of ideas and in that of art. If the writer has not suppressed the facts, we can seek to understand him; and if we find value in his work, we can justify that work despite agreement or disagreement with his formal ideas. And it is to be remembered that in art the facts are not statistical; the facts are perceptions, observations, insights, revelations of certain aspects of those mysteries of life which surround us on every side and which exist even in our own consciousness.
It is now almost three centuries to the year since John Milton wrote Areopagitica, one of the most eloquent defenses of freedom of inquiry and freedom for the artist that has ever been written. And Milton wrote that it is “as good almost” to “kill a man as kill a good book: who kills a man kills a reasonable creature ... but he who destroys a good book kills reason itself.” (Because of the limitations of my typewriter, I have here taken the liberty of modernizing the typography and the spelling of Milton.) What Milton said is in the spirit of the eloquent apology of Socrates when he stood on trial for his life, charged with having demoralized the youth of Athens, and when he declared to his judges: “... the unexamined life is not worth living ...” And, to conclude, serious literature is one of the most powerful means contrived by the human spirit to examine life. This, in itself, is the basic justification of literature in any period. This is the answer which the artist can confidently hurl back at all Philistines who fear to permit the examination of life.

Footnote
1. I have stated in detail my own views on the question of proletarian literature in my book, A Note on Literary Criticism. Views directly counter to my own are to be found in The Great Tradition, by Granville Hicks. There are a number of books which relate to this question in varying ways, and I cite a few of them: Leon Trotsky, Literature and Revolution; Joseph Freeman, Joshua Kunitz and Louis Lozowick (eds.). Voices of October; Henry Hart (ed.), American Writers’ Congress; Stephen Spender, The Destructive Element; Edmund Wilson, The Triple Thinkers; A. Zhdanov, Maxim Gorky, N. Bukharin, K. Radek and A. Stetsky, Problems of Soviet Literature; V.F. Calverton, The Liberation of American Literature; Christopher Caudwell, Illusion and Reality; Max Eastman, Artists in Uniform, and Art and the Life of Action; Bernard Smith, Forces in American Criticism; Jean Fréville, La Literature et l’Art, choisis, traduits et présentés par Karl Marx et F. Engels; George V. Plekhanov, Art and Society (introduction by Granville Hicks). In Ireland during the period of national revolutionary ferment, prior to the Easter Rebellion of 1916, the same question was discussed in literary controversies, but there it was an issue concerning literature and the aspirations of the nationalist movement. One of those who defended the writer against the criticisms of those nationalists who demanded that Anglo-Irish literature serve as a direct instrument of the national movement was the late Lord Mayor of Cork, Terrence MacSwiney (cf. Principles of Freedom). MacSwiney said: “It is because we need the truth that we object to the propagandist playwright.”
2. I have here discussed prophecy in literature in terms of the prediction of events. Those who demand that the poet play the role of prophet from a regressively cultural point of view base their contention on the traditional philosophical conception of cognition as the sole factor in the process of knowledge. They then assume that the insights and “intuitions” of the poet constitute a superior form of knowing than that embodied in scientific method. They desire to substitute the poet for the political theorist and analyst, and for the scientist. However, there is a sense in which the poet, for instance, Shelley, plays a rôle that can he considered analogous to that of the prophet. When a poet or a novelist emphasizes the need for a change in values and attitudes which are required by the demands of social evolution, his rôle is then more or less analogous to that of the prophet. However, to perform this rôle he must have more than an alleged superior form of knowing which is assumed to be poetic insight.
 

 T. Farrell to Leon Trotsky on Ireland (1938)




James T. Farrell  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
Letter to Leon Trotsky on Ireland
(1938)

Copied with thanks from the Workers’ Republic Website.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





 


11 December 1938
New York City



Leon Trotsky
Coyoacan
Mexico DF
My Dear Leon Trotsky:
We were both very pleased to receive your note. Hortense, jokingly, says that it must all be a Stalinist plot. While she is not disinterested in politics, she is, in no sense, a political person. However, she is no bitter foe. And in her own profession, the theatre, she must pay a price for her attitudes and the stand that she has taken. Stalinist influence is permeating the American theatre, and Hortense is automatically excluded from even being considered for roles in plays by certain managements because of this fact.
Concerning “the mysteries of my style” [1], you may be amused to know that one Communist Party functionary described it, once in The Daily Worker, as “Trotskyite.” And one of the most current criticisms of my writing in Stalinist sources is that “the rationale of Trotskyism” has given a basis for his “despair,” and through that means he is degenerating.
This summer I was in Ireland, and I saw Jim Larkin. All men have weaknesses, but all men are not the victims of their weaknesses. Jim Larkin is a victim of his own weaknesses, and his own temperament. Now, he is embittered and envenomed. He feels that the Irish working class has sold him out. He was not returned in the last elections for the Dáil, and he ran in a working class district. He defended the trials, but thought that Bukharin could not be interested. But Larkin’s formal attitudes do not have much meaning. He is untheoretical and unstable intellectually. He is always a direct actionist, and his direct actionism takes whatever turn that his impulses lead him toward, In the midst, for instance, of a severe fight, he might be walking down the street and see a sparrow trapped in some electric wires where it might die. He will become incensed, and will telephone important members of the government and demand that they have men sent down to release the sparrow immediately, and then this will loom more important than the fight in which he is engaged. He is very garrulous, human and humane, witty, vindictive, vituperative, and he is Irish. At times, he is almost like an embittered version of the stage Irishman. In Ireland, there has never been much theory, and in consequence, never been many men with a rounded view of the reasons why Ireland was struggling. Before the war, the Irish labor movement was very militant and well toward the forefront of the European labor movement. It was defeated in the great Dublin transport strike of 1913, and out of this crushing defeat, the Irish Citizen Army was formed. Larkin left for America, and Larkin says that one of the last things that he said to Connolly was not to go into the National movement, not to join the Irish Volunteers, which was the armed force of the nationalist movement. Connolly did go into the Easter Rebellion, and there is the disputed question as to whether or not he made a mistake. Sean O’Casey, the Irish playwright, in a pamphlet he wrote on the Irish Citizen Army, declares baldly that James Connolly died not for Irish socialism but for Irish nationalism. Others maintain that Connolly could not have remained out of the rising. At all events, the Irish Citizen Army was decimated, and crushed by the Easter Rebellion. There were no leaders left to carry on the social side of Connolly’s doctrines. The entire movement was swept along in a frenzied rise of Irish patriotism and Irish nationalism. Sinn Féin was in complete control of the movement. The leaders of Sinn Féin had only the most vague notions of what they wanted – an Irish Ireland speaking Gaelic, developing its own Irish culture, free of the British crown, and some were not even fighting them for freedom from the crown. In 1921, when the treaty was negotiated in England, there was this same unclarity. Following the treaty, there was the split in the Irish ranks. The record of that split is most saddening to read. It was not a split on real issues. There were two or three documents with different wordings, and they all meant much the same thing. Instead of discussing social programs, they discussed Ireland, and they insulted one another. Out of this split the bitter civil war developed, and the comrades in arms of yesterday assassinated one another. The treatment which the Free State government meted out to its former comrades matches almost that which Stalin has meted out. The bravest fighters of the Irish Republican Army were taken out and placed up against a wall and butchered without any formality. And now, after all the trouble, the Irish people have changed masters, and a new Irish bourgeoisie is developing and coagulating, and the politicians of Sinn Féin are aligned with them and the Church, with reaction rampant, poverty to match even that of Mexico, progressive ideas almost completely shut out, a wall of silence keeping out the best Irish tradition – that of Fintan Lalor, Davitt, and Connolly, and poor Ireland is in a hell of a state. Larkin returned in the early twenties. After defeat, the Irish labor movement needed someone to lead it who could remould a defeated class. Larkin was a great and courageous agitator, but not a leader of a defeated army, and he could not work with any one. Gradually, he lost influence, and now he is old and embittered. Of course, Catholicism plays a strong role in Ireland, and Larkin is a Catholic and talks of the virtues of the Christian home. And suddenly out of his garrulous talk, a flash of his old fire comes through. Perhaps you are riding through the Dublin slums with him, and suddenly, seeing the poor in their filth, standing in front of the filthy buildings in which they are forced to live like animals, and a strong denunciation comes, and there is something of the Jim Larkin who defied the British Army, and at whose words the poor of Dublin came out into the streets in thousands, and flung themselves against the might of Britain and that of the Irish bourgeoisie. Human beings are social products, and Larkin is a product of the Irish movement. The principal instrument of the Irish revolutionaries was always terrorism and direct action, and when Larkin was unable to function with these methods on the wave of a rising and militant movement, he was lost, and the labor bureaucrats outmaneuvered and outsmarted him. When he returned to Ireland from an American jail, he got his following together, and marched on the quarters of the union he had formerly led. He took the building, but later lost it in the law courts, and he is no longer the leader of the transport workers. He has union following, and among his strongest support is that of the butchers and hospital workers.
He showed me something in Ireland that few people in Dublin know about. In the Parnell days, a terrorist organization, composed almost exclusively of Dublin workingmen was formed and named the Invincibles. The Invincibles committed the famous Phoenix Park murders in front of the vice-regal lodge, and were denounced by the Church, by Parnell, and by almost the entire Irish nation. There are no monuments in Ireland to the Invincibles. They died in isolation, some of them defiant to the end in their utter isolation. At the spot across from the vice-regal lodge in Phoenix Park, where the murders were committed, there is a patch of earth alongside of the park walk. No matter how often grass is planted over this spot the grass is torn up by the roots, and this spot of earth is left, and always, there is a cross marked into the dirt in commemoration of the Invincibles. Every week, someone – principally, I believe, one of Larkin’s boys – goes there and marks that cross. This has been going on for a long time.
In Larkin, there is something of that characteristic of defiant defeat that runs through so much of Irish history, and with it, never any real investigation of causes. But even up to today, he remains the only figure of commanding proportions in the Irish labor movement. The rest is pretty nearly all bureaucracy, tied to the tail of nationalism, enfolded in the cassock robes of the priestcraft, seeing the problems of Irish labor as an Irish question. Ireland is having something of an industrial boom. Certain sections of the Irish working class, the most advanced trade unions – which have been in existence some time – these are better paid than corresponding trade unions in England. But the country is partitioned between an industrial north and an agricultural south. In the south, de Valera is engaged in a program of industrialization. The Irish market is small, and that means that monopolies must be parcelled out to various groups or persons. When these monopolies get going, there will be resultant crises, because they will be able to supply the Irish market with a few months work and production. Also, the new factories are being spread over the country – a program of decentralization – and in many instances, factories are being set up in agricultural areas where there is no trade union strength. It is necessary to further industrialization in Ireland to have, as a consequence, sweat shop conditions. There is a small labor aristocracy and even this lives badly. And below it, poverty that reduces thousands upon thousands to live like animals in the most dire, miserable, and inhuman poverty. I saw some of this poverty. One family of eleven living in one room. The family has lived in this same room for twenty-four years. The building is crumbling, walls falling, ceiling caving in, roof decaying. The oldest in the family is nineteen, the youngest is an undernourished infant of eight months. Six sleep in one bed, three in another, two on the floor. The infant was born last Christmas eve in the bed where six sleep. The role of the Church is important. The Church tells the Irish that they are going to live for ever and be happier in heaven, and this engenders patience. There is a mystic fascination with death in Ireland. In all the homes of the poor, the walls are lined with holy pictures, those of the Sacred Heart predominating. The poor live in utter patience. They have lived in this patience ever since the heyday of Jim Larkin. In those days, at his word, they thronged the streets and threatened the power of England, and of the Irish and Anglo-Irish bourgeoisie. But no more. However, with the industrialization program, there is likely to be some enlargement of the Irish working class, and the economic factors of proletarianization, plus the resulting effects of factory work and familiarity with machines is likely to cause some changes in the consciousness of Irishmen. Familiarity with machines is likely to rub off some of the superstition, and the economic conditions will pose their problems to the Irish workers. There is possibly going to be a change in Ireland because of these factors, and some of the eternal sleep and mud-crusted ignorance is likely to go. But being an agricultural country, a poor country, a country ridden by superstition, it now sleeps, and there is a lot of talk about Ireland, and little is done about Ireland, and a characteristic attitude is sure and what is the bother. Ireland is no longer merely a victim of England, but of world economy now. Irish nationalism correspondingly has altered from being a progressive movement to a reactionary movement. Fascism could easily triumph in Ireland were fascism vitally necessary to the new rulers of Holy Ireland.
The Irish Republican Army is split into factions, some demanding emphasis on a social program, others on a national program. Stalinists are in the former group, but Stalinism is very weak in Ireland, practically inconsequential. It amounts to a few pensionaries. Ireland does not need Stalinism. It has Rome. Rome handles these problems with the necessary efficiency. Rome confuses the struggles, poses the false questions, sidetracks protests as Stalinism now does in advanced countries.
As a kind of compensation, Ireland a defeated nation has developed a fine modern literature, just as Germany, defeated and still un-unified at an earlier period, developed German philosophy. But the moral terrorism in the name of the Church and the Nation, and the parochial character of the life and of intellect in Ireland might choke the literature now. So backward is Ireland that even the American motion pictures have a progressive influence in the sense that they make the youth restless, that they produce freer and less strained relationships between the sexes, and that they give a sense of a social life of more advanced countries that is not permitted because of the state of economy in Ireland. Ireland impresses me as being somewhat parallel to Mexico, except that in Mexico there are progressive strains in the country, and in Ireland these are weak and morally terrorized. In part, this is undoubtedly because of Ireland’s lack of mineral resources and wealth, the backwardness and sleep of its labor movement, and the role of the Church. In Ireland, the Church was not the feudal landholder. Behind the scenes, the Church always fought against the Irish people, and spoke for law and order. But at one time, the Church itself was oppressed. The Church and the people became entangled in the consciousness of the Irish, and the religion question befogged the social and economic one. In Mexico, Spain, France, and Russia, the Church was more openly a part of a feudal or pseudo-feudal system. The peasants became anti-clerical because they wanted land. This did not happen in Ireland. In consequence, anti-clericalism did not take the same form. Anti-clericalism amounts to jokes at the priesthood, dislike of the archbishops, and so forth. In earlier days, it was stronger, particularly among the Fenians. But it never took the real form it took in France, Spain, etc. And so the Church has great power in Ireland today. In the most real, vivid, and immediate sense it gives opium to the people.
Poor Ireland! She is one of the costs demanded by history in the growth of what we familiarly call our civilization. There is an old poem with the lines – They went forth to battle And they always fell. And today, after having fallen so many times, Ireland is a poor island on the outpost of European civilization, with all its heroic struggles leaving it, after partial victory, poverty-stricken, backward, wallowing in superstition and ignorance.
My favorite Irish anecdote is the following. The last castle in Ireland to fall to Cromwell’s army was Castleross on the lakes of Killarney. At that time, the castle was held by the O’Donoghue. For several months, the British could not take the castle. The Irish infantry was more lightly clad than the British, and would always lead the better armored and more heavily clad British down into the bogs where their armed superiority became a handicap, and then the Irish would cut them to pieces. There was an old Gaelic prophecy that Castleross would never fall to a foreign foe until it was attacked by water. There was a proviso in this prophecy. For the lakes of Killarney empty into Dingle Bay, where the water is so shallow that foreign men of war from the sea cannot enter it. The British general heard of this prophecy. He went to Dingle Bay and built flat-bottomed boats and floated them up the lakes of Killarney. He fired one cannon shot at Castleross. And the O’Donoghue, thinking that the prophecy had been fulfilled, surrendered without firing a shot in return.
I took the liberty of writing in such detail about Ireland because I thought you might be interested in modern Ireland. They call it the “new Ireland” these days.
Hortense joins me in sending our warmest greetings to you and Natalia.



 


Yours,
Farrell



This summer I saw Alfred and Marguerite Rosmer [2] a number of times, and they were very well. Madame Rosmer talked very often of you and Mrs Trotsky.
 

 T. Farrell: Cain's Movietone Realism (1946)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
Cain’s Movietone Realism
Novels Written for Hollywood
(December 1946)
 
From New International, Vol. 12 No. 10, December 1946, pp. 296–301.
Copyright © December 1946 by James T. Farrell.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.
 
James M. Cain’s novel, Mildred Pierce, might have been a very good novel; it might even have been a great one. Had this novel been properly handled, James M. Cain might even have lifted himself to the level of Dreiser in American letters. The story he told could have been a very representative one. It is some time since I read a book in which a real story was so wantonly squandered as is the case here. Because of this and because there are so many touches revealing how Cain has empirically grasped important details concerning the modern American scene, I winced again and again as I read this book and saw how it was disfigured into movietone realism.
The Pierce family is middle class, living on the lawn, bracing trees. The time opens impressively with the husband, a smallish man named Bert Pierce, working on the lawn bracing trees. The time is the depression. Bert Pierce had been an executive in a real estate company, Pierce Homes, which had built a group of standardized houses. One of them is the house in which he lives. The company had gone into receivership and Bert Pierce was forced out of the concern. His spirit is broken. He cannot find a job and he doesn’t even seem to look for one any more. He is a decent man but his personality is disintegrating. He has lost his function in society and is no longer the provider. It seems as though it were profoundly symbolic that his personality disintegrates when he becomes bankrupt and can no longer play a role in Pierce Homes, Inc. His name was given to the company, to the group of houses it built, to a street in the community which is composed of these houses, and there also is a Pierce Drive. There is nothing left of Bert Pierce’s activity in this work except the name; and there is little will left in the man. We see that his will, his very self, has deteriorated with his loss of function as the head of a family, as well as the loss of his business position in the community.
His wife Mildred is in her thirties; they have two girls, one of them in her teens. Mildred is not beautiful, but she remains very attractive and has lovely legs. Although she has been a housewife, she has definitely not lost her looks. She is physically described by the author, cut to the pattern so that she could act the part of a movie star. An excellent cook, she is supporting the family by baking pies and cakes for neighbors. Bert is having an affair with a woman named Mrs. Biederhof. The marriage is broken up. It is clear that Bert gets comfort, consolation and sympathy from this vague Mrs. Biederhof. Mildred sometimes nags him. But even if she had not nagged him, the fact that she – the little wife – was providing for the family is, in itself, sufficient to unman Bert. The petty bourgeois American male who has skyrocketed to a position of affluence in the 1920’s cannot be supported by his little missus. The personality of Bert Pierce had, we can easily deduce, been intermingled with Pierce Homes, Inc.
The older daughter, Veda, is an incorrigible snob. She is ambitious and wants to live among the rich. She has contempt for her middle class Glendale surroundings. The mother has fixed all of her ambitions on Veda’s future. She wants her to be a great pianist and even now, in adversity, she scrapes enough money to provide for Veda’s music lessons.
 
Commodities and Human Relations
The story then opens with a petit-bourgeois man on a lawn. What he does is described; but what he feels is not touched on by the author. The lawn is one of Bert’s things. The life of this family has been a life of things. Here is his last thing, as it were. Then there is a quarrel and Mildred takes the initiative in driving him off to go and live with Mrs. Biederhof. Now she is alone, and the support of the two children depends on her. She has had no training in the business world. And in a depression when many trained people are almost on the bread line, what chance has she? She looks for work and the only prospect offered her is that of domestic service; she is repelled by this.
One of the striking and promising features in the early portions of this novel is that the two main characters are presented with reference to things, to objects and to conventional conceptions. They possess little individuality in the sense that many literary characters have individuality. The style of the book is objective, even a little flat in places: it records movements, performances, the handling of tilings, such as Bert bracing the trees, Mildred cooking and the ingredients of what she cooks which go into the making of something that she will sell. This presents to us a world of private life in which things, commodities, almost become the protagonist.
But to continue, Mildred overcomes the revulsion she feels about doing menial work and becomes a waitress. She works diligently and in time she gets the pie concession in the restaurant where she has found employment. She gets a few other customers. Wally Bergen had been associated with Pierce Homes, and when the company had gone bankrupt, he had managed to wangle himself into a job as the receiver. He happens to call after Bert had left, wanting to see Bert concerning some business details. When he learns that Mildred and her husband have separated, he shows interest in her. He makes a date with her. Mildred talks about this with her neighbor, Mrs. Cessler, the wife of a man who is getting on by engaging in the illegal liquor business, hauling it from the boats which bring in booze along the Pacific coast. Mrs. Cessler tells Mildred how to behave in order to capture Wally. Instead of letting him take her out to eat, Mildred should cook for him, give him good drinks which Mrs. Cessler provides, tie him to her by being the person who provides the food and liquor before she lets him sleep with her.
Mildred acts on this advice. She cooks a dinner which Wally devours, gives him drinks that he couldn’t get in speakeasies where the quality of booze is bad, and then, lets him seduce her. But Wally is smart enough not to be trapped. In time, however, Wally helps Mildred start a restaurant. She begins without capital, but Wally manages to help her get adequate credit. In order to protect herself financially she divorces Bert. Further, while working as a waitress, she has met a wastrel named Monty Beragon. His family is rich and socially prominent in Pasadena; he is a polo player. He picks up Mildred on her last day at the restaurant where she works, takes her to his little shack at the beach and they have a weekend together. While Mildred is away, the youngest daughter, who is spending the weekend with the father, becomes fatally ill. Then, the restaurant opens, and Mildred quickly catapults to success. She has an affair with Monty. His family loses its money, and he has to depend on her financially. He is contemptuous of her. A kinship of social snobbery develops between him and Veda who is growing up into a desirable female of the Hollywood type. It turns out that she cannot play the piano well, but she becomes a coloratura singer. Mildred kicks Monty out just as she did Bert. She works energetically; her business expands and she is able to run several restaurants. The daughter, Veda, detests her mother, detests the fact that her mother earns money in a bourgeois manner and detests Glendale. With Wally’s aid – he is a lawyer – Veda blackmails a motion picture family with whose son she has slept, and this enables her to leave home. Veda is the one substantial human relationship in Mildred’s life.
With Veda gone, Mildred’s life seems empty. Monty, in decay and with a spreading bald spot, has to sell his family home, an atrocious stone pile. Mildred buys it, and marries him in order to get Veda back. Veda returns and Mildred lavishes the profits and resources of her business in providing for Veda and Monty, with whom, however, she doesn’t live as a wife. Veda becomes a famous singer and earns five hundred dollars a week in radio.
Mildred, wasting the money of her business, is going to be forced out by her creditors. It is when she learns this that she returns home late at night and finds her daughter in her husband’s bed, naked. She almost kills her daughter. The girl pretends that she has lost her voice because of the way that her mother choked her. Monty leaves. Mildred is forced out of business. She divorces Monty. She takes Veda back. Veda seems changed. But it has only been a ruse on the part of Veda. She has pretended to have lost her voice in order to be able to get out of a five hundred dollar contract so that she can accept another one for twenty-five hundred dollars a week. She leaves home and goes off to New York with Monty. Mildred has, after all of her driving effort, now come to the point where she is thirty-seven; her looks are going; she is getting fat. She meets Bert. In the meantime, Bert’s mistress, Mrs. Biederhof, has gone back to her husband who has gotten a good job. Bert and Mildred talk things over and come back together. Bert tells her that Veda is no good. She finally realizes this. She is purged of her almost unnatural love for her daughter. And then the book ends, with Bert and Mildred reconciled, having each other, and Bert says: “Goddamn it, that’s what I want to hear. Come on, we got each other, haven’t we? Let’s get stinko.” And Mildred has the last line: “Yes, let’s get stinko.”
 
Cain – Hollywood “Realism” Master
I have only roughly and hastily told the story. But this account of the story should indicate how it has been Hollywoodized. The story, however, when presented in outline only suggests what is wrong with this novel but doesn’t indicate what is the character of the opportunity that Cain has squandered. Cain is able to tell a story which has the merit that the reader doesn’t have to spend too much time in getting on from the first to the last page. Shocks and violence punctuate his novels. They are written as a kind of literary movie. And, inasmuch as a greater latitude is permitted the novelist than the scenarist, Cain’s books have the appearance of greater reality than most films do. Unrestrained by a production code, the pattern of a Cain story can be more like patterns of real lives than can those of a motion picture. Mildred Pierce is no exception here, but it could have been an exception. Cain began with a real problem, one relatively untouched in contemporary writing. Mildred Pierce could well have been an account of the middle class housewife. It could have been a poignant story which told what happens to many of these housewives so that in the fictional character, Mildred, there would have been particles from real life of hundreds of thousands of such women. At times there are suggestions of this. The opening portions of this book are highly promising. But then we see where James M. Cain has learned his literary lessons. Story values take the place of Mildred’s problems. Plot involvements, relationships based on plot and story, falsify what has been begun as a story of people. Further, what is important in the promising portions of this book is that we see how things, objects, commodities have become the basis for the spiritual content of Mildred’s life, and how Bert, having lost all of his things becomes a good natured and ineffectual person. And we see further the transformation of one of the roles of the housewife – as a cook – into a businesswoman. Things and money creep out of every page of this book and they become fetishes which are pressed into the very soul of Mildred. She has affairs. She has scenes of anger and reconciliation with her daughter. She knows success and wins prestige. But one of her high moments is when she gives Bert a few drinks, cops the key to the automobile which he had taken when they split up, and then, by this means, she gets possession of the car itself. After taking Bert home, she drives rather wildly and she feels elated, almost ecstatic. At the wheel of the car she forgets herself even more than she does in sexual affairs with Wally or Monty. Much has been written about the standardization of human beings in modern American society. But here was the promise of a vivid, empirically grasped and well presented fictional account of the structure of American standardization. Here, in Bert and Mildred, were the beginnings of two characterizations which reveal how things take the place of human relationships. This was what made the novel so promising, and it, in turn, is the reason why I winced when this fine beginning was wrapped up in a package of cheap glamor and cynical melodrama.
Cain writes of valueless people who are cruel, violent, self-centered and who have a minimum of consciousness. In his world there is neither good nor bad and there is little love. People commit adultery and the wicked do not always go punished. If the wicked are punished it is purely fortuitous: punishment is a result of the needs of the story and not of the stern hand of Providence. This is a world in which the incapacity of an automobile to go as fast as the driver wants it to can send the adulterer to a sinner’s grave just as well as can the moral law of the Almighty God and the almost equally Almighty Joseph Breen, Code Administrator for the Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of America.
The historic past has given us a high level of literary culture. This level is expressed in a series of great tragedies which come down from the Greeks to modern times. In tragedy there is an unhappy ending. Serious American writers such as Theodore Dreiser have written in this tradition, and the spirit which motivates work such as Dreiser’s is one that is drawn from a high level of literary culture. Contrasted to such work, there is the cheap escape fiction, the best seller and the plot short story. By and large, the plot short story and the saccharine best seller cannot be maintained in the modern American world. The falsity of writings of this order is so patent that in a hard, atomized, cynical urban world this type of writing seems merely funny – unintentionally funny. Slowly and surely, the old type of saccharine best seller is being driven from the market. There can be very few new Gene Stratton Porters.
A best seller today must have something different from the best seller of thirty or forty years ago. If it is given a religious tone it can be a market sensation, as we find in the case of Lloyd Douglas. But naive virgins, happy and good housewives performing their role, love without hormones – these ingredients of the old best seller are rapidly declining in sales value. It is writers such as Cain who stand in between the work of a serious and tragic character which has been fathered by such men as Dreiser in America and the work that has connection with the more or less forgotten writings of Robert W. Chambers, Gene Stratton Porter or Harold Bell Wright. And in this in-between, neither-fish-nor-fowl-literary medium, James Cain has become the master. He is a literary thrill-producer and he profits by the reaction against the sentimentality of other years. At the same time, he gains from the prestige of more serious and exploratory writing. As a consequence, James M. Cain is not an insignificant or unimportant American literary phenomenon. He has helped to perfect a form which combines Hollywood and serious realism.
 
The Mencken Background
And herein hangs an irony which should be pointed out. James M. Cain is an old newspaper man, a former contributor to The American Mercury, a writer whose background is intimately associated with the 1920’s. The sophisticated attitude of The American Mercury of the Twenties remains in his writing. For instance, in Mildred Pierce, Veda is a caricature of a flapper of the Twenties and she describes bourgeois people as peasants. If one reads Cain’s book, Our Government, one is transported back to the days when we all read that green-covered magazine. Cain has not grown by jumping off from the positive sides of Mencken and of The American Mercury. Mencken was a major voice in America agitating for serious realistic fiction: at the same time that he played such a role in advancing Dreiser, that he welcomed Sherwood Anderson and others, he attacked, parodied, flayed the books of Chambers, Winston Churchill and others, and cast on their kind of work the brand of ridicule at which he had become so expert. In doing this he helped to open channels for the more serious writer and contributed toward the creation of a better taste for literature among more serious and literate people, especially younger people. Cain comes out of this period. The taste for reality exists in him. To it he has added lessons learned from Hollywood. Therein lies the irony. The James M. Cain who wrote about a government which was elected by yokels and middle class “peasants” is now the thrill-producing movietone realist who shocks these yokels and the sons and daughters of these yokels with novels of adultery, murder, cynicism and violence. To drive home the irony, one might say that in the Twenties, the attitude on government which Cain implied was, more or less, that people deserved the government they got. The American middle class yokel deserved a Calvin Coolidge. These same yokels deserve, as it were, the realist they now have and that realist deserves his audience.
 
Pseudo-Realism and Public Taste
Mildred Pierce has been made into a movie by Warner Brothers, produced by Mr. Jerry Wahl, who is likely to become one of the Hollywood producers of movietone realism in which there is adultery, murder and unhappy endings. The saccharine story of the happy ending, the virgin, the pure but masculine and smartaleck hero has become the typical story of Hollywood. Boy meets girl. The boy is immature; the girl is immature. The story of the boy and the girl is juvenile and revolves around how the boy comes to meet the girl and how they end up in a kiss, sufficiently short not to constitute a sin, and properly directed so that the kiss is more like that of a brother and sister than that of two lovers. The endless retelling of this story, the stupefying succession of movies with this kind of happy ending has now confused public taste. If a movie has an unhappy ending, it is realism – not romance on the level of a popular song. Because of such facts, the filming of novels of James M. Cain has a certain significance and will be falsely interpreted by many who are now so groggy with stories of purity that they accept as realism any story with murder, an unhappy ending and love which violates the Sixth Commandment. Such stories then are falsely accepted as signs that Hollywood is growing up and becoming sophisticated. It is apparently assumed that if Hollywood can “crack” a Cain book, and produce it within the boundaries set by the Production Code, then we see signs of change, of a new era in pictures. Intellectuals, producers, writers and others have, in fact, begun to look forward to such achievements with hope and confidence. Mr. Jerry Wahl has begun to produce more serious pictures. Now, Hollywood will advance into the stage of real film art.
With this in mind, it is well to take a quick look at the film, Mildred Pierce. The novel begins with a description of a middle class home that is breaking up because of the depression. The sense of the novel relates to this beginning. Mildred Pierce is a middle class woman whose capacities have been restricted by the performance of her role as mother and wife. When her husband is driven out of business she has to assume the role of the man and she has to enter, unprepared, the savage and competitive world of the breadwinner, of the male. The life of the middle class is atomized. Socially it is crushed between the two antagonistic classes of modern society, the big bourgeoisie and the proletariat. Its social relationships are dictated by business considerations. Its women are half-ornament and half-slave. They often preserve their beauty, their figure, the loveliness of their flesh, but their characters go into a stagnant sleep, and their inner life dries up. They are trained for nothing but to be a mate, a mother, a housekeeper and housewife. The performance of this role makes them the queen of their class. Mildred is such a woman.
But the film opens with a murder. There is no murder in the novel. Mildred seems to be a murderess and she even wants to commit suicide in one of the first scenes of the film, but a policeman prevents her and this permits some quasi-humorous dialogue in which the policeman tells her to go home and remarks that if she tries to go swimming rather than home, he will have to take a swim too and he might even get pneumonia. The edge is thus taken off of the murder and of the torn image of Joan Crawford standing over a bridge getting ready to dive into turbulent waters. Also the movie story is told backwards and becomes a quasi-mystery story.
 
Movie Changes Plot
In the novel, home, things and an inadequately motivated mother-daughter relationship are the basis of what subsequently happens. In the motion picture, false suspense as to who killed Monty is the starting point, and the story unfolds in such a way as to suggest that Mildred is the murderess. This change of plot and emphasis, obviously helps the studio sneak the film past the Code. [1] All that is promising in the opening of the book is sacrificed. Even less than in the novel is the mother-daughter relationship motivated. Veda is turned into an outright and humanly impossible movie villainess. The consequences of the Hollywood alterations of this already Hollywoodized realism are such that the film becomes stupid and senseless.
The same comment could be made of a previous film based on a Cain novel – Double Indemnity. The demands and restrictions of the Production Code are such that this is one of the most likely types of realism, of sophistication which can be introduced into films. Such realism, such sophistication is usually further enhanced and made vivid by the familiar and glamorous background of sin in our time. There is a suggestion of the “sins” of the glamor boys and girls of the newspaper columns in such films. The “sinfulness” of the characters is made thrilling in scenes of night clubs or road houses, and it is also laid against a background of furnishings and decorations such as one might see in the advertisements of The New Yorker. The magic of the movies, the capitalization on glamor, the skillfulness of producers, directors and scenarists are thus all put into the creation of a pseudo-realism. At the same time the demands of the stern Mosaic Code of the Hays Office (really the Johnston Office) are met: the sinners die. Murder and adultery are punished. The thrills of adultery in the most modernistic setting are then compensated for. The Vedas of this realism die in the end. If this new movietone realism continues it will most likely have the effect of further debauching popular taste in America. One of the major virtues of serious realism is that it describes the pitiless force of circumstance and the equally pitiless drive of human emotions which often play so central a role in causing the tragic destruction of human beings. But in this pseudo-realistic type of novel and movie the pitiless force of circumstance and of human impulse is turned into the fortuitousness of automobile accidents and the like and into a melodramatically simplified conception of good girls and bad girls. Furthermore, the tendency in such films can be that of sneaking just a few added thrills of adultery into the plot. If this happens, then the censors will howl anew. The Hollywood movietone realists will, under such circumstances, crawl back into the usual motion picture defense of virtue. They will, then, be in a position to claim that they tried realism, tried to produce serious art and were thwarted by powerful forces which are beyond their control. This will undoubtedly make it likely that serious realism will be open to fresh attacks. With these fresh attacks it will have to carry along the burden of defending and of being held responsible for this movietone realism. Herein, it seems to me, is one of the significant aspects of this new movietone realism, one which must be watched and analyzed. Far from being any serious step in the light direction, it is merely one of the new and rapidly developing “art” forms of our contemporary and commercialized culture.
 
Top of the page
 
Footnote
1. The rigorous prescriptions of the Production Code are such that motion picture scenarists are again and again faced with the problem of “licking” a picture. This means to contrive some means of saving something of a story and, at the same time, recontrive it in such a way as to make the film permissible under the terms prescribed in the Code. To my knowledge, no one has attempted to observe and study the consequences, moral and artistic, of this practice. The need to get by the Code conditions or ran condition the picture-maker to think in terms of ambiguities. It imposes false problems on the writer. In time, it will undoubtedly contribute greatly toward helping create cynical and dishonest attitudes toward material. This cynicism will threaten to infect the audience as well as the picture-makers. For the audience will perceive the sexual meanings behind many contrived ambiguities of invention and will draw proper conclusions. I would hazard the guess that the problem of “licking” the Code which is so constantly imposed on writers is one of the significant causative factors in inducing the artistic decay of so many writers who work in Hollywood for a long period of time. In order to suggest the dangers involved here we might refer to Freud. In The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, Freud revealed and exposed the psychological structure of forgetting. He discovered that in an instance of significant forgetting, a process of thought had been begun and then left incompleted just prior to the act of forgetting. This incompleted process of thought is intimately involved in the act of forgetting and is bound up with the repression which underlies the same act of forgetting. Consider the significance of this discovery in terms of the scenarist who is constantly required to sneak something by the Code, and to recontrive something else so as to make it acceptable to the Code administrators. There must be involved here an endless series of little repressions, repressions of the kind which sap the artist.
 

 T. Farrell: A Comment on Literature and Morality (May 1946)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
A Comment on Literature and Morality
A Crucial Question of Our Times
(May 1946)

From New International, Vol. XII No. 5, May 1946, pp. 141–145.
Corrected in line with Erratum, New International, Vol. XII No. 7, September 1946, p. 200.
Copyright, June 1946, by James T. Farrell.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In recent years there has been a growing emphasis on the moral
questions in all kinds of discussions; journalistic, political,
literary. Such widespread interest in and discussion of many types of
issues from a standpoint of morality should help to suggest the,
moral impasse into which the entire capitalist system, and with it
the Soviet Union, has sunk. Briefly, the modern world has fallen into
a moral abyss. In, the light of this condition, it is obvious that
discussions of morality deal with matters which are undeniably
serious. However, the seriousness of a subject or of an issue does
not mean that all those who discuss it are equally serious. To the
contrary, there is almost a pathos of pettiness in the lack of
seriousness with which a number of writers – ex-Marxists,
journalists who have been styled “one-man revolutions,” literary
critics included – have tried to discuss serious moral questions
while they, at the same time, have been so unserious.
In dealing with the moral question here, two counterposed.
approaches can be cited, the approach which emphasizes social
morality, and that which stresses personal morality. A social
morality conceives the basic cause, the basic conditions which permit
or delimit practices which are condemned on moral grounds as
derivable from the structural character of society itself. In
consequence, the aim of social morality in changing and lifting moral
practice to a higher level is that of changing society, or
eradicating those conditions which, sanction and which contribute in
manifold ways to practices that are, open to condemnation because
they result in social harm, in the deformation of human personalities
and in the oppression of groups, classes and nations, let alone
individuals. To rephrase this aim, a social morality conceives social
change as the means of helping to create better moral conditions. The
real core of any social morality, the most clear theoretical
establishment of the premises of such a social morality, is to be
found in revolutionary Marxism. For it declares decisively and
without equivocation, that the major factor in sanctioning harmful
practices that can be be morally condemned is to be seen in the
exploitation of man by man. [1]
The recent recrudescence of moral interest, real and verbal, has
been partly manifested in a moral critique of Marxian morality. The
criticisms of and attacks upon Marxism, from the moral standpoint,
have, however, been of varying seriousness, of variable importance
and of differing merit, often from case to case. In some instances,
to cite an example, these attacks have been upon the practices of
individuals or organizations which are organized within the
historical tradition of Marxism. In the case of such criticisms, some
have been on the ground that Marxists, or so-called Marxists (if one
will) have violated in practice their own moral standards: other
criticisms have been to the effect that immoral practices, real or
alleged on the part of Marxists, have been a consequence of the
essential ideas, the basis, the seemingly ineradicable character of
Marxian theory and practice itself. However, it is rare that critics,
well-intentioned or otherwise, intelligent and informed, or obtuse
and trivial, have attacked the premise upon which a Marxian, a
socialist, moral conception is and must be built – its condemnation
of the exploitation of man by man. Here, where I speak then of
Marxian morality, I do it on the basis of this premise. The major
reason for immoral practice in modern society is, directly or
indirectly, a consequence off the exploitation of man by man; this,
in turn, means the exploitation of social classes by other social
classes, in order that the exploiting classes can reap something of
the share in the fruits of what the exploited class produces, so
often produces under conditions which barely permit much more than a
subsistence living. For the purposes of this article, subsidiary
questions, questions of the practices of Marxians, criticisms of the
methods of certain organizations which are or which style themselves
Marxian, are not at issue and do not bear directly on the points of
this discussion. Hence, I do not take them up in detail.
Counter to a conception of morality which is social is a
conception which is individual and which assumes that, when looked at
morally, the major problem facing man is that of the regeneration of
the individual rather than that of changing society. There are a
number of varieties of this attitude, various Christian attitudes,
such as that of the Catholic Church, which holds that the purpose of
life is death and the aim of a good man on this earth should be that
of saving his soul in the next world, that of Tolstoyism, which
preaches passive resistance, pacifism, a-politicalism in general, and
sexual abstinence (although it is rare to find a Tolstoyan who
accepts this feature of Leo Tolstoy’s morality), that of various
anarchists, Platonists and pseudo-Platonists, ex-Marxists,
psychiatrists who conceive the curing of psychoneurosis as the major
problem facing man, and so on. I don’t wish arbitrarily to equate
these various doctrines, based on one or another form of personal, or
self-regeneration. However, it should be clear that they can be
grouped together in the sense that they present the problem of the
individual as prior to the social problem.
 
Social and Personal Morality
There is no necessary polarity between a moral code based on what
I here call social morality, and one based on personal morality. When
separations are made, these are a consequence of bifurcation, of
separating of the individual and of society. Man – and this is also
stressed in Marxian writing – lives out his personal drama on the
plane of society: man’s very self and his personality are socially
directed, socially delimited, socially organized. The self is a
social product, not an individual entity which is superior to,
anterior to, separable from society. A bifurcation of society and the
individual, and the establishment of moral premises on the basis of
either aspect of. this bifurcation, is misleading. To treat society –
in other words – as outside of man, superior to man, the sole
responsible agent for what is called immoral action, is to confuse
the issue. To consider and to condemn immoral action on the ground
that the individual, and the individual alone qua individual,
is solely responsible for the action so condemned, and that, in no
way, is the society in which he lives also responsible, is equally to
be seen as misleading. In consequence, a social morality should not
and cannot base itself on such a bifurcation. When this social
morality is premised on the fact of the exploitation of man by man it
should, however, be obvious that such a morality is not guilty of the
aforesaid bifurcation. The law, the standards, the moral sanction,
the mores of capitalist society sanction exploitation, grant to
individuals with money the legal right to exploit others. But when a
man is exploited he is not exploited by society in general: he is
exploited by individual men. Furthermore, a careful reading of, say,
Marx’s Capital should make it clear that Marx definitely
indicates, and implies, that a society based on exploitation, such as
is capitalist society, creates the conditions whereby both exploited
and exploiter are deformed in their very selves, and that, thus, they
pay a moral price. Something of their human nature is deformed. Other
writers, besides Marx, have made the same kind of a point, and this
point has been dramatized in fiction. Thus it can be shown I believe
that this is one of the motifs of Tolstoy’s, War and Peace
[2]; also, it is, I hold, possible to demonstrate that this same
motif, in the context of the conditions dealt with in the novel, is
centrally involved in The Adventures of Huckleberry Firm by
Mark Twain. [3]
A social morality should not conceive society as undynamic; it
should not view society as a responsible agent in itself when
divorced from the men who live in that society, affirm’ or attack
its sanctions, live by, in spite of, or in opposition to its values,
and make up the human beings who form that society. If this is done,
social morality is rendered arbitrary. And such an arbitrary social
morality can often serve the means of turning morality into merely
sentimental and innocuous humanitarianism which preaches, but does
not practice. It can, and has been, turned into a philosophy of
social service in which social service, social work, is made . into a
substitute for political action, for independent political action on
the part of the workers, on the part of all the oppressed and
exploited. But, on the other hand, a morality that is solely premised
on a conception of personal and self-regeneration is usually limited
at best and most often it is, besides being inadequate, a means of
evading many issues, a means of expressing moral snobbery and moral
priggishness, a means of moral escape and inactivity.
 
Morality and Literature
The problem of literature and morals is complicated and is – at
least it can be – a serious one. For moral conceptions, moral
judgments concerning literature are ultimately inescapable, even if
these judgments are made on the basis of merely the satisfaction of
needs which give pleasure, and the escape of pains which cause
suffering. Simply put, morality deals with what is considered to be
either good or bad, and good or bad are determined, absolutely or
relativistically, in terms of some set of values, attitudes,
standards. We all make moral judgments, and we make moral judgments,
at times, when we discuss literature. Recently the re-establishment
of problems of literature and morality has been one of the
manifestations of the alleged moral renaissance of our times. This
problem has been posed and dealt with differently by various literary
critics and writers. [4] The current revival of Henry James, the
establishment of James (in fact) as what amounts to a cult figure has
also restated problems of literature and morality. Some of the James
enthusiasts have, in fact, presented James as a moralist. But there
are moralists and moralists. In James, morals and manners become
inermixed, and we can see this simply and clearly in one of his best
stories, Daisy Miller. Daisy, a delightful, spontaneous and
wholly attractive American girl in Europe – a characterization
which, if nothing else could be cited, would be more than enough to
establish James as an artist of perception and extraordinary
adroitness – faces dual dangers. The dangers she faces flow out of
the fact that, in matters of social relationships, her spirit is
democratic, and that, in general, she is direct, frank, honest. These
dangers are (a) the possibility that she may lose her virginity, and
this is, in the world in which she lives, synonymous with ruin and
degradation, and (b) the danger that she will compromise herself and
cause her social ruin by associating with men in public in a way that
is not prescribed by the code of etiquette that prevails among the
socially acceptable people with whom she comes in contact. In James’
work, there is often such a mixture of morals and manners. James was
not a moralist in the sense that Tolstoy was. James did not write
with an urgency, even a pitiless consistency, urging change, urging
it as a demanding necessity, defending a code of morals which he saw
as higher than that prevalent in his times and, at the same time,
condemning the code prevalent in his times and all of the evils that
flowed out of it. Morality in James’ writing is merely reflected.
As the consequence of a tight moral code and also as the consequence
of an inhumanly stuffy set of principles of etiquette, there are
deforming consequences to be seen in the lives of various Jamesian
characters. This is what I mean by saying that in James’ world
morality is merely reflected.
When James, then, is used as an illustration of the connection
between literature and morality, this point must be stressed. If it
is not, confusion is created. And the confusion created is as unfair
to the reputation of James as it is to the reader, especially to the
reader who is not very alert, and who has not, in his own mind,
clearly posed and considered these problems. And it is this aspect
of the present revival of interest in the works of Henry James which
is most open to criticism. For the creation of such confusion creates
additional ones. The moral problem is in this way turned into a
personal problem and, as such, it becomes a means of evading the
problems of social morality. At the same time, the moral problem is
confused with problems, if they be called such, of good manners. This
kind of confusion is seemingly au courant; it is one of the
newest things; it is to be found in the work of critics and writers
who are, presumably, the most culturally advanced people in America.
[5] The seeming newness of this stylized and estheticized morality
makes it appear as part of the tone of the times. But actually it )s
an attitude which is one of the stalest of all reactionary tricks.
Until reaction is forced out into the open, where it must be nakedly
violent, it needs to rely on all kinds of subterfuges. and these
subterfuges appear in literature, in literary criticism, in
philosophy, in ideology in general. The full or the partial equation
of morals with manners, the stylization of morals into an
esthetic-moral attitude, the snobbery that grows out of this so that
special appreciators of literature, of cultural value, become
advanced people – how common, even how banal, this is! In passing,
I would remark that a parallel attitude in politics was one of the
major ideological weapons of the rebellious slave owners who tried to
destroy the American Union in 1861, and to establish in perpetuity a
slave owners’ republic in America. And the ideologists of the slave
owners said that their cause would win because Jefferson Davis was
more educated than Abraham Lincoln, that he had better manners than
the rail-splitter and that – to cap the climax – he was also the
better looking of the two presidents. [6] I cite this example. not to
equate the ideologists of the slave owners with some of our current,
advanced, educated, genteel and undeniably competent literary people
of the hour, but, rather, to point out by illustration that there are
various manifestations of this reactionary subterfuge.
This estheticized morality on which I have commented is a
variation of the moral attitude which demands personal regeneration
in place of social change. But at best it is a morality in only the
most tenuous sense. It is not robust, it is not all-inclusive. It is,
largely, literary. And it functions. more or less, by dealing with
moral reflection, as this is to be grasped in the reading and the
analysis of works in literary art. However, there is something else
to be said concerning works of literature which deal with moral
problems in terms of personal experience. Two writers who, in my
opinion, are of lasting significance in world literature have dealt
with moral problems in works of art. I cite them – Dostoevsky, Ibsen.
 
Dostoevsky’s Approach
In Dostoevsky, a moral problem is dealt with from the standpoint
of personal experience, in the case of the chief protagonist, or of
one of the chief protagonists. The moral problem usually results fromâ
an act or acts on the part of a hero who, by this act, causes serious
and even irreparable injury to another human being or else the wish
to commit such an act. Thus, Raskolnikov commits a murder. Thus, Ivan
Karamazov wishes for the death of his father and acts on this wish by
speaking with high suggestiveness to Smerdakakov, who is the actual
murderer: Ivan, then, goes off so as to be away from the scene at the
time that the murder – if it is to be committed – will be
perpetrated. An action of this kind, for Dostoevsky, then poses
directly a moral problem in the mind of the hero. This problem
becomes obsessive. It is expressed in a need for change, a need for
confession, a need for a relaxation of a disturbing, a painfully
recurring, a demanding sense of guilt. Dostoevsky, thus, deals in
moral problems in terms of consequences on others as well as on the
agent who commits such an act. And these problems are the result of
actions presented in his narratives, actions which are central in his
stories. He meets moral problems head on. Furthermore, Dostoevsky,
directly and by unmistakable implications, identifies himself with
sinners, with criminals, with the suffering, with the unfortunate. He
was explicitly reactionary, but he never masked this fact. And
explicitly reactionary though he was, he nonetheless identified
himself not with those who benefited most from their advantageous
position in reactionary Czarist society, but those who suffered most,
those who punished themselves and others. And this work, at the same
time, expressed an urgent need for change, for psychological change
which he perceived as a process of purgation and regeneration. Thus,
it is to be noted that at the end of Crime and Punishment,
Raskolnikov, a convicted and confessed murderer, is described as
bound for Siberia, and the author states that this sets the stage for
a possible drama of Raskolninov’s regeneration. Finally, it can be
seen in Dostoevsky’s writings that the moral problem posed involved
the hero, the chief protagonist. I remark on this fact because one
can now note how in this new tendency of stylized literary morality,
the moral problem is posed in terms of the spectator who doesn’t
act, who doesn’t have to make decisions.
 
Ibsen’s Approach
For Ibsen, a recurrent problem was that of conscience. A
representative Ibsen character, such as Mrs. Alving or the wife of
John Gabril Borkman, is haunted by ghosts. The ghost symbolizes a
feeling of guilt that resides in the conscience, and that
continuously poisons the existence of one or more persons in the
present. The actions of some person in the past have seriously
affected the destinies of people, and by these actions, the sins of
the fathers, as it were, are visited on the children: this happens
not as a result of any general moral law of the universe or because
of the Will of God, but, rather, as a result of connected
circumstances and relationships. The guilt for this past action, the
visitation of the ghost of conscience comes about because of
immediate and direct consequences which are perceivable in the life
of one or more persons who is a victim of these past actions, who
suffers in consequence and who is in one way or another, unfree. The
yearning and manly urge for freedom expressed in Ibsen is a desire to
be free of these ghosts. Further, these ghosts are intimately
associated with bourgeois morality. In Ibsen’s world it is a
bourGeois who has been guilty of the actions in the past which cause
serious problems in the present. It is more favorably situated
persons, in Ibsen, who suffer moral guilt. In this connection, one
might passingly remark that Ibsen does not throw the major burden of
guilt on Jacob Ingrstrum, and on his daughter, who, in Ghosts,
is a maid in the Alving household. These two characters, both of them
lower class in status, are shown as being more or less like they are
as a consequence of actions of their superiors, and these actions of
their superiors were – this is unmistakable in Ghosts – possible
because of the superior class and social position of the Alvings.
In general, it can be observed that in many works of the past
which deal with morality from the standpoint of personal experience
and of personal problems, there are parallel features to those which
we have briefly noted in the case of Dostoevsky and Ibsen. The artist
does not reveal these moral problems from the standpoint of the upper
classes. He does not present the upper classes as morally superior.
Rather, he deals with the moral problems, and the moral consequences
which must be posed by those who have a relatively favored position
in society.
 
A Current Example
In Partisan Review, Fall 1945, there is a story by Lionel
Trilling, The Other Margaret, which will throw light on these
problems. It can be accepted as a representative literary expression
of the stylized literary-moral tendency which exists in advanced
cultural circles of contemporary New York. The chief protagonist of
Mr. Trilling’s story is named Stephen Elwin: he is a cultivated
scientific publisher; he’s married, and he has a thirteen-year-old
daughter, Margaret, who obviously goes to a progressive school. Stephen
lives in the East Nineties, and the best feature of the story is the
manner in which Trilling recreates the genteel, cultivated wistful
atmosphere of an educated family living in such a section of
Manhattan. Stephen, a man of taste, is first seen buying a reproduction
of Roualt. He can be described as a seeker after wisdom, and early in
the story, he recalls that in high school, a teacher had read to his
class, the following sentence from Hazlitt: “No young man believes
he shall ever die.” Then, Stephen didn’t understand the wisdom of
this sentence fully: but now, at the age of forty-one, he does
understand this sentence. Wisdom is, thus, the knowledge of death. He
is wistful, gentle, and he has wisdom as well as taste. In addition,
Stephen perceives what is presumably the moral problem of the present
time, and this moral problem, tendentiously posed and described, is
at the heart of Trilling’s story.
The moral problem presented in this story concerns the question of
responsibility. Is the individual responsible for his actions, or is
society responsible? And further, as Stephen sees this problem from the
vantage point of a moral spectator, this problem arises in class
terms. In the course of the story, three important incidents, which
afford data concerning this moral problem, are related. As Stephen rides
home on a Fifth Avenue bus, an Irish conductor is nasty to a small
boy of the well-to-do classes, a small boy who might be as Stephen was
in the days when he didn’t truly understand the wisdom of that
sentence – “No young man believes that he shall ever die.”
Then, when Stephen arrives home with his reproduction, and his daughter,
Margaret, ritualistically prepares his pre-supper cocktail for him,
Stephen’s wife, Lucy, happens to tell how she was riding on a bus,
and she heard another conductor speaking to a Jewish person with
anti-Semitic innuendoes. Further, the Elwins are having
difficulties with their colored maid, who is “The Other Margaret.”
(This explains the title of the story.) “The Other Margaret” is
very unpleasant. On this day, she has not shown up for work. Mrs.
Elwin has to cook dinner.
While she does this, Stephen has his drink. He shows his Roualt
reproduction to the daughter. She doesn’t like it. Father and
daughter discuss morality. The daughter disagrees with Stephen
concerning the conduct of “The Other Margaret.” Margaret declares
that she isn’t to be blamed for her rudeness. At school, Margaret has a
liberal teacher who tells the children that society is responsible.
Stephen, wistfully tolerant, doesn’t press his objections to his
daughter’s view too strongly. But it is clear that he doesn’t
accept it. He points out to her how they had a previous maid who had
to borrow money in order to go South because of family sickness. This
maid paid back the money she borrowed, and thus, she – while of the
lower classes – is different from “The Other Margaret.” Also,
at school, Margaret has modelled a toy lamb which is to be given her
mother as a birthday present. She shows this to her father. He is
pleased. The mother sees it and she is touched.
The other Margaret unexpectedly appears to serve dinner. She is
again very rude in her work. But this rudeness doesn’t change
Margaret’s view that society is responsible. However, after dinner,
“The Other Margaret” – as is her wont – breaks things. One of
the things she breaks is the personally precious lamb which Margaret has
made for her mother. When this happens, the daughter cries in anger.
She denounces “The Other Margaret.” She declares that the maid
did this on purpose, and out of hatred for herself, Margaret. In
consequence, the claim that society, and not the individual, is
responsible is refuted: Margaret’s liberal teacher is shown to be wrong
on the basis of evidence to be found in personal experience. Margaret is
hurt, and she cries. Stephen gives her what comfort he can, but this is
not sufficient to heal the wound she has received. And this wound is,
additionally, revealed as one of the scars of growing up. Like her
father, she, also, must bear the pains of growth and discovery, those
pains which mark the journey through life whereby the child becomes
the youth, the youth who believes that he will never die, and the
youth goes on into the maturity of middle age and there, he begins to
attain wisdom. The attainment of wisdom is painful, and it teaches us
that we die, that we are responsible agents, and that we must accept
our responsibility. This in substance is the theme of Trilling’s story.
 
Story Is Tendentious
On the one hand, this story has been conceived and written with
adroitness: on the other hand, it is highly tendentious, and its
tendentiousness is revealed in the careful selection of incidents.
Thus, all of the middle class people in this story are kind,
civilized, tolerant. They want to be fair. To the contrary, the
workers, the lower classes, appear in the image of a bus conductor
and a colored maid. They are insulting, rude, and cruel. The rudeness
of the lower classes is seen in the sphere of home life, of personal
experience, and of passing incidents of the streets. This rudeness is
not called for if one considers the kindness of the middle class
Elwin and the inoffensiveness of the boy whom the bus conductor
insults. These incidents are used as data of experience on the basis
of which a conclusion is to be reached concerning the moral problem
of the contemporary period. The moral view of Stephen Elwin is that
the individual is responsible: the opposite view is presented as the
claim that society is responsible. This alternative view is presented
in the words of an inexperienced thirteen-year-old girl who is still
too young to appreciate the painting of Roualt. She has learned this,
as if by rate, from an off stage teacher who never appears directly
in the story. In addition, this social view of morality is presented
in a few generalized sentences. Opposed to the child who defends the
ideas of social morality, we have the moral spectator, the man who
has grown to wisdom, Stephen Elwin. At the same time, Stephen is not
really called upon to act morally. He is one who perceives the data
of experience necessary for the drawing of moral conclusions in much
the same manner as he tastefully appreciates the work of Roualt.
There is in all this a truly high-faluting triviality. Trilling
wastes his genuine skill and cultivation on such triviality, and he
masks it by so organizing the story as to be able to draw an almost
all-encompassing moral conclusion. At the same time, this generalized
moral is the projected concealment of a guilty sensibility. Stephen
Elwin’s wistfully sad feeling about the rudeness and brutality of
the world – as this is shown by bus conductors and maids – what
is this, if it isn’t the attitude we find in contemporary
criticism, in the Henry James cultists, in those critics and writers
who were the literary Marxists of yesterday? Furthermore, the
triviality of this story is to be found in the relative pettiness of
the incidents and the relative grandeur of the conclusion. For the
conclusion of this story affirms nothing less than that man is a free
agent. For to be a free agent is the sense of the claim that the
individual is responsible. Thus, while we can recognize the skill
with which this story is written, and while we can, at the same time,
see that it has the merit of picturing a certain cultivated milieu
of the present, it is also necessary to point out that it is a story
which is cleverly organized in such a way as to persuasively present
a reactionary moral view. It seems that the very needs of the story,
then, will explain its tendentiousness. This tendentiousness is to be
found not in overt statements, but in the very selectivity of the
story. The rude lower classes are described by conversation, or else,
they are seen in action, offending children. The cultivated
intellectual of the middle class is presented as a thoughtful man, a
tolerant man, and his consciousness is penetrated by the author.
Further this man is not an exploiting capitalist who brutally grinds
down the workers: he is a man who performs a valuable social
function: he publishes scientific books. His way of life and his way
of feeling is that of the intellectual: in fact, he could even be a
literary critic, for the style and tone of his thoughts suggest the
man of literary rather than of scientific cultivation. He is curious
about aesthetics, about morals, and he is truly a seeker after
wisdom. But his curiosity does not reach to the point where Stephen
would pose, for himself, the question as to what conditions in the
life of bus conductors and maids might contribute, at least, towards
a rudeness. a rudeness which we are not here trying to defend? If
this question were posed, it would lead to other questions and
problems. One of these is that of identity. How might Stephen be like
and how might he be different from the rude representatives of the
lower classes who insult children? Is his cultivation something which
makes him more tolerant, and if so, how did he attain it? These and a
number of other questions might be asked. It is legitimate for us to
present them here in the analysis of a short story for, let me
repeat, this is a short story which aims to enforce an all inclusive
moral statement; again, the aim of this story is to prove that man
has free will. Finally, it needs to be stated that the setting, the
incidents, the characters do not warrant the author’s conclusion.
The story is, in reality, not what it seems: it is an expression of
the moods, the retreat from Marxism, the growing moral snobbery of
the advanced and cultivated New York intellectual. As such, it is a
revealing account of the escape of what we might here call The
Partisan Review intellectual. It demonstrates what we may expect
in the way of creative literature from those of literary
sensibilities who mix up morals and manners, and see morality, more
or less as a kind of literary stylization. [7]
In conclusion, such attitudes, such writing might be contrasted
with the morally vigorous work of the Ibsens, the Dostoevsky of the
past! How the contemporary intellectual is sinking, declining! This
fact alone should be sufficient to warn the most sensitive, the most
alert. the most rebellious spirits of the younger generations of
intellectuals away from such tendencies. For here we see is the high
road that leads to the realms of the most cultivated banality.

Notes
1. Cf. my letter of discussion in Politics, March 1946. In
the early portion of this essay, I am restating some of the points
which I made in that letter.
2. Cf. my article, Tolstoy’s War and Peace
as a Moral Panorama of the Czarist Feudal Nobility, the
University of Kansas City Review, Summer 1945.
3. Cf., for my view of this, my book, The League of Frightened
Philistines, New York 1945.
4. In my title essay to The League of Frightened Philistines,
I have discussed my views on the way in which critics, such as Van
Wyck Brooks, J. Donald Adams and Archibald MacLeish have moralized
about literature, and will not repeat here
5. I hope that it is needless for me to point out that the
magazine Partisan Review has taken the lead in expressing this
kind of esthetico-moral evasion.
6. Southern literary Confederates, such as Allen Tate and Donald
Davidson, persist in the expression of this attitude. The movement in
letters which they sponsor, and which is expressed in their books and
in The Sewanee Review, edited by Mr. Tate, can be boiled down
to the claim that these literary Confederates have ideas which make
better personalities than is the case with the Yankee writers of the
North who are forever mixing into the affairs of the South and,
thereby, challenging various forms of the expression of the doctrine
of white supremacy.
7. In The Nation for April 20, 1946, Lionel Trilling
contributed a long attack on Dreiser titled Dreiser and the
Liberal. I urge the reader to peruse this article in connection
with the story. If this is done, one can see what kind of an
alternative literature Trilling can offer to that of Dreiser. This
attack is mean-spirited and unfair. He refers to the question of
anti-Semitism and treats Dreiser as an anti-Semite. It is true that
some years ago letters of Dreiser were published in The Nation
which gave definite warrant for such a charge. However, the
sentiments of these letters can nowhere be found in the fiction of
Dreiser. Trilling writes of The Bulwark. Like the previous
novels of Dreiser, this work has nothing to do with the Jewish
question. But Trilling introduces anti-Semitism as a means of
criticizing the fiction of Dreiser, and he does this without
evaluating the full career of Dreiser. Also, he mixes up the work of
Dreiser with the favorable views of Dreiser expressed by some
critics, and attacks both as if they could always be equated. In
general, he writes this article in the true spirit of a Matthew
Arnold of the radio program, Invitation to Learning. He
criticizes Dreiser’s thinking, but he does not show what is the
real relationship between Dreiser’s thinking and his novels. He
stands at the door of culture, guarding it from such a barbarian.
Inside of the doors of culture we should presumably be able to find
many more works on the level of The Other Margaret. [Note by ETOL: In the printed version there is no anchor for this note – we have placed it in a position that seems to us to be appropriate.]
 

 T. Farrell: Stalinist Literary Discussion (April 1946)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
Stalinist Literary Discussion
An Answer to Maltz and The New Masses
(April 1946)

From New International, Vol. XII No. 4, April 1946, pp. 112–115.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

The American Stalinists are currently engaged in a heated literary
discussion. Like all previous discussions of this kind, the polemics
read as if they were concerned with a lynch campain or a pogrom. Once
again, the Stalinists are giving a deeper cultural significance to
such words as “rat,” “renegade,” “degenerate,” “fascist,”
“enemy of the peopIe,” “enemy of the working class,” etc. And
now, they are also. adding a new word to the lexicon of literary
criticism – “Browderite.”
For years the Stalinist movement has used literature as a party
instrument. This is the practical significance of their slogan which
holds that “Art is a weapon.” On every occasion that the Kremlin
bureaucracy has changed the party line, there has been a
corresponding change in the Stalinist cultural orientation. A study
of the back issues of New Masses would clearly document this
fact. In accordance with the party line, practically every
contemporary writer of any significance or reputation has been damned
and praised in this magazine, and often by the same man. [1] In
recent years, the social-patriotic Stalinists had a corresponding
cultural orientation corresponding to their politics: this was
expressed in a vague patriotic populism. So long as a writer did not
attack the party line he was allowed a certain latitude in which to
move and yet could be praised and accepted by the Stalinist critics.
With this formally loose policy, which was nonetheless managed with a
bureaucratic whip that would be snapped at any writer who would
threaten to direct a possible criticism at the party line, the
Stalinists built up a broad cultural front of various kinds of fellow
travelers: these included a large number of hack writers, radio
writers, Hollywood scenarists: they gave a seeming political status
to writers who came from cafe society, that upper slum of capitalist
America: they collected pulp writers, detective story writers,
worn-out poets and literary stuffed shirts. Now and then, one of
their alleged critics, such as Samuel Sillen would stuff a few of the
pieties of Marxian phraseology into a book review or an article; now
and then Howard Fast or someone else would pay passing respects to
the dialectic. But withal Stalinist criticism was loosely populist.
 
The New “Left” Line
Now the Stalinists have a new line. Their left or pseudo swing is
adventuristic in its emphasis on class struggle, demagogic in its
attack on monopoly capitalism, and, at the same time, it uses this
new leftism to conceal the deepening reaction within the Soviet Union
and as a cover-up for Stalin’s nationalist-expansionist policies.
The new line was established with the attack on Earl Browder,
yesterday’s beloved leader. If we would believe the Stalinists,
Browder misled them for years: he derailed them from
Marxist-Leninist-Stalinist theory, imposed a Wall Street line on
them, acted as an alien element within their ranks, and fooled almost
everyone of them. The Communist Party has now expelled Browder. Those
who fawned before him in the most servile spirit only yesterday are
now attacking him with typical Stalinist venom. They call this attack
a defense of Marxism. However, these Stalinists were such independent
thinkers, such morally brave theoreticians, such politically capable
men that almost all of them did not even know that they were fooled.
They only learned that they were not following a Marxist line when a
French Communist named Duclos – who had never been to America –
wrote an article in French and told this to them. After Duclos told
them that they were being fooled by Earl Browder, they flung
themselves on the floor and grovelled in penitent confessions. The
spectacle of these Stalinists admitting their errors, vying with one
another in proclaiming their mistakes, announcing what dupes they
were in the hands of their beloved leader – this furnished us with
one of the most obscene political spectacles in recent political
history. It was a variation of the Moscow Trials, a minor American
Moscow Trial in itself. Now, however, they have confessed. Having
done this, they are now “Marxists” again.
The literary discussion which they have now opened is, in essence,
a concomitant of these developments. It is the literary and cultural
corollary of their turn from social patriotism to demagogic leftism.
In essence, then, it is a cultural swing from social-patriotic
cultural populism to bureaucratic, leftist cultural “class
struggle.” This is the way it must be understood.
 
II.
If we read New Masses, it seems that this new literary
discussion began, believe it or not again, with problems of
conscience. Back on October 23rd, Isidor Schneider wrote about the
problems of conscience of the left writer. This problem is, briefly,
to be seen in the moral dilemma – should he write art or should he
write journalistic political propaganda? What should he do if the two
don’t seem to mix?
Concerned with this problem of conscience the Stalinist writer
Albert Maltz contributed a rather long piece, What Shall We Ask of
Writers? to New Masses of February 12. Maltz’s article
was theoretically unclear and, in consequence, somewhat confusing.
His confusion, however, was an old one in Stalinist writing. He could
not distinguish between the politics of a writer and the art of a
writer, and in consequence, he left them completely separated, and he
argued that, in New Masses, the critics should discuss art in
the book reviews, and that the editors, on the editorial page, should
criticize if they deemed this necessary the politics of the same
writer. [2] He distinguished between the writer as a citizen and as
an artist. Then he urged that a writer could be a good or even a
great literary artist and at the same time, a bad citizen. He
appealed to the authority of Engels and to the example of Engels
admiration for Balzac, who was a monarchist in the period of the
Restoration. [3] He then cited some modern examples, and in his
citations, he committed the unfortunate blunder of using me as his
major instance. He praised some of my work, declared that he did not
approve of the committees to which I belong, and also stated:
“Farrell’s name was a bright pennant in New Masses until
he became hostile to the New Masses.” [4] He spoke,
similarly, of Richard Wright. He argued that the novels of Wright and
myself are to be considered differently than those of Arthur
Koestler’s. Koestler, he declared, “always writes with a
political purpose so organic to his work that it affects his
rendering of character.” And, most inexcusably Maltz added that the
literary future of Wright, and of myself, could not be predicted: in
other words, he left it as an open question as to whether or not we
were degenerated literary artists.
At the same time, Maltz complained of the “straitjacket” into
which Stalinist critics were constantly trying to put the writer. He
explained this straitjacket criticism by attributing it to the narrow
application of the formula – “art is a weapon.” He declared he
agreed with this “doctrine” broadly, but that it has been abused
and applied in the narrowest fashion. This, he affirmed, created
endless difficulties for the writer. He confessed that it has created
for him these problems of conscience of which Schneider spoke. Of
course, it has for long been no secret that the Stalinists apply
constant pressure on any writer who will allow them to do so.
Nonetheless, it is important to note that Maltz – a loyal, patient,
plodding Stalinist writer of fifteen or more years’ duration –
here admitted everything that critics of Stalinist literary practices
long knew and stated in print. Maltz charged that these practices
produced “schematic writing,” “wasted writing”; he spoke
of the results as a “calamity”; he stated that they aided in the
production of works which were politically shallow as well as
artistically inferior. He also remarked that as a consequence of this
atmosphere the creative power of the writer was deformed.
Listen to him:
“I know of at least a dozen plays and novels, discarded
in the process of writing because the political scene altered.
Obviously the authors in question were not primarily bent upon
portraying abiding truths, either of character or of the social
scene, but were mainly concerned with advancing a political tactic
through the manipulation of character. Otherwise, a new headline in
the newspapers would not have made them discard their work. I even
know of a historian who read Duclos and announced that he would have
to revise completely the book he was engaged upon.”
 
Fate of Young Writers
This all reveals that the Stalinists use literature as a weapon of
political tactics. The Stalinist cultural movement has always been
the graveyard of promising literary talent. In the early 30’s, for
instance, there was a burst of creative energy: there were little
magazines all over the country; young left wing writers were
numerous; the Communist Party bragged about helping them; Michael
Gold, Granville Hicks (whom Gold of course defended when writers such
as myself attacked him) and others saw the future of American
literature in these young writers. Where are most of them now? What
has happened to them? [5] The Stalinists have to create anew, and
almost from the ground up, the same kind of movement they once helped
to create. For this they must find new talents. The old talents of
the 1930’s are almost all dried up. After all, living creative
literature depends on creative effort, creative works more than it
does on critical dicta. The new line which the Stalinists are now
starting to lay down is something like that of their third period.
This was proved a failure in practice. When writers were imposed on
by the Stalinist literary bureaucrats, they fought back, and often
they left the Stalinists bag and baggage. When writers were found who
would write according to the proscriptions laid down for them, it
became an almost insuperable task for the bureaucratic critics to get
anyone to read their books. And with changes in the world political
situation, this line was abandoned. The little magazines were
liquidated. Archibald MacLeish, once described as a “fascist” by
Mike Gold, and similar writers were courted, and the promising young
left wing writers were shoved into the background, to be treated like
poor relations.
Albert Maltz himself states that he is not an aesthetician and
that, perhaps, some of his formulations may not be sufficiently
precise, but urges the reader to consider his main point. He asks
that the writer be given greater freedom and that his work be not
judged in terms of the immediate political needs of the movement.
With this, it is obvious that anyone with the least bit of sense will
agree, if he is not dragooned into disagreeing by Stalinist
functionaries and party line critics. However, the way in which Maltz
discusses his problems leaves the whole issue open to various confusions.
 
Literature and Politics
I can only comment on this is passing. The general relationships
between literature and politics is a question which is both
theoretical and empirical. It demands theoretical analysis and
investigation. In this context, it is a problem involving the
relationship, the series of correlations among different types of
human activities. In correlating literature and politics, it is
necessary to investigate the problem historically and to note what
has been the case in different periods of the past; and further it is
necessary to note the differences between the problems of politics
and the problems of literature. And, in tum, such an investigation
requires that the investigator have his own values, that is that he
be clear on what he wants for himself and for other men. If
complicated problems of this kind are reduced to the question of
applying political tactics, the entire discussion is most likely to
be arid.
Finally, the state of consciousness of a period must be taken into
account. The level of education in a society, the variations of level
of education among the members of different classes, the context of
the emotional problems of different persons in a society, all of this
must be taken into account if one deals in the formulation of
perspectives for writers and critics.
Maltz does not see the problem as so involved and as complicated
as I have here indicated. He approaches it from the standpoint of a
writer who has sat between two stools for years; a writer who has
tried to be an artist and a party liner at the same time. He presents
the problems from the standpoint of the dilemma which Stalinism
imposes on loyal writers. In doing this he urges that more freedom be
allowed to Stalinist writers. His appeal is better late than never
and, in itself, it ought to be supported by the adversaries of
Stalinism. [6] In this sense, it is to be welcomed. But if Stalinist
writers feel more free, they will strive more earnestly to understand
themselves and the world around them, and they will write in such a
way as to aid in blowing up some of the false claims of Stalinism.
Because of such possible consequences of freedom, the Stalinists have
to discredit Maltz. To confirm this, I need merely to point out that
in practically every case where a writer refuses to let the
Stalinists tell him what to think, they attack him and declare over
and over again ad nauseam that he has degenerated
artistically. In order to try to give the least warrant to such
charges, they need to attack a writer’s character; they need to
castigate him for his political views: they need to put him into an
amalgam with fascists, reactionaries and so on. Then, without
analyzing his work, without letting their doped readers have any real
idea of what they are doing, they correlate a literary production
with political actions, real or invented. At present, in their
ferocious attacks on Maltz, they are using Richard Wright, John Dos
Passos, Koestler, Silone and myself as scapegoats. Without showing
differences in the books and in the orientations of all these
writers, they are all lumped together as degenerates; and then the
name of Ezra Pound is added to give a finishing touch to the amalgam.
And to cap the climax, this is literary “Trotskyism.” Why?
Because by using this word here, they can then give a pretense of
proof of their charge. They can cite the official version of the
Moscow Trials as seeming proof. Ergo! writers are conspirators.
What Maltz was really trying to do in this article was to get the
Stalinist bureaucrats to give him a little more literary freedom and,
at the same time, to win from them permission to admire in public the
same books he appreciates in private. But this is what he put his
foot into: this is, also, a revelation of the reason why Stalinists
don’t want writers to create freely. Further, the naïveté of
Maltz suggests how little Stalinism can educate the writer. How is it
to be explained, for instance, that a writer like Maltz can be in
this allegedly Marxist movement for something like fifteen years and
yet he cannot learn from it, with all of its alleged theory, how to
pose questions clearly, how to think about his own questions with
some rigorousness. Year in and year out, the Stalinists have appealed
to the writer, on the ground that they can help him in his work.
Maltz exposes this appeal. He exposes it in his very person. The
looseness of his article shows how little Stalinism has taught him.
 
III.
I have indicated the nature of the reaction to Maltz’s article.
In the same issue as that in which it appears, Isidor Schneider,
literary editor of New Masses, also contributed one dealing
with these same problems, Background to Error. Here, I do not
have space to discuss Schneider’s article. Suffice it to say that
he didn’t take sharp issue with Maltz, didn’t correct him for
praising “renegade” writers and, in fact, he didn’t really
disagree with Maltz. Rather, he tried to show that there was more to
be said on the questions and that the political and historical
conditions had forced these errors on the Stalinist movement. He
called for both a party apparatus literature and culture, and a freer
fellow traveler one of the type that Maltz wants. In this sense, he
said yes and he said no, and in order to do this, he wrote a new
version of the Stalinist cultural past in America. Inasmuch as the
dialectic has been introduced into this controversy by Howard Fast
and others, I might apply it to Schneider. Schneider does not know if
he is yes, and doesn’t know if he is no. Hegel used the word
“chemism” to describe this condition of dialectical tension. It
fits Schneider. He is a man turned into a dialectical chemism and he
hangs suspended in dialectical extremis waiting until he is
told whether he is yes, or whether he is no.
More importantly, it is significant to observe that Schneider has
not been subjected to the same attacks as has Maltz. On the face of
it, the situation suggests that poor Maltz was maneuevered into
becoming a scapegoat. He can, thus, be turned into a horrible example
of the dangers of “Browderism,” “Trotskyism,” “anti-Marxism,”
“fascism.” If other Stalinist writers yearn. to be as free as
Maltz, they have received in advance an impressive warning that they
had better keep their mouths shut.
Now, let me comment briefly on the nature of the attacks directed
against Maltz. In a political report on the expulsion of Browder,
Robert Thompson, a party functionary, characterized Maltz’s article
as “Trotskyite.” Samuel Sillen, an alleged critic, wrote a series
of articles in the Daily Worker. Leaving aside his attacks on
myself, Sillen’s articles are cut to the typical bureaucratic
pattern. He states Marxist propositions in a generalized and slovenly
manner, and associates himself with these propositions. He does not
render them concrete in any manner. Then he hides behind Lenin. This
is achieved by quotations. In consequence of this, if Maltz does not
agree with Sillen, Maltz is, presumably, attacking Lenin. At the same
time, Sillen piously admits that errors have been. made, and even
admits that the Stalinist critics, himself included, were misled by
Browder. In fact, in the late 1930’s, Sillen was describing Browder
as the continuation of the American tradition, and when writing about
literature, he would quote Lenin, quote or paraphrase Browder,
associate them and present his own slovenly banalities as an
extension of the views of Lenin and Browder. [7] Withal, the
following point can, suffice in, a discussion of Sillen. He says that
Browder misled him; he admits that errors were made by himself and
others. Then, what guarantee should anyone have that he is not now
being misled, that he is not making new mistakes? Why should he be
taken seriously, even by his own comrades, when he was so easily
fooled by Browder? Here is a passing sample of the meaningless drivel
which he presents in Marxist language:
“Let us remember that the solution of our problem
requires not a retreat from Marxism, but an ever more vigilant and
militant struggle for Marxism in theory and practice.” [8]
In New Masses for February 26th, Joseph North, one of the
editors of New Masses, contributed an article, No Retreat
for the Writer. North has been a party journalist and editor for
fifteen years or more. In this period he has justified every zigzag,
every change of line! His capacity to think what he is told to think
has had no apparent effect on his duodenum, his arteries, his heart –
or his brain. He is a journalistic example of how a man can flourish
if he is obedient. He has always been a mere journalist. Here he
shines forth as if he were a theoretician. In the usual pattern of
the third period, he opens his article by talking of world crisis.
This pattern puts onto the shoulders of the writer the burden of the
crisis. He must be responsible. Hence, he must do what North says,
just as North does what he is told to do. For the rest, North admits
that he and his comrades have all made errors, and he states that
they are all earnestly searching for clarity. But why? North has
been, as he admits, a true Marxist for years. He has the Marxist
science to teach him. He, along with endless others, have been
denouncing all opponents for not being Marxist. Their denunciations
of writers have been reprehensible, shameful. And North denounces
anew in the same old spirit. He denounces me, he denounces Maltz. And
yet, he declares that he doesn’t have all of the answers, that he
is groping for Marxist clarity. His humility would be touching if he
were not so insolent. He admits his incompetence to discuss the
questions at issue. And then, he launches forth into vituperation.
Searching for Marxist truth that he admits he has not found, he
interprets Maltz’s article as one which could well “destroy the
fruitful tree of Marxism.” North’s article is irrelevant to all
theory. It has one real purpose, that of laying down anew the Moscow
trial amalgam in New Masses. Furthermore, it needs to be
pointed out that North, as a responsible editor of New Masses,
allowed Maltz’s article to be printed. He is, in the eyes of his
comrades, a man who wittingly or otherwise allowed what is now called
a “Trotskyite” article to appear in New Masses. This leads
me to remark that he had better hurry up and gain the Marxist clarity
that he searches for in print.
 
The “High-Falutin” Touch
North, Sillen, Gold are merely routine in their attempts to refute
Maltz. The real blow against the poor fellow is delivered by the
writer, Howard Fast. Fast is not only the white-haired boy of the
Stalinist cultural front: he is also one of the most distinguished
cold storage patriots in these United States. And it is he who gives
the high-falutin touch of art and theory to the controversy.
Alongside of the North article he writes one entitled Art and
Politics. He charges that Maltz rests his article on a platitude;
that Maltz doesn’t quote Engels (which he doesn’t either, if it
means anything); that Maltz’s proposals will liquidate the Marxist
and the whole progressive movement in America; that Maltz does not
know how to think; that Maltz praises Trotskyites; that Maltz’s
formulations are “shoddy,” and that all of this leads to the road
of sterility, whether it be that of fascism, neo-fascism, or of mere
mediocrity. But that is merely a detail. In showing up Maltz, and
giving us some real theory, Fast tells us: “One must look deeper
than the obvious.” And then, at the same time that he “destroys”
Maltz, he also says: “Of course, we are not free from critical
mistakes, vulgarity, incompetence; that we know, and the reasons for
the situation are manifold. Some of these critical failings we have
corrected; others we will correct.” But he is sweating with
profundity so intensively that he just doesn’t go into details on
the vulgarity, incompetence and mistakes to which he confesses. And
we can be sure he will correct them, for he belongs to the Left, and
how could mistakes not be corrected when you consider that “The
Left has never denied change; it strives to understand change, which
is the very essence of dialectics.” But then, after showing that
Maltz doesn’t know much about the theory of art, speaking of that
“far from admirable trio, Farrell, Wright and Koestler,” and
indulging in various types of literary Fancy-Dan shadow boxing, he
dives down so much deeper than the obvious that he breaks what little
head he has. Listen to him clinch his analysis with this lecture on art:
“The writer, however, has a singular responsibility;for
he must select from life those factors which suit his purpose; he
must turn them into word-pictures and thought-pictures; and he must
arrange them on paper in such juxtaposition taking into consideration
rhythm and emotion of sound and beauty of phrase, as to achieve that
rare and splendid result we call art. Sometimes he succeeds,
sometimes he does not; for in the best of worlds, art is not common.
But unless he can engage in his original selection with a degree of
clarity and understanding, and unless he can bring to his appraisal
of life that relationship with life which we call philosophy, he will
fail – even if he has the talent of the gods.”
Believe it or not, this paragraph of Fast’s is the high-water
mark of the controversy. And Howard Fast most bravely hurls it into
the face of writers who are “far from admirable,” who are sterile
mediocrities, who are “reactionary.” The cream of the jest here
is that it is completely compatible with all that. Maltz has to say
if Maltz will only stop approving of Trotskyite books such as Studs
Lonigan and Black Boy. After pother, denunciations,
confessions, admission of errors, promises to do penance and then
more denunciations, the formal content of the controversy – as
distinguished from its political character – all boils down to a
vague, pretentious and almost vacuous banality.

Notes
1. Cf. New Masses: Friends and Enemies, by
Herbert Solow, Partisan Review, March 1938. Solow made a brief
and amusing little study of just this point. His article began: “The
Communist Party – the New Masses in the literary field – is
never content to ‘prove conclusively’ that all critics of Moscow
executions, the People’s Front or the American Writers Congress are
fascist agents.” Solow pointed out, then, how many “enemies of
mankind” were former contributors to New Masses itself. He
found that a number of writers were in this category. Also, he quoted
from reviews of various writers at different periods, indicating how
literary judgments had changed with the changes in the political
line. The most amusing (but in a grisly way) instance of this which I
know is the following. In 1935, Edwin Seaver praised and tried to
apply views on literature which were expressed by Bukharin and Radek.
I criticized these in my book, A Note on Literary Criticism.
Seaver solidarized himself on literature with Bukharin and Radek.
Shortly afterward, Bukharin and Radek were put on trial in Moscow.
2. I have tried to present my views on some aspects of these
problems in my books, A Note on Literary Criticism, op.
cit., and The League of Frightened Philistines, New York,
1945. I hope I shall have the time to deal further with these
problems in the future.
3. Although I agree with the comments of Marx and Engels on
Balzac, I should like to add that by 1946 it is time for one to be
able to like a book and yet not like the politics of the author,
without having to support oneself by repeating that Marx and Engels
admired Balzac. What are we to say of the moral character, the
intelligence, the independent of spirit of people who can’t say in
public that they found interest or value in some work of art without,
also, feeling constrained to, support their admiration by this
argument from authority?
4. In New Masses, August 19, 1936, I had a controversy with
Isidor Schneider somewhat similar to this new one of Maltz’s. I
suggest that the reader compare what Schneider said then with his
statements in Background to Error, New Masses, February
12, 1946. I would add that the common practice of New Masses
critics is that of admitting errors in general when they are
criticized. and of then discrediting the particular critic by
accusing him of wanting to liquidate Marxism.
5. In an article, The Last American Writers Congress,
printed in the Saturday Review of Literature, June 5, 1937. I
discussed this point. I cited a number of the young writers whom the
Stalinists hailed as promising in 1935, and noted on the meager
quantity of the work they had produced. I further indicated that this
was the case even though they had affirmed a view on literary
creation which demanded that they show great fertility.
6. Merely for the record, and in no spirit of vengeance, I think
it must be set down here that during all the years when Maltz
patiently, ploddingly, loyally followed the party line, fellow
writers of his were denounced and slandered because they tried to
maintain their independence. Maltz was, then, silent on all of these
questions. His silence now rebounds on him, for he is given the same
treatment which he silently watched others receive. We might ask –
how many others remained timidly silent because of the silence of
Maltz and of others who may share his views?
7. Browder, when he delivered speeches to writers at writers’
congresses, always managed to say precisely nothing. However, in
1937, he did launch into a vicious attack on Waldo Frank because the
latter had, in a most feeble manner, asked some questions which
implied the possibility of doubt concerning the official version of
the Moscow Trials. Here, Browder himself laid out the lines of the
amalgam for writers, and to this day that same amalgam is being used.
It is a little gruesome to think that Browder is now being put into
his own amalgam.
8. I’d make bold to remark that Engels would have described the
writings of people like Sillen as rubbish. For that was how he
described the parallel drivel of the Sillens of his own day.
 




Dear Friends and Comrades:
Permit me to send you May Day greetings. May Day is usually the occasion for a renewal of hopes in the socialist future. However, the valuable and highly precious feelings which we experience on May Day often lead many to overvalue small gains and to draw from these falsely optimistic conclusions.
The origin of May Day is American: it is a product of the struggles of the American workers. However, the American socialist movement has not given a development in theory which runs parallel to the greatness and deep significance of this holiday which is the outgrowth of the workers’ movement. In the face of the terrible defeats and equally terrible disillusionments suffered all over the world in recent decades, the all-importance of a new and rigorous development of theory has now become crucial.
It is important, I believe, on this May Day to stress the essential need of serious theoretical effort. In America, the ideas of Marx are as yet understood only by a small and uninfluential minority. This year in the May Day renewal of the hope for socialism I trust that all will dedicate themselves to the task of studying, advancing and looking with fresh eyes on the fundamental and impregnable theories of Marxian socialism.



 


Fraternally yours,
James T. Farrell



 

 T. Farrell: American Literature Marches On - 1 (September 1946)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
American Literature Marches On
An Essay by James T. Farrell
(September 1946)

From New International, Vol. XII No. 7, September 1946, pp. 218–223.
Copyright © September 1946 by James T. Farrell.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

I think that we can gain some insight into the conditions of contemporary culture in America if we can see it in the light of some contrasts and comparisons with Russian literature in the nineteenth century. Marxists have framed what is called the historical law of uneven and combined development. They analyze, evaluate and picture society on the basis of hypotheses which are describable as norms, norms of development and of historical evolution and change. This aspect of their methodology is to be found in the basic work of all Marxian thought, Karl Marx’s Capital.
His analysis of capitalist society as a form of society (evolving under definite historical conditions, revealing its own inner and developing dynamics, and working according to its own laws of development, of growth, change and decay) is all laid out in the account which Marx gives of what is called “pure capitalism.” In his introduction to the first volume of Capital Marx remarked that the instrument for the great development of physical sciences was that of experimentation, but that in the realm of political economy, the scientific weapon was abstraction. By abstraction, Marx did not mean pure theory, irrelevant to and irresponsible of fact. Abstraction meant (to him) what it means on its face – to take aspects out of life, and by a process of synthesis and analysis to look at them closely, see what they show in themselves, and then, to link them together with other abstractions in a chain of categories which provide us with a system of hypotheses that permits us to re-enter the realm of crude, direct primitive fact in life, and to see in this welter, the tendencies that are in motion, that are evolving in a manner which permits generalization because of the uniformities which these tendencies express. To continue, Marx did not regard capitalist society as one lump, a lump to be seen, described and analyzed. To the contrary, he looked at the phenomenon from different standpoints, he cast on it an eye which could see from a number of perspectives, a number of intellectual posts of observation. In this way, he analyzed “pure capitalism.” Pure capitalism is a synthetic account of capitalism, which reveals it as evolving in terms of its own dynamics without being impeded, without counter tendencies, obstructions, confusion, or new emergences to interfere with that pure development.
One of the correctives to a literal application of this analysis of pure capitalism is the Marxian law of uneven and combined development. This law seeks to frame the terms in which capitalistic society evolves and changes, not in the terms of analysis, but on the stage of history. It tells us that in history, societies change not according to an absolute of evolution, but in patterns of different deviations from that norm. The norm is, thereby, a criterion, a hypothesis, a means of measuring change. The phenomenon of uneven and combined development is seen in the many glaring contrasts in the world between progress and backwardness, in the contrasts between the employment of the most advanced technology side by side with the use of the most primitive tools. The backward, the semi-colonial countries, the late comers onto the arena of world power, such as Imperial Japan, illustrate this phenomenon clearly. In the social structures of such societies, the contradictions are glaring: capitalist relationships have been imposed on the relationships of past societies, and there is a tension of opposites in the very structure of such societies. The logical tension which Hegel wrote of years ago, and which he saw in a world of spirit, i.e., of concepts, becomes, as it were, an actual and an acute social tension based on this unevenness of development.
Goethe wrote in Faust to the effect that gray is theory, but green, forever green, is the tree of life. This greenness, in history, is often a poisonous color, a terrible form of poison ivy, to continue the metaphor. And one task we must try to meet here concerns this grayness of theory and greenness of the tree of life. We need to find avenues whereby gray theory and green life are not separated, but rather, where the one leads us into knowing what the greenness of the other is. The greenness of life in history is a wild color, uneven, full of shades and reflections, an impressionistic landscape. Looked at, in itself, it is senseless. But to accept the premise that life is senseless is to negate, in advance, the very role of intelligence, and with that to deny the possibility of human control. Societies have evolved and changed without human control and direction. Direction and control have been fragmentary, episodic. In consequence, this unevenness of development has been most pronounced. Uneven development means that there is not an all-sided and consistent regularity in the advances made in civilization, so that the implications of new technological instruments are not implemented in all relevant fields; the changes in society effected or brought into reality by these new instrumentalities are not evaluated, coordinated, and put into marching step with other changes. Combined development means that the old and the new are pressed together and exist side by side. And we see the most advanced machinery and the most backward tools used in the economy of the same country – as was notably the case in Imperial Japan, and in nineteenth century Russia.
 
19th Century Russian Literature
The significance of this law in culture is that it provides us with the hypothesis for the analysis of what sociologists, philosophers and many others in our own age call “cultural lag.” Inasmuch as men are not merely what they think they are, but, more importantly, are what they do, we can observe a whole series of ambiguities, confusions, false problems, contrasts of old and new ideas, clashes of philosophies and philosophical systems in the culture of any period. To relate the culture of a period, a society with its social structure, its level of production is now a commonplace. Marxists have always tried to do this. Anti-Marxists, and non-Marxists are always doing this, too, although they frequently try to issue formal denials that this is the case. Looked at broadly then, nineteenth century Russian literature can illuminate some problems of contemporary culture. In the nineteenth century, Russia had an almost a-historic past. It had been a feudal land without a thirteenth century, without the tremendous development of feudal civilization in the West. It had entered modern history, modern civilization. Its social structure was contradictory. On the one hand, it was feudal: on the other hand, it was capitalistic. In the course of the nineteenth century, there was a relatively tremendous development of capitalism in backward Czarist Russia. This did not only precondition a tension in the interests of classes and groups: it was, also, reflected in ideological and cultural tensions. More than mere machinery, and economic relationships on the pattern of the West, were introduced into Russia. There were also – ideas. These were the ideas of the Great Enlightenment of the eighteenth century, of the rights of man, of western individualism. Herein was laid the social or material basis for a period of the most intense ferment. Intellectual ferment is possible only if there is an awareness of problems, and if this awareness of problems is sensed to a degree sufficiently widespread so that it is clear that a social and historic condition exists which involves and even threatens the entire sense of the self. In other words, an awareness of problems must not be purely formal, and be stated in the language and concepts of political economy, philosophy, sociology, etc.: it must also be psychologically felt in personal problems, tensions, inner hopes and doubts, in problems concerning what man is, what is his place in the universe, what is the relationship of social classes, what is the relationship of men to men, of men to women, what is the role of women and so on. All sides of the nature of the life of man must be involved in this awareness: in consequence, there must be an awareness that the entire self is involved. Such was the case in Czarist Russia. The most sensitive spirits of the time felt just this.
 
Part of World Literature
We see in nineteenth century Russia, then, a contradictory social structure, and a period of intense ferment. In Russia, the Russian problem was not the sole one posed. The problem of Europe, and with this, that of the past and the future was posed, posed in an all-sided way so that it involved not only social relationships and political forms, but also moral ideas, concepts of the universe, of purpose in the world in general, and of the purpose of man in particular. Uneven and combined development was to be seen in culture as well as in economic structures. All of the fears, the anxieties, the hopes, the confusions, the moods which agitated advanced cultural nations in the West, notably France, these were also registered in Russia. Ideas were imported as well as machinery. Napoleon did not conquer Mother Russia. But the Napoleonic Invasion make irreversible the fact that forever after, Russia had to be a western nation, rather than an eastern one, lost in Oriental fatalism and going on endlessly from generation to generation sans change, sans technological inventions.
There is a marvelous all-sidedness in Russian literature of the nineteenth century. Its development was, unquestionably, as high as has been that of literature in any period of human history. The great Russian writers – and most notably Tolstoy and Dostoevsky – became world writers. Russian literature, saturated with pictures of life in Russia, rich in its presentation of Russian types, describing the Russian land, Russian characters, moods and customs, became overnight part of the body of what we call world literature. We cannot account for this in the sense that we can really account for what we call genius. But we can account for it in the sense that we can state what material prerequisites existed in Russian society, and in the relationship of Russia to the West – prerequisites without which Russian literature could not have taken the character it did take, with its serious, penetrating and all-sided probing into those problems which agitated, not only the most sensitive and conscious spirits of Russia, but also, the most sensitive, alert, aware spirits of the entire western world.
 
Theme: Integrate Ideals and Actions
At one place in Anna Karenina, the character, Levin, is described as seeing his times as topsy-turvy. In general, nineteenth century Russia was topsy-turvy. The character of its topsy-turviness was that the struggles, the tensions, the problems agitating this land were a forecast of the twentieth century. Technologically backward, if compared with the West, Russia became, in the summits of its culture, the most advanced of nations. One way of interpreting literature is by describing it as an imaginative trial of the consciousness of man. In imaginative representation and re-creation, man goes through the trial of his times, the trial of his past and his present, and in doing this, he anticipates his future as best he can. One feature, then, of the uneven character of nineteenth century Russia is revealed in its tremendous cultural development. This development is evinced not only in literature, but also in politics, in political thought. In general, the ideas of the West were grasped immediately, intensely, and they were pondered over and discussed. Practically every major writer and thinker of Western Europe, during this century, had a profound influence on some person, some group or groups in Russia. Kant, Hegel, Nietzsche, Marx, Stendhal, Balzac, these and many others were read and studied with a care rarely matched in any other country. Often, the intensity with which western culture was felt and worked over is evinced by the fact that it was acted on. We see suggestions of this in Russian literature, in the succession of characters who are described in such convincing human terms, and who modelled or tried to model their lives, for good or for ill, on a philosophy, a set of ideas. The major theme of Russian literature of the nineteenth century is a moral one – that of revealing in various ways the effort of men to find consistency between their ideals and their actions. As nowhere else in this century, the meaning of literature was lived, lived in life. The effort was made to put ideas, to put values into practice. In passing, this is one of the important facts to be observed in the life of Leo Tolstoy, the great Russian literary genius.
 
America – Capitalist Paradise
Whereas Russia was a backward country, America was an advanced country. Whereas the introduction of capitalism into Russia was marked by the most disrupting of social contradictions, capitalism in America developed in a more “normal” fashion, in a fashion which is, I think, the closest approximation to the “pure capitalism” which Marx described that we can find in any country. Marx’s analysis, it is true, was based mainly on England: but American capitalism is more “pure” in this sense than even English capitalism. The American continent offered a new world to man. This new world was exploited, under the aegis of capitalism, without the impediments of the feudal past which stood in the way of capitalistic development in Europe. Often, various historians and others have commented on how many of the early settlers were nothing but the rag-tag of Europe, the prisoners, the ignorant, the dangerous, the dissidents and so on. Snobs who make this comment do not understand the significance of such a fact. In a new world, with free conditions of development, even the rag-tag, the human refuse of an old continent could develop, could show ingenuity, courage, daring, inventiveness, and could contribute to the making of a new world. Even the despised of humanity could, and usually always can, make a mighty contribution to creating a new world if they are given conditions of free development. America developed historically into the closest approximation to a capitalist paradise that mankind will ever know. And if we see this first, we can see precisely what it will mean when we say that American capitalism has been a success. The vision of the founding fathers of the American republic, the profound historic vision of Alexander Hamilton – a man so misunderstood by contemporary liberals – has been realized, more than realized. But it is a commonplace to say that man wills, and that what he gets is not an exact realization of what he willed. Again, we can say, gray is theory, but green is the tree of life, and that in history, there is often a noxious poison in some of the rich greenness.
Alexander Hamilton – lest some of our contemporary business men, newspaper owners, practical men and others forget – was a highly developed theoretical man. No man who is devoid of theoretical grasp can have a profound political vision of the future. The vision of Alexander Hamilton was that of the free – i.e., capitalist – development of an entire continent. No man of his time had a more profound vision of the American future. We say this now, however, with the future he visioned really behind us. The understandable gloom, despair, confusion, anxiety which we felt in immediate reaction to the perfection of the atomic bomb now incontrovertibly attests to this simple fact: the future of American capitalism, the realization of a great statesman – Hamilton – is behind us. This is the kernel of meaning in the commonly and currently discussed statement, “Modern man is obsolete.”
American capitalism has been a success, and the development of American capitalism has been one of the most important historical developments in the entire history of mankind. With the exception of events such as the Great French Revolution, and the Russian Revolutions of the century, no historical subject as much demands the most intense, the most serious, the most honest and through study as does that of the history of American capitalism. The rise of America, the development of American capitalism has permitted mankind to solve – for all times – some of the most important of all problems confronting man. The organization of production on a scale that can satisfy all of the major needs of mankind has been perfected in the United States. In passing, we might add in irony and bitterness, that in America, under capitalistic aegis, mankind has also solved the problem as to how he might destroy himself and the planet known as the earth when and if he wishes, and perhaps, even without wishing. The success of American capitalism, in the historic sense, shows us, in another focus, the same phenomenon of uneven and combined development. In passing, it might be here suggested that it can’t really be described as a fortuitous fact that so many social scientists, philosophers, cultural critics and others in America wrote continuous analyses and polemics based on the phenomenon called “cultural lag.” This cultural lag reveals the character of unevenness of development in America. The heights of cultural development in America are to be seen in technological improvement, in inventiveness, in the organization of means, methods and techniques of production, in scientific development – especially the practical application of scientific development.
At the same time, the development of what we call humane culture has lagged. This is evinced in literature, the most profound of the modern forms of humane culture. Alongside of French and Russian literature of the nineteenth century – in particular – the greater body of our own writing is relatively more shallow. At the same time, we see this same phenomenon evinced in the way that European – especially English – culture was for so long imitated, in the hostility that has been successively manifested for many generations against writers from the mid-west and the west who – regardless of all else – had what might loosely be called a native American flavor. In line with this fact, we can note the recurrent irony to be found in the fact that in the major political democracy in the world, there is such cultural and literary snobbery. Successively, writers from the plebeian heart of these United States have, generation after generation, run afoul of this snobbery. They have been treated with condescension, described as crude, as barbarians, as bad writers, as uneducated, as raw fellows; they have not been able to measure up to the pseudo culture of a sterile genteel tradition. Again and again, without one evidence of concern about the problems the American writer faces, about the relationship between his real environment and his style, about the obstacles he has faced and still faces, he has been arbitrarily measured against the background of European writers who grew out of a much deeper, much more sophisticated, much more profound culture. Critics – sometimes critics whose major trait is merely that of a holy cultural petulancy – have thrown the great cultural traditions of Western Europe into the face of the struggling American writer. This can be both snobbish and meaningless.
 
American Aesthetics Utilitarian
By and large, the culture of a society cannot really rise above its origin. By and large, there is, and there must always be, a most intimate relationship between culture and the society out of which it grows. By and large, negatively or positively, the culture, the literature of a society will be an imaginative trial of consciousness of man in that society. And American literature has been precisely this. Speaking most broadly, the theme of American literature has been the so-called American Way of Life. If we would express what is the real philosophy of the American Way of Life, our procedure should not be that of analyzing the statements – especially eulogistic, patriotic and ceremonial statements – which praise and contain laudatory descriptions of the American Way of Life. Rather, we should look at the quality of life, the aims, the wants, the actions, the things men do, and the values they want to realize among the different social classes that go to compose the population of these linked States. If this is done – and in passing works such as Middletown by the Lynds will give the verification of social science to my statement – it can be said that the philosophy of life in America to be deduced from the plane of action, of living, of struggle can be described as Benthamistic. It is often a rather primitive Benthamism. If one but cursorily looks at the phenomenon of commercial advertising, the character of advertising appeal, one can see that this is the fact. By and large, Americans live on the pleasure-pain principle that Bentham formulated, and they abide by a morality and an aesthetics of utilitarianism. This fact again introduces us into the subject of cultural lag. The criticism of American civilization, based on what we now call cultural lag, has been the most common one made by a variety of American critics, critics of different points of view. The way that this criticism has usually been phrased is that there is a contradiction between ideals and actions. Jane Addams said this; so did the late Herbert Croly. This is the burden of the writings of the younger Van Wyck Brooks. It is at the heart of the comments on America by John Dewey, and the writings on America of his distinguished colleague, the late George Herbert Mead. From a different standpoint, Waldo Frank and Lewis Mumford have said this also. The basis of Sinclair Lewis’ criticism of America in Babbitt – a criticism weakened by that undisciplined inclination of Mr. Lewis to confuse his own personal irritations with ideas – is, again, just this.
 
Commodity a Work of Art
Especially since the end of the First World War, one of the dominant motifs of American writing – both serious and “popular” or commercial – has been that of leisure. There are many more accounts in American fiction of the way Americans spend their leisure than there are of the way that Americans work. If we go back to the fiction of Henry James, we can note this. The Jamesian world is mainly one of people on vacations. One of the aspects of James, in fact, is that he introduced into world literature, the vacation attitude and the vacation consciousness, and related this to American attitudes. The sharpest, perhaps the bitterest, of modern American satirists is Ring Lardner. An analysis of his stories will patently reveal the same phenomenon. On the one hand, he writes stories of people trying to have a good time when they are not working; on the other hand, it is usually the case that when he describes a character at his or her occupation, that occupation is of the kind that relates to leisure, to the pleasure and the entertainment of others. Thus, he shows us a caddy at work; or he describes ball players, prize fighters, song writers and theatrical producers at their work. The major motif of the late F. Scott Fitzgerald was social disillusionment, that is, the disillusionments of people who enjoy much leisure, and who finally became bored with it. The characters of Hemingway are seen, mainly, in a tourist world. The occupations of his characters are of secondary importance: when he shows characters at work, we see prize fighters, newspaper men in foreign countries, waiters, bull fighters and so on.
Directly, or by implication, the motifs, and the actions of characters in a great preponderance of American fiction deal with aspects of the enjoyment of life, with what people do and what happens to them when they are on vacations and can spend money, or develop their awareness, with how they play cards, make love, go to parties, talk in social gatherings and so on. This can be generalized in the statement that a dominant theme or motif, then, of American fiction is that of leisure, and with this, that of how to use or how commodities of one kind or another are used. Some of this fiction is couched in the tones of glorification of the American Way of Life: other works of this kind are critical. The Hollywood hero, the hero of the plot short story, is almost always happy at the end, and involved in his happiness, in most instances, is the fact that he has gained access to the commodities he will need to enjoy the fruits of a Benthamistic paradise: often, the hero of serious and “realistic” fiction is unhappy, and he finds that commodities are not enough. Sinclair Lewis has criticized the low cultivation of Babbitts and Main Streets: he then later wrote a novel with the theme that a hotel was a work of art. Leaving aside literary criticism of this novel, it is suggestive of my point here: a commodity is a work of art.
 
Culture Superfluous
A common reaction to these aspects of the so-called American Way of Life has been that of using culture as a form of snobbery. We have already noted this in passing in our reference to how eastern critics have treated writers from other areas with such recurrent and usually predictable condescension. In fact, most American literary criticism reeks with snobbery, although it is often concealed behind democratic phrases. In the last analysis, this snobbery is based on a class idea of culture: culture as something which is the special prerequisite of people with (a) peculiarly sensitive capabilities of appreciation, or (b) the income to possess objects and the time to read books that others cannot possess or appreciate, or (c) a combination of these. A reason for this snobbery is that culture has never had the same meaning in America as it has in Europe. Building, exploiting a new continent, most Americans had little need of the culture that concerned Europeans.
If we go back to Mark Twain, we can note – for instance in The Adventures of Tom Sawyer – how he criticizes what went for culture in the immediate background of the frontier – romanticism revealed in the adventures of kings and dukes. Tom Sawyer concerns himself with this, and builds a fantasy life out of it. Or we can see a related indication of this in Booth Tarkington’s Penrod. The minister who is cultivated is also effeminate, and the ladies dote over tea and poets. The sissies among the boys like to read. Penrod, however, is the real boy, and his father is a man in a man’s world who (unlike the minister) smokes a cigar and has little use for poets and books. In Frank Morris’ The Pit, the artist, Corthell, is removed from the business of making money, and concerns himself with his impressions and art objects from Europe. When the Great Bull of the Pit, Mr. Jadwin, is too busy to pay attention to his wife, the artist reads her Browning and other poets. Snobbish conceptions of culture are related to the fact that those who were doing the work of exploiting the resources of the American continent, who were making money, who were gaining power, had, with rare exceptions, little need of culture. Often, they let their wives attend to this realm, and they sent their sons to eastern colleges where some of it could be imbibed. And the sons and daughter and wives could make the Grand Tour of Europe, look at Rome, at castles, at pictures and at medieval armor, and thereby, they could get culture, and the business man could buy a lot of this culture, and put it in his house. Men, with little more cultivation than that contained in the three R’s, could become millionaires, powers in the nation. Since there was little need for culture, it did not become important.
 
Realistic School
At the same time, optimism is an attitude related to the role of culture in capitalistic America. For decades, there was tremendous hope and optimism in America. Marching capitalism, after all, had an entire continent to develop and exploit. With this, there was opportunity. There was, in American class relationships, an extraordinary fluidity. New generations produced new financial kings and speculative barons. The sons of successive waves of immigrant rose on the social ladder. New lands, new jobs, new opportunities were open on all sides. The success legend was no myth. After all, the statement that a child born in a log cabin of a working man could be President of the United States was not a mere fiction: Abraham Lincoln was so born. Briefly, opportunity was open on the planes of business, and in the field of politics. The country once thronged with the so-called self-made man. Socially, life offered a more open universe in America than anywhere else in the world. When, under such circumstances, you could get a bird in your hand, what need was there to concern yourself with two of them in the bush?
The growth of the so-called realistic school of writers in America has charted the course of the change in the American dream, of the decline in the basis for this optimism and hope of success. As such, realism has been a means of counting the cost of American civilization. In Dreiser, the successful man is insatiable: he can win neither a sufficiency of power nor of love. In Sinclair Lewis, the Babbitt has no inner life. His life, and hence his character, is formed in terms of commodities that he owns, gadgets that he can put into his house, and in a religion of service. In Ring Lardner, the glamor of the sporting hero is shown to be inglorious when the man is looked at. The sons of the rich in F. Scott Fitzgerald became sad young men, and they don’t know what to do. Sad horns do not play forever. Concommitant with this, we note that other emphases tend to drop out of American writing. A major theme of writers like Henry James, of Stephen Crane in The Red Badge of Courage, of Harold Frederic in The Damnation of Theron Ware can be described as that of awareness. Rather than awareness, development, the realistic novels of the twentieth century usually deal with movement, geographical movement and social movement from class, and with this, the consequences of what happens either to those who have moved, geographically or socially or both, or with what happens to their children. Another emphasis that we find rather rarely in American fiction is that of friendship. It is striking to observe how little there is friendship (friendship such as that portrayed between Pierre and Andrey of War and Peace) in American fiction. One of the reasons why Clyde Griffiths, of An American Tragedy, ends as he does is because he has no friends. He has no one to talk to, no one whom he can really trust. The characters of American fiction are unduly competitive, or else, they possess the color of their milieu. In one way or another, many of them are strikingly aggressive. They are American individualists.
 
Describes Man in Commodity Culture
In this context, how strikingly can we see the difference between individualism in American literature, practically since the post-Civil War period, and individualism in Walt Whitman. Whitman, one of America’s first figures of world literary importance, was the poet par excellence of individualism. And yet in Whitman, individualism is social, friendly, comradely, inclusive, non-aggressive. Walt, alone with a blade grass, alone on the shores of the bay, wherever he goes, is surrounded with friends, with a feeling of friendship. No matter where he goes, he is not alone. The entire universe is an arena of love and friendship, love and friendship which are not tainted with the slightest sentimentality. Contrast this with the attitude of Mark Twain, another great American writer. In his last years, he looked at the “damned human race,” and he saw man, alone in a dreary waste of space. In this same contrast, let us consider the boasting of Walt Whitman, and the boasting of many characters in twentieth century American fiction. When old Walt boasted, he did so because he felt that he was like all other men. He boasted because he belonged to the great human family, a brotherhood of men who lived on the earth bravely and who joyously opened their senses to all of the possibilities of life: To him, living, life and death were adventurous. How different this is from the boasting of, say, Babbitt. Babbitt has a vanity of things, a vanity because he belongs, not to the human family, but to an organization of business men who are the best of good fellows, the like of which is practically non-existent anywhere else. They call each other by their first names as if it were a ritual they must perform because a resolution was passed requiring such a ritual. Many parallel illustrations also could be cited here, and these would only give added confirmation to my analysis.
Let me then repeat – American literature – regardless of precise literary evaluations of specific writers – has been a treatment of the American Way of Life. It has been an effort to explore, to reveal, to criticize, to eulogize, or to state the tragedies and disappointments of men and women living in the closest approach to paradise that capitalistic civilization can or will ever produce on this earth. As such, it is an account, however incomplete, of the story of how man tries to live in a commodity civilization. The notes of dissatisfaction, the notes of personal irritation, the tragedies so often told, all of these are related to this one central fact. For America has gradually been producing a culture of commodities. In this culture, the commodity itself tends to become a value superior to all other values. Serious American realism is, really, an account of what happens to men when the commodity is the real summum bonum.
Part II
 

 T. Farrell: The Problem of Public Sensibility (August 1946)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
The Problem of Public Sensibility
A Review of the Film The Open City
(August 1946)

From New International, Vol. XII No. 6, August 1946, pp. 183–188.
Copyright, August 1946, by James T. Farrell.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Viewing films such as the Italian production, The Open City
and the Swiss The Last Chance, one realizes how starved one
has become for a breath of life in the motion picture film. And this
stresses all the more clearly elements of the problem of public
sensibility at the present time. This problem is not purely
aesthetic: we will be far from exhausting its meaning if we conceive
it merely as a question of taste and of form. Public sensibility and
politics are being bound together in the modern world; in fact,
Hitler gave a programmatic character to this connection when he
discussed propaganda in Mein Kampf. He declared that the
masses are feminine; he meant that they react more on a feelingful
and a sensory basis than they do on an intellectual one. He attacked
the intelligentsia not as it might be attacked from the standpoint of
socialism for its tendencies merely to follow the leader, or for its
vacillations, and the political characterlessness that it so
frequently reveals: to the contrary, Hitler attacked the
intelligentsia for its progressive virtues, for its representation of
variety, disinterestedness, curiosity, reasonableness. One of the
progressive functions of the intelligentsia is that of helping to
lift the level of public sensibility. Clarity of thought, and a
rising level of public sensibility; are now essential in any effort
to oppose the propagandistic exploitation of the masses. In his
insistence on the “femininity” of the masses, and his attacks on
the intellectuals, Hitler was warranting his own practical ideas
about propaganda. These include the political use of art. The Hitler
technique of propaganda is familiar to us. Hitler said that a big lie
should be told. This big lie is then driven into the consciousness of
masses by a persistent and all-sided propagandistic effort. In order
to assure mass acceptance of the big lie; processes of thought must
be rendered rigid. Then the appeal to feeling; to sensations can be
made more effectively. The totalitarian propaganda film aims to help
achieve precisely such a kind of response. Fact and
propagandistically presented lies are, thereby, bound together with
an extraordinary cleverness – a cleverness which relies on sensory
appeal as one of the means which assist in introducing the big lie
into the consciousness of masses. This type of film utilizes music, a
commentator and other devices: it mixes up fact and myths: it
juxtaposes maps; correct statistics, newsreel clips of true scenes
with fictionalizations of a propagandistic order. It, thus, shows us
concretely what Hitler meant by his assertion that the masses are
“feminine.” Feeling is appealed to in order to help establish an
iron-bound and unquestioned conclusion. Frequently, this type of film
even politicalizes meaning by a relative de-politicalization of
content. [1]
 
Analysis of Content Essential
The film is one of the paramount instrumentalities of mass culture
in our time. The Nazis used it as one of their major propaganda
weapons. Today, the political utilization of the films has become a
contemporary commonplace. With this, the utilization of totalitarian
techniques in Hollywood has now really begun. [2]
In consequence, we cannot discuss the film merely in terms of pure
art. When thousands and millions of human beings all over the world
see current films, when these masses of people go to motion picture
theatres with more or less starved sensibilities, when as so often
happens films concretize the meagre conscious streams of reverie of
many human beings, when the film affords one of the most magical;
stirring, rousing and gripping types of experience which one can know
today in the whole field of public life – then we must try to take
account of the various types of influences and effects which a film
can exert. Furthermore, motion picture films are, with rare
exceptions such as Jean Cocteau’s The Blood of a Poet, not
important for the principal reason that they afford us with object of
aesthetic experience. For the majority, motion pictures are important
because of their surface content. The analysis of content is a
necessary part of a critical and artistic discussion of modern motion
pictures. When that content . directly or indirectly involves
politics, political events and tendencies of immediate world
significance, we must refer our analysis to historic events.
A realistically done film is a representation of life. We must
look to the type of life that is represented when we discuss such a
film. We demand that the artist have independence and sovereignty
over his material, and we struggle to retain for him the widest
possible freedom over that material. This struggle demands a
persistent polemical and critical attack on all of those who would
reduce the appreciation of art to the mere level of testing –
usually with rigid concepts – the ideological, the political, the
moral presuppositions or conclusions in a given work of art, and
then, on the basis of this test, and then, of deciding that art is
good or bad in accordance with the degree to which the ideological,
the political, the moral presuppositions and formal conclusions of
the artist agree or disagree with those of the critic. There is no
real contradiction between this position, and the necessity of
analyzing and evaluating content in a work of art, especially when
the content reveals a guiding political theme. When characters are
selected and developed, when details and events are dramatically
organized, and even tendentiously conceived, in terms of a content,
then, that content is not an irrelevant feature of the given work of
art in which this is the case: this is especially so when it is
likely that the content of a given work of art will have a definite
and immediate political influence. Thus, it is proper, without any
violation of our premises concerning the freedom of art, to analyze
and to warn people concerning this influence. For motion pictures,
films are now being used to form a definite kind and level of public
sensibility: the film is becoming a major political weapon.
One of principal orientative attitudes which movie art is
insidiously inculcating into the movie audience is that which
indirectly – sometimes even directly – establishes the moral –
Follow The Leader! We can, in a general sense, say that this
type of movie art is bureaucratic, and that it is an art of the
glorification of the functionary.
These general remarks should help us in an effort to deal with
various current films, including the Italian one now being shown in
New York City, The Open City.
 
II
Art Humanizes Knowledge
I have already mentioned the starved feeling one has for motion
pictures which give us more than does the usual Hollywood films.
Additionally we often also feel starved for more knowledge of what
has gone on during recent years, what have been the human meanings of
the terrible events of war. What has it done to people? What has life
been like all over the world during recent years? What has personal
life been like during the time that the fascist regimes of Italy and
Germany held unchallenged power. What has the brutality, the
bestiality of fascism done to human beings? Our knowledge of modern
life in other countries is largely formal and generalized: it is
mainly political, economic, sociological, journalistic. It is
insufficiently human and immediate in the sense that our knowledge of
life in America is human and immediate. And if we regard art from the
standpoint of what it does for us in increasing our knowledge of the
world, this function of humanizing our knowledge is one which it can
or should perform.
If art does this, it helps to increase our awareness of the human
aspect of life: it offers us images, representation of the quality of
life and the quality of men in different times and places. Today we
need most urgently to expand this price of awareness.
Again and again, when we see a Hollywood production, we know that
life is not at all like what it is being shown us in this film. The
human relationships embodied in the movement and sound before our
eyes are all false to what we know, and to what we feel. The love
story is adolescent, childish. In order to maintain any enthusiasm
for, any abiding interest in the film other than one based on
child-like, almost deliberate and wishful dreamy indulgence in
commonplace fantasy, we must somehow find a way of convincing
ourselves that the aims, the destiny, the feelings of the hero and
the heroine have some real importance, some real significance,
socially, or emotionally and personally. For instance, we must find
some way of convincing or deceiving ourselves into believing that the
all-encompassing need for some physically beautiful, characterless
actress to become recognized and to sing boring, songs in a large and
gilded cabaret, is an all-important human end, an end which we wish
to see her attain. We must ourselves supply what the film
lacks-internal conviction. The greater majority of Hollywood films
feature the young attractive and childish hero and heroine. They are
mainly attractive because of their physical traits, and, in the case
of the women, their clothes, and their makeup. Thanks to the roles
they play and their very appearance, they become an implicit measure
of types. Types differing from them are correspondingly reduced in
human significance. Usually a deviation from the norms of youth,
health and physical attractiveness must be of secondary significance
in these films. Types with a certain kind of deviation are laughed
at: the moron, the fat person, the unduly thin person, the ugly woman
and so on. Such falseness to life becomes all-sided in Hollywood. We
meet people in direct life much differently and we evaluate them
differently than we are allowed to in the film. In a direct, an
vividly immediate empirical, a way, the Hollywood film is creating a
new hierarchical standard of evaluations of human beings, of their
physiological and psychological traits and appearance. This is having
the result of deforming public sensibility. In recent years, the
sense of urgency which we feel concerning the problems of the world
has created many dichotomies between what we need in the way of art
and what we get. This need is more complicated and more subtle than
that expressed in the demand for films which are formally true to
life and history, which tell us what historic events and movements
are like. It involves the evaluation of traits of character, of face
and body; it involves setting, background, emotional and sensory
response to objects, to fields of vision. The element of control, of
emphasis in setting, in the types of rooms and homes in so many
Hollywood films, even this leaves us starved.
 
The European Film
In reaction against such films, we welcome European films where
the actors and actresses are less standardized, less typed. We react
with enthusiasm when we see that setting is placed in closer
relationship to character so that a home looks more like a home than
it so often does in an American film. The trappings of vulgar glamour
are absent from the best of European films. In this sense, one feels
a rush of joy in seeing certain European films because one
immediately recognizes that the appearance of the players is more an
appearance that makes them seem like human beings. One gains a sense
of humanity sitting in a theatre and seeing The Last Chance
or, in viewing certain scenes, at least, in The Open City.
This fact, plus the additional one that this latter film is presented
as an artistic representation of what life was like in Rome just
prior to its capture by the Allied forces, endows the latter film
with an added interest. History, recent history, our thirst for human
knowledge, human awareness, vivid images of humanity engulfed in the
floods of recent history – this all cooperates with the makers of
The Open City. These considerations, then, only make more
necessary the need for clear and careful analysis of such a film.
 
III
The Open City
The Open City presents a story of Rome in the grip of the
Gestapo. Through a minor character – an Austrian deserter – we
come to understand that the Americans are at Cassino. Due to the fact
that we see a building ruined by bombing, we know that Mussolini has
fallen. The hero is an engineer named Manfredi: he is a member of The
National Committee of Liberation, and he fought in Spain with the
“Reds”: he was also an experienced member of the underground
prior to the Spanish revolution and Civil War: and he is a member of
the Communist Party. Early in the film, he escapes over a roof just
as the police come to arrest him. He has been “named,” and the
Gestapo and the Italian police are searching for him. He has had a
love affair with an actress, Marina, a girl who was once poor, but
who, through the stage and love affairs, has managed to reach a
higher level of comfort. He has, we learn, met her during a raid. She
and he didn’t go to the shelters. But he is going to break it off
with her. Fleeing from the Gestapo, he goes to the home of Francesco,
in a working class district. Francesco is a printer. He is going to
marry Pina. She is a widow, mother of a boy who is around ten.
Francesco and Pina have had a love affair which began two years
before the time of the film and Pina is pregnant. Also early in the
film, there is a shot of a raid on a bakery, and through subsequent
dialogue, it is revealed that Pina has inspired this raid. Francesco
is a worker member of the Liberation movement: he works in the
underground printing plant where Liberation papers, or at least, a
paper is printed. Francesco, the worker, is distinguished from
Manfredi, the member of the Committee of National Liberation. The
latter is a professional Communist, but came to have assumed the
title of engineer. There is one scene where the two lovers, Francesco
and Pina sit in the hall – there is no place for privacy for the
two lovers in their homes because they live in crowded quarters –
and they talk of the future. Pina is distressed, unsure of the
future. Francesco tells her that he is not a cultured man, like
Manfredi, and that he cannot clearly explain what he means as could
the latter, but that he believes in a better world, that she must
also believe and that they must do this for their children.
Because he is a hunted man, it is dangerous for Manfredi to carry
necessary money to the armed partisans. Manfredi sends for the local
priest, Don Pietro. The latter, a Partisan priest, delivers one
million lira, printed into books. (In passing, it is interesting to
note that in the film itself, no information is given to us as to why
this much money is needed, or as to where it came from.) The
Liberation movement is not shown conveniently as a strong one, and we
see only passing glimpses of it in action. Its political character
must be assumed since it is not concretely and clinchingly
represented. One cannot avoid the question: a movement which can get
a million lira should be strong, stronger publicly than this one is.
To continue: Francesco is a worker Communist, but yet after years of
fascism, during which he has come to hold to revolutionary
principles, he cannot explain to his beloved what he and she must
really fight for. He isn’t cultured enough for that. This is all
the more glaring when one realizes that he is a printer, that he
reads and works on the underground press. He even brings the latest
issue of the paper to Manfredi and announces that twelve thousand
copies were run off. Francesco and Pina are going to be married in
the Church. She believes in God, although at the same time, she
appears in the film as the working class and Communist woman, one who
has inspired a food raid on a bakery. Besides citing her belief in
God as a reason for being married in the Church, she asks Manfredi if
it is not better to be married by a Partisan priest than by Fascist
municipal authorities. The latter in a fraction of a second, agrees
with her.
The Gestapo has a dragnet plan for the capture of the enemies of
the fascists. They know that Manfredi, the hunted, is in the
neighborhood where Francesco lives. On the day of the intended
weeding, they put their plan into operation in this district.
Manfredi and Francesco flee out of a window. While all who live in
the huge building the being lined up in the courtyard, they are
captured. Pina breaks through the soldiery, and chases after the van
in which her Francesco is being carried away, along with all of the
other men whom the Gestapo have rounded up. And she is shot down,
murdered in the street. The auto vans carrying the prisoners are
attacked by the Partisans, and Francesco and Manfredi escape. They go
to the rather luxurious apartment of Marina. There, Manfredi makes it
clear to her that he is breaking off their affair. He tells her that
love holds people together, makes human beings live more fully. But
this is the love of men and women, husbands and wives, parents for
children, not the sordid love she practices with fascists, Germans
and others in order to have better clothes, better food, a career, a
better home than the one she would have had. She knew Pina as a girl:
Pina’s sister, a young actress, who wants to escape from working
class poverty, has even come to live with her, and during this scene,
she is drunk. Marina tells Manfredi that if she had stayed in her
class, she would have married a trolley car conductor, and would now
be raising children. Manfredi and Francesco discuss plans. Manfredi,
through the offices of Don Pietro, could have gone into hiding in a
monastery. He has not done so in order to be active in the work of
the National Committee of Liberation, which we do not see in the
film. But now, he decides to go into hiding. On the morning after
this evening at Marina’s house, they go to Don Pietro, procure
false papers and along with an Austrian deserter, are being, taken by
the priest to a monastic hiding place. But Marina has turned them in
and they are caught on the street by the Gestapo. At first, the Chief
of the Gestapo offers to make a deal with Manfredi. If the latter
will give information, the Gestapo promises the Communist Party
freedom in Rome. The Gestapo Chief also tries to persuade Manfredi,
by pointing out that Italian Monarchists are not reliable allies.
Unlike Molotov from 1939 to June 1941, Manfredi does not think that
fascism is merely a matter of taste. He won’t talk. He is tortured.
He still won’t talk. Don Pietro is appealed to, but he refuses to
intervene, and sitting in the office, looking through the opened door
of the torture room, he sees Manfredi tortured to death. Marina is at
headquarters during these scenes. She is given an expensive coat as a
reward for informing, and she is assured that all that will happen to
Manfredi is that he’ll be questioned and released in a couple of
days. But she is tense and anxious, and is given drinks. After
Manfredi has been brutally tortured to death, she comes into the
office of the Chief with a drunken German officer named Captain
Hartmann. (He was in the First World War, and he is cracking, because
he sees no future, and thinks that the Germans are making themselves
hated all over Europe and leaving behind them a trail of corpses.)
Marina faints as she sees Manfredi dead. The coat is taken off of her
stricken form. It will be useful the next time.
 
Hierarchical Concept of Characters
Certain other features of the film also need be mentioned here.
The Partisan priest is one of the most attractive characters. He asks
God to curse the Gestapo Chief after the latter has had Manfredi
tortured to death: then, he prays to God for forgiveness. He is kind
to the little boys: he is resourceful in outwitting the police and
the Gestapo. He shows a certain leniency towards sinners, for
instance, when he walks along a street – carrying money to the
Partisans – and hears Pina’s confession. That she has sinned by
having sexual relationships with Francesco out of wedlock – that is
human. We all don’t do what we should. Even he. He is a good
priest, human and understanding, and is a good patriot, a hero: he
dies before a firing squad. The Gestapo Chief points out to him that
the Communist Manfredi is an aethestic foe of religion. But still Don
Pietro will not change sides. And he and Manfredi together represent
the leading elements in the Liberation. This is done by tendentious
selection, by omissions, and by bringing their personal images
forward in the action.
And let us note the treatment of children here. There is a child
leader, Romoletto. He is, like Manfredi, a character with little
temperament. Also, like the adult leader, Romoletto has few important
connections of a personal character. He is not beaten up by parents
when the children come home late, and apparently he has no parents,
and lives alone on the roof. After a bombing raid, he addresses the
children like a leader talking to his followers, and he thanks them,
saying that he is proud of them. He appears in the film only a few
times, and for a few seconds in each appearance. Pina’s son is the
child equivalent of Francesco.
He is the main child character. Early in the film, the other boys
are shown playing soccer with the priest as referee. But Pina’s son
is not in the game. Rather, he is sent with the important message for
the priest to come and see Manfredi. He stands out from the other
children just as Francesco stands out from the other workers.
Manfredi is set apart, as is Romoletto, in a more important but
parallel manner. The same parallel is seen concerning Francesco and
Pina’s son. As we have seen, Francesco tells Pina that Manfredi can
tell what the fight for a better world means. Manfredi dies at the
end. The priest is executed. The last shot shows the children walking
off, their backs to the camera. For their parents there is only
suffering and death and struggle. This suffering, this death, their
struggle is necessary to make a better world for children. But they
have their leader, the little son of the murdered Pina.
Liberation, the struggle for this better world is organized,
hierarchically represented in the terms of human relationships. Here
is a world of leaders and led, just as is the brutal world of the
Nazis one of leaders [and] of led. It is striking that the dialogue
between the Gestapo Chief and Manfredi, victor and victim, is also
one between equals. They can understand each other. Manfredi does not
oppose ideals to the Gestapo Chief as much as he does loyalty to his
own movement. He won’t make a deal. The Gestapo Chief tries
flattery, and indicates clearly that he and Manfredi understand one
another. They are bitter enemies in a struggle for power, but each is
removed from the masses: each lives and thinks on the plane of
leadership. This hierarchical structure of human relationships, then,
is embodied in the picture in the very characterizations and in the
relationships between characters and it is stressed in small details.
The priest goes to the underground printing plant. He is introduced
to the Director. This title is used, rather than the word Comrade.
The Director is set off from the workers in the printing plant, and
this fact is established by his little office in a closed off space.
He takes the priest into his office, just like any other executive.
 
The “New” Communist Woman
Pina is the most spontaneous character in The Open City.
She is more free emotionally than the other major characters. But her
freedom and spontaneity is revealed only in her domestic and purely
feminine role. In the first scenes, she appears to us as very
charming. Her charm and appeal – she is dressed in character, and
is lovely – in itself attracts us more genuinely than the Hollywood
star actress can or usually does. Pina is natural, temperamental. She
loses her temper with her little boy. She loves genuinely and with a
spirit of self-sacrifice. She has suffered, and is a widow. She is
pregnant. She feels guilty and needs to go to confession. She has a
moment of doubt about the future, and Francesco assures her, sitting
on the hall steps. Manfredi dies in stoical heroism: Don Pietro dies
with dignity, declaring to the priest who prays at the end as he
walks to be shot that it is not so difficult to die well, for the
greater difficulty is found in trying to live well. But when Pina is
murdered, she is carried away by frantic emotion, by love and fear.
Her emotion gives her strength and courage to break past soldiers
with guns, and to run down the street after the truck full of
prisoners. As we learn through the dialogue, she inspired a food
riot. But then, she relapses to human duties, to those of mother and
beloved woman. The actions given to her by the scenarist establish
her as the “new” Communist woman. And such, she is differentiated
from man. She is hierarchized in this subtle fashion.
The inhabitants of the building where she lives, serve as a human
background. We see them in most intimate and personal terms when they
are engaged in an argument in a crowded home, concerning children and
the difficulties of crowded family life. This constitutes a humorous
touch, and elicits laughter from the audience. Only in a humorously
humanizing role do they come forward. This fact further reveals the
hierarchization within the picture. And contrasted with them, and
with Pina, we see the actress Marina. As we have noted, she has
escaped from such a life by selling her body as a commodity. But she
has found love through a chance meeting with Manfredi. She would,
through her love, cause him to forsake the people. She has lost her
humanity by breaking from her past. She compares unfavorably with
Pina. She is more nervous. She needs pills and cigarettes and
clothes. She has no one to love, no one to live for. Rejected by her
lover, she betrays him for a fur coat, and she does not even get
this. She is last seen stretched out on the floor of the Gestapo
Chief’s office, unconscious. The freer woman sexually, the woman
with artistic gifts, is not as happy as the mother who is loved by
the workingman. For the latter, though the goods of life are love and
struggle, not a change from her present position in the world to one
of more freedom. If you have more of the comforts of life, as does
this actress, you are not happy. You can live without these, and you
can have the emotional goods of life. And you have leaders who know
how they can create a better world for your children.
 
Stalinist Functionary – Superman
This hierarchization is further stressed in the very
characterization of Manfredi. He is nearly always calm. Only when he
is subjected to unbearable tortures in the torture room, does he
scream out. But hunted by the Gestapo, living in danger, he never
loses his composure. He has far less temperament than Pina. Unlike
the priest, he is faced with no inner contradictions. He has made a
clear decision to break off his love affair with the actress – an
alien element. He speaks clearly to her as to why he breaks it off.
He suffers no strain in making other decisions. When he sees the
necessity of going into hiding, he makes this decision with
promptness. At the same time he is attentive to others. Francesco is
shaken after his beloved Pina is murdered at Marina’s apartment,
and he needs aspirin. Manfredi perceives that, and also that he needs
sleep. He gives Francesco the couch on which to sleep: he takes the
chair. He is, at the same time, modest and unassuming. He points out
that he is no hero, but that others have died before him, without
talking, and he hopes that he may measure up to them. His milieu is
one of danger. It has been this for years. But danger has left no
strains on his personality. In brief, he is the functionary, who has
courage. He takes risks, willingly, but he is not foolhardy: the
Hollywood hero is always foolhardy, determined to win by sheer
bravery, physical power, and shrewdness against odds, and his actions
are usually stupid and preposterous. The movie audience is used to
such heroes, and this fact, for an American audience, endows Manfredi
the more with a human attractiveness. His stoicism is magnificent. As
we learn, his love affair began during a raid: he found this girl who
was, like him, unafraid, and they both remained where they were
instead of going to a shelter where there was more protection. He
talks to others mainly about their problems, or about practical
details, not about ideas. He says very little about himself. In this
characterization then, we see a most subtle tendentiousness: the
function of this tendentiousness is that of further embodying this
new hierarchization. We have, in Manfredi, the new Stalinist functionary.
 
Myth of CP Role
The Open City depicts the new Stalinist myth concerning the
role of the Communist parties. We have been familiarized with this
myth in successive revolutionary situations ever since the Chinese
revolution. On the political level this myth conceals the
programmatic policies of the Stalinists: on the personal level, it
brings forth the Stalinist heroes. In this movie, the hero and leader
stands in front, and the politics are only passingly indicated. The
only political party mentioned in the film is the Communist Party,
although we know that in the Badoglio period of recent Italian
history, there were six parties. The Catholic appears in the role of
a priest, not a Catholic political leader. At one point in the film,
the Gestapo Chief is at his desk, looking at the latest editions of
the underground press. There are a number of these papers with
different names: but yet only one left political tendency is
positively named, the Communist. In effect, the Communist Party is
almost the only party. Another tendency, monarchism, is referred to,
however, as an unreliable ally for a Communist. But the Communist
Party is so significant that the Gestapo can propose a deal with its
leader, guaranteeing it freedom in Rome. As yet, we need to gain much
more data on what happened in Italy just prior to and immediately
after the fall of Mussolini. But we know enough to be certain that
there was a higher and more tense political atmosphere. Prior to
Mussolini’s fall, there were tremendous strikes in the North: in
Rome, Mussolini had no sooner fallen than the underground papers were
out, and political parties with their leadership came into the open.
Such facts as these predicate both a different political atmosphere
and a different level of political consciousness in the masses of
Rome than that concretized in this film. In brief, the movie is made
to rewrite history in myth.
Art is given a practical political function. This function is not
performed by a simple and obtuse didactic emphasis, but rather with
the aid of tendentious characterization, tendentious organization of
plot, a tendentiousness in details. This tendentiousness serves,
further, the purpose of distorting and concealing the politics of a
political movie: a political movie, furthermore, which was made in
Italy in a time of tense and centrally important political crisis.
Formally, the film embodies the idea of national unity: more
intimately, it establishes the leadership principle. The leader has,
further, a definable social character. He is a cultured man, an
engineer. He is the new intelligentsia, or the intelligentsia in its
new role. Stalin, we know, has defined the intelligentsia of the
Soviet Union as “a layer between classes.” Hitler attacked and
destroyed the old liberal intelligentsia, and put the intellectuals
to work under his service. They were the carrier of propaganda, the
rigidifiers of the public consciousness. From the standpoint of
Stalinism, we have here something that is parallel. Manfredi is in,
as it were, the layer between classes. He has contacts of a wider
variety than Francesco or Pina: he can have a love affair with an
actress; he can meet her in a restaurant or cafe, obviously one which
is not patronized by workers. His province is ideas: his function in
relationship to the masses is that of serving as an example, of
listening to their talk of their problems, of making decisions, of
giving the orders and blue printing the plans for the better world
that the children will know. He has his parallel in the child who,
even in boyhood, is being trained in life as the new leader, and as
such, the next generation of men who serve as the layer between classes.
 
Public Sensibility vs. Totalitarian Art
This is the content of the film: this is its significance, its
“message.” The condition of public sensibility in America
suggests that this message will be readily accepted by many serious
persons. We have noted some of the reasons for this. The political
and the artistic character of this film come together, as it were,
and with this linkage of art and politics, the condition of public
sensibility can be seen to be a crucial problem. I have emphasized
the point that Francesco tells Pina that he is not cultured and
cannot, like Manfredi, tell her what the better world is really to be
like. Manfredi has the ideas and the programme in his head. These he
doesn’t state in the film. The audience is left in the same state
as Francesco and Pina concerning the aims and ideals of this terrible
struggle that is going on. A confused intellectual condition in the
public is necessary fur this picture to achieve its effects. This
intellectual confusion, in itself, smothers aesthetic sensibility,
reduces it. Such being the case, the audience is likely to be less
demanding. It is likely to miss this crucial flaw, both political and
artistically, in the film. Just as the working people must rely on
their leaders, so must the audience trust to faith. The picture is
subtly ideologically without a statement of its ideology, a
presentation of it in the film. In this sense, it doesn’t carry its
own full power of inner compulsion. It relies on historic events in
the terms of their presentation and interpretation from the
standpoint of an all-class, Popular-Front, National-Liberation
conception of fascism. Both inside of the film, and in the world of
History, we have the bestial Nazis, hated by millions on millions all
over the world. Hatred of the Nazis must help the makers of this film
to achieve their effects. Since the Nazis are bestial, then
opposition to them is, in itself, a sufficient motivation. The
anti-fascist front opposes them. But in the picture, this is turned
into the Stalinist opposition. It is in this way that history is
relied on to give to the film the compulsion and conviction which it
does not fully carry within itself. The artistic flaw of The Open
City serves as the means of establishing its real ideology, if
the conception of trusting and following the leader be considered an ideology.
If you add to a political and intellectual confusion, a low and a
relatively starved aesthetic and public sensibility, then you can
grasp more clearly the special nature and significance of this film.
When public sensibility is sufficiently low, divert and uncritical
emotional reactions dominate the response of the audience. The person
sitting in the audience reacts favorably to heroism, and unfavorably
to brutality, cruelty, injustice. Besides the direct presentation of
these contrasts, the hero is anti-fascist: the brutes are Nazis. The
anti-fascist hero wins the favor of the audience. And the leadership
conception is thereby stamped into the mind of the audience.
This analysis should help to demonstrate, not only the importance
of serious and clear political analysis: it should also suggest
something of the problem of art, of the questions of sensibility in
our own age. With mass distribution or circulation of art, the
problem of lifting mass sensibilities becomes paramount. This need
was implied in the very early writings of Marxism. Engels stated in
Ludwig Feuerbach that the German working class was the heir of German
classical philosophy. The socialist conception of culture is a
conception of a human culture, based on the highest possible
standards. But this is not, any longer, a problem of theoretically
posting the conception of a human culture in the future. This has now
become a practical problem demanding the most serious consideration
and attention here and now. Aesthetic sensibility, in our time, .will
help to provide one more barrier to the subtle appeal embodied in
totalitarian art. For this art plays on the senses, the feelings. It
divorces ideas and feelings, and rigidifies the former: it then uses
all of the wealth of modern technical imaginativeness to attract the
feelings. The Hitler technique of propaganda has entered the field of
world art. The major art in which that technique is being utilized is
the movies. The Open City is one of the most subtle, clever,
appealing illustrations of just this fact.

Footnotes
1. For an analysis of the Nazi
technique, cf. Propaganda and the Nazi Film, S. Kracauv, New York 1943.
2. Cf. the article, Mission to
Moscow, by Meyer Schapiro, Partisan Review, May–June
1943, and my article, More on Hollywood, in The Lengue of
Frightened Philistines, New York 1945.
 




Martin Eden
by Jack London
Penguin Books reprint, New York, 1946, 346 pp. 25 cents
One of the most pronounced traits of Jack London was his vigor, his energy, his sheer love of life. He regarded realism as a way of writing which permits a writer to reveal this love of living. And this trait of his is significantly embodied in his novel, Martin Eden.
As is commonly known, this novel has an autobiographical basis. It is the story of a young man of the working class who suddenly discovers the world of ideas and the world of art and poetry. As London has observed, Martin Eden’s mind had long lain fallow, and because of this, Martin was all the more responsive, the more excited, the more eager to learn. The novel deals with Martin Eden’s struggle to learn, and to write, and, at the same time, with his love for a bourgeois girl, Ruth Morse. As such, it involves class relationships presented on the plane of personal experiences, and bound up with a story of love.
 
Social-Darwinist Theory
London was influenced by Herbert Spencer, by Nietzsche, and by Marx. His novels are one of the reflections of the current of thought, known as Social Darwinism, which exerted such a pervasive influence in America in the latter part of the nineteenth century, and in the earlier part of this century. Martin Eden can be described as a novel of Social Darwinism. The hero, Martin, is subjected to a process of social adaptation and struggle. Motivated by his love for a girl, and his eagerness to learn and to write, he is successively exposed to disappointments, frustrations, poverty. Not only must he learn how to write, but he must even learn the simple rules of etiquette and manners.
When he first enters the bourgeois home of the Morse family, he does not know how to walk in a comfortable room, nor how to use a knife and fork. The problem of survival and with that, the problem of adaptation, are posed for him on the social plane. Martin is an eager, powerful and honest giant of a youth, bursting with health and vigor. Temperamentally and physically, he is admirably suited to survive. His struggle to survive; his disillusionment in love which is a consequence of the bourgeois values of his sweetheart; his experiences in trying to write for bourgeois magazines—all results in his developing a profound melancholia.
Success comes too late to be meaningful. He becomes a famous writer overnight, but he is treated like a matinee idol, and looking down on all of this from the standpoint of his adopted attitude of the Nietzschean Superman, he rejects it. In the end, he quotes Swinburne, and commits suicide.
 
London’s Dual Insights
The insights of London in Martin Eden are dual in character. On the one hand, there are sound and sharply observed insights into the social aspects of class relationships and class differentiations: on the other hand, there are insights which are bound up with Nietzschean and Social Darwinian attitudinizations. Martin Eden’s melancholia has the character of being derived too much from this second type of insight. In this way the element of attitudinization plays too strong a role in the-motivation of his suicide. It is not a necessary suicide, and in this sense, is not deeply tragic.
However, there are many parts of this novel which still have a suggestively contemporary aspect. The problems of Martin as an aspiring writer are, at the same time, the problems of any eager and ambitious youth of the working class who wants to learn, to grow in his own inner life. And if seen from such a standpoint, it should become clear that Martin Eden is a work containing truly prophetic insights. Just as London revealed such prophetic grasp into the mechanisms of capitalism in his novel, The Iron Heel; here he revealed parallel insights into the nature of bourgeois society in terms of social relationships. Martin Eden will more than stand comparison with many contemporary novels. It is one of important works of twentieth century American fiction.
 







On November 11, 1946, Labor Action featured an article by Albert Gates which dealt with the James M. Cain plan for the. establishment of an American Authors Authority. The plan, envisaging the control of authors’ copyrights by destroying the power of book publishers, Hollywood and the radio chains, was subjected to criticism because of its totalitarian, bureaucratic and Stalinist character. Once the plan was made public, followed by a campaign to force its acceptance by all the Author’s organizations, a struggle broke out among these bodies and their individual adherents. One of the most active opponents of the plan is James T. Farrell, noted novelist, literary critic, and socialist. Farrell’s letter to Elmer Rice, who subsequently also came to oppose the Cain plan, is printed because of its intrinsic importance in the fight against Stalinist totalitarianism which is the most powerful force at work in favor of the Cain plan. It subjects the Cain plan to devastating analysis and criticism.



*
Oct. 3, 1946, N.Y. City.
Mr. Elmer Rice, President
The Authors League of America
Authors Guild
6 East 33rd Street
New York City
Dear Mr. Rice:
Inasmuch as a committee is now presumably studying the James M. Cain proposal for the creation of an A.A.A. I take the liberty of addressing a second letter to you. I have again read the Cain proposal, and the arguments favoring it in The Screen Writer for July, and I have tested my views by discussing them with a number of persons, with writers and non-writers. I wish again most urgently to propose that this plan be rejected both in its original form, and in any modified version of it which may be suggested.
I have learned that many confusions concerning this plan exist in the public mind. A considerable number of persons have been fooled into thinking that the issue involved in this proposal is one in which the forces of progress are lined up against the forces of reaction. The plan is considered to be a liberal plan advanced by pro-Roosevelt writers, and opposed by anti-Roosevelt writers. The most gross version of this false view is to be found in the pages of The Daily Worker and New Masses. In these organs, all opponents of the plan are lumped together as, in effect, fascists, members of a fascist literary front. Also, the impression has been created that I am a member of the American Writers Association, both in the pages of these organs and elsewhere. Thus, for purposes of information, I stress the fact that my opposition to this plan is independent, and that I am a member of The Authors League in good standing.
After I sent my letter of September 14th to you, you sent me a telegram in reply in which you assured me that the Council of the Authors League would never permit the passage of any measure “that would prejudice” the freedom of writers. However, I cannot accept your assurance. For in the same telegram, you also stated to me:
“The unfortunate injection of political and fractional issues into the discussion has merely played into the hands of the powerful groups who would like nothing better than to see dissension within the ranks of the Authors League.”
 
“Fractionalism”: False Issue
Your statement here is, in itself, political; from it, one could only imply that I am one of those who have been “guilty” of what you would call “fractionalism.” Your statement further makes it clear that you see some of the issues involved as one demanding unity among authors. This is false. The question of dissension is not at all significant in this matter. And the fact that you made such a statement has left me with anything but assurance concerning what will happen in the study which the committee is now presumably making.
I have learned that many persons have been fooled and misled into seeing the Cain proposal falsely as one which concerns liberal and reactionary politics. The reason for this, of course, does not lie with you, nor with the Authors League. However, the statement of yours which I have quoted causes me to fear that you, also, may have allowed yourself to be fooled. I hope that my suspicion is unwarranted. But then, it is based on your own words.
In my letter, I have charged that this proposal is bureaucratic. Others have made a similar charge. I have learned that some members of the public dismiss this charge, and that they argue that the word “bureaucratic” is one used by reactionary newspapers, in their attacks on the New Deal and so on. It is unfortunate that such shoddy views should be current among literate people. I do hope that no members of the committee also sponsor such a view. I, personally, am highly fearful that this plan: would permit the literary Stalinists to gain powerful influence over American writers. The attacks of the Stalinist press on all opposition to this plan only strengthens my fear. However, I think that on its own merits, the plan is most dangerous, and the essence of this danger lies in the fact that it is a bureaucratic one.
 
Plan Has Bureaucratic Traits
The distinctive trait of a mind bureaucratically disposed is that of a lack of faith in ideas. In line with this lack of faith in ideas, there is a lack of confidence in democratic action. In my letter to you of September 14, I pointed out to you that the Cain proposal was based on the premise that authors are suckers. In the course of re-studying and reconsidering this document, I even found it more shocking than I had originally thought. James M. Cain spoke vaguely and generally of the rights of authors, but he was not at all clear as to what these rights are. Only in passing, did he speak of the right of free speech, and, in general, it is impossible to know what he really means by rights. The word is used most ambiguously in his document. But the document appeals to writers; to accept an AAA on the ground that their rights will be defended, and that they will make a lot of money. This defense of their rights will be carried on by “tough muggs.” And the proposal also tells us that these “tough muggs” will use all means in defending the rights of authors.
This strongly suggests that the plan was drawn up without any complete conviction in the justice of the authors’ case, without any conviction in the capacity of writers to learn and to defend themselves. Cain’s, faith, lies solely in. organization qua organization, and in the hard-boiled competence and aggressive spirit of these “tough muggs” who will use all means to attain Cain’s end. This proves most clearly that the plan comes from bureaucratically minded persons.
Also, please let me stress for the benefit of the committee, that the plan itself is bureaucratic. It proposes that each section of the Authors League will appoint one member of the board. These four appointed members will then appoint a chairman of the board, who, will, in turn, be the fifth board member. He will have the power to appoint a number of persons, representatives, lawyers and others. Also, the plan provides that a tax be imposed on all licensings of copyrights, and that this tax serve as the means of supporting the board.
In this way, Cain said that a “million dollar kitty” will be raised, and that this can be used by the board in advancing and defending the interests of authors. This board will be appointed. Its head will in turn be appointed by the four appointed board members. They will receive very good salaries, and presumably, they will get traveling expenses, etc. And they will have at their disposal, if the plan works out successfully, a sum of something like a million dollars. And they are instructed in the plan to use all means to advance the interests of authors. This is shocking. And it shows that one can state that in two ways the plan is bureaucratic. The arguments in its defense are bureaucratically minded arguments: structurally, the plan is bureaucratic. It ought to be clear that this plan will be best for those who want to become literary pie card artists.
 
Control of Copyrights
It is also pertinent to speak once again of the proposal that the board be put in control of all copyrights. This plan envisages only the copyrights of unhired writers. Copyrights belonging to business organizations which hire writers will not be placed under the control of this board. Thus, the plan would permit large organizations to hire writers, and to have them work for salary or wages, and thereby, they could escape the necessity of having to deal with the board. And we can be sure that if this plan is adopted, such a practice will become more widespread than it is now. Between the board and employment for large cultural enterprises, the independent writer will have no place to go. In my previous letter, I stated that this plan does not promise to help the poorer and more independent writers. And this possibility strongly suggests the validity of my argument. I might state that the fact that this provision was put into the plan shows how carelessly worked out it is.
One of Mr. Cain’s proposals – the one which plans to have the board legally defend the author – seems to impress him very much. And yet, it is also dangerous. In any legal proceedings involving copyrights, the board as the owner of these copyrights will come into court as a defendant. Mr. Cain thinks that this would be better than the present practice whereby the Authors League comes into court in an amicus curiae. I strongly doubt that Cain’s claim here is legally sound. However, there is a more important point to be mentioned in this context. This plan would deprive the author of any say in his own defense. He would have no choice concerning his own lawyers, and he would be likely to have no voice in the defense of his own case. And let us not forget that this is a board which is, also, to be instructed to use all means to defend the rights of authors, and that it is to be intentionally composed of “tough muggs.”
I know that I personally would consider it most onerous if I had to leave any legal offense of my rights in the hands of such a board, without any choice in the selection of lawyers, and without any real voice in the way that I was to be defended. This provision is particularly ominous for radical writers who maintain any independence of position.
 
Abetting of Stalinist Influence
It is a public fact that there are strong Stalinist influences in the Authors League. The Stalinists are now sufficiently powerful so as to have all important voice in the appointment of the board members. And these board members will have complete power of decision in the legal defense of all authors. Any writer who has opposed Stalinism can well be alarmed at this possibility. And even if such a possibility were not real, this feature of the proposal is most alarming on its merits. For let me repeat – it deprives the writer of the power of decisions in his own defense.
Furthermore, this feature of the plan exposes the bureaucratic minds that are behind the plan. We will both agree that actually or. potentially, the writer exerts a powerful influence in society. He often becomes an important voice. But what is the American public going to think of writers who are (on the one hand) important voices, and who are (on the other hand) considered so unintelligent, so incompetent, so pronounced a group of suckers that they cannot even trust themselves to select their own lawyers, and to make responsible decisions concerning their own fate.
I am surprised: that many members of the public have not as yet seen the proposal in this light. We have writers who are constantly speaking on every crucial problem of the day: we have the Hollywood screen -writers who are, day in and day out, agitating so that they may be held; in higher public respect because of their craft. And we have at the same time this proposal, with this feature central in it. And it plainly tells the public that these writers who are such voices, who speak on so many issues, who should be held in such high regard – these writers are not competent to defend themselves, not competent:to have a voice in their own defense.
Alongside of these allegedly important advantages which will accrue to the author if this plan is adopted, Cain offers the writer other and trivial ones. For instance, one of the functions of this board will be that of keeping records, and it will have the power and the funds with which to hire people who will keep such records. This will save the writer the trouble of keeping his own records, a not too complicated procedure. He will not have to worry lest he lose his contracts.
When I reread what Cain and the plan has to say of this advantage, I paused and wondered how it was that the newspapers failed to pick it up, and to treat it with the loud and raucous laughter which it deserves. Had this plan been carefully read by newspaper editors, they would have made the authors of America a laughing stock. And if the authors of America are as incompetent as Cain seems to think, they only deserve ridicule. Think of it. If we have five tough muggs to speak for us, Mr. Rice, we don’t have to worry about losing our contracts. We have no need to concern ourselves with the business details of writing. We don’t need to say yes or no on anything of consequence concerning our profession. It will all be done for us.
(To be continued next week)
 

 T. Farrell: American Literature Marches On - 2 (October 1946)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
American Literature Marches On
An Essay by James T. Farrell
(October 1946)

From New International, Vol. XII No. 8, October 1946, pp. 243–247.
Copyright October 1946, by James T. Farrell.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

We print below the second and concluding section of this
article. – Editors
II.
In the past, American businessmen as a whole did not have a great
interest in or need for culture. Today, this is changing. Culture has
become an important field of investment. Culture, and pseudo
substitutes for culture, have now been socially organized on the
basis of huge business concerns, even of near monopolies. I have
tried to deal with this subject elsewhere and here I merely state the
fact. [1] This growth of bigness, this commercialization of culture,
is evinced in the phenomena of Hollywood, of radio, of the mass
circulation magazines, and in the growth of the book business in
recent years, especially during the war. With hundreds of millions of
dollars now invested in the production of cultural works, and of
pseudo or substitute cultural works, there is a mass market for
culture. With this mass market, there is an insatiable need for
cultural production. By and large, this means that the businessman’s
starting point for the creation of cultural works is not human needs
and human problems as these are seen from the standpoint of the
individual artist; to the contrary, the starting point for the
creation of cultural works becomes more and more the need to satisfy
a market. The market need is gradually casting a bigger and ever
bigger shadow over cultural creation. Whereas the plenitude of
commodities, the wealth of America, influenced themes and motifs of
fiction in the past, largely in the indirect fashion of posing
problems of leisure and enjoyment, now the commodity in itself is
becoming the deciding factor. In its most crude form, we can see this
in the tie-up between songs and sales in radio advertising.
Similarly, we now have popular songs in which the title and theme are
related to a commodity. Thus, the song, Rum and Coca Cola.
In the Film Production Code of the Hollywood studios, the
determination that characters in films keep the Ten Commandments
according to certain prescriptions is not the only concern: the
section on foreign countries, prescribing that the rulers,
institutions and customs of foreign countries be not cast into
disrepute is directly a provision which will help to make movies a
more salable commodity abroad. Also, it is a commonly known fact that
in film studios, great difficulties are encountered in the working
out of stories because of the dangers that something in a film may be
considered damaging to the good will or products of commodity
producers, or to the respect with which various occupations and
professions demand that their practitioners be viewed. Not only is it
a fact that cultural goods must be sold on a mass market with all
that this implies concerning content and standardization, but
additionally, in the more popular forms of culture, commodity needs,
sales needs, and the like are directly intervening in the very
organization of stories. Factors of this kind have entered in an
important way into the very creation of cultural works in America.
Here, it is necessary at least to mention this in passing. But there
are also other factors which demand our consideration.
It is impossible to press an ideology or set of values upon an
artist and thereby to guarantee that he will produce serious if not
great art. It is impossible in our time to make him create in terms
of a fixed set of moral values imposed on him and to guarantee that
good results will be attained. It is irrelevant and often inept to
tell an artist that he must either affirm or reject life, praise or
deride the dignity of man and so on. One of the tensions in American
society grows out of a conflict of values, out of the difference
between life as it is lived, and life as it is imaged in conventional
images and stereotypes. No form of society in the past has shoved
aside traditions as ruthlessly as has been the case with capitalism.
This is especially the case in America. In contemporary culture, the
traditions of the past cannot be expected to be as important as the
need of making some added dollars out of cultural production. It is
commonly declared (sometimes in voices of lament, sometimes in voices
of pride) that America has been traditionless. The relative
traditionlessness of America has been one of the reasons why American
capitalism has been, historically; a success, in the sense that I
have described it as such. It had less baggage of the past to shed;
it was less fettered than was the case in Europe. The relative
absence of tradition has been a positive aid to American capitalism.
At the same time, it is one of the important factors involved in the
relative shallowness of American culture, when we regard culture in
terms of humane culture, rather than more broadly so as to include
scientific, technological and business culture. This fact also hel ps
to explain important aspects of the motifs, the problems, the types
of character and subject matters that have so often been introduced
into American writing.
A tension between past and present, expressed by a contrast of
bourgeois and feudal values, has not been felt concretely in life in
America by the broader sections of the American population. Such a
theme in fiction, then, was not a major one because it was not a
major problem to many Americans. American writers have – even if
not with sufficient aesthetic resources taken their own problems.
They will continue to do this, and the critics who make moral,
ideological and political demands on them will fail to have a genuine
and lasting influence. In the last analysis, the only way that one
can really make these kinds of demands really effective is by calling
on the policeman to enforce them. However, it is in the form of such
demands that critics are speaking to writers and readers in the
present time, just as they have in the recent past.
Rather than discuss relevant problems here in reference to these
critics, rather than polemize against them here, rather than try to
present substitute demands on the writer, it seems to me that a
generalized account of problems that are now faced and a further
exploration of the comparisons and contrasts with nineteenth century
Russian fiction will, perhaps, be more fruitful.
 
Some Historical Factors
Faith in progress is, in America, rapidly dissipating. Behind even
some of the propaganda for naïve conceptions of progress, there is seething inner doubt. In the realms
of commercial writing, where stories in praise of progress and the
American Way of Life are concocted in a pattern of simple and naïve
eulogies, this inner doubt is unmistakably intense. The glowing
language of Service and Progress, linked with the vulgar and
simple-minded economic notions of the 1920’s no longer can enlist
genuine and widespread belief. The proponents of rugged individualism
are and have been gradually shifting their lines of argument and
propaganda. Now and then, one or another of them breaks loose and
utters a shrill scream. But hardly anyone believes him. The business
men have had their day as the popularly conceived masters of destiny,
the popularly presented leaders of America, the models on the basis
of which youth will pattern itself. The presidents of the period when
the business man had his last day in the sunshine as a model and a
paragon are scarcely even mentioned. In memory, Warren Harding and
Calvin Coolidge are forgotten historical characters. The depression
has left its ineradicable impressions. The doubt, the disbelief in
the capacity of the business to guarantee and secure what had
frequently been called the promise of American life – this is a
psychological and political fact of contemporary America which cannot
be overlooked. It is evinced in the variations of emphasis in the
propaganda and advertising of some of the business concerns
themselves. One note, for instance, has been that of describing large
corporations as guardians, trustees of the people’s capital.
This fact has already been reflected in some of our so-called
popular culture. Just as some corporations have attempted to present
themselves in public in the light of trustees of the people’s
capital, the people’s resources, just as the late President
Roosevelt popularized the emphasis that the government is “your
government,” so has it been the case that a number of films, plays,
radio plays, novels and stories have been written in order to make a
corresponding emphasis, a populist emphasis which flatters “the
common people.” If we recall the origins of the phrase, “the
forgotten man,” we will remember that Sumner’s “forgotten man”
was really the man of the middle class. This forgotten man of the
middle class has again been equated with the people, as the
representative figure of the people, and as such, he has been
flattered. The chief protagonist of most of the late George Ade’s
fables in slang was this same man of the middle class. Ade’s humor
revolved around the attitudes, the smugness, the genuine human and
democratic (in the sense of social relationships) views of this man,
particularly in the face of the trusts and of social snobbery.
Penrod’s father was this same man, stereotyped. But now, this
reconstructed figure is placed in the context of a new set of
impressions and of a revised attitude concerning American life.
The late President Roosevelt told us in one of his speeches that
the faith of America is the faith of the common man. And this common
man, reflected in popular or mass-production art forms, embodies the
attitudes of the man of the middle class, regardless of his
particular occupation and class relationship in a particular work.
He, not the business man, is America. Just as a residue of attitudes
have been left after the collapse of the New Deal, so is there a
residue which can be described as the New Deal cultural climate. This
New Deal cultural climate is a consequence of the collapse of the
idea that the business man is legitimately, properly, and happily the
leading figure of America, the true master of destiny, the model of
conduct for youth, the man on whose. shoulders rests the
responsibility of securing the prosperity of the American Way of
Life. Fewer and fewer people believe this, and it is doubtful if many
of the business men themselves even believe it. Babbitt may still be
Babbitt, but he cannot sing the old tune.
The prosperity of the 1920’s ended in a collapse which
demonstrated conclusively that American economy could not – with
all of its productive capacity – sustain an internal market which
could guarantee what is called prosperity. The shadow of the next
depression hangs over the entire land. More and more, the probability
of another depression is taken as a fact, a fact that is often
accepted almost without debate. We can, in consequence of this, see
that the social conditions giving rise to the theme of the American
Dream, the American Way of Life in our culture are rapidly becoming
part of the past. Stage by stage, the implications, the premises, the
assertions which went to compose the ideology of the American Dream
have been chipped off. This is one of the facts behind the current
and widespread mood of insecurity. And, consequently, it becomes one
of the reasons which permit us to predict that gradually this theme
is bound to be abandoned in American writing.
 
Early Democratic Attitudes
Time was when the treatment of the American dream in writing was
less nakedly political than at present. Democracy was embodied, not
in praise of the system of political democracy that has been
established in America, but rather, in terms of the social attitudes
and social relationships of characters. In this sense, the stories of
George Ade, the cartoons of the late Tad Dorgan, are illustrative.
The cartoons of the boys in the backroom showed directly that they
held democratic and equalitarian attitudes toward one another. The
George Ade character was uncomfortable if he acted like a snob. But
now this democratic feeling has to be asserted in banal political
statements and speeches made by characters, and introduced into the
story itself. In other words, the characters don’t prove democratic
social relationships by actions in a direct fashion: the author tries
to prove that these exist by overt statements and speeches. At the
same time, it needs to be said that in the past there was a social
warrant, a social and economic prerequisite, which made plausible the
success story if this be looked at merely in its own terms and on the
plane of the immediate and direct action presented in these success
stories of the past. That is to say, many people, relatively, had the
chance of succeeding. Social and class relationships were less
stratified than they are now.
The reaction to the success story in more serious and sensitive
fiction, thus, was that of revealing patterns of destiny which
emphasized that success didn’t create inner harmony, contentment.
In other words, one emphasis was that of the consequences of success.
Serious writers registered the fact of negative consequences. The
weakness and superficiality of the success story was not to be found
so much in falseness, in the sense of emphasizing a possibility in
America that was not open to a fairly proportionate section of the
population: rather, its falseness lay in the shallowness of its
psychology, in its substitution of stereotype for character. Today,
the successful movie and fiction heroes often register a sense of
guilt. They are nostalgic for the days when they were not successful.
Further, a new success story is being written, the success story of
the character of glamor, the entertainer, the popular artist, the
jazz musician and so on. Willy nilly, new models of conduct, new
types for imitation, new heroes are being created in mass production
culture. These new heroes are entertainers, usually ones who come
from the people, not the classes. They are common or forgotten men.
This is evidence of the rust that has accumulated on the American
Dream of other years.
With such tendencies apparent at the present time, we can see that
whereas in the past, the American Way of Life was opening vistas to
the future, it is not seen, principally, as one which constitutes
a way of life that poses problems. Almost the entire nation,
practically, is aware that grave and crucial problems have developed
in America, and that these are, basically, economic. All of the
necessary conclusions, however, have not been drawn from this
awareness. Withal, there is now no mistaking the fact that a state of
awareness of serious problems exists. This awareness stamps the fact
that people of all classes are more conscious that something is
wrong, that problems exist. As a corollary of this, it is perceived
that these problems involve the future of everyone, the sense of the
self which people hold of themselves, the destiny which they envisage
for themselves and their children. In other words, the awareness of
problems of this order is one that is now intimately related with the
moods, the feelings, the intimate personal life, the psychology of
people. It is such awareness which is one of the preconditions for
changes in the content and themes of writing, and for changes and
variation in the tastes of readers. When problems remain purely
public and generalized, then the existence of these problems may have
little direct relationship to tastes in reading. But when they are
grasped directly, intimately by people, they will most likely begin
to be revealed, expressed, stated in literature. A problem that is
public in character must be translated into the terms whereby men and
women realize that its existence as a problem involves their very
sense of themselves. This, precisely, is what happened, and this,
precisely, is one of the ways in which we can see why the American
Dream is becoming a worn-out literary motif.
During the war, not only Americans, “but the entire human race,
was given an education,” the like of which has never been gained in
the past. Conclusions have not been drawn from this education, but
that does not negate the fact itself. The war beat and pressed itself
into the very organisms of almost everyone. The realization that
world problems exist is now one that has been translated into
problems of the self, problems of personal life. With the atom bomb,
it is no choice intelligent few who know that it is possible for
humanity, itself, to be annihilated. Despite arguments, promises,
propaganda to the contrary, Gallup Polls, shortly after the war,
indicated that over fifty per cent of the American population either
believed or else did not exclude as a definite possibility. the onset
of a Third World War, of one that will be worse than the Second. This
attests to the same fact that we have already noted. Public problems
are now being translated into the problem of the self.
It was the translation of public, of general problems, into those
of the self which helps to explain the development of the novel in
Russia in the nineteenth century. Czarist Russia was topsy turvy. The
twentieth century is topsy turvy. The sense of America as being topsy
turvy is growing. In this sense there now is to be seen a parallel
between nineteenth-century Czarist Russia and twentieth-century
America. But this parallel must be strictly limited. The
topsy-turviness of Czarist Russia was based on the contradictions
between feudal and capitalist relationships and this existed in a
period when capitalism was expanding, and when there was confidence
in the future of capitalism. Contrast the greater ease with which
Europe could recover from the ravages of the Napoleonic War than it
can from the two World Wars of the twentieth century, and one sees
this historic change clearly. Today, we live in a topsy-turvy world
which cannot expand as was the case in the nineteenth century.
Capitalism was then progressive. Capitalism is now exhausting itself.
It has received two mortal wounds in the form of two World Wars. It
is like a beast that is slowly dying from these wounds. How long its
death agony will be is unpredictable. Whether it lashes out and
gathers together its last energies and snarls and bites like a
wounded dying beast gone berserk before it expires, is another
unpredictable matter. These general factors define the limits of our
analogy with Russian literature.
 
Contradictory Tendencies at Work
The conditions for literary change, for a literary renaissance,
are various. One of them is this awareness that historic, political,
social, economic problems involves the very status and destiny of the
individual self. This condition exists in America. It may serve as
one of the prerequisites for a period of literary ferment and even of
literary renaissance. A force that is checking this ferment and
renaissance, however, is found in the fact that big business is in
control of a large and most significant area of culture. A second
factor that may check an American renaissance lies in the fact that,
despite cheerful words expressed in public, despair is widespread.
Many literary critics, commentators, clergymen, political leaders and
others have the mistaken notion that a literature of so-called
negativism is a danger to an existing social system. This is
incorrect. If we look at Russian literature of the nineteenth and the
early twentieth century, we can prove this. The writers who did the
most damage to the Czarist system were :hose who affirmed life, if I
may use the language of Van Wyck Brooks and others. Tolstoy affirmed
life, and no Russian writer of his time was a greater menace to the
security and even the existence of Czarism than was Leo Tolstoy.
There are few writers more likely to make rebels, even to this
day, than Tolstoy.
Dostoevsky defended Czarism. He co-related the defense of Czarism
with belief in God, and, correspondingly, saw revolution in atheism.
Yet his major influence negates his affirmations. For he worked out
the problems of belief in God, and in doing this, he created an ideal
character, Aloysha Karamazov. When we read The Brothers Karamazov,
many of us work through this problem anew, and we do not conclude
that we will emulate Aloysha, that we will try to be like him, and
that if we do, we can save our own selves. Dostoevsky, defender of
the Czarist system, was really a danger to that system. But contrast
these two writers with Artzbashieff, their literary inferior and a
man who came after them. His work is morally nihilistic: Sanine
had a widespread but relatively transitory influence.
Whereas Tolstoy and Dostoevsky worked out central problems of the
self in literature, Artzbashieff popularized facile despair, facile
and at least semi-hooliganized Nietzscheanism. If one seriously
imitated Dostoevsky and Tolstoy, one would more seriously explore,
more seriously try to harmonize ideals and action: doing this, one
would actually be in a position concretely and intimately to test
their affirmations, to know by the very tensions and play of impulse
in oneself whether or not these worked. Imitating Artzbashieff’s
Sanine, one runs away from oneself: one substitutes a facile
immoralism for a moral seriousness. Moral nihilism does not endanger
a crumbling social system in the way that moral seriousness does.
Cynics and moral nihilists perform the role of safety valves. The
moral nihilist, in emphasizing hopelessness and cynicism, thereby
implies the lesson that there is no future worth fighting for. And
those who attack a social system at its foundation are men who firmly
believe that there is a future worth fighting for, and with this,
that life is worth passing on. In this sense, they are morally
serious. Dostoevsky and Tolstoy confirm and strengthen an attitude of
moral seriousness in readers; Artzbashieff doesn’t. Further, this
difference is most important for young readers. They, above all
others, can learn these lessons from literature. If the guardians of
what is called order and property in this world care for advice from
this critic, I willingly give it to them. I advise them to tell the
youth, especially the serious youth, to read writers like
Artzbashieff, not ones like Tolstoy and Dostoevsky. Various
newspapers, publicists and others are fighting post-war
disillusionment by denying it, by condemning it. But the simple fact
is that it is here. We now live in the era of post-war
disillusionment. An era of widespread mass disillusionment proves
that you cannot fool all. of the people all of the time. The most
common demonstration to validate the assertion that the people cannot
always be fooled can easily be observed – in periods of widespread
disillusionment. Before masses of people prove that they cannot be
always fooled by taking the road of social revolution, they will
often display apathy, disillusionment. They show that they are not
fooled in the realm of immediate and practical life, but in broadened
political and cultural areas. Personal life affords everyone the
immediate and concrete basis for empirically testing the values that
are generalized in culture. When the workers are told that the
capitalists can guarantee them jobs and a high standard of living,
and the capitalists fail to fulfill their guarantee, they begin to
disbelieve. They are not fooled by this promise. A new promise, a new
guarantee, may fool them, but the old one will not. When women are
told that it is murder to practice contraception, and when they
experience dangerous and debilitating consequences after acting on
this moral instruction, they, also, draw conclusions. When Catholic
daughters, for instance, see what it has meant for their mothers to
be child-bearing animals, they often draw the conclusion of
practicing birth control.
Endless illustrations of this simple truism could be elaborated.
Here, we need, mainly, to apply it to the assumptions of the American
Dream, to the eulogistic conceptions of the American Way of Life.
When motion picture and mass production stories continuously present
the same fables to masses of people, they feed their revery,
de-energize their moral nerves. But at the same time, they show these
people what they do not have. Over and over again, the trial of
values of American capitalist society is imaginatively, made in this
popular art. It can confirm these values only temporarily. It can
induce only passing belief. For depression, the opportunity for freer
sexual relationships, the many-sided possibilities of life, the
many-sided frustrations of people all tend to negate the implications
of these films and stories. Social, political conclusions are not
necessarily drawn as a consequence. But personal conclusions are. And
through this process of acceptance and rejection in private life, the
movie makers, the hack writers, the magazine editors and others are
providing the American people with concrete material that permits
them to evaluate the success or failure of the so-called American Way
of Life. Just as children gradually come to understand that neither
Santa Claus nor the Big Bad Wolf exists, so do adults come to
understand that other kinds of fairy tales are – fairy tales.
It is this conclusion which again leads me to offer advice to all
of American reaction, advice which I doubt that they will take. My
advice to them is to encourage an art and a literature of moral
nihilism. Moral nihilism is their major barrier to the drawing of
conclusions in the present era. What is now a major danger to them is
an art of moral seriousness. The masters of our destiny, politically,
economically, and theologically, have all issued promissory notes:
they lack the moral, the political capital to pay on the line on
these notes. Their failure is now stamped and almost dated by the
great scientific discovery in human history, die capture of atomic
energy. Those who say that only America could have produced the
atomic bomb in this period are correct. Capitalistic America – as
the fact proves – alone could do this. But in having done this,
capitalistic America has demonstrated that it cannot solve probletms
for itself, let alone for all humanity. The man from Independence,
Missouri, sits in the White House, in no enviable position. When he
was to become President of these United States as a consequence of
the death of the late Franklin D. Roosevelt, he is reported to have
declared that he felt as though he had been hit by the moon and the
stars. He was hit by something as terrible: he was hit by the
problems of this period.
Many years ago, a man from the border states, a man from Kentucky,
a man of the people, sat where he now sits. That man possessed the
will, the humanity, the greatness to – regardless of all else –
organize a war so that a problem would be solved, however terribly.
History has changed, or as we are told, Time Marches On. His
successor, the man from Missouri, can solve nothing. His impasse is
focused in his atom bomb policy. If he reveals the alleged secrets,
or if he doesn’t, the same problem remains. Neither secrecy nor
openness will guarantee us, or our children, from war and possibly,
annihilation. The atom bomb focuses sharply, dramatically, and in a
manner which can press terror into every human being, the problems of
the present. Now, the world crisis is not a generalized crisis merely
to be talked about in newspapers and books. Now, it is not merely a
problem for the leaders, the masters of destiny. Now, as never
before, it has been, it is being translated into the intimate
consciousness of almost. every adult human being on the face of this
planet. This has profound, and not fully predictable, consequences
for literature. These consequences can be stated, to repeat, by the
remark that now there is a wide special awareness that the problems
of the world at large involve every aspect of the very life of
individual human beings. It is a realization of this that produces
the frantic formula – modern man is obsolete. The correct statement
is that contemporary ideology is obsolete. Art, in affirming this
ideology, is bound, in the long run to drive home more forcibly the
fact of this obsolescence. Culture pressed into the service of this
obsolescence cannot succeed. It must call on the aid of the policeman
for a relative success.
American literature, in this period of continuing crisis, will
develop how? The real answer to this question will be written by the
new generations. And we can suggest, repeating in conclusion, that
this answer will be of one kind or another depending on whether or
not we have moral nihilism or moral seriousness. In this way, the
moral question, so frequently discussed, is really involved in the
literary situation. The critics who speak in generalized moral
affirmation have done a disservice to their country. They have
created the wrong kind of confusion. The cultural defense of the
status quo demands now, not a continuation of the old fables
of health and happiness and love: it demands not a belief in God in a
vacuum. It demands despair that will be channeled into personal, into
personally self-destructive actions and attitudes. It demands not the
rose-colored falseness of hope, but rather, the compensatory and
consoling self-flattery of personal cynicism, of personal
disillusionment. For this dissipates those feelings of alarm, of
urgency, of growing and insistent demand for change which turns
personal disillusionments into social and political deeds. This,
then, is the general setting for the problems which the new and young
writer, the next generation of intellectuals face as they begin to
function. This, further, I believe, suggests the nature of the
problems involved in the analysis of the content of contemporary
American culture. This, briefly, outlines certain of the significant
aspects of contemporary cultural problems. To give answers to these
problems, to chart a new course is a present task, a task which rests
mainly on younger generations.

Footnote
1. Cf., The League of Frightened Philistines, New York 1945.
 







On November 11, 1946, Labor Action featured an article by Albert Gates which dealt with the James M. Cain plan for the establishment of an American Authors Authority. The plan, envisaging the control of authors’ copyrights by destroying the power of book publishers, Hollywood and the radio chains, was subjected to criticism because of its totalitarian, bureaucratic and Stalinist character. Once the plan was made public, followed by a campaign to force its acceptance by all the Author’s organizations, a struggle broke out among these bodies and their individual adherents. One of the most active opponents of the plan is James T. Farrell, noted novelist, literary critic, and socialist. Farrell’s letter to Elmer Rice, who subsequently also came to oppose the Cain plan, is printed because of its intrinsic importance in the fight against Stalinist totalitarianism which is the most powerful force at work in favor of the Cain plan. It subjects the Cain plan to devastating analysis and criticism.



*
(Continued from last week)
One of the major grievances of James M. Cain concerns taxation. Now it is true that there is a certain inequity involved here. The author must pay an income tax, and thus, he receives different treatment than does the corporation. And in the long run, he is also at a disadvantage if he is contrasted with the person who pays an income tax on what he gets from stocks and bonds. But this is an inequity which concerns all professional people, and not solely the writer. He is not a special victim of the government. In addition to which, this inequity mainly concerns the more successful authors, those who have to pay taxes according to surtax rates. It would be better if the successful writer did not have to pay such high taxes. But at the same time, this grievance involves complicated questions of taxation, and it likewise involves important principles.
Given the economic system we live under, the best principle of taxation is that which is based on ability to pay. Most certainly, the question of taxes here should not be a sound argument for the appointment of a board such as the one proposed.
And let me remind you, further, that after citing the grievances of the writer, including this concerning taxation, Mr. Cain speaks of the plight of desperation to which writers have been reduced. Think of it – Mr. Cain, and Hollywood writers earning a thousand dollars a week and two thousand dollars a week, are reduced to desperation, and they are, presumably, among the major victims of social and governmental injustice in these United States. For remember, the economic complaints on which this plan is based are the complaints of rich or well-to-do writers more than they are of the poor and the independent ones.
And despite such facts, there are many who dare to call all opponents of this plan fascists, reactionaries, illiberal. These features of the plan, also, should stress what I wrote in my previous letter. This plan is in the interest of the hired writer, rather than of the free writer. It has been concocted from the standpoint of Hollywood writers. Their trade mark is on it. I offered my cooperation in any struggles they make to better their lot. However, I again wish to point out that all writers must not be herded and bureaucratized as the means which will help them get a better deal. Their problems are not always precisely the same as the problems of the independent writer.
The very economic relationships of the independent writer are different from those of the employed writer. The relationships of the former are more those which are like the relationships of a craftsman to a merchant capitalist: the relationships of the hired writer more resemble those which prevail in the case of a factory owner and a worker. However, the scale of pay of the screen writer is much different from that of the factory worker. In the light of these facts, I wish to urge that the most complete and careful study be made of the different types of economic relationships which prevail in the business world of writing. Such a study will, I predict, confirm my criticisms: it will also reveal that this plan was worked out before it had been properly thought through to the end.
 
Bureaucratic Control of Copyrights
You were quoted in the press as stating your opposition to any plan which would require that authors sacrifice their copyrights. However, even if this pernicious proposal be eliminated from the Cain plan, I would still most strongly urge its total rejection. The creation of this appointed authority would give such a board an entrenched position, and from this entrenched position, it could well be able gradually to expand its power and influence. It could well work toward the acquisition of power over copyrights in the future. It could set up the basis for clique and group control among American writers.
At the present time, it is not a secret that many prominent American writers are either non-members of the Authors League, or else, they have stopped paying their dues and have lost interest in the organization. It is dubious as to the real significance of the League, and as to how many writers it really speaks for. The League has no provisions – to my knowledge – for the admission of poor young writers who cannot afford to pay their dues. By and large, the League consists of successful writers.
The fact that it has not attained a greater membership places a greater responsibility on its shoulders when it considers this plan. For even without the copyright provision, the League and the Board could be turned into a powerful group that could be controlled by cliques. The one organized group of writers in America could become an instrument of pressure on other writers. This pressure would possibly be in line with the ideas of pressure proposed by Cain and the other proponents of his plan. Without this copyright provision, the AAA will still be bureaucratic. Likewise, the claims that the AAA will not have any authority over what is printed are inadequate to defend the plan. For the AAA will have too much power. There will be no democratic control over it. In indirect ways, it can easily influence what is written when it wants to.
The fact that I am a member of the League should testify to my acceptance of the idea of the organization of writers. But different principles and plans of organization are possible. The Cain plan is not the only solution to the problems of the organization of writers. It is not the only alternative. Many of the concrete proposals for the economic betterment of writers, envisaged in this plan, can be accomplished without it.
 
“Tough Muggs” and Licensing
For instance, it is not necessary to appoint this AAA of “tough muggs” in order to establish the practice of licensing the motion picture rights of books instead of selling them outright. A large number of those whose books are likely to be sold are already members of the League. I am sure that it will not be hard to convince them that they ought to license their work to studios rather than sell them outright. This plan does not stand or fall on the licensing proposal. However, this proposal has already been advanced in such a way as to fool many members of the public; They seem to think that all opponents are against licensing, and that, thus, opponents are against the economic interests of writers. This false impression is then amalgamated with the false notions that all opponents of the plan are reactionary, and that its sponsors and defenders are progressive.
The press quoted you as stating that this issue is a trade union issue. This is also a misconception. It is not a clear cut trade union question. It centers in the matter of the property rights of authors. And further, even if it were an out-and-out trade union question it would not follow that Cain’s proposal is a good one. I think that I have established this point in my two letters to you, and I hope that the Committee will carefully consider them. Also, I would add that if you persist in treating this question as a pure trade union one, and as one of merely formal unity, then you, yourself, will contribute greatly toward the creation of what you will call “fractional issues.” For you will then be laying the basis for the misrepresentation of all opponents of the plan according to the amalgam which is now being publicly created, the amalgam which presents all writers opposed to the Cain plan as fascists.
Unity in terms of the Cain plan can only be a most dangerous unity. In fact, I predict that if the Committee recommends this plan, and if the League adopts it, both will have created conditions for the biggest “disunity,” for the greatest “fractional” fight In the history of modern American writing. For I am confident that American writers as a whole, and in particular the best and the most independent ones, do not want to be herded about by Jim Caln’s “tough muggs” and pie-card artists.
In conclusion, then, let me formally propose that the Committee rejects this plan in toto.



 


Sincerely yours,
James T. Farrell



 



I know of no words strong enough to be employed in condemning the murder of Leon Trotsky. And I am convinced, that he was murdered by an agent of the O.G.P.U.
For Leon Trotsky, I felt both admiration and affection. I was not a follower of his in the strict and literal meaning of this term. But I was influenced by him. The Old Man educated some of the members of my generation: 1 was one of those whom he educated. Were it not for his writings, I would be a different person than I am, and I would think differently than I do. The loss of Leon Trotsky at this particular moment is tragic. In this black and bitter period of reaction. Trotsky was needed, and needed not merely as a symbol, but even more so as a leader. Now, those points on which one disagreed with him fade in importance. One sees now his greatness, the inspiration which was gained from his very life, from his indomitable fight, and from his brilliant writings. Leon Trotsky was a great revolutionist, a great writer, a great man, a great spirit. Edmund Wilson, the literary critic, once remarked that since his exile from Soviet Russia, Leon Trotsky had served as “the Marxist conscience of the world.” The pickaxe blow of Stalin’s hired assassin struck down “the Marxist conscience of the world.” With grief, I say farewell to the Old Man. He is dead in the flesh. The spirit that animated his work will not die.



Aug. 28, 1940


James T. Farrell



 

T. Farrell: Author of “Studs Lonigan” on Trotsky’s Death (28 August 1940)




James T. Farrell  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
Author of Studs Lonigan on Trotsky’s Death
(28 August 1940)

Workers&rsqu Forum, Socialist Appeal, Vol. 4 No. 36, 6 September 1940, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Editor:
I know of no words strong enough to be employed in condemning the murder of Leon Trotsky. And I am convinced that he was murdered by an agent of the GPU.
For Leon Trotsky, I felt both admiration and affection. I was not a follower of his in the strict and literal meaning of this term. But I was influenced by him. The Old Man educated some of the members of my generation: I was one of those whom he educated. Were it not for his writings, I would be a different person than I am and I would think differently than I do. The loss of Leon Trotsky at this particular moment is tragic. In this black and bitter period of reaction. Trotsky was needed, and needed not merely as a symbol, but even more so as a leader. Now, those points on which one disagreed with him fade in importance. One sees his greatness, the inspiration which was gained from his very life, from his indomitable fight, and from his brilliant writings. Leon Trotsky was a great revolutionist, a great writer, a great man, a great spirit. Edmund Wilson, the literary critic, once remarked that since his exile from Soviet Russia, Leon Trotsky has served as “the Marxist conscience of the world.” The pickaxe blow of Stalin’s hired assassin struck down “the Marxist conscience of the world.” With grief, I say farewell to the Old Man. He is dead in the flesh. The spirit that animated his work will not die.



Aug. 28, 1940


James T. Farrell



 






(Editor’s Note: Labor Action takes great pleasure in reprinting the following brilliant message which the world-famous novelist, James T. Farrell, sent to the mass meeting held on December 15 in Hotel Diplomat, New York, protesting against the conviction of the defendants in the Minneapolis trial.)



*
On the 150th anniversary of the Bill of Rights, the defense and preservation of civil liberties have become a paramount issue. Now more than ever, the priceless political rights guaranteed in the First Amendment of the American Constitution must remain operative. In peace or in war, when the right off free speech is destroyed, public life becomes rigid. Thinking turns into sheer routine. Artistic creation is driven into feeble channels of escapism. The rich spiritual, intellectual and artistic resources of the human spirit are dried up at their very source. These are truisms, but they are truisms that cannot now be repeated too often.
The names of Holmes and Brandeis are among the most honored in American legal history: but their words are not as respected as are their names. For it is clear that they had in mind a period such as the present one when they enunciated their theory of “a clear and present danger.” In the Minneapolis case, this theory was abandoned: for it, the prosecution substituted one of indirect causation. Such a theory is a parallel to the Japanese notion of “dangerous thoughts.” Once this is established as the law of the land, all thinking will become dangerous. In place of thinking we will only be allowed to quote; and even quotation will be dangerous.
The convictions obtained at Minneapolis are, to my mind, a clear and present danger to the Bill of Rights. On this issue, the liberal magazine, The Nation, has already sounded an alarm. In an editorial appearing after the outbreak of war between this country and Japan, it declared: “We believe that all progressives of whatever political orientation must join in the defense of the Minneapolis defendants or permit the establishment of a precedent that may some day be used against them.” The Minneapolis convictions were based on the Smith Act. It is a law in open contradiction to the Bill of Rights which proclaims that “Congress shall make no law abridging freedom of speech ...” In consequence, the Minneapolis case has today become the crucial one in the struggle which we must make for the preservation of civil liberties.
 
An Elite or Confidence
To destroy freedom of speech is to admit implicitly that one has lost faith in the great mass off the people. Instead of confidence in the masses of the common people – whose ancestors were responsible for the Bill of Rights – one substitutes an elite. On them is placed all responsibility for continuing the succession of ideas which alone can give us the intellectual resources for the creation of a civilization, a culture, that is truly human. On December 15, 1941, I am not prepared to sacrifice this faith. That is why I assert that the question of civil liberties is of such paramount importance now. Many years ago, the courageous French novelist, Emile Zola, boldly and confidently proclaimed that the truth is on the march. Since then, oppression has spread over nation after nation. But in the face of every oppression, it is our duty to do what Zola tried to do – to keep the truth on the march. That we cannot do unless men are allowed publicly, honestly, seriously to think to express their ideas, to defend: their convictions.
When Socrates stood: on trial for his life, he told his judges that “the unexamined life is not worth living.” These words of Socrates are as profoundly significant today as they were when he uttered them. Allow me to repeat: “... the unexamined life is not worth living.”
 

 T. Farrell: On the Minneapolis Convictions (15 December 1941)




James T. Farrell  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
On the Minneapolis Convictions
The Conviction of the 18 Is a Clear
and Present Danger to the Bill of Rights
(15 December 1941)

From The Militant, Vol. V No. 52, 27 December 1941, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





(Text of the statement delivered to the Dec. 15 mass meeting in the New York Hotel Diplomat, celebrating the 150th anniversary of the signing of the Rill of Rights and protesting the conviction of the 18 Socialist Workers Party and CIO members in the Minneapolis “sedition” trial)



* * *
On the 150th anniversary of the Bill of Rights, the defence and preservation of civil liberties has become a paramount issue. Now more than ever, the priceless political rights guaranteed in the First Amendment of the American Constitution must remain operative. In peace or in war, when the right of free speech is destroyed, public life becomes rigid. Thinking turns into sheer routine. Artistic creation is driven into feeble channels of escapism. The rich spiritual, intellectual, and artistic resources of the human spirit are dried up at their very source. These are truisms: but they are truisms that cannot now be repeated too often.
The names of Holmes and Brandeis are among the most honored in American legal history, but their words are not as respected as are their names. For it is clear that they had in mind a period such as the present one when they enunciated their theory of a “clear and present danger.” In the Minneapolis case, this theory was abandoned; for it, the prosecution substituted one of indirect causation. Such a theory is a parallel to the Japanese notion of “dangerous thoughts.” Once this is established as the law of the land, all thinking will become dangerous. In place of thinking, we will only be allowed to quote; and even quotation will be dangerous.
The convictions obtained at Minneapolis are, to my mind, a clear and present danger to the Bill of Rights. On this issue, the liberal magazine, The Nation, has already sounded an alarm. In an editorial, appearing after the outbreak of war between this country and Japan, it declared: “We believe that all progressives of whatever political orientation must join in the defense of the Minneapolis defendants or permit the establishment of a precedent that may some day be used against them.” The Minneapolis convictions were based on the Smith Act. It is a law in open contradiction to the Bill of Rights which proclaims that “Congress shall make no law ... abridging freedom of speech ...” In consequence, the Minneapolis case has today become the crucial one in the struggle which we must make for the preservation of civil liberties.
To destroy freedom of speech is to admit implicitly that one has lost faith in the great masses of the people. Instead of confidence in the masses of the common people whose ancestors were responsible for the Bill of Rights one substitutes an elite. On them is placed all responsibility for continuing the succession of ideas which alone can give us the intellectual resources for the creation of a civilization, a culture, that is truly human. On December 15, 1941, I am not prepared to sacrifice this faith. That is why I assert that the question of civil liberties is of such paramount importance now.
 
Keep the Truth on the March
Many years ago, the courageous French novelist, Emile Zola, boldly and confidently proclaimed that the truth is on the march. Since then, oppression has spread over nation after nation. But in the face of every oppression, it is our duty to do what Zola tried to do – to keep the truth on the march. That, we cannot do unless men are allowed publicly, honestly, seriously to think, to express their ideas, to defend their convictions.
When Socrates stood on trial for his life, he told his judges that “the unexamined life is not worth living.” These words of Socrates are as profoundly significant today as they were when he uttered them. Allow me to repeat: “... the unexamined life is not worth living ...”
 

 T. Farrell Answers Broun (June/July 1939)




James T. Farrell  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
A Letter to the Editor
James T. Farrell Answers Broun
(June/July 1939)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 54, 28 July 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.


Editor:
In answering a critic named Mr. Brent in The New Republic of June 28, Heywood Broun made the following remarks concerning me:
“If Mr. Brent had attended the Writers’ Congress of two years ago he would have encountered a one-man picket line in front of Carnegie Hall. The legion of protest consisted of Mr. James T. Farrell, who wrote A World I Never Made. Now Mr. Farrell in his sincere and earnest way can use as many short and ugly words as any writer living, but his addiction to this theory of literature has not made him a progressive. There is nothing to prevent an author’s being a realist and a reactionary. Escape can be found in a swamp as readily as in an ivory tower.”
Feeling that these remarks called for an answer, I addressed one to Mr. Bruce Bliven, editor of The New Republic. Without seeing fit to ask my permission to summarize and quote from my letter rather than print in full, he presented a one paragraph summary of it with quotations in The New Republic of July 12th. Inasmuch as I am anxious that my letter in full be printed, I am including it here, and I would be grateful if you would print it in your columns.



 
 
New York City, July 6, 1939


Sincerely yours,
James T. Farrell
 



* * *
James T. Farrell’s letter to the New Republic follows:
Bruce Bliven
The New Republic
40 East 49th St.
New York City
Sir:
I trust that when Haywood Broun takes his next catechism lesson, or – if he has completed these – when he examines his conscience next year to make his Easter Duty, he will seek to acquire some information concerning the sins of contumely and mischief making. For it is a moot point whether or not the sin he committed against me in the New Republic (June 28) is describable as one of contumely or as mischief making. Personally, I think it is contumely. However, I do not wish to labor the point, and would suggest that Mr. Broun consult his confessor. Likewise the question as to whether or not his sin is mortal or venial is one which he must settle in his own conscience and with advice from the proper authorities. Saint Thomas Aquinas said:
“Contumely essentially involves a certain dishonour, if the speaker’s intention is fixed on taking away the honour of the hearer by the words that he utters, this properly and in itself is utter contumely; and that is a mortal sin no less than theft or robbery.”
However, while Haywood Broun’s sin raises problems in his own conscience, my duty in this matter is perfectly clear. As Saint Thomas Aquinas said:
“Sometimes ... we must rebut contumely put up on us for two reasons ... the one is the good of him who offers the contumely, that his boldness may be checked and he may not try such things on us again, according to the text: ‘Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he imagine himself to be wise:’ the other is the good of the many, whose advancement is hindered by the contumelies put on us.”
Since, then, it is my duty to answer Mr. Broun, I shall do so, and my only hope is that he be led to face his own duties in this matter with the proper gravity.
 
Statement of Position
Mr. Broun seeks to dishonor me by stating that I am a reactionary. He based his contumely on the allegation that I picketed the second American Writers’ Congress. I did not picket that Congress. But had I done so, such conduct would not prove that I am a reactionary. The League of American Writers organized this Congress. Some of the reasons why I am opposed to the League of American Writers are the following:

On all major issues and policies, it has followed the line of the Stalinist Third International. When the Third International changed its political line in 1935, the League of American Writers altered its policies to fit the new line. I am opposed to the Third International.
 
I am convinced that the policies of the League of American Writers are calculated to lead this country into war, and I am opposed to war.
 

Undemocratic

The League of American Writers has already furnished abundant illustrations to prove that it is an undemocratic organization.
 
The League of American Writers has protested against the jailing of writers in Germany and Italy. I agree with such protests. But this organization has not protested against the equal brutality and equal injustice of the present regime of the Soviet Union in jailing writers. I am for freedom, not only in Germany and Italy, but also in Russia, and everywhere else in the world. The League of American Writers has either defended or remained silent concerning the many brutalities of the Russian regime which refer to political rather than literary life. I am opposed to such a policy.
 
At the second American Writers Congress, the only representative of a political party who spoke was Earl Browder, and when he indulged in wanton political and personal attacks, the majority of the membership was described as having applauded him.
 
In the reports of Congresses held by the League of American Writers, I have clearly observed that the League makes insufficient distinctions between serious literature and commercial writing. I think that such action aids Philistinism, and I have no use for Philistinism.

These are not reactionary reasons for opposition to the League of American Writers. By calling me a reactionary, Heywood Broun proves that he has not changed his political line. But then, I have done my duty for his own good. I leave him to his conscience.
I would like to add that I have presented in detail, my conceptions concerning naturalism and realism in literature and my views concerning the relationship between literature and politics in my book, A Note on Literary Criticism. Heywood Broun’s reference to my theory of literature is a misrepresentation.



 
 
New York City, June 22, 1939


Sincerely yours,
signed: James T. Farrell
 



 

 T. Farrell: Letter to Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia (February 1939)




James T. Farrell  |  ETOL Home Page

 
James T. Farrell
Farrell Demands Mayor Explain Protecting Nazis
(February 1939)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 11, 28 February 1939, p. 3.
Transcribed by Joe Allen.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





James T. Farrell, noted novelist, who was present as an observer at the Madison Square Garden counter-demonstration, has sent to the press and to several prominent individuals in New York, the following letter of protest against police brutality which he sent to Mayor LaGuardia and other city officials:






To Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia:
Why was an anti-Fascist demonstration broken up in front of the Rivoli Theater at Forty-Ninth and Broadway between ten-thirty and eleven o’clock last night while the Fascist meeting of the German-American Bund at Madison Square Garden was protected by cordons of policemen, not to mention as of uniformed stormtroopers who did police duty inside of the meeting?
In front of the Rivoli Theater, after the anti-Fascist demonstrators had been dispersed, I saw policemen slugging to helpless demonstrators who were at their mercy. Witnesses of this were herded off by the police officers with all the necessary efficiency. One of these men was lying helpless on the sidewalk, crying out that his leg was injured, an expression of pain on his face. The other one, trapped by several policemen, and obviously only trying to defend himself was brutally punched by detective. On Forty-Ninth Street, around the corner and just east of Broadway, there were other demonstrators, most of them youths, with bruised heads and faces, and young girls screaming hysterically.
Why was this? What principle of democracy was upheld when one group was permitted to meet at Forty Ninth Street and Eighth Avenue, and another suppressed by force at Forty Ninth and Broadway?
Citizens of New York were treated to the following policy by the authorities: police protection for Fascists, police clubs for anti-Fascists. Why?
These events are reminiscent of the pre-Fascist Italy and pre-Fascist Germany. In these countries, the democratic authorities also conferred the benefits of police protection on Fascists, and the benefits of police power on anti-Fascists. I quote from what Miss Dorothy Thompson, who attended the Madison Square Garden meeting, stated in this morning’s Herald Tribune:
“The entire meeting was familiar to me. I saw an exact duplicate of it in the Berlin Sports Palast in 1931. That meeting was also ‘protected’ by the police of the German Republic. Three years later the people who had been in charge of that meeting were in charge of the government of Germany, and the German citizens against whom, in 1931, exactly the same statements had been made as were being made tonight by Mr. Kunse, were being beaten, expropriated, and murdered.”
Is this policy to continue? Or is the conduct of the police on the streets of New York last evening going to be investigated? Or do the taxpayers of this city support the police department in order that these men can herd the public like sheep, attack anti-Fascist pickets, tear their banners from them, and slug them?
Why was this, Mr. Mayor? Who is responsible?



 


Sincerely yours,
James T. Farrell



 

