M. Fenwick: The Mandarins’ Lament (Winter 1957)






Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
An Article Review
The Mandarins’ Lament
An Analysis of Simone De Beauvoir’s Recent Novel
(Winter 1957)

From The New International, Vol. XXIII No. 1, Winter 1957, pp. 62–68.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the Marxists’ Internet Archive.

SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR IS MOST commonly thought of in this country as a brilliant female representative of the traditional French bohème, dutifully scandalizing the bourgeoisie with the iconoclasms of a secular existentialism.
This image of Beauvoir as a leader of the St. Germain des Prés literary Fronde is, of course, not without basis. But the overriding fact is that the bulk of her post-war writing – like that of her mentor, Sartre – deals with politics. In its latest phase her writings touching political themes have increasingly become apologetics for Sartre’s own uniquely split-level Stalinist apologetics.
The superficiality of so much of the criticism of her recent writing stems from a failure to assimilate this commonplace. For historical reasons which are not at all obscure the United States is not a politically sophisticated nation. The same causes lie behind the absence of a political dimension in the analyses of most current literary critics. The personal and the psychological rule. It is a pity, for with this failure of perception many foreign novels, in particular, lose a great deal of their resonance. This is especially true in the case of Simone de Beauvoir’s The Mandarins. [1]
To find in her novel only a substantiation of the nostalgic and somewhat dated conventional American concept of the French intellectual is to miss the indicative value of the book as a reflection of the contemporary crisis. In point of fact, a person unacquainted with French post-war politics (setting aside, for the moment, his political orientation) will not only lose much of the intended emotional impact of the novel, he will certainly find big sections of it incomprehensible.
Though the non-political aspects of the novel will of necessity be the most interesting ones for American readers they are in the main actually derivative, supportive, or extraneous. In the novel, as in the times themselves, the demiurgos is politics.
In itself The Mandarins represents a shift in emphasis in the point of view of Simone de Beauvoir, as even a cursory comparison with her first novel The Blood of Others, written during the occupation, will demonstrate. In The Blood of Others the focus is on the existential categories of responsibility, guilt, engagement, isolation, and death. While these are present in The Mandarins political problems have come to take on a more concrete, complex, and examined character. If The Blood of Others is the product of a cherished personal, existentialist assessment of life The Mandarins represents a turn toward a social and political evaluation of the same realities.
 
THE NOVEL IS A DETAILED AND bleak transcription of the life of a certain segment of the French radical literary intelligentsia in the years immediately following the liberation. Since the recasting of actual persons, organizations, and events into fictional form is of hardly more than a token order, it is possible to regard The Mandarins as a social document as well.
In the most general and inclusive sense the novel is a study of the varying reactions of these intellectuals to two interrelated facts: First, that France has with historic finality become a fifth-rate power, closer in a wearying number of ways to a stagnant backwater like Ireland than to the France of 150 years ago before whose Grande Armée all of established Europe trembled. Secondly, that the world fate, including that of France, is currently at the effective disposition of two power-blocs dominated by Russia and the United States.
In the novel these reactions are politically and psychologically precipitated by an attempt to establish a political force relatively independent of the two power-blocs. This organization, the SRL (formally identified in the book only by its initials) is, of course, the RDR – the Rassemblement Démocratique Révolutionnaire (Revolutionary Democratic Assembly) – which was organized in 1948. This promising movement, supported by a very broad representation of the anti-Stalinist left and enjoying striking early successes in a period of general political apathy, nevertheless dwindled away and vanished after a brief two years of existence. It is this period which is covered by the book, though the exact chronology is not observed.
The novel opens on Christmas eve, 1944, with the entire cast assembled at a party which in celebrating the liquidation of the von Rundstedt offensive through the Ardennes likewise serves to bring to a ceremonial close the epoch of the resistance, in which all have been deeply involved.
The resistance had been a negation: Against the Germans! Its positive aspect lay in its potentialities for the regeneration of the French radical movement which was in a state of unprecedented prostration following the failure of the popular front, the defeat of the Spanish republican forces, the outbreak of World War II, the Hitler-Stalin pact, the defeat of the French in a six weeks’ war, and the occupation. Under the conditions imposed by the (remember?) Grand Alliance the negative aspect of the resistance lay in its chauvinism and in a political program which hardly got beyond the assertion that in the future things could not return to what they were before the war. “Politics,” says Dubreuilh in the novel, not a little sententiously, “should never again be left to politicians.”
The bliss and the fevers of those blazing August days, when men and armor came pounding out of Normandy to liberate France, quickly subsided. “As I remember it,” says one of the characters, “in August there was a lot of talk about everything changing. And it’s just the same as ever. It’s still the ones who work the most who eat the least, and everyone goes on thinking that’s just great.” On the personal level, another muses about the problem of what to do “with this peace which gave us back our lives without giving us back our reasons for living.”
The answer is provided by the initiative of Robert Dubreuilh, who is Jean-Paul Sartre down to his smallest mannerisms (his phobia against being photographed, for example) but without the existentialist ambiance. This is provided by Anne Dubreuilh, Robert Dubreuilh’s wife, who acts as the narrator for this documentary and speaks in the first person. Anne Dubreuilh, who is Simone de Beauvoir’s alter ego, is cast as a psychoanalyst, that social type which is threatening to become as much of a stock figure in modern literature as the Braggart Soldier was in the Roman comedy. By one of those inexpensive transpositions aimed at assuring us that we are dealing with art and not reportage the existentialist atmosphere of life as a prolonged living suicide is conveyed by a pervasive psychoanalytically derived despair.
“Here in France,” says Dubreuilh-Sartre, “we have a clear-cut objective – to achieve a real popular front government.” The aim is not really to create an independent movement: “We don’t want to weaken the CP,” says Dubreuilh, “but we would like the Communists to change their line. Well, here’s our opportunity to bring pressure to bear.” The overall task of the SRL, Anne Dubreuilh tells us, “was to maintain the hope of a revolution which would fulfill its humanist intentions.”
A first step for Dubreuilh is to convert L’Espoir (Hope) an independent left-wing paper, into an organ of the SRL. In the novel L’Espoir typifies such papers as Combat and Franc-Tireur, which emerged from the resistance and enjoyed tremendous prestige in the immediate post-war period. But to secure L’Espoir means to win over Henri Perron, its editor and animator. Perron, whose archetype is Albert Camus, was wrenched into the politics of the resistance and the life of action by the facts of the occupation. The occupation once ended, his only thought is to get back to creative writing. “Four years of austerity, four years of working only for others – that was a lot, that was too much. It was time now for him to think a little about himself.” Perron’s internal strugglings form the real axis of the book.
While he wants to retain his independence, Perron wishes “he could find a few good reasons for his stand.” “I’m rebelling,” he says, “because I’m afraid of being eaten up by politics, because I dread the thought of taking on new responsibilities, because I’d like some leisure, and especially because I want to stay master in my own house.” He feels ignorant. “Until now it hadn’t bothered him – no need for any specialized knowledge to fight in the Resistance or to found a clandestine newspaper ... there was something unfair in this whole thing. He felt obligated, like everyone else, to take an active interest in politics.” Financial problems close in on L’Espoir. He feels the danger of war. And he feels powerless. He was “nothing but an insignificant citizen of a fifth-rate power, and L’Espoir was a local sheet on the same level as a village weekly ... France can’t do anything for herself ... What difference did it make if L’Espoir remained independent or not, if it had more or fewer readers, or even if it went bankrupt? ‘It isn’t even worth the trouble to be stubborn over it!’ Henri thought suddenly.” In the end he yields to the importunities to Dubreuilh.
Hardly has he done so when the ideas of Dubreuilh begin to change. The CP tightens the screws on Dubreuilh through their press. Dubreuilh is disappointed in the concrete results of the establishment of the SRL. But basically he cannot find a justification for an independent existence because he identifies the CP with the working class. The split with Perron comes with Perron’s decision to publish documents on the Russian slave labor camps. This, Dubreuilh feels, is to play the game of the reaction in France and of the United States. He moves closer to the CP. His motivation is the argument from realism:
“The Soviet Union as it should be, revolution without tears – those are all pure concepts, that is to say: nothing. Obviously, compared to the concept, reality is always wrong; as soon as a concept in embodied, it becomes deformed. But the superiority of the Soviet Union over all other possible socialisms is that it exists.”
Perron resigns from L’Espoir, becomes involved in clearing a collaborator on the basis of false testimony, and ends with an uneasy stabilization of relations with Dubreuilh, with whose daughter he has launched a loveless marriage.
Now all this is not an exact picture of the genesis and evolution of the RDR. It was, for example, not initiated by Dubreuilh-Sartre, but by persons like David Rousset, a man with a revolutionary past. (It is of some interest in defining Beauvoir’s sympathies to note that while she can palliate the behavior of almost all the characters in the book she has nothing but snobbish contempt for Samazelle (Rousset’s persona in the novel) who is shown as ultimately going over to de Gaulle.) Nor was the RDR conceived of as an organization created simply to exert pressure on the CP, as a reading of its program will reveal. It was a third camp tendency. Neither did the crack-up occur over the question of the Russian slave labor camps. Several factors were at work – not the least of which was the organizational slackness of the RDR.
But the novel does come much closer, indeed, to representing Sartre’s conception, as is evident by a rereading of the discussion on the nature and perspectives of the RDR engaged in by Rousset, Sartre, and Gdrard Rosenthal, which was published in Sartre’s magazine Les Temps Modernes in September 1948. This is not to deny, however, that the factual Sartre was considerably to the left of the fictional one. There is little point, however, in pressing the discrepancies between the novel and the historical fact. We are dealing here with art of a certain dry order and it has its rights. In either case the conclusions which follow would be identical.
The portrait of Dubreuilh which is laid in emerges as that of the Stalinoid type. He is, first of all, linked in many ways to the capitalist world of bourgeois democracy. It is not only a matter of his “whole discreetly privileged life,” but of his attachment to the interior life of the bourgeois intellectual in all its subtlety and complexity, its freedom of inquiry and criticism, and its social disengagement.
At the same time he feels himself an outsider in capitalist society. At odds with the pecuniary and power aims of the controlling stratum, he is also alienated from the working class. Being able to generalize beyond the temporary conjuncture he is fully aware that the capitalist order, particularly the ramshackle French one, is in a state of decline.
As the most obvious heir of this dying order the CP attracts him. For it is the CP which currently has the almost total allegiance of the French working class, the only force within the country capable of overthrowing or (for Sartre) seriously modifying French capitalist society. Many of the CP’s enemies are his enemies, too. Since, also, it is an anti-bourgeois power it is one upon which he can lean in his isolation. Moreover, it is a bureaucratic power toward which the regressive aspects of his own bourgeois personality tend to make him gravitate.
But if for nothing else its intellectual sterility repels him – not to speak of its moral reduction of the individual, its lack of democracy, and its control by a foreign power.
No wonder that Sartre is today a very divided man, supporting the CP yet not joining it, at a time when French CP intellectuals (like Marc Beigbeder, his biographer, for example) are reassessing their whole political past in the light of the 20th congress revelations and the armed struggles against Stalinism which have succeeded it. No wonder, likewise, that despite much trumpeting (including a commercial in The Mandarins) Sartre’s long-heralded major work reconciling existentialism and Marxism has not yet appeared.
 
EXISTENTIALISM IS A RATHER DEFLATED balloon these days, contrary to the expectations of George Lukacs, the Stalinist culture critic, whose conviction it was that it would become the universal outlook of a capitalism in extremis. Existentialism was in any case never a detailed, concrete, and systematic examination of society in a historical perspective. It is supra-historical, the necessary prediction being simply man in an absurd universe.
Its explanation for human action is diametrically opposed to that of Marxism. Elsewhere Simone de Beauvoir has said, “Man is the sole and sovereign master of his fate if he wishes to be it; that is what existentialism affirms; precisely therein lies its optimism.” The contrast with the social determinism of Marxism is obvious. Up to the present Sartre has been willing neither to accept nor abjure this uneasy stability, whose contradictions have daily become more and more monstrous, particularly since the upheavals in the satellite countries. A limited and none too sanguine interest in seeing just how Sartre will emerge from his present dilemma is certainly in order. [2]
Herbert Luethy is surely right when he says that all that French CP intellectuals have got from Marx is his revolutionary journalism. His sociological and economic analyses, especially in their concrete applications, completely escape them. If the political discussions in The Mandarins seem so superficial, so dull – compared say, on their level, to the discussions between Naphta and Settembrini in The Magic Mountain – it is, we are willing to believe, not simply due to a literary deficiency on the part of Beauvoir but also to the political inadequacies of her protagonists.
For we are dealing here with a literary intelligentsia, not a revolutionary one. They operate on slogans like “the spirit of the resistance,” “the unity of the left,” “the war danger,” “the defense of democracy,” and “domination by the United States,” unexamined phrases which leave them helpless before the practical politics of the CP. They are captives and idolators of the word. Action to implement their ideas, that is, the fusion of their ideas with the social power of the working class, never really arises as a problem. For them there is no organizational question, that problem which is always such a burning one to revolutionists. Workers as individuals nowhere appear in the novel except very briefly to Perron as memories of embarrassing, alienated, and contemptuous allies in the resistance. These intellectuals are therefore inevitably forced to confront their own impotence or to find support in the CP, which is based on the working class. The idea of the working class as the social prime mover in our epoch, as an independent force capable of breaking the hold of both capitalism and Stalinist reaction, really never crystallizes as a focal idea for these people.
They are nationalist, chauvinist. Germany does not even appear as a problem in The Mandarins, for example. Nor do they think in terms of some sort of larger integration such as a United States of Europe, not to speak of a democratic socialist Europe, the only basis upon which the economy of France can hope to begin to survive. In the end you realize that at heart they do not even have the perspective of a social revolution in their own country – simply a program of pressure on the existing government.
 
ANOTHER, AND ALLIED, BLIGHT of the times taints the book – academicism, particularly in its aspect of detachment, which really comes down to cowardice and moral callousness. Beauvoir, the former lycée professor, played no role in the resistance. As she herself documents in America Day by Day, when she visited the United States after the war her time was almost equally divided between night club hopping, drinking, lecturing at universities, simple sight-seeing, and bewailing the times’ decay with the Partisan Review crowd. She has no basic identification with the working class world or with working class politics. What a contrast between The Mandarins and the rich literature in France over the past thirty years which finds its setting in the workaday world outside the Latin Quarter!
 
THIS LACK OF INVOLVEMENT with her characters gives a contrived atmosphere to anything in the book which is not on the plane of ideas – sex, love, tenderness, deep feeling, human relations, the physical setting, nature. Like the writings of Francoise Sagan, The Mandarins sounds like a very clever fulfillment of an assignment in Advanced Composition in some university. But the whole book misses fire. Even a momentary comparison with the work of Colette reveals everything.
Under these conditions it is not surprising that there is not a whole person in the book, not one who escapes the pestilence of hopelessness, not one who is capable of love. Lambert joins the staff of Les Beaux Jours, a literary journal catering to former collaborators. Vincent pursues a career of killing former collaborators who have never been brought to justice. One of those he kills is Sezenac, a former member of the resistance who turns out to have been an informer. Paula, Perron’s mistress is institutionalized and released effectively a zombie. The CP intellectuals are revealed as captives – and know that they are. Anne, the raisonneuse of the book, decides – on the next to the last page – not to commit suicide.
Part of this atmosphere is, of course, the product of the existentialist formula and is therefore a reflection of the decay of the times as viewed by a given school and a specific individual of that school. As with Simone de Beauvoir herself, mortality and death gnaw at the well-being of the people in her books day in and night out as persistently as ever they did at the population of Europe during the Black Death. Action seems a final futility.
In the long run we are all dead, and no person who has not come to some sort of reconciliation with that fact is ready for a total experiencing of life. On this level, one of the problems for Marxists, at least, is to differentiate between irreducible existential problems and those which are the product of epoch, class, and accident. Not the least of the victories of socialism in resolving the basic problems of physical and psychological existence will be to permit ever increasing numbers of people to confront the problems of beginnings and ends, and of transcendence, in all their infiniteness. Their responses will have a gravity and a beauty denied those evoked in The Mandarins, which are in the end so largely simply the lament of an articulate caste in a dying culture ...
* * *
Footnotes
1.
The Mandarins, by Simone de Beauvoir, The World Publishing Company, New York City 1956.
2. The Hungarian events have provided us with this opportunity. Shortly after this review was written Sartre and, needless to say, Beauvoir, along with several other non- party and party intellectuals, issued a statement condemning the Russian armed intervention in Hungary.
Since we have every confidence in Sartre’s unquestionable gift for transforming the obvious into the incomprehensible, we would attach only moderate importance to his recent turn except that it is symptomatic of the greatest reexamination of conscience that has taken place among French left-wing intellectuals since the time of the Hitler-Stalin pact. And since this re-examination is taking place under infinitely better circumstances than could possibly have obtained in 1939 it warrants the closest attention. – (J.M.F.)
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (17 December 1945)      Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page  James M. Fenwick Off Limits (17 December 1945)  From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 51, 17 December 1945, p. 3.Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.   Chicken Every Day I suppose that there is hardly an infantryman who has not said at one time or another during his army career when the going was rough or the chicken was especially deep, “I sure wish now that I had enlisted in the navy. It’s a lot better deal.” Of course, even while saying that, we had a sneaking suspicion that the West Point riff-raff, ex-numbers’ racket salesmen, professional bootlickers, former college fraternity boys, pool room habitués, bond salesmen, policemen, and the reactionary and ignorant samples of the flower of southern chivalry who composed our officers, had their counterparts in the navy. Life magazine recently printed some interviews with navy men that shows our suspicions to have been only too well founded. “They dislike the Navy,” says the article, “for its traditional belief that an enlisted man can’t think for himself; for its tendency to make him a ‘prisoner of the ship’ while the officers are allowed to go ashore; and for its habit of paying less attention to its men’s all-around intelligence than any other branch of the service ... “The veterans have seen a wealth of Navy supplies and man-hours of labor lavished on officers’ clubs in Hawaii, Bermuda, Noumea, Espiritu Santo, Manus, Ulithi, Guam, Leyte, Samar, and Saipan. They have carried officers’ gear and baggage. They have toted provisions, beer and liquor to officers’ clubs from freighters and supply ships. “Some have been on smaller craft where the ship’s movies were always held in the officers’ wardroom, with standing room only for the men, instead of in the general mess where all officers and men could have been seated. They have been on ships where most of the welfare fund, or very disproportionate parts of the fund were spent on such items as golf clubs, tennis rackets and football tickets, which only benefited the officers. “A radioman, now on the Seattle, part of the receiving station at Pier 92 in New York, recalls seeing gangs of Seabees and Filipinos work for weeks at Manila to prepare the flower beds and lawns of one of the Pacific’s largest villas for the occupancy of a vice admiral.”   What About the Army? It is not surprising to find that some of the men feel that the contemptible treatment is peculiar to the navy and that things are better in the army. One navy man “suggested that the admirals study the human-relations set-up in the 1st Marine Division, the 1st Cavalry Division, the 1st Infantry Division, the Rangers or any of General Patton’s armored divisions. ‘In those outfits the men always come first. They’re fed first. They get to wash first, if there’s a chance. They’re bivouacked first and they’re dug in first. And if it’s a matter of recreation, the officers start for their own only after they’ve fixed it up for the troops to get theirs’.” The writer of this column cannot speak for most of the outfits mentioned, but I can speak of conditions within the First Division, of which I was a member for fifteen months. And I am sorry to report to our navy friend that life in “The Fighting First” was not only not as he imagines, but directly the opposite. In short, it was much like life in the navy. As a matter of fact, the life of the enlisted man in all the armies and navies of the world is much the same, except that the life of the enlisted men in foreign armies is infinitely worse. Anyone who had the slightest contact with foreign soldiers knows the miserable conditions under which they exist.   The British and the French The redeployment situation in the English army, for instance, is worse than ours, especially when it is considered that many English soldiers have been fighting for six years and are still forced to fight against colonial liberation movements all over the Far East. From one rubber plant in England, 4,000 men were inducted into the army. To date, only twelve have been returned through redeployment, and six of them have been re-inducted into the army. The French enlisted man is no better off. The French economy is so decrepit that it can hardly sustain an army. A private’s pay is 180 francs a month—or less than what an American soldier can get on the French black market for two packages of cigarettes. Since the army cannot furnish the French soldier a complete uniform, he is forced to buy it on the black market (at 800 francs for a pair of o.d. pants and a shirt) or make a deal with an American soldier. Discipline is even more petty and intense than in the American army. In generals like de Lattre, who personally inspects his men’s teeth and underwear, and has palatial headquarters built for him by the enlisted men, France has a general who can give even a human zero like Patton a few lessons. The discipline in the German and Japanese armies was notorious in its brutality. It is useless to try to attempt to explain this condition by imagining that it is caused by simple ignorance on the part of certain officers, that it flows from bad precedents established by the Royal Navy, or that it is simply “the Army.” As long as capitalism with its class society exists there will also exist a capitalist army with an aristocratic minority riding upon the backs of the majority, who possess almost no rights. Since very few people in their right senses will join a capitalist army voluntarily under “normal” circumstances, and since capitalist propaganda has great difficulty in hiding the fact that the war is solely for the benefit of capitalist profits, the army has to be created and held together by force. This force is wielded by the officer caste, that privileged minority which is bribed by capitalism through better pay, the best cuts of meat, a jeep and driver, a softer bed roll, access to nurses for social purposes, liquor rations, dog-robbers, terminal leave, salutes, separate entrances to buildings, private latrines, and better burials. It’s as simple as that.   
M. Fenwick: Off Limits: The Brutalization of the American Soldier - I (24 December 1945)      Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page  The Brutalization of the American Soldier  James M. Fenwick Off Limits Part IThe Brutalization of the American Soldier (24 December 1945)  From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 52, 24 December 1945, p. 3.Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.   Early last September, I, along with 450 other men, left northern Bavaria for eventual redeployment home. Bavaria is hauntingly beautiful, but now most of it is an indescribably complete and depressing ruin. Everywhere wander children, old men and women, and young, mutilated Wehrmacht veterans, picking their way through the rubble, trying somehow to live. On one occasion we stopped beside a freight train loaded with displaced persons. We all got out of our freight cars to stretch. Standing on the loading platform beside a pitiful heap of personal belongings was a young woman. One of the men of our unit walked up to her, coolly lifted her dress over her head, and slowly inspected her as if she were a slave on the block. The woman stood there in her filthy underclothing, afraid to move or object, torn with rage, tears and shame. Only my buddy and I protested. “Put that woman’s dress down!” The soldier turned to us, still holding up the dress, spit casually and said: “What the hell’s it to you?” Yes, yes ... what was it to us?   The War Has Debased All Human Values That little incident defines very well the plight of millions of people in Europe today. Certainly at no time within the memory of living man has the value of human life sunk so low. And it demonstrates very well, also, the brutalization which has taken place of an unfortunately large number of American troops in Europe. It is a little surprising, even for a class-conscious veteran, to return home and find how little actual knowledge exists on the conduct of the American soldier in Europe. And it is equally surprising, when stories are printed in such magazines as Life or even Politics, to find how cautiously the argumentation is advanced and how carefully the documentation is adduced in support of the facts. For there is not a GI who was in combat in Europe who cannot tell scores of stories which are so vile that many soldiers endowed with a sense of human decency have come to feel that mankind is essentially bestial and irredeemable; the French and Belgian press have been full of denunciations of American soldiers – a harbinger of a full-scale political revolt against American imperialism’s domination of Europe. In Germany, where the Americans have behaved many times worse, the Germans are in no position to protest. *  “You Are Worse Than the Germans!” A French professor in Paris who had formerly been a liaison officer with the British, who had lived in both the United States and England, and who bitterly, disliked the Germans, once told a group of us that in their personal relations with the French the Germans were models of correctness compared with the Americans. A Belgian Trotskyist in a small mining town who can by no means be accused of chauvinism, summed up the situation by saying: “The American soldiers treat us like conquerors, not like liberators.” Yet what soldier who was there can forget those bright summer days of late August and early September 1944, when it almost seemed that the war had meaning? Everywhere were crude signs hung across the houses: “Thanks to our Liberators!” “Long Live the Americans!” Everywhere crowds thronged the streets, offering tomatoes, pears, apples, cognac, wine, mint drinks and bread. Everyone was laughing, clambering up on the vehicles and kissing the Americans, even while shots were stiil echoing in the streets. Children were held up to touch the fabulous Americans as they passed by. The FFI (French Forces of the Interior) appeared in the open, proudly wearing their tricolor brassards. The long night was over. The Hitler empire, which was to endure for a thousand years, was falling to the ground in dust. Hardly a year later one of the common jokes current in Paris was, “The Americans liberated us from the Germans. Now who’ll liberate us from the Americans?” What happened in the interim?   
M. Fenwick: The Brutalization of the American Soldier - II (31 December 1945)      Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page  The Brutalization of the American Soldier  James M. Fenwick Off Limits Part IIThe Brutalization of the American Soldier (31 December 1945)  From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 53, 31 December 1945, p. 3.Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.   During the war the American press was filled with horrifying stories of the devastation and the brutality accompanying German and Russian military operations, That the facts were, in the main, not manufactured but true, proves once again how far the retrogression of humanity has proceeded, even in comparison with the depths attained by World War I. But if the American capitalist press were honest (what a bold thought!) it would have exposed and condemned similar acts on the part of the American army. While quantitatively and qualitatively these acts did not reach the levels of bestiality to which German fascism sank, they did violate every civilized norm achieved so painfully by thousands of years of human struggle. The vileness of the conduct of a large number of American soldiers in Europe is one of the chief factors which are currently creating a wave of hatred against Americans in allied and enemy countries alike.   The Years of the Locusts The Germans, of course, being the enemy, received the full force of American brutality, whether it was the product of official strategy or of the individual soldier. It is now admitted that the allied bombing of Berlin, like the German use of flying bombs or rockets against London, served almost no strategic purpose. Children, old people, and women formed an unduly large number of the victims. It was terror bombing. The capitalist press, whose cultural level is well exemplified by such an ingeniously sadistic comic strip as Dick Tracy, frequently denounced the cultural vandalism of the nazis, who destroyed the Tschaikowsky museum, melted down ancient Belgian church bells, and committed other crimes against universal culture. Our record is little better. Elements of my regiment occupied buildings of the University of Bonn, formerly one of the most renowned schools of the world. Karl Marx, among others, studied there. What allied bombings began, our ground forces completed. Scientific equipment was looted, books and valuable research were destroyed. Similarly, Beethoven’s birthplace, likewise located in Bonn, is now a mass of wreckage.   “Lootin’ Is Verbootin’!” Looting was almost universal among officers and men alike. German prisoners, as a matter of routine, were stripped of cameras, watches, money (“You won’t need that anymore!”), jewelry, cigarette lighters, gloves, and even photographs of wives, mothers, and sweethearts. The first measure after capturing a town was to loot it. Some looked for cognac, some sought money, the pious stole Bibles. So avid became the looting fever in our regiment that sometimes Germans would be holding the second floor of a home while our troops would be looting the first floor. On one occasion three German half-tracks shot up a town our forces had just taken, surprising the men while they were looting and before they were dug in. Officers, having exceptional opportunities, were in many cases exceptional looters. Looting became so commonly accepted that barracks bags became known as “loot sacks.” The attitude toward it became summed up in a cynical, stereotyped dialogue: “What you got there? You know lootin’s verbootin’!’’ “I didn’t loot this – I LIBERATED it!”   Man’s Inhumanity to Man Brutality toward Germans was common, especially during combat. Every combat soldier knows that German soldiers were oftgn mercilessly beaten while being interrogated. Frightened, disarmed prisoners were many times taken into the woods or into a shed and shot. German civilians were treated with arrogance and brutality. Often, aged German couples were given half an hour to evacuate their homes so that their house could be occupied by our troops. Where were they to go? With what? That was their problem. Food from mess halls were thrown away before it would be given to Germans. I have seen small children, who were trying to salvage food from garbage cans, driven away with riding crops. Ravenously hungry displaced persons, their hands stretched out imploringly through the fence surrounding the mess were treated similarly. The standard greeting to a German woman was, “Wieviel?” – “How much?” They were constantly subjected to obscenities and suggestive acts which if committed on an American street would invite a beating or commitment to a psychiatric ward. Taking advantage of the crushing economic chaos, soldiers purchased sexual pleasure on the crudest barter basis, in which chocolate, C rations, soap, or tobacco were used as the medium of exchange. The relation was on the meanest level, the woman customarily being referred to as “my pig.”   An Unendurable Friendship The situation was hardly better in Allied countries. Houses in combat areas were similarly looted. French and Belgian men were either ignored or treated almost like enemies. In cities like Reims or Paris, which were leave centers, French women were treated on the streets as if they were universally prostitutes. Prostitutes were themselves often beaten, cheated or robbed. Private homes were broken into by soldiers demanding to see the girls. Drunkenness was common. It was not unusual to see GI’s stretched out cold in subway stations. Mirrors were shot out in bars. Frenchmen were beaten up with the slightest provocation. In short, American troops behaved like conquerors. Even with his own comrades, particularly if they were from another outfit, the American soldier behaved contemptibly. This was especially evident in the attitude taken by white soldiers toward Negroes. Fights, ganging up on Negroes by whites and shootings were almost a nightly occurrence in areas where Negroes and whites were billeted near each other. What is the reason for such conduct? Is human nature inherently and irrevocably debased? Why did so many American soldiers in Europe behave in a fashion that made persons possessed of a sense of even common decency avert their eyes in shame?   
M. Fenwick: The Brutalization of the American Soldier (December 1945/January 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
The Brutalization of the American Soldier
(December 1945/January 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 52, 24 December 1945, p. 3, Vol. IX No. 53, 31 December 1945, p. 3, Vol. X No. 1, 7 January 1946, p. 3, Vol. X No. 2, 14 January 1946, p. 3, Vol. X No. 3, 21 January 1946, p. 3 & Vol. X No. 4, 28 January 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Part I

Part II

Part III

Part IV

Part V

Part VI
 

: Self-Rule for Colonies; Bring the GI’s Home (17 December 1945)      Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page  J.M.F. Self-Rule for Colonies;Bring the GI’s Home (17 December 1945)  From Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 51, 17 December 1945, p. 4.Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.  In its efforts to hide the real character of the world we live in, the capitalist press will resort to anything. Many times it even stoops to telling the truth. And the current truth is that while millions of soldiers and sailors in all the God-forsaken corners of the globe are sweating out redeployment, allegedly because of the lack of shipping space, scores of American-made ships are transporting the troops and materiel being used in the horrible massacre of the native populations of China, Indonesia and Indo-China. The case is simple: The colonial peoples want the right to govern themselves. They want this right so that they can free themselves from the exploitation which condemns them to a life little better than that of the beasts of the fields.  U.S. Replaces Nazis But imperialist France, Holland, Britain and the United States want control of these areas for economy, political and military reasons of their own. France and Holland, Which themselves know what it means to suffer under the yoke of a foreign oppressor, came out of the war so economically weak, however, that they can no longer even be simple and effective tyrants and murderers. The job had to be taken over by powerful United States imperialism. That the United States foreign policy thereby becomes almost indistinguishable from the policy of Nazi Germany should come as a surprise only to those who believe that the war was fought for paper ideals like “democracy” rather than because of the capitalist greed for profits. For the American soldier and sailor the present situation is a clear proof of the old socialist truth that the interests of workers all over the world are identical. Withdraw the troops, ships and arms being used against the colonial peoples in their struggle for independence! Bring the American soldiers and sailors home!   
M. Fenwick: Lost Decade (January 1949)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Books in Review
Lost Decade
(January 1949)

From The New International, Vol. XV No. 1, January 1949, pp. 29–30.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The Last of the Provincials
by Maxwell Geismar
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 1947, 404 pages, $8.50
Looking backward at the early 1930s, now receding so swiftly behind us, we are able to appreciate what a fruitful period of Marxist culture it represented for the United States. The Marxist approach lay behind a great deal of the significant writing of the period. There was James T. Farrell in the field of the novel; Clifford Odets in the drama; that much neglected man, V.F. Calverton, in sociology; Edmund Wilson in literary criticism; Lewis Corey in economics; and there were scores of others. There was also a large body of important writing which was influenced by the Marxist climate. Lundberg’s America’s 60 Families is a good enough example.
Of course, a great deal of the writing in this genre was inept. But the inner rot which caused the structure to collapse was Stalinism. In the early phase it was ultra-leftism, which, lacking all subtlety, vitiated the work. In the latter phase it was the policy of collective security, which produced an unstable union of liberal capitalist ideology and Stalinism. This blew up the series of explosions which followed the Moscow trials, the republican defeat in Spain, the improvement of economic conditions, and the Hitler-Stalin Pact. About all that was left when the smoke cleared were propagandists for U.S. or Russian imperialism and a small residue of anti-Stalinist socialists.
What is the prospect for the future? It cannot be called inviting. V-J Day was no Salamis, to be followed by a long and relatively undisturbed period of peace in which culture will flourish like the green bay tree. Everything is being subordinated to the necessities of the war against Russia, especially in those fields closest to the social scene. A recent reading by this reviewer of Ruth Benedict’s The Chrysanthemum and the Sword, a purportedly scientific anthropological study of the Japanese mentality, gives a foretaste of what is ahead.
The threats and the propaganda of governmental agencies are even felling representatives of the anti-Stalinist socialist vanguard who escaped from the last disaster in full possession of their faculties. Stalinist writing, of course, is due for an eclipse, as is genuinely Marxist writing, and writing influenced by it. Fortunately, the decline is not a direct one. There are residual currents and counter-tendencies which occasionally cast up books worth reading. Maxwell Geismar’s The Last of the Provincials is such a book.
Geismar owes a great deal to the Marxist literary critics of the ’30s, to their predecessors like Parrington, and to their successors like Kazin. In this book he analyzes five American writers of the period 1915–1925, using the sociological approach. His analyses very skillfully extricate the leading themes of each author’s works and relate these works to the development of American society. Esthetic elements of the works are treated in proper subordination.
H.L. Mencken, the subject of the initial essay in the book, is, unfortunately, the least satisfactorily treated of all the authors considered – a fact easily ascribable to the contradictory character of this man who had such a great influence on the intelligentsia of the ’20s. Geismar catches the main outlines, however.
“His value, therefore,” says Geismar, “lies as much in his profound and unwilling reflection of a period as in his brilliant reporting of it. If he helped to mold the spirit of the post-war epoch he also betrayed its underlying pressures ... And if he undervalued the resources of our democratic social arrangement – exaggerating in this as in so much else, he could hardly exaggerate the blind consuming power as well as the blind fertility of our industrial machine.”
Geismar underrates Mencken’s contribution in at least two respects: his tremendous role in introducing European and American literature to the United States – with the enhanced sensibility which resulted – and his role in developing a critical attitude toward capitalist culture.
The essay on Sinclair Lewis is full of stimulating insights. Of Lewis’ literary world Geismar says:
“This is also a middle class which is essentially without a home life, without children, without religion, and finally, without an economic status to speak of: a middle class which is without all the historical props of a middle class, and which, hardly established in power, has every appearance of dissolving – including the escape into a dream world of the middle class ...”
The essay on Willa Cather is brought around very judicially, using as a point of orientation the thesis that:
“... the whole range of Cather’s values, standards, tastes, and prejudices, her tone, is that of an inherent aristocrat in an equalitarian order, of an agrarian writer in an industrial order, of a defender of the spiritual graces in the midst of an increasingly materialistic culture.”
Geismar does full justice to that attractive figure in American literature, Sherwood Anderson, whose work can be summed up in the statement Geismar applies to one of Anderson’s last productions, Home Town:
“Then there is Anderson’s realization that ‘the breakup which came to America in ’29’ – a breakup whose echoes are everywhere in the volume – that this last and most radical change in the pattern of a changing American life probably marks the final, the ineradicable breakup of the earlier agrarian society he has made his own.”
The final essay is on F. Scott Fitzgerald, that tragic, glittering figure, half snob, half radical. Of him Geismar concludes:
“Although Fitzgerald remains the folklorist of the rich in their more restricted aspects, and, like his own Munro Stahr, who had never learned enough about the feel of America, still retains a ‘certain half-naive conception of the common weal,’ there are few others who could have given such a bright and glowing intensity to such a shallow world ... this age in itself beautiful and damned, for which horror and death waited at every corner, and whose youth may seem ‘never so vanished as now’.”
In a final section titled, Summary: The Years of Loss, Geismar evaluates the literary decade 1915–1925. In words which occasionally smack of the Church Fathers he denominates the ’20s as the coming of age of capitalism and the voices of this period as voices which testify against it.
“Here, certainly,” he concludes, “is Conrad’s sense of terror and darkness in the life of man, but where is that accompanying sense of the wonder and prodigality of life?”
It is proper to bring together and to assess this period whose leading representatives served as precursors of those who in the depression decade more explicitly understood the evils of the times. And yet how distant both of them now seem to us! Hardly has the intelligentsia begun to assimilate the disappearance of the frontier, the decline of the village, the monstrous growth of capitalism, the unprecedented depression and World War II, than it faces problems of undreamed-of complexity, extensiveness and import. The literary masterpieces of the ’20s are recessive, they are dropping below the horizon. For the conflicts which elevated them to greatness are beginning to seem trivial before those of the atomic war and capitalist barbarism which are looming up over the horizon.
When has the intelligentsia of the United States ever approached the cataclysm more poorly prepared? Where are even the Jeremiahs and the prophets of the threatened catastrophe?
 

M. Fenwick: Eisenhower - Portrait in Brass (March 1949)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Eisenhower: Portrait in Brass
A Critical Appraisal of a Nurtured Legend
(March 1949)

From The New International, Vol. XV No. 3, March 1949, pp. 72–77.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

In our secular age it is not often that we are given the opportunity to observe the birth, growth and nurturing of a god. In the career of Eisenhower, however, we are witness to just such a phenomenon. The legend began seven years ago and has steadily grown.
It has survived even the publication of his collected speeches and the circulation of over a half million copies of Crusade in Europe.
The quantity of literature in the United States critical of Eisenhower is extraordinarily small. Only Ralph Ingersoll has dared raise a really profane voice. But his Top Secret is a book based on the provincial thesis that the United States was and is the innocent victim of British diplomacy. It is a concept which necessarily vitiates his evaluation of Eisenhower.
A critical appraisal of this public figure has been long overdue.
 
1
Contrary to popular opinion, Eisenhower’s main contribution in World War II was not in the military field. Though his military intervention in the European campaigns was constant, it was circumscribed.
Strategic aims were set by the American and British governmental heads in conjunction with the combined chiefs of staff. Tactical problems were resolved by the combined chiefs of staff and lower echelons. Almost all important steps – and many trifling ones – were taken by Eisenhower in consultation with the combined chiefs of staff, to whom he frequently referred as “my bosses.”
Only a very few pressing decisions were made by Eisenhower alone: one was the decision to postpone D-Day for the Normandy assault; another concerned the exploitation of the Remagen bridgehead. There were few others. None required a high order of genius.
The English press was correct (if a bit ... unsporting) in referring to Eisenhower as “the chairman of the board.” In an age of total industrial mobilization, mass armies, world fronts, and unprecedentedly massive coalitions, battles can no longer be directed by one man from a carriage pulled up on commanding ground. Modern war is a corporate effort. “The atmosphere in his quarters,” says Kay Summersby in My Boss Eisenhower, “was that of a business executive, not a five-star general.” That catches it.
His primary role was that of a top-level spot coordinator of the Allied forces in Western Europe. He was a mediator, not a messianic personality. As was the case in military matters, all important political and social policies were worked out on the governmental level. The basic decisions were made at multinational conferences such as took place at Casablanca or Yalta. Other decisions were made by Roosevelt, the State Department, the Treasury Department, and even, on occasion, Congress itself.
Eisenhower did not initiate policy. He lubricated the Allied machinery when friction developed, or threatened to develop, in actualizing these plans.
He absorbed the Churchill pressure for further diversions in the Mediterranean after cross-channel commitments had already been made – and also mollified English and United States Red Cross girls who were squabbling over uniforms. He mediated British inter-service feuds – and also answered crank letters from empire patriots. He worked at getting arms away from the Belgian Forces of the Interior – and also took an honorary degree from the University of Louvain. He overruled air-force opposition, ordering United States strategic bombing units to be used tactically – and also decided how captured liquor should be divided between officers and enlisted men. He took special measures to secure more landing craft from United States shipyards – and also worked to get more home-front publicity for his generals.
 
Personal Credentials
Eisenhower was perfectly cognizant of what was expected of him. He was deliberately picked out by Chief of Staff Marshall – who was himself a type similar to Eisenhower – over the heads of many senior officers whose nicknames themselves suggest their incapacity for this particular job: Ben (Yoo-Hoo!) Lear, J.C.H. (Jesus Christ Himself) Lee, George S. Patton Jr. (Old Blood and Guts).
It must be admitted that Eisenhower turned in a first-rate performance. His work was no small factor in achieving the Allied cooperation which was so strikingly genuine, especially when compared with the jungle law which governed inter-Axis relations and relations within the German army itself.
That Eisenhower was able to achieve this was due to a happy conjunction of personal qualities which are uncommon enough in civilian life – and so rare in the military one as normally to be construed as a weakness by the professional army officer. Eisenhower’s social presence is composed of the following: modesty, courtesy, sociability, democratic behavior, tactfulness, a trim figure, and a photogenic smile. Charm.
This is backed up by an alert but not profound mind, a good memory, self-confidence, a variegated peacetime military experience at home and abroad, a very competent understanding of his trade, and an ability to speak coherently – this latter in an occupation where speaking ability can normally be registered in decibels only.
On the organizational plane he possesses four prime requisites: the ability to choose able associates, delegate responsibility, back up subordinates, and act decisively.
But beyond this – these are the superficies – what are the man’s beliefs and capabilities? They are not the mystery that newspaper writers would have us believe.
 
2
Was he a great general?
“Germany,” wrote Amiel in 1871, “will teach the French that rhetoric is not science.” It remained for the United States to teach Germany that science is not mass production. Under conditions of overwhelming superiority in manpower and material such as the Allies enjoyed over the Axis powers, the skill of a general--or his lack of it – was obscured.
In the final three years of the war the failing resources of the Germans lent very great importance to the qualifications of each German general, thereby making an estimation relatively easy. The best of them were the exceptional generals of this war. Even if Eisenhower’s intervention on the military plane had been more direct than it was, it would be difficult to assess his military capabilities.
Were the North African, Sicilian, and Italian campaigns needless wastes which prevented the mounting of a cross-channel invasion in 1943, one year earlier than it actually took place? Probably. Eisenhower more or less thought so. That he could not firmly oppose them was not basically due to his ambivalent attitude but to conditions of coalition war: Russian pressure for a second front, English pressure for action in the Mediterranean – and pressure from Roosevelt, who wanted our newly conscripted troops to see action.
 
Tactical Errors?
Was the strategy of the broad front in attacking Germany wrong as against the British proposal for a thrust north of the Ruhr? Possibly. Was the Salerno operation badly executed ? Probably. Badoglio thought so. Was the Ardennes attack by the Germans a product of Allied carelessness and overconfidence? Unquestionably. But these and other probable errors can be written off as representing the normal permissible incidence of mistakes in a long war, mistakes in which Eisenhower shared. But were they mistakes? Unfortunately, battlefields are not chessboards where the problem can be set up again and replayed.
The question becomes somewhat academic. A successful general is a good general. Eisenhower was successful.
 
3
Where does Eisenhower stand politically?
Like most professional soldiers, Eisenhower has an aversion for politics, which is regarded as a disturbing element in the classic unrolling of military operations. In Eisenhower’s case this aversion is compounded by the traditional American lack of feel for international diplomacy.
Throughout the war Eisenhower merely followed the State Department line. This was true even in North Africa, where Roosevelt urbanely and publicly placed the responsibility for the Darlan deal on Eisenhower. This is not to say that Eisenhower disagreed with the pro-Vichy policy. He did, in fact, agree with it, basing himself on the practical grounds (which in the end proved not so practical) of military expediency.
He had no specific ideas of his own – just a conservative military bias so ingrained that he simply could not even understand the point of view of the liberal opposition to the North Africa policy. (“The liberals crucified me in North Africa.”) It was many a month before he could establish even reasonable working relations with De Gaulle and the Committee of National Liberation which represented the French resistance movement.
 
A Political Primitive
Nor is there any evidence in Harry C. Butcher’s semi-official diary My Three Years with Eisenhower that until the outraged roar from the United States reached Africa Eisenhower was at all sensitive to the existence of the Vichy concentration camps maintained in Africa and to the operative anti-Semitic laws. As it was, not until five months after the African invasion were the infamous Nuremberg laws repealed !
Butcher reveals the atmosphere at SHAEF at that time:
“In England we were harassed on the Negro question by liberty-loving provocateurs. In Africa we, apparently, are supposed by these same gentlemen to have a general election of Arabs, Jews and French to elect a congress and president, and then go on with the war.”
In Italy, likewise, Eisenhower betrayed no democratic tremors in dealing with the Fascist general Badoglio (the Duke of Addis Ababa!) and the House of Savoy, which had propped up the shaky Mussolini regime over the years.
Politically, Eisenhower is simply a primitive. He led a hand-to-mouth existence, depending for sustenance on the Allied policy at any given time. He foresaw nothing. To the politically sophisticated Churchill, who insisted that the Anglo-American forces drive on to Berlin, Eisenhower stubbornly replied that it was not militarily necessary. He could not appreciate the political implications motivating Churchill’s proposals.
His opposition to the army’s running of military governments was not based upon democratic principles but upon military exclusiveness and contempt for civilian activities. His analysis of the Russian problem – after he finally got around to seeing one – went no deeper than thinking that everything would turn out all right if the Russians and Americans could sit down and talk things over.
Eisenhower has not committed himself on any non-military domestic issue, a fact of symptomatic importance. But it is not difficult to deduce the conservative nature of his politics.
Here we have to speak of an orientation, for it is doubtful if Eisenhower has ever formulated a concrete political program. His typically mealy-mouthed statement on Roosevelt in Crusade in Europe affords a clue:
“With some of Mr. Roosevelt’s political acts I could never possibly agree. But I knew him solely in his capacity as a leader of a nation at war – and in that capacity he seemed to me to fulfill all that could possibly be expected of him.”
The deprecatory counterposition of the New Deal president to the war president is obvious.
His whole life has been passed within one of the most conservative milieus in society – that of the regular army. And Patton, the authoritarian prototype, was one of his best friends in that army. That Eisenhower is considered “safe” by business has been demonstrated by his post-war career. To become president of Columbia University he had to pass inspection by a board of trustees whose Republican conservatism is irreproachable.
 
4
Eisenhower’s own economic position is not calculated to make him a subverter of society. His salary as president of Columbia is reported to be around $25,000 a year; his army pension is $15,000. The sum paid Eisenhower for Crusade in Europe has been rumored at be somewhere between $100,000 and a million dollars.
His handling of the publication deal indicates a real flair for survival in a chancy civilian world. According to the New Yorker:
“The manuscript was finished on March 24th and sold to Doubleday early this month [October 1948] ... The reason for the hiatus, and for the outright sale rather than the usual royalties deal, was a ruling by the income-tax people that in this way Eisenhower would qualify for a twenty- five per cent capital-gains tax on the transaction, instead of being subject to the graduated income tax. The capital-gains tax is limited to twenty-five per cent only in the case of so-called capital assets held at least six months, and apparently writers can get in under it when they are non-professionals.”
It is difficult not to believe the rumor that places him in the Republican Party. There is, however, more explicit evidence.
 
Party Allegiance
On the basis of conversations with Eisenhower in Europe in 1945, Harry Hopkins stated that Eisenhower “and his family had voted against Roosevelt every time up until 1944; but that he did vote for Roosevelt this last time.” Robert Sherwood, Hopkins’ biographer, states in Roosevelt and Hopkins:
“Eisenhower once told me (it was in London in March 1944) that his family had always been Kansas Republicans but that he himself had never voted in his life. He felt that since an army officer must serve his government with fully loyalty and devotion regardless of its political coloration, he should avoid all considerations of political partisanship.”
Sherwood’s view, which coincides more closely with Eisenhower’s expressed attitude toward politics than does the Hopkins statement, is in any event not in direct opposition to it, since the general Republican atmosphere is accepted in both cases.
That several labor leaders panted after Eisenhower is a measure not of Eisenhower’s pro-labor sentiments but of the desperation induced by their self-confinement in the two-party system.
“As late as the summer of 1944,” notes his biographer Kenneth S. Davis in Soldier of Democracy, “he said repeatedly in private conversation: ‘The liberals crucified me in North Africa. All this talk about my “betraying the common people” – it’s absurd. I am a common man myself, more so than most of those people who are always talking about the “proletariat.” I’ve worked with my hands at about every kind of job there is.’”
 
Ideological Elements
But Eisenhower is hardly a “common man.” His whole life from the age of twenty-one has been spent in the army. For two years prior to that he worked full time in a creamery, not “at about every kind of job there is.” He was never a member of a labor union. He has never made an explicit statement of any sort which might be construed as indicating sympathy for organized labor. In his talk to the CIO convention in 1946 he stressed “cooperation,” his post-war stock in trade.
Fundamentally, this field, like so many others, is alien ground for Eisenhower. “During the war period when I drove the general and worked in his office,” Summersby notes, “I never once heard him discuss such questions as racial segregation, capital vs. labor, international politics, or any other of the usual signposts to political conviction. He was too busy directing the war ... to put a conversational toe into such dangerous waters.”
But Eisenhower has been portrayed as a democratic military type. Isn’t he?
His democratic attitudes are genuine. On the personal plane they probably derive from Mennonite forebears, Kansas equalitarianism, and personal inclination – nurtured in the socializing climate of a large, working-class family. On the national plane they reflect the traditional democracy of American life, the absence of a feudal military tradition, and the disciplinary latitude which a tremendous industrial potential permits.
But this democratic spirit of Eisenhower’s is limited. It is, after all, synchronized with army norms.
He can visit his enlisted-man driver when he is hospitalized – and also rake his “naval aide” Butcher over the coals for eating with the same driver. He can intervene to retain Mauldin’s cartoons and the B-Bag (letters to the editor) in the army daily Stars and Stripes – and also keep the Patton slapping incident out of the press. He can order supply troops out of Paris – and also take a vacation on the Riviera himself during the final phases of the battle for the Rhine. He can order priorities on supplies for front-line troops – and also maintain a private armored train, complete when en route with billiard table, record player, movie screen and projector, portable generator, jeeps, several dogs, a cat, two cows, and a large entourage including a tailor and a driver used also, on occasion, for retrieving golf balls. He can, without revulsion, have champagne with his meals and dine on oysters sent by air from the United States.
On the Negro question – a real democratic touchstone – Eisenhower is Jim Crow. His typical, ambiguously formulated position is caught by Butcher in a diary entry dated July 14, 1942, describing an early press conference which took up the question of policy toward Negro troops in England:
“... he told them his policy for handling colored troops would be absolute equality of treatment, but there would be segregation where facilities afforded. The colored troops are to have everything as good as the white.”
Neither during the war itself nor after did Eisenhower evince even a desire to abrogate the Jim Crow system in the army.
His democratic role (carefully photographed and recorded in all its phases) served as a front for the benefit of the people back home. In the European Theater of Operations his example – such as it was – was not catching.
In fact it didn’t affect even his chief of staff and close friend, Walter Bedell Smith, of whom Summersby writes:
“Most of the headquarters staff, especially the junior officers, regarded General Smith as a complete Prussian. He could be, too – tough, humorless, driving, with all the sentiment of an SS general. As Beetle himself often put it, ‘Someone around the top has to be an absolute S.O.B. and Ike’s not in a position to do it all the time. So that’s my job.’”
There’s the real ETO atmosphere!
 
5
In late 1948 with the publication of Crusade in Europe Eisenhower emerged as a historian. It must be said immediately that the book is unique in at least one respect – it was dictated and finished in forty-six days. There were obviously no problems of intellectual logistics involved.
The first impression is of the failure to establish the locus of the war in the historical continuum. Out of what did it come, and why? And when in the end Eisenhower turns his back upon the lunar landscapes in ruined Germany and returns to the United States no question arises for him of what follows for humanity. There is no tortured sigh for human suffering which even the hard-bitten Churchill cannot keep out of his morality-play prose.
 
Inept Historical Judgments
Military events are treated descriptively, not analytically. Nothing exists in depth. Only superficial use is made of the key information gained from post-war interrogations of captured German officers, without which it is impossible to present a historically viable work. (“... the German mind, if it is a mind,” remarks Eisenhower, in an access of smugness, of some of the best military brains of his times.)
Beyond the ritualistic reference to Cannae there is virtually no examination of World War II in the light of past military theory, particularly that of the post-World War I period. Even rudimentary technical matters which formed such fierce points of contention during the war Eisenhower does not handle. For instance, the notorious inferiority of United States tanks and anti-tank weapons is not even discussed briefly!
 
His Estimate of His Colleagues
The virtues of Eisenhower the administrator are the vices of Eisenhower the historian. Almost every positive statement made in Crusade in Europe is immediately qualified to extinction, so that Eisenhower’s real opinion (in those cases when he is not simply confused) is about as sharply defined as the fried mush of which he was so fond. It leads to bloopers like this one concerning the Italian campaign, about whose value Eisenhower could never make up his mind:
“Fundamentally, however, the Italian campaign thereafter became a distinctly subsidiary operation, though the results it attained in the actual defeat of Germany were momentous, almost incalculable.”
Was the Ardennes debacle an Allied error? Was Patton a scoundrel? Was Eisenhower in agreement with the Morgenthau plan? Was Montgomery overcautious? The balanced antitheses that Eisenhower erects in answering these and a hundred other questions would be the pride and joy of a medieval scholastic.
When Eisenhower aims to be critical – as he does occasionally – he employs such an oblique method that the casual reader, or one who does not happen to be acquainted with the background material, can innocently pass over the critical passages.
Eisenhower’s distaste for MacArthur, for example, is well known. To get at him, however, Eisenhower attacks Quezon, who in 1942 sought “the neutralization of the Philippines, with each contestant agreeing to withdraw its troops.” In attacking Quezon, Eisenhower is perfectly aware of what is forthrightly documented in the Stimson biography On Active Service in Peace and War: that MacArthur was sympathetic to Quezon’s view and so radioed Washington.
Later, describing the North African campaign, Eisenhower writes: “Rommel himself escaped before the final debacle, apparently foreseeing the inevitable and earnestly desiring to save his own skin.” When taken with a reference to Bataan in the paragraph which precedes it, this sentence can be construed only as another furtive cut at MacArthur. For, obviously, if Rommel should not have fled, neither should MacArthur have left the Philippines. Otherwise the sentence remains simply a curio.
There are omissions. Eisenhower fails to mention that hedgerow fighting was completely unprepared for. The Huertgen Forest slaughter is dismissed with little more explanation that the “the First Army got involved ...” – a classic of understatement.
There are simple errors. Von Rundstedt, for instance, did not lead the Ardennes offensive. He was actually opposed to it and played only a nominal role in the operations.
There is outright falsification. In Crusade in Europe Eisenhower infers that Darlan’s presence in Africa was an entirely unexpected and unprepared windfall: “We discounted at once the possibility that he had come into the area with a prior knowledge of our intentions or in order to assist us in our purpose.” In a diary entry dated October 17, 1942, three weeks before the invasion, Butcher states:
“Today a succession of messages from ‘Colonel McGowan’ [Robert Murphy] ... Darlan apparently wants to play ball ... Murphy recommends that Darlan be encouraged on the basis of securing his cooperation with Giraud; Darlan expected in Algiers within a week.”
Future historians will find Butcher’s My Three Years with Eisenhower a more useful source book than Crusade in Europe. This day-to-day account of the war as seen from the pinnacle of SHAEF by Eisenhower’s “kibitzer, water boy, cigarette girl, and flunky” (the description is Butcher’s own), edited though it is, gives a much more accurate and colorful account of the Allied inner conflicts, the fluctuations of morale, the inter-service jealousies, the tactical improvisations, the material and logistical problems, and the top echelon Bohemia than does Eisenhower’s olive-drab prose.
 
6
Following his quasi-retirement from the army in 1948, Eisenhower became president of Columbia University in New York City. “... it was with no illusions,” he said, “that I could contribute anything academically.”
And in all truth Eisenhower can be considered as a transmitter of “Western” culture only in the most specific American sense. His known tastes run exclusively to cowboy stories, horse operas and Western ballads.
 
His Academic Role
At West Point, says his biographer, he “stood consistently at the very bottom of the upper one-third of his class.” (A decade later, however, he was to graduate from the Command and General Staff School first out of a class of 275.) He was better in athletics. In view of his general public activity and his role of military adviser to the government, his contribution to the administration of Columbia must be as tenuous as his academic one.
What, then, is the significance of his Columbia job?
The influence of Columbia upon education in the United States – and thereby upon its cultural life as a whole – is exceptional. About one out of every ten Ph.D.s granted in this country, for example, is granted by Columbia. The student body numbers 31,000, the faculty over 4,000. Its income from investments is second only to Harvard’s. It amounts to $6,180,000 annually – which is equal to the income received from $247,200,000 invested in 2½ per cent government bonds.
A university of this size, located in the intellectual and financial center of the United States, is of prime importance for the most conscious representatives of the capitalist class. They have not overlooked their opportunity. In The Goose-Step, Upton Sinclair referred to Columbia as “the palatial University of the House of Morgan.” There has been no reason to change that characterization essentially in the twenty-six years which have elapsed since the publication of Sinclair’s fascinating book.
True, the elder Morgan no longer sits upon the board of trustees, which is the final arbiter of university policy. But the representatives of Wall Street (in the most literal sense) are very much in control.
Of the twenty-four trusteeships at Columbia, seventeen are self-perpetuating: when a trustee dies his place is filled by vote of the other trustees. Six are elected by the alumni. The president of the university, likewise selected by the trustees, serves as a trustee also. The overwhelming majority either have very close ties with the plutocracy of the country or are active members of the plutocracy. A survey by Hubert Park Beck, published in 1947, shows that the known taxable income (based on 1924 data) of the thirteen board members for whom figures were available averaged over $65,000. Figures from the mid-thirties, available for seven trustees, showed an average annual salary of $74,000.
The public spokesman for the trustees – who typically lead a rather anonymous existence – is the president of the university, who is carefully chosen by them. For a generation prior to the appointment of Eisenhower the post was held by the rubbery Nicholas Murray Butler, presidential aspirant, opponent of any further amendment of the Constitution (it was like “proposing amendments to the multiplication table!”), supporter of child labor, director in a Morgan insurance company, and over-all reactionary.
 
Academic Beliefs
The times, not the least important component of which is the development of a powerful and articulate organized labor movement, call for someone less obviously reactionary. Hence the selection of Eisenhower. His appointment was acclaimed by almost everybody, including the campus chapter of the American Veterans Committee. Nevertheless, a grave precedent has been established: heading up one of the most influential universities in the country is a man whose cast of thought is antithetical to the spirit of free inquiry which should pervade a university.
To date he has trod warily. His concept of academic freedom, though it has not been explicitly revealed, is plain enough, however. Ira T. Freeman, writing in the New York Times, says:
“His conception of academic freedom, however, does not include the right to advocate ideologies hostile to ‘free enterprise,’ since he has threatened to dismiss at once any instructor ‘infiltrating our university’ with ‘inimical philosophies.’ He defended the release of one left-wing faculty member from Teachers’ College.”
The implementing of that credo would guarantee the destruction of academic freedom at Columbia.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – The Wrangle Over China – I (24 February 1947)




Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
The Wrangle Over China
Part I
(24 February 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 8, 24 February 1947, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The Marshall report on China, if it did little to reveal the actual economic and political forces intersecting in China, at least had the merit of focusing attention on that tortured land. Just what is going, on there?
Needless to say, the actuality is considerably different from the simplicities of the Marshall report. If it is convenient to set dates, the fall of Singapore to the Japanese in 1942 greatly reduced British influence in the Far East. The crushing defeat of Japan by the United States three years later guaranteed the dominant role of United States imperialism in the orient for the coming period. But the dominant role is not synonymous with the sole one. For a struggle with Russia, symmetrical to the one taking place in Europe, is being enacted throughout the orient. It is this antagonism which forms the basis of United States, foreign policy in the Far East.br />  

What the U.S. Wants
What does the United States want? Stated most simply it wants to line up in the American camp the largest possible number of Asiatic peoples for the war against Russia which is being openly and systematically prepared. Hence the exceptionally judicious treatment of the Japanese. Hence the very rude pressure being applied to decadent French imperialism, whose contemptible warfare against the Indo-Chinese threatens to detonate the accumulated hatred of imperialist exploitation in the entire Far East.
How does Washington view China? A. Suchsdorf, writing in The American Scholar, does not put it badly:
“She is a market, a political proving ground, a reservoir of military manpower, a strategic base, and one-fifth of the Big Five. As China goes, so in time will, go the colonial peoples today squatting on their haunches in Lahore, in Surabaya, in Leopoldville ... China’s troubles have become universal ... These days, if you punch China, we roar.”
Unfortunately for Wall Street’s global aspirations, Stalinist Russia also views China in much the same light. The Kremlin gang, disposing of a large Stalinist party in China itself, and a very large, if poorly equipped, peasant army, is able to intervene directly in Chinese affairs in a manner totally denied United States capitalism. In 1937 the Stalinists had an army of 100,000 men and governed 1,500,000 people. By the summer of 1946 they claimed to have a regular army of 1,000,000 men supported by a peasant militia of 2,000,000 and to govern 131,000,000 persons.br />  

The Chinese Stalinist Armies
The tidal wave of revolutionary struggle generated by World War I struck China in the midtwenties. A surge of anti-imperialist activity inundated China. At the point of its greatest amplitude in 1927 the movement collapsed, due to the counter-revolutionary attacks of Chiang Kai-shek upon the radical labor movement and to the false policy of the Comintern, already badly degenerated. The Communist Party lost its base in the urban working class and was never able to reestablish it.
From that time on Stalinist influence in China has been based upon the peasantry. Generally speaking, the Kuomintang has controlled the urban centers and the more developed areas along the seaboard. The influence of the Stalinists over the peasantry is based upon its ability, if not to resolve, then to ameliorate the inequities of the holding system – a key problem in a semi-colonial country like China cursed with all sorts of vestigial remnants of feudalism.
The Stalinist agrarian program has varied somewhat according to the necessities of Russian foreign policy. But its main outlines have remained the same. Outright expropriation of the landlord class, as took place during the Russian revolution, has not been resorted to. The Stalinists have sought, rather, to modify excesses of the landlord system: taxes and rents have been reduced and wages, hours and working conditions fixed. Seizure of lands was relatively limited.
During the war, in the interests of a working agreement with the Kuomintang against the Japanese, policies were considerably modified.
“These called for,” says Tillman Durdin, writing from Nanking, “regard for the landlords’ rights under proper regulation and for reducing large holdings through a progressive tax system and urged social unity and cooperation between the classes.”
 

Policy Following the War
The defeat of the Japanese, and the control of the extensive areas turned over to the Chinese Stalinists by the Russians as they withdrew, permitted the Stalinists to exercise a freer hand.
“... they instituted a limited distribution through the confiscation of the lands of persons classed as traitors or puppets. These lands were given to landless peasants. In a second stage, confiscation was enlarged to include the taking of land in ‘fines’ from the ‘bad gentry.’
“The third stage was inaugurated last summer. This is characterized by a general confiscation of the bigger part of the large landholdings regardless of the characteristics of the landowner ... In some areas all the lands were split up more or less equally. In others the landlord was allowed to keep a fairly large part of his holdings if he was cooperative or ‘patriotic,’ as the Communists termed it.”
It is this land policy which is the source of the Stalinists’ strength. It must even have a certain appeal to certain of the landlords who have seen the Stalinists intervene against the “excesses” of the peasantry who resorted to direct action, especially during the period following the defeat of Japan.
 

: On the Wages of the Miners (10 February 1947)




Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

J.M.F.
Readers of Labor Action Take the Floor ...
On the Wages of the Miners
(10 February 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 6, 10 February 1947, p. 7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Dear Sir:
During the recent coal strike the newspapers were crammed with stories of the big money miners were making. It was almost enough, we imagine – almost but not quite enough – to lead newspapermen to take up mining.
There are a lot of things that whittle down the miner’s annual wage. None were generally mentioned by the papers – or by John L., for that matter. Here’s one of them taken from the Morgantown, W.Va., Post for January 25, 1947:
The supply of coal cars to Monongalia County mines by the Monangahela Railway Company this week was the lowest since Christmas week, with an average of 47 per cent of normal as compared with 38 for the week beginning Dec. 23, 1946.
Car placements by the day for this week were 100 per cent Monday, 60 per cent Tuesday, 40 per cent Wednesday, 40 per cent Thursday, none yesterday, and 40 per cent of normal supply for today.
When the car supply is 40 per cent of normal that means that the coal mined is 40 per cent of normal – which means that wages are 40 per cent of normal.
Let’s keep that in mind when the weeping and the lamentations start next March.
J.M.F.
 

 James Fenwick: A Question About On-the-Job Training (24 February 1947)




Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

L.J. & James Fenwick
Readers of Labor Action Take the Floor ...
A Question About On-the-Job Training
(24 February 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 8, 24 February 1947, p. 7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Dear Sir:
In the January 20 issue of Labor Action, James Fenwick, in his article, Taking Off, Mr. Bolste? refers to the wage cuts instituted by Omar Bradley in the on-the-job training program. I would like to know how the on-the-job training program caused wage cuts.



 


Sincerely,
L.J.,
Wilmington, Ohio.



*

The article in question did not make the point that the on-the-job-training program caused wage cuts. It stated that General Bradley “initiated the wage cuts in the on-the-job training program.”
It was Bradley who last year, utilizing the excuse that some employers were chiseling on the program by “training” executives for their posts at fancy figures like $700 a month, proposed that subsistence grants not be given beyond a total income of $175 per month for single men and $200 per month for married men. The proposal was incorporated in Senate Bill 2477 and passed by Congress. This meant a wage cut for a considerable, number of veterans who were earning more than these figures. This is what was referred to in the article.
The program itself, however, did induce unscrupulous employers to institute wage cuts, as the following story from Newsweek reveals:
“A veteran working as a garage mechanic in a small Southern town was getting $35 a week. When the garage offered to train him as a foreman, he accepted. They promptly cut his pay to $23 a week, explaining that his subsistence allowance would more than make up the difference.”
This action by Bradley was roundly condemned as late as a few weeks ago by the UAW Veterans’ Conference which met in Washington.
OK, L.J.?



 


James Fenwick



 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – The Latest Housing Scandal (6 January 1947)




Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
The Latest Housing Scandal
(6 January 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 1, 6 January 1947, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

To say that New York City is the center of the world is not a patriotic exaggeration. It is the simple truth. It is the guiding brain of United States capitalism whose economic, political, and military pre-eminence is today seriously challenged only by Russia. If the United States is not the cultural master of the globe it is because that in this period of capitalism’s decay its recent contributions to human culture have been relatively modest and that amid the ashes of intellectual Europe a few bright embers glow.
In this city, whose powers and possessions make the wealth and influence of the Athens of the Age of Pericles seem like the worldly goods of a gifted child, live 7,500,000 people. About one out of ten are veterans; 765,000 of them returned from the war hoping to find a home and to pick up again the delightful monotony of living. They were cruelly disappointed. There are 85,000 applications on file with the New York Housing Authority alone “for permanent or temporary housing of any kind.”
 

The Incredible Truth
Fantastic though it may seem in this city of apartment dwellers, despite the crying need not a single new apartment house was built in the first ten months of 1946. This isn’t Düren, Cologne, Caen, or Hiroshima – it’s New York City, the richest city in the world!
The astonishingly pitiful record in the creation of other types of housing is revealed by construction statistics:



One-family houses


  


1,603




Two-family houses


   822




Units derived from remodeling


   597




Temporary apartments in quonset
huts and rebuilt barracks


4,252




Dormitory rooms


1,240




The incredible total


8,514



Thus, by adding together every possible nook, cranny, clothes-closet, and rumor of a clothes-closet, a trickle of shelter was squeezed out in a Sahara of need. To top it off, more “New York families than ever before are being put out of their homes through eviction orders ...”
 

Real Estate Cracks The Whip – Truman Jumps Through The Hoop
In the face of such typical conditions Truman’s revision of the government housing policy-under the friendly pressure of the real estate boys was so scandalous that even the newspapers felt constrained to protest. Norton E. Long, the resigning assistant national housing administrator, called the new program “a fraud perpetrated on veterans ....”
The new policy does the following:

Removes the $10,000 ceiling price on new homes. This will result in the production of the more profitable higher-cost dwelling – which will be out of the reach of even those veterans able to buy the $10,000 home.
 
Encourages commercial and industrial construction – at the expense of low-cost, housing.
 
Delivers a blow at prefabricated housing manufacturing through failure to correct the Reconstruction Finance Corporation’s abuse of its loan facilities.
 
Fails to broaden and ease financing of rental projects by the FHA.
 
Abolishes, quality standards.
 
Attacks rent ceilings in permitting ceilings of $100, if the project average is $80.

There’s the dead-end of all the promises to the boys overseas, the glowing housing newsreels, the cardboard models, the pre-election oratory, the dream castles of the women’s magazines.
 

Remember?
Do you remember those days two years ago or so when you and the rest of the guys were lying around in some French orchard in a rest area, speculating about that vague future state known as Civilian Life? If you were like us you were saying, “I’m so used to the army that when I get back I bet I won’t rent a house. I’ll just take my entrenching tool and go in the back yard and dig in.” It was, under the conditions, a pretty funny gag. But there’s very little humor in the current housing crisis.
The situation calls for bold action on a national scale. The Workers Party program calls for d 250 billion dollar five-year program to provide decent housing at low rental for all,” the aim to be the construction of 25 million permanent low-cost housing units. Does this seem absurd? This country spent an estimated $317,600,000,000 for war material to prosecute World War II, a genuine absurdity. Let a similar mobilization be made for peace. Nothing less will suffice.
Truman’s latest action once again demonstrates the necessity for the creation of an independent labor party – independent of both the republicans and the democrats, who, however they may differ in some things, are united in one:
Hatred of the working class.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – The Marshall Appointment (27 January 1947)




Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
The Marshall Appointment
(27 January 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 4, 27 January 1947, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Old Max Lerner continues to creep around intellectually, a nostalgic reminder of that nobler species, the American Liberal, most of whom died during the war, some from the patriotic fever, others from the Stalinist pestilence. Lerner was heavily wracked, but he can still tell a hawk from a handsaw when the political wind is right.
“We live in the kind of world,” he said recently, “in which the distinction between the General Staffs and the Foreign Offices has been narrowed almost to nothingness. More and more the generals and admirals, not only in America, but also in Russia and elsewhere, have come to occupy diplomatic posts and shape state policy.”
This is, of course, correct, and Lerner is here merely noting an inevitable accompaniment of the decline of capitalism.
The appointment of General Marshall as Secretary of State reflects this trend. In the context of the impending meeting of the council of foreign ministers in Moscow, the appointment signifies a stiffening in the United States’ attitude toward Russia. It follows a period in which Byrnes was frequently criticized for being too conciliatory toward her.br />  

Cold Comfort for the Kremlin
The Stalinists have been half-heartedly trying to derive comfort from the “conciliationist” role allegedly played by Marshall in China. His report, conveniently released just before his appointment so as to create a little synthetic diplomatic background for him, provides a very weak straw for the Stalinists to clutch at. A critical attitude toward the Kuomintang has been an integral part of recent U.S. policy. This was necessitated by the recognition that the reactionary character of the Chiang Kai-shek regime alienated the support of the Chinese masses from the base of U.S. influence in China, the Kuomintang. The more militant program of the Stalinists permitted them to work up extensive support from the peasants.
Actually, the Marshall report whitewashed Chiang Kai-shek, the real leader of the Kuomintang, who is hardly more seriously interested in stabilizing present relations in China than the “reactionaries” of the Kuomintang, the United States’ differences with the Kuomintang are family differences. The differences with the Stalinists are of a more serious order. Time correctly pointed out recently that “U.S. policy, unsuccessful as it had been so far, would still be geared to the legal government of China.”
Tactical support to the political strategy enunciated by Marshall will be given by military figures who more and more occupy key commands in the United States imperialist offensive: MacArthur in Japan, Clark in Austria, Clay in Germany, Smith in Moscow, Kirk in Belgium, and Holcomb in South Africa. The assistant secretary of state for occupied areas is also a soldier – Major General John H. Hilldring.
Marshall is also expected to clean house in the State Department, which has been frequently criticized recently for its lack of unity of policy, its general disorganization, and its ineptness. The State Department has to be elevated to the level of the world tasks with which it has suddenly been confronted. In 1938, the year before the war, it employed 963 persons. In 1946 this number had increased to 7,623.
Unlike the British Foreign Office, which has behind it centuries of skilled diplomatic swindling, the U.S. State Department is really only going through its apprenticeship. The United States is now confronted by a complex of economic, political, military, social, and cultural problems which cannot be solved on the former pragmatic basis. Marshall is to bring the house to order.
Not the least interesting aspect of the Marshall appointment was to reveal how much of American “representative” government is government by bureaus and by appointment. Marshall’s appointment, which had been arranged by Truman months before, was ratified by the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee in twelve minutes. A man whose beliefs are almost absolutely unknown to the people, not to speak of the members of the new Congress, was thereby chosen for one of the most important posts in the country. If Truman were to be carried off through the effects, say, of his well-known mental anemia this unknown would become President of the country!
Marshall represents the growing tendency toward Bonapartism in the United States, that is, rule primarily based not upon the electorate but upon the government departments and the military machine. For the time being this Bonapartism is directed externally – specifically, against Russia.
Marshall fits the Bonapartist mold well: he is “above parties” (the Republicans and the Democrats both support him) he has never even voted, and he is a soldier – a strong man.br />  

But Who Is He?
How successful Marshall will be, this man out of a world where nobody talks back, is not our problem. What actually is remarkable, however, is how little is known about the man or his thinking. Beyond such biographical trivia as that as a youth he preferred cock fighting to pumping the organ at church, that he sat on a bayonet at Virginia Military Institute, or that Truman (O.K., men, let’s stop that snickering in the ranks!) considers him a greater commander than Alexander, Genghis Khan, or Napoleon, information on him is meager.
A 1901 graduate of VMI, not of West Point, Marshall went through the normal belt-line of a regular army career. By 1918 he had become an aide to Pershing. Two decades of peace and slow preferment followed. In 1939, however, Roosevelt jumped him over thirty-four other candidates and made him Chief of Staff. He became the prototype of the politico-military mediator, of whom Eisenhower was an example and for whom Roosevelt with his skill in politics, served as mentor.
But this all hardly adds up to a suitable background for a Secretary of State. His political intervention during the war and after was always determined for him – he merely enunciated it. From this point of view he is hardly superior to former secretaries like the ailing, aged, and provincial Hull; Stettinius, the Morgan partner, a man whom even his friends didn’t consider overly bright; or Byrnes, more adept at congressional horse trading than international politics. What Marshall is expected to bring is iron to the policy.
“In a military truce,” says the often not unperceiving Washington correspondent, Paul Mallon – “which is what this situation is – what could be more logical a choice than Marshall?”
What could, indeed?
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – What the Veteran Is Thinking (13 January 1947)




Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
What the Veteran Is Thinking
(13 January 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 2, 13 January 1947, pp. 4 & 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The last five years have witnessed what has been called the Europeanization of the United States. One of the aspects of this process has been the increasing role which the armed forces are playing in the domestic and foreign life of the nation. The number of congressional investigations conducted, the space devoted to the subject in the press, and the studies being made of the soldier and the veteran amply demonstrate the interest which the capitalist class has in the problem.
It studies carefully the attitudes of the 17,000,000 veterans of World War II and the current army personnel, for it knows well that it is for the possession of the globe itself that the next war will be fought. Fortune magazine, one of the more popular house organs of big business, recently conducted a poll among male veterans. The questions asked were not of a superficial character but bore upon serious aspects of class relations in the United States.
The results deserve the same serious attention from all progressive trade unionists and socialists as is unquestionably given by the capitalists for whose information the data was compiled.br />  

Veterans Are Not Homogeneous
The poll reveals that in general veterans do not think homogeneously. Their attitudes are basically determined by the class of which they are a member. For instance: 70.9 per cent of the group labeled “prosperous” thought that a privately owned and operated plant rather than one owned and operated by the government “would be likely to give the best value to the taxpayer in making airplanes for the Army and Navy,” but only 22.2 per cent of the group labeled “poor” thought so.
Similarly, 39 per cent of the “prosperous” felt that one of the prime talks before Congress was the more strict regulation of unions, though only 20.6 per cent of the veterans as a whole thought so. Of the “poor” 33 per cent want more jobs made available, as against 16.1 per cent of the veterans as a whole.
The poll also clearly showed the arrested political development shared by the veteran with the working class and the middle class of the country generally. The recent swing to the Republicans was clearly revealed.
In certain matters such as housing, however, it is probable that the interest of the veteran is more acute than among the population in general. The poll likewise showed that where the veteran did not have direct experience with the issue involved, as in estimating labor’s contribution to the war effort, the anti-labor propaganda was not without effect. But where the veteran was or is directly involved, as in matters of housing, attitude toward officers, or the German people the propaganda proved relatively ineffective.
The most popular presidential candidates among the veterans were Dewey, Stassen, Truman, Wallace, and Taft, in the order named – a sequence which shows that the veteran here reflects the trend of the country as a whole.
What is of more than passing interest, however, is the decisive rejection of the army big brass as presidential material. The average veteran, it would seem, had more than enough of the authoritarian bark and arrogance in the services to want it in the White House. Only 16.1 per cent wanted to see MacArthur, of the Manila penthouse crowd, as a presidential candidate. (Destiny, alas, has paused, raised her hand above his shoulder ... and passed on.) Even Eisenhower, whose prestige has been carefully nurtured, could muster only 30.6 per cent support among the veterans. An interesting fact, worthy of speculating upon, is that on this question officers were even more opposed to a soldier for president than enlisted men were.br />  

The Domestic Issues
The following table was derived in answer to the question: “Which two things on the list would you pick as the most important to make an immediate start on?”:



 


Per Cent




Make better housing available


51.6




Prevent inflation  


43.7




Arrange for international control of atomic bomb


21.4




Regulate labor unions more strictly


20.6




Pay a cash bonus to veterans


20.4




Make more jobs available


16.1




Reduce taxes


13.4



That the housing problem should head the list is hardly surprising in view of the calamitous failure to provide adequate housing for the people of this country, a condition which bears down upon the veteran with especial severity.
Nor is it surprising that inflation should be considered the second basic problem, in view of the fact that the cost of living is now higher in the United States than it has ever been before. The desire to curb inflation was particularly strong in the upper and lower middle class groups, where the percentage was 49 per cent and 46 per cent respectively. Only 25 per cent of the group labeled “poor” attached primary importance to the inflation problem, a fact that provoked speculation by Fortune magazine which pointed out that the poor had most to lose by inflation. This discrepancy is easily accounted for when it is understood that 33 per cent of the “poor” made a more basic approach to the problem in voicing their desire for more (and better) jobs. That only 16.1 per cent of the veterans regarded the creation of more jobs as a primary problem, while 43.7 per cent regarded the question of inflation as basic, show’s that while there is more or less satisfaction with jobs and wage scales, except among Negro veterans, there is a general opinion that something should be done about prices.
The importance given to housing and inflation should be of interest to readers of Labor Action in giving statistical confirmation to the emphasis laid upon these problems in our agitation.
That only around 20 per cent of the veterans give first importance to the issues of the atomic bomb (foreign affairs), the regulation of unions, and the bonus testifies not only to the urgency of the issues of housing and inflation but, at this moment, to a comparative lack of immediacy in the other questions. The same holds true of the job issue. The problem of unemployment, the key issue during the depression, is not at all an acute one now.
Of these veterans classified as “poor,” however, 33 per cent want more jobs made available, and 46 per cent want a cash bonus. This gives an indication as to when the job and bonus question will become live issues – during the next depression. It shows why, also, veterans’ organizations such as the AVC have remained primarily middle class in membership up to the present. A real influx of worker members will occur when the unemployment crisis becomes actual.
The effect of capitalist propaganda can be seen in the reaction to the question asking the veteran to rate the war effort of “business corporations” and labor unions. The contribution of the corporation was rated as excellent or good by 62.5 per cent of the veterans, but that of unions as only 35.4 per cent. It is probable that the poor showing in this respect can be ascribed to the heavy propaganda during the war, envy on the part of the men overseas of those at home, and lack of first hand experience with the issue in question, such as the veteran possesses on other issues. Even Fortune cautions its readers not to rub their hands gleefully over the apparent antagonism, pointing out that the previous month’s survey had shown veterans to be more sympathetic to organized labor than the public as a whole.
This is confirmed by the reaction to wartime salaries and wages. The salaries of business executives were thought to have been too high by 50.5 per cent of the veterans. Labor’s wartime wages, however, were thought too high by fewer veterans – 45 per cent. Some 29.5 per cent thought executives’ wages were about right, but 45 per cent – 15.5 per cent more than in the case of executives – thought labor’s wages were just. These totals very clearly reveal that the’ veteran thinks that both the salaries of executives and the wages of workers were too high – in relation to the the images that the veteran was getting for the work he was doing. But the bias in favor of labor is very evident.
The thinking of the veteran is further revealed by a question which posed the nationalization of war industry. Government ownership was supported by the sizable total of 36.9 per cent, with 50.5 per cent supporting private ownership. The response to this particular question very neatly revealed the class structure of the army: 72 per cent of the officers supported private ownership, but only 48 per cent of the enlisted men did so.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – Taking Off, Mr. Bolte? (20 January 1947)




Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Taking Off, Mr. Bolte?
(20 January 1947)

From Labor Action, Vol. 11 No. 3, 20 January 1947, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Charles G. Bolte, national chairman of the American Veterans Committee, has just been granted a Rhodes Scholarship to Oxford University, England. His two-year course of study will begin this fall.
This is the same Bolte of whom PM in a gushing biographical sketch once wrote: “AVC was the agent that jelled Bolte’s personality. Later he was to remember a motto he had seen mimeographed in an early AVC Bulletin. It was Sir Francis Drake’s prayer as he sailed into the harbor of Cadiz, ‘O Lord, God, when Thou givest to Thy servants to endeavor any great matter, grant us also to know that it is not the beginning but the continuing of the same, until it is thoroughly finished, which yieldeth the true glory ...’ The italicized section Bolte took as his text.”
Despite this piety, his numerous articles on the veteran, his spare speaking style, and his culture, Bolte reveals himself as another bright Ivy League liberal using the veterans for what Shakespeare once called “young ambition’s ladder.”
The AVC has largely been identified with Bolte. His taking off now for a two-year exposure in the most caste-ridden school of the most cast-ridden country of Europe can have only adverse effects. There will be a tendency to think of the AVC as led by persons seeking only to feather their own nests. Bolte leaves, further, at a critical juncture in the growth of the AVC. His leaving likewise permits the Stalinists to bang away hypocritically at the seersucker set controlling the national AVC, whom they have constantly charged with dilettantism and conservatism.br />  

Up from Dartmouth
Bolte comes from the upper middle-class. His life has been a carefully cushioned one. His father is a $20,000 a year advertising executive who moves in the circles of Henry R. Luce. Bolte graduated from Dartmouth, a “good” eastern school. While there he engaged in normal campus literary activities and in exceptional ones like discussing with Robert Sherwood, the playwright and literary mechanic to whom Roosevelt subcontracted many of his speeches. After a passing phase of pacifism Bolte became what he himself identifies as a “warmonger and one of> the most unpopular men in the history of Dartmouth College.” Shortly after graduation he enlisted in the British army, where he became an officer. After he was wounded at El Alamein he was invalided home. He did a turn writing propaganda for the OWI. Then followed the organization of the AVC.
Other leaders in the AVC have much the same . background: Franklin D. Roosevelt, Jr., William L. Batt, Jr., son of the well-known Philadelphia capitalist and recently democratic candidate for Congress; Oren Root, Jr., Republican campaign manager for Willkie in 1940. The young AVC had roots in the democratic administration and in the business world. Eleanor Roosevelt showed an early “interest” in the AVC. The publishers Marshall Field and Eugene Meyer were early financial angels of the organization. It is from such circles that a considerable section of AVC’s national leadership gains financial and ideological sustenance. Politically they can be described as New Dealers.br />  

Walking on Eggs
Under these circumstances it should surprise no one that the AVC program can be criticized for lack of aggressiveness. The AVC’s opposition to the bonus; the indecent slobbering over Omar Bradley, who initiated the wage cuts in the on-the-job-training program; the lack of militant prosecution of the housing fight; and the persistent putting of the damper upon demonstrative actions of the most justifiable kind are of ultimate benefit to capitalism – and not the veteran.
Overlooking the cold political calculation which leads a Stassen to discover what a buddy he is of the AVC membership, and overlooking the career boys like Bolte, for whom the AVC is a means to a personal end, what is the objective significance of the role played by persons such as Root, Roosevelt, or Bolte? The simple answer is that the AVC is utilized to keep the veterans’ demands within reasonable bounds – i.e., capitalist ones.
It is this condition which permits the Stalinists to conduct a “plausible” fight against the milk and water policy of the national organization. The Stalinists, needless to say, are interested in a militant program for the AVC only insofar as it permits them to gain control of the organization to use it as another pressure point in Russian foreign policy.
The answer is a MILITANT policy based upon the present progressive beginnings which have made the AVC unique in its field.
The answer is not, like Bolte, to turn from the real world of struggle to the illusory peace of the academic groves. Moreover, Bolte’s course has its own logic, whatever he may personally thinks motivates his action: he yields ground to the Stalinist totalitarians at home, and, under the present international constellation of forces, serves to help create those ideological ties linking British and United States imperialism together for the contemplated atomic war against Russia.
 

M. Fenwick: Dubious History (July 1950)






Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
>Books in Review
Dubious History
(July 1950)

From New International, Vol. XVI No. 4, July–August 1950, pp. 252–253.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the Marxists’ Internet Archive.

An Essay for Our Times
by H. Stuart Hughes
Alfred A. Knopf, 1950. 196 pp., $2.75.
Not the least impressive aspect of the national and world crisis which began in 1929 and has continued up to the present has been the almost total incapacity of the United States professoriat to predict it, analyze it after it has occurred, or propose a defensible way out.
The professors whose helplessness was rudely revealed by the depression had been pretty generally shaped by the idyllic ’twenties. It is only now that a second generation, molded by depression, war, and the post-war insecurity, is making its voice heard. It is a lamentable fact that these events have only made the confusion worse confounded.
H. Stuart Hughes, now an assistant professor of history at Harvard, begins his book with a description of the successive environments which he, as a typical member of the most intellectually sophisticated of his generation, was subjected. A socialist of the Popular Front persuasion during the ’thirties, he was able, to justify the war as a “war for socialism – a democratic socialism which (in a phrase now worn and nearly meaningless) would serve as a bridge between the Communist East and the liberal West.” During the war our Harvard Horatius, like so many bright young men, was to be found defending the bridge to socialism in the field artillery, the OSS, and the State Department, it is almost needless to remark.
Unfortunately, almost “before we knew what had happened, we found two embattled forces, opposed both nationally and ideologically, facing each other across continents, oceans, and polar icecap. The prospect left the most stout-hearted at a loss.” Despite everything, however, he is still able to say today that more “of the underlying assumptions of this essay derive from Marx than from any other source.”
“The new irrationalist temper in thought,” Hughes states in beginning his analysis of the modern dilemma, “the doubts as to the future of our civilization and the capacity of Western man to cope with his spiritual environment – these have set off our time rather sharply from its predecessors. We shall find traces of this mood of doubt and uncertainty in a wide variety of fields.”
This malaise was variously expressed in the thinking of such social analysts as Henry Adams, Freud, Jung, Adler, Fromm, Toynbee, and Spengler. It also found expression in the novel – in its purest form in the works of Kafka, of whom Sartre said:
“But what we were particularly sensitive to was that in this trial perpetually in session, which ends abruptly and evilly, whose judges are unknown and out of reach, in the main efforts of the accused to know the leaders of the prosecution, in this defense patiently assembled which turns against the defender and figures in the evidence for the prosecution, in this absurd present which the characters live with great earnestness and whose keys are elsewhere, we recognize history and ourselves in history.”
So far, so good, and even comfortably platitudinous.
Platitudinous, but not comfortably so, is the rest of the book. Hughes begins with a rousing demonstration that none can be so brave under Stalinist totalitarianism in Russia as an assistant professor of history comfortably resident in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
“Since the middle thirties,” he booms, “the Soviet Union has been a socialist state – within the usual definition of the term. The chief means of production have been nationalized ... if every Soviet citizen were to receive the same wage, in a country with as low a standard of living as the USSR all would live in virtual squalor, and there would be no margin for the cultivation of the arts or even for maintaining a decent showing before the outside world ... Perhaps we should consign the whole notion of equalitarianism to the disrepute of that utopianism which Marx and Engels never tired of attacking.”
“We may surmise,” says Hughes, “that in its original and reformist guise Marxism was too rationalistic to enroll overwhelming popular support, too theoretical to formulate a concrete, unquestioned plan of action ... As a late product of Western rationalism, it remained closed to the unfolding spirit of our era.” Faced with the “almost primitive force” of the Russian peasant it “was up to Marxism to take the place that the Orthodox Church had forfeited ...”
The resultant society has its values, however much we may deplore some of its aspects.
“In the East the rulers of the Soviet Union have thought in terms of ‘doing things,’ of collective enterprise, of shared work and enjoyment. Certainly the consciousness of participation in building a socialist society – however infrequently it may be felt with any real understanding – represents a civilized value.”
We must therefore work for a peaceful co-existence of the United States and Russia, for “a clear victory for either side, particularly a military victory, would mean the destruction of something precious in terms of civilized values.” Hughes is himself dubious of the possibility of such a solution.
That even such a solution can be envisaged is possible in the first instance only by a total absence in the book of an analysis of the economic dynamics underlying the cold war and in the second by a bland idealization of the political realities at home and abroad which underlie the cold war.
That Hughes can propose the freezing of the status quo, with all the economic, political, and social inequities current in the world today, not only reveals a bureaucratic temper bearing a strong Stalinoid cast but also identifies him as an example of the regression from the nineteenth century rationalism which he dwells upon so patronizingly throughout the book.
 

M. Fenwick: War Strategy (July 1950)






Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Books in Review
War Strategy
(July 1950)

From New International, Vol. XVI No. 4, July–August 1950, pp. 253–254.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the Marxists’ Internet Archive.

The Second World War
by J.F.C. Fuller
Duell, Sloan & Pearce, New York, 1949. $2.50.
The inversion of Clausewitz’s most well-known dictum which is now current, “Politics is war carried on by other means,” is something more than a facile witticism. It accurately describes the situation in the world today.
Prior to World War II large-scale wars could plausibly be considered as relatively rare aberrations in the evolution of society. Since that time war has generally come to be accepted as a normal mode of existence and peace as an interval in which new wars are prepared.
This change in attitude is probably most obvious in the United States, where the military factor heretofore has been only a minor part of the social structure. Today military considerations based on an orientation of war with Russia are major determinants of almost all aspects of national policy.
They lie behind economic aid to Europe, the political evolution permitted Germany and Japan, the current attitude toward Yugoslavia. At home they are reflected in the huge military establishment and its research program, the stockpiling of raw materials, the decentralization of production and government offices which is beginning, the drive against the Communist Party and the attack on civil liberties. The character of United States capitalism is making a huge and sometimes lumbering change.
What would Engels say today, that acute analyst of military phenomena, who in commenting on the Franco-Prussian war could write in 1878 that “this war compelled all continental powers to introduce ... a military burden which must bring them to ruin in a few years. The army has become the main purpose of the state, and an end in itself ... Militarism dominates and is swallowing Europe”?
The whole emphasis of Marxist analysis has shifted. Russia, Germany and the United States have each in their own way long since demonstrated their ability to weather economic and social stress greater than Engels ever dreamed of. Where in the socialist movement, taken in its broadest sense, can a serious discussion be aroused on, say, Luxemburg’s theory of capitalist crisis, at a time when Einstein announces that with the discovery of the H-bomb the destruction of all human life has become a technical possibility?
The Marxist who does not today devote the most serious attention to the study of the military problem runs the grave risk of becoming disoriented. There are two phases to it: a study of the military aspects of World War II and a reassessment of our former political estimates in the light of this information; and an application of these lessons to our current analyses.
With important exceptions, World War II is already the best documented conflict in history. The best analysis of the war to come to the attention of this reviewer is that of J.F.C. Fuller. Fuller, a retired English major-general, was one of the earliest proponents of tank warfare, has written numerous informative books on military subjects, possesses an objective interest in his craft, is not uncultured (he quotes freely in his works from Marx, Engels and Lenin – as well as from Petronius Arbiter, St. Augustine and Adam Smith, among others) – and was a supporter of Oswald Mosley’s fascist movement. The balanced tensions implied by these facts have by and large permitted him to produce a critical and objective book.
On some future occasion it will prove useful to extend Fuller’s analysis and to relate his main conclusions to World War III. For the time being we shall content ourselves with noting a few of his leading observations from among a larger number of very provocative judgments:

The Maginot Line concept was not bad in itself. But France had neither the materiel nor the manpower to equip a mobile reserve to operate behind it.
 
Hitler’s failure to invade England was a crucial mistake. He never realized the importance of seizing the Mediterranean in this respect.
 
The invasion of Russia was “one of the greatest strategical blunders in history.”
 
That the “invasion of Russia came as a political surprise to the Kremlin is unlikely, but that it was a tactical surprise is all but certain.”
 
The causes of the German defeat in Russia were: massive Russian reserves, an ultimate five-to-one preponderance in materiel by the Russians over the Germans, long lines of communication, poor roads, too few tracked vehicles, an early winter in ’41, trained partisans and the Hitler policy of last-ditch stands.
 
The initial Japanese victories, in which an area one-half the size of the United States was conquered, showed the value of preparedness under modern conditions of waging war.
 
The Pacific island assault tactics were probably “the most far-reaching tactical innovation of the war.”
 
The slogan of unconditional surrender “trapped the British and Americans into tactically the most absurd and strategically the most useless campaign of the whole war” – the Italian campaign.
 
Strategic bombing was not only ineffective militarily, it diverted production facilities from landing craft, the absence of which unduly prolonged the war. It also made the establishment of post-war peace difficult: “... cities and not rubbish heaps are the foundations of civilization.”

In sum, says Fuller, neither side had a viable overall strategy. Hitler improvised from year to year. The aim of the allies was to defeat Hitler. The limitations of this concept are visible today. Does the United States currently have an overall strategy? Obviously not; the problems of material and manpower are immense. Hence the current hesitations. What if the United States should win the war? But who dares think ahead that far? But does Russia have such a strategy? More than the United States, obviously, since she wields political movements in other countries. But even in these movements resides the menace of Titoism. Viewed realistically, her chance of knocking out the United States and still being strong enough to capitalize on it are slim.
This absence of a long-term strategy on the part of the major contestants is no accident – it is simply one more demonstration of the frightful – and frightening – impasse into which modern society has driven itself.
 

M. Fenwick: Trapped in Emptiness (January 1950)






Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Books in Review
Trapped in Emptiness
(January 1950)

From New International, Vol. XVI No. 1, January–February 1950, pp. 60–62.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the Marxists’ Internet Archive.

Meaning in History
by Karl Löwith
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1949.
Antiquity did not develop a theory of progress. It viewed history as a cycle of birth, growth and death comparable to that observed in natural phenomena. Only in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, under the impact of changes wrought by early capitalism, was a theory of progress first articulated by such thinkers as Fontenelle, Vico, Turgot and Condorcet. By the end of the twentieth century the concept was hardly challenged.
World War I delivered the concept a crippling blow, somewhat mitigated by the promise of the Russian Revolution. The world economic crisis of the ’30s, the rise of fascism, the degeneration of Russia, World War II, and the menace of an atomic war almost completely compromised the concept – to the point where it can hardly be said to exist outside of socialist circles, and even there it has been radically reformulated.
 
Essentially Banal
Karl Löwith, the author of Meaning in History, is one of the survivors of the German professoriat which came to maturity during the unstable Weimar republic. He writes with considerable scholarship, skill in exegesis, urbanity, and epigrammatic provocativeness – all of which, unfortunately, is not sufficient to hide the banality of his essential ideas. Recently a professor at the Hartford Theological Seminary, he now teaches at the New School for Social Research in New York City, the happy diversity of whose staff is bound together by a sophisticated anti-Marxism.
Of all the concepts of history covered in this volume, Löwith finds himself in accord with the ideas of Jacob Burckhardt, the well-known nineteenth century historian. That is to say, Löwith can find no meaning in history, only continuity. “To the critical mind,” he states in opening this collection of essays, “neither a providential design nor a natural law of progressive development is discernible in the tragic human comedy of all times.” This lack, however, is of no real “consequence to a genuine Christian faith in God, as revealed in Christ and hidden in nature and history.” Wisdom consists “not the least in disillusion and resignation, in freedom from illusion and presumptions.” Man’s “planning and guessing, his designs and decisions, far-reaching as they may be, have only a partial function in the wasteful economy which engulfs them, tosses them, and swallows them.”
Working his way backwards in history, Löwith attempts to show that modern theories of progress are basically only successively secular translations of Jewish-Christian eschatological hopes, of belief in future fulfillment. The examination begins with Marx and progresses through Hegel, Proudhon, Comte, Condorcet, Turgot, Voltaire, Vico, Bossuet, Joachim, Augustine, Orosius, and ends with the Biblical view of history.
Löwith bases a good deal of his indictment of Marxism upon the Communist Manifesto, whose inspiration he views as deriving from Jewish messianism and prophetism. It is, “first of all, a prophetic document, a judgment, and a call to action and not at all a purely scientific statement based on the empirical evidence of tangible facts.” In Marx’s doctrine surplus value corresponds to original sin, the proletariat to the chosen people, the bourgeoisie to the children of darkness, the revolution to the last judgment, the communist society to the Kingdom of God. In sum, it “is only in Marx’s ‘ideological’ consciousness that all history is a history of class struggles, while the real driving force behind this conception is a transparent messianism which has its unconscious roots in Marx’s own being, even in his race. He was a Jew of Old Testament stature, though an emancipated Jew of the nineteenth century who felt strongly anti-religious and even anti-Semitic. It is the old Jewish messianism and prophetism – unaltered by two thousand years of economic history from handicraft to large-scale industry ...”
 
Genetic Fallacy
We are dealing here with an example of the genetic fallacy. Assuming that everything Löwith says is true, to explain the origin of Marx’s ideas is not necessarily to refute them. Marx’s theories might well be true even if they originated whole or in part out of Christian-Jewish eschatological thinking. Here Löwith was obligated to review the startling verifications of Marx’s economic, political, and social insights in the history of the real world – as Löwith did with the random, unsystematized thoughts of Burckhardt, with whose ideas he is sympathetic. Marx’s insights were based upon a wealth of empirically derived data, which is not examined at all. It is, after all, upon the material in Capital that Marx’s case fundamentally rests.
In general, Löwith’s inspection is made on the ideological level, to the exclusion of material factors. If the Christian-Jewish messianic trend was as decisive as Löwith suggests, it is legitimate to ask why the origin of a theory of progress was deferred until the rise of early modern capitalism. Material factors would seem to have been decisive. Finally, assuming that there are eschatological elements in Marx (derived, say, from French socialist theory) another question poses itself: just what are their specific weight as against other, and more secular, factors?
In dealing with nineteenth century figures like Hegel and Comte, where religious antecedents are not only obvious but admitted by the theorists as well, Löwith’s insights are more authentic. Applied to earlier thinkers his erudition and his analyses are useful in elucidating the thought of periods when almost all ideas had a religious investure. Since the death of Marx and Engels a mass of historical writing has been done which has, for obvious reasons, not been assimilated by the socialist movement. Löwith’s work does something toward closing the gap.
But as far as illuminating the modern dilemma is concerned, he has hardly a useful thing to say. His work here is anti-Marxism of a more distinguished order than the usual domestic run, but basically he is no more original.
At the risk of being accused of possessing the mentality of the terribles simplificateurs whom Löwith inveighs against, it is difficult for the reader not to conclude that Löwith’s essays are a product of that culture which Burckhardt foretold would be caught between “the emancipated working class from below and the military hierarchy from above.”
“Disgusted by contemporary history,” say Löwith, articulating his own belief well, “Burckhardt escaped to Italy to write his Cicerone and to collect material for The Age of Constantine ... Feeling that minor amendments would not do when the whole social body is in anarchy, he resolved to retire into a sort of Stoic-Epicurean privacy.”
It is the classic confession that a line of thought has reached a dead end.
 

M. Fenwick: Korea and US Foreign Policy (1950)






Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Korea and US Foreign Policy
A New Stage in World Politics
(September 1950)

From New International, Vol. XVI No. 5, September–October 1950, pp. 287–292. [1]
Transcribed by Ted Crawford.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the Marxists’ Internet Archive.

Hardly had the disappearance of the frontier been assimilated mentally and the preponderance of the city over the town established as a fact when, in the late twenties, the United States was ravaged by an unprecedentedly severe depression. The problems raised by the depression were destined to remain unresolved right up to the time that the United States began to be drawn into World War II, from which it emerged as the undisputed leader of the capitalist world bloc.
Seldom had a modern world power been more ill-equipped for world leadership. In terms of world necessities capitalist political thought in the United States evidences a cultural lag greater than most other major capitalist countries. This lag has its historical roots: an enormous internal market which has, in an absolute sense, not been exhausted up to the present moment, an internal market which undercut the necessity for the acute drive for colonial markets which possessed European capitalisms and gave an authentic patina to their domestic and foreign policies; a consequent isolation from the tensions of twentieth century European politics, where the almost daily crises of capitalism in decline mandated the acquisition of political sophistication, an isolation which was reinforced by simple geographical facts; and an enormous, highly developed, industrial plant which up to and including World War II permitted United States capital to resolve most internal and external problems by means of its crushing economic superiority.
The limitation of this relatively simple reliance upon economic strength to the detriment of political considerations periodically broke through the placid surface of allied and home front collaboration during the campaigns against Germany and Japan. Such was the nature, for example, of the flurries surrounding the Darlan contretemps, the dispute between England and the United States over the location of the second front, the Badoglio brief encounter, the slogan of unconditional surrender, the Morganthau proposals for the deindustrialization of Germany, the discrimination against Negro troops, and the decision to use the atom bomb.
But the real deficiencies of Allied and, particularly, United States policy began to become apparent in the latter phases of the fighting in Europe and the Far East. It then became obvious that concentration upon simple military objectives, formalized at secret meetings at Casablanca, Teheran, Yalta, and Potsdam had left the Russian colossus straddling huge areas in Europe and Asia of an extent, power, and dynamism which Czar Alexander I, who in the turmoil of the Napoleonic debacle likewise thought to mediate Europe, could only have envied.
The naiveté, the political backwardness and the characteristic, if diffused, responsiveness of bourgeois democracies to public opinion – of which the rapid demobilization was a typical example – placed the United States at a disadvantage in the face of Russian expansion in Europe and Asia following the war. The result was a series of victories which even the whole pre-war Marxist movement had discounted as unthinkable.
Since the United States does not understand the laws of motion of capitalist society or the structure of Stalinism in any long term sense its reaction was sui generis – that is to say, it reacted with characteristic economic empiricism. It saw with more or less clarity that if the influence of Stalinism was to be destroyed in Europe the economic prostration which is one of the preconditions for its development had to be overcome. First-aid was administered in the form of UNRA supplies. Then the economic organisms next received extensive Marshall Plan transfusions. Capitalism had indeed traveled far since the Cobden epoch!
These transfusions, complemented by the remaining recuperative powers of the organism, helped see European capitalism through a bad crisis, though England and Italy, each in its own way, showed how unstable this Marshall Plan recovery really was. None of the contradictions of capitalism having been eliminated by these operations, however, the inherent imbalance of world capitalism began to assert itself on the world market. The fact of the matter was that debilitated and outmoded European capitalism could not compete with the United States in the field of foreign trade. The most obvious symptom was a dollar shortage which threatened to slow down the whole system of European foreign trade and production. A new world crisis loomed, which led capitalist and Stalinist court economists to speculate upon an economic collapse in the United States.
Fortunately for both the capitalist and Stalinist ideologues, the limits of elasticity of their various economic doctrines were not to be tested further. One of the variables in the equation had begun to assume a new value. This was the war danger, provoked in the immediate sense by Stalinist political and military successes in Europe and in Asia. This took on sharpest form in the Orient, where the stunning successes of the Chinese Stalinists finally provoked Washington into a belated recognition of the seriousness of the Stalinist menace.
The United States record in China has been an inglorious one. Prior to the present, three phases can be distinguished in United States policy. The first, founded upon the immediate post-war euphoria, consisted of the attempt to effect a Stalinist-Kuomintang coalition government. It expired in a few days. The second phase consisted of something less than whole-hearted aid to Chiang Kai-shek. When Chiang proved successful only in multiplying defeats the third phase ensued: Chiang and China were in effect written off and the liberation of China was more or less vaguely viewed as a semi-automatic function of disenchantment with the Stalinist regime. In so far as such matters were ever explicitly formulated in Washington, Korea and Formosa were similarly written off. There were those who were, by a process of strict logic, willing to do the same for Japan and the Philippines. It was an embarrassing confession of bankruptcy but it was a fact.
This was the state of affairs when the North Koreans invaded South Korea and United States forces were thrown into combat. The proportionate role played by the various factors motivating this abrupt reversal of policy is difficult to assess and may never be known. But the following are certainly the major elements: a desire to inhibit the immediate expansion of Stalinism to the extent that this expansion is the product of test probings and is abetted by the failure to take demonstrative action; fear of the guaranteed loss of prestige in the Far East and the correlative further heightening of the prestige of Stalinism were the forces in South Korea to be defeated; the similar fear of a loss of prestige in the more important arena of Europe and the consequent paralysis of will before totalitarianism which could ensue there; the knowledge that Russia possesses the atomic bomb and that every day that passes nullifies much of the effect of United States superiority in this weapon; the knowledge that the long post-war indoctrination of the population of the United States as to the inevitability of war with Russia has not been without effect, thereby permitting stepping up the tempo of intervention in Stalinist-threatened areas; the uneasiness over the ominous decline in employment last year, which made a limited transition to war production not unpopular even, unfortunately, in certain labor circles; and the needling of the present administration’s meanderings in foreign policy by the uncontrollables in the Republican Party.
The power of self-deception is practically infinite, but upon the significance of the Korean war there can only be one opinion: it is the prelude to all-out war directly with Russia.
To the degree that relative peace or all-out war depends upon the intentions of the present administration it can be said that there is no immediate danger of World War III breaking out. This condition is, of course, not the product of humanitarian considerations on the part of Washington; the governing cadres are, as one of their favorite phrases has it, faced with a condition, not a theory. And the bald fact is that the United States is in no wise prepared from the point of view of manpower, modern materiel, adequately armed allies, and new tactical doctrine for a large-scale war. Whatever impressions may have been created in the past months by some of the blowhards in the Department of Defense have been dissipated by the harsh realities of a war in a small and up to yesterday obscure country.
It is, in general, in the light of this unpreparedness that the temporizing of the administration in almost all fields must be viewed. This fear of spreading the war motivated the decision not to employ Chinese Nationalist forces in Korea for fear of involving Stalinist China – a task which the United States is by no means able to assume at the present time. A second factor is the total absence of a long-term strategic plan for the campaign against Russia. The indecision regarding the disposition of the Western European complex, for example, is in part a reflection of this absence of perspective. A minor element preventing the hammering out of a policy flows from the jockeying for the November elections.
For the moment the Korean war is delimiting the extent of the war preparations. The character of the economic and manpower mobilization (including the role to be assumed by organized labor) is an index of this, for the contemplated controls are by no means total in character and in many instances have been planned on a contingency basis, to be implemented at the President’s discretion. The military mobilization as it is currently evolving hardly exceeds what is necessary for the Korean war, including replacements, reserves, forces with which to mount an offensive, and what is necessary for the creation of forces which can be used on a stop-gap basis elsewhere in the world. United States capitalism badly needs time not only to produce war materiel but, as the Korean events have showed, to design and get into production new weapons. In World War II quantitative superiority on the part of the United States sufficed; in World War III a similar, comforting institutionalized mediocrity will not be permitted by events. The goal, at least, must be both quantitative and qualitative superiority.
The ideal of a small, neat war in Korea is menaced not only by the Stalinists who can, for example, commit Chinese troops in Korea or create diversions elsewhere, such as in Formosa, it is resident in United States policy itself. To answer only the following questions successively in the affirmative is to approach the point where the commitment of United States forces in the Far East itself becomes so large as to begin to threaten what must remain the major focus of activity – Europe! Shall United States troops, whatever the outcome of the current fighting, eventually be sent across the thirty-eighth parallel? Shall they drive to the Manchurian border? Shall a large army remain in Korea to occupy the country and defend it from attack from outside the borders?
Napoleon was able to gain crushing victories on the European continent because his military operations were supplemented by important political ones – the abolition of the residues of feudal property relations, the liberation of the peasantry. His failure to appeal to the serf accounted in great measure for his shattering defeat in Russia. Because the United States can not today transcend bourgeois property relations it finds itself unable to supplement its inadequate military strength with political weapons. Stalinism, this monstrous historical deviant, is hemmed in by no such limitations. Its power, far from resting on capitalist property relations, derives from their abolition. Therefore, in the Far East through policies of land reform, tax reduction, education, “social reforms,” and the curbing of the old corruption it has secured the allegiance of native masses in a manner that is absolutely denied to the United States. This permits the Stalinists to create native communist parties which can put Russian policies into action, while the United States is always forced to appear as the foreign, white imperialist intervening from the outside.
The Stalinist “socialist” demagogy has proved less successful in Europe, where powerful and educated ruling classes nave existed throughout the capitalist epoch, and where the level of misery of the working class has not been as low as it has been in the Orient. Here during the past decade Stalinism has been forced to achieve most of its major ends by military means or extra-legal violence. Nevertheless, by means of its social character it has been able to create mass communist parties in many of the leading countries of Europe. These parties are able to exert political influence among the working masses in Europe – and thereby in the chancellories themselves – which United States capitalism, possessing but few rags of propaganda to hide its capitalist nakedness, cannot duplicate. This is the mysterious secret of Stalinist dynamism, which congressional illiterates and their editorial confreres can ascribe only to the use of brute force and to the irrationalism of uneducated foreigners – or, on the other hand, to some equally mysterious semantic failure on the part of The Voice of America – a name which in itself must be an affront to any number of South Americans.
The United States, then, must seek to obtain its objectives by almost solely military means. But to cast up the possibilities of confronting Russia and her satellites on the manpower level alone reveals exceptionally depressing perspectives. None of the bourgeois ideologues seem to have pursued such an analysis to the end. France and Italy both possess a manpower pool. But who would guarantee the political and thereby military efficiency of an army drawn from these countries where Stalinism is especially strong among precisely those who would make up its ranks – the workers? England is an exhausted world power with limited possibilities. It is not surprising, therefore, that for man-power and for strategic reasons eyes are being cast upon the resources of Western Germany and Spain.
But can the political, economic, and military difficulties involved in recruiting these countries to the United States cause be resolved in time? There is a school of thought in Europe – aided in its reflections by Stalinist propaganda – which does not think so. Members of this school would prefer to remain neutral. They find the prospect of Stalinism less terrifying than that of another, and atomic war. Others would like to remain neutral but independent of the two major combatants. In either case United States imperialism has to overcome great apathy toward participation in another war. Evidence of this is contained in what has obviously been the ridiculously small response of the allied nations when asked by United States capitalism to provide troops for the manufacture of a UN fig leaf for the operations in Korea. The same lack of manpower is driving the United States to rearm Japan, which is one of the few remaining available sources of manpower in an Orient more than cool towards United States intervention in Korea, with its mass bombings of civilians, its ravaging of the country, its contemptuous, manipulative attitude toward Asiatics, and its open support of English, French, and Dutch colonialism. The meaning of the shameless pressuring of nominally independent India is not lost upon the colonial mind.
The prosecution of a war on who can say how many fronts also means tremendous drains upon the United States economy. This drain can be enormously augmented by the possibilities inherent in the atomic epoch, when huge industrial areas in the United States can be destroyed in a very few days and commensurate damage inflicted upon Russia only with great difficulty because of the dispersion of its industry, its location underground, and the lack of information concerning its location. Russia is in a much better position to control the timetable of the war than is the United States. Were she to decide at some point in the moderately near future to drive to the Atlantic before allied forces could be built up to oppose her successfully the attempt to reinvade Russia under conditions of atomic warfare would be exceptionally costly in terms of manpower and war equipment, and perhaps impossible.
What this all signifies is that the possibility of the United States being able to stabilize the world through military means is drastically reduced and the possibility of being able to do it through political means is nil. We will yet be witness to more blunders resulting from a foreign policy which necessarily consists in great measure of improvisation dictated by the initiative which Russia still exercises. Even by analyzing events in its own terms it is difficult to escape the conclusion that United States capitalism is rising to meet a mortal challenge with something less than minimal consciousness of the full implications of the struggle which has been so inauspiciously blundered into. It is a reflection of the historical insufficiency of capitalism in general and of United States political and military amateurism in particular.
This is not to infer that the future belongs to Russian bureaucratic collectivism. It will find the defeat of the United States and its allies hardly less difficult. Short of the socialist revolution, which alone can undercut Stalinism as well as capitalism, the most probable outcome of a struggle between the two world powers would be the destruction not only of a great portion of the material wealth amassed by mankind but the utter debasement of the conquests of the rationalism which emerged from the Renaissance and received such finished expression in the analysis and perspective offered in the works of Marx and Engels.
Whatever the temporary vagaries of United States and foreign policy may be, the main line of development is clear: the trend is gradually but inexorably toward authoritarianism. This will not be a simple repetition of the World War II experience. The demands which must be met are too great to permit the latitude which was extended labor in the last war. The Korean war is more than a passing summer storm, it is a warning of the fury that is to come.
The century which began with such great confidence in the forward movement of society is entering its second half cringing under the threat of atomic annihilation. It is the price which humanity pays for the continued existence of reactionary capitalism and reactionary Stalinism.
*
Note by ETOL
1. At this time in Korean there was a temporary lull in fighting on the Pusan perimeter and the Inchon landings had not yet taken place.
 

: Anatomy of Murder (September 1950)






Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

J.M.F.
Books in Review
Anatomy of Murder
(September 1950)

From The New International, Vol. XVI No. 5, September–October 1950, pp. 315–317.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the Marxists’ Internet Archive.

Murder in Mexico
Salazar and Gorkin
Secker and Warburg, London, 1950. $2.50.
Ten years after the assassination of Trotsky an account of that tragic event written by Leandro A. Sanchez Salazar in collaboration with Julian Gorkin has finally appeared in English. Salazar was the Mexican police officer in charge of the investigation of the two attempts upon Trotsky’s life, Gorkin is a former leader of the POUM.
The belated appearance of the book is political in origin.
“Circumstances due to the war have delayed the publication of this book for several years,” says Gorkin. “We were in the course of preparing it when the rupture of the Hitler-Stalin Pact and the invasion of Russia by the German Army occurred. Stalin thus became, in spite of himself, an ally of the democratic governments, and Russia one of the principal factors in the fight against Nazi militarism. I was given to understand by those in high places that the publication of the book was not opportune.”
It is a useful, small reminder of the role played by the democratic capitalist countries in creating the Stalinist monster.
The book is the story of the police investigations into the two attempts made upon Trotsky’s life in 1940 – the first one led by the Stalinist painter and GPU agent Siqueiros, and the second by Jacson, which ended in Trotsky’s death.
With one major and one minor exception there is little new material in the book. The major exception consists of the facts adduced to argue the theory that Robert Sheldon Harte, believed by Trotsky to have been a loyal secretary and guard, was in reality a GPU agent. The evidence is impressive. The minor exception is the almost certain establishment of the identity of Jacson. He is believed to be the son of Caridad Mercader, a woman born in Catalonia but who has lived for extended periods in France, Belgium, and Russia. She has involved almost her whole family in GPU work. (See Serge diary in this issue. – Ed.)
The book is valuable in revealing the nature and extent of the power of the GPU and of its control of the world communist parties. If there could have been legitimate doubt in the radical movements in 1940, the ten years that have elapsed since the assassination of Trotsky have depressingly confirmed what our tendency contended in 1940: that what apparently remained of proletarian policy in the actions of the Kremlin was, in the context of the whole, solely demagogy serving the interests of the Russian bureaucracy, which increasingly achieved its external ends by military violence and preserves them internally by the violence of the GPU. In retrospect the circumstances surrounding the assassination of Trotsky take on a more typical character than many in the revolutionary movement may have been inclined to accept at the time.
Gorkin pointedly describes the emergence of the new, automaton type in the Stalinist epoch, a type which is created all over the world wherever Stalinism gains a foothold:
“Such men are explosives in human form – explosives more terrible than those which were discovered during the last war, for they pass for human beings and are quite unsuspected by the rest of the world. They form, in any case, the most dangerous political arm of which Moscow disposes in this tragic epoch. They are the messengers of death, as mysterious and as threatening as death itself. The victim is pointed out to them and they fall upon him. Humanity will be threatened as long as such men exist, blind agents of a power and organization which can dispose as it pleases of all which life and death hold most sacked. The future of man is threatened. And moral values, dignity, truth, right, justice, freedom – simple bourgeois prejudices, according to Stalinism – all are threatened. It is not a question of simple intellectual juggling or flights of fancy, but one of the most tragic realities of our time.
“Such types, with one degree of variation or another, occupied numerous posts in the Mexican government and actively participated in the attempts against Trotsky. They hid Siqueiros from the law, others were approached for police uniforms to use in the first assassination attempt, the secretary of the penitentiary was a Stalinist. Members of the Chilean diplomatic staff were Stalinists – and eventually got Siqueiros scot-free out of Mexico. Members of the Mexican CP did everything including prostituting themselves in the literal sense in closing the trap on Trotsky. And nine-tenths of it was done in the name of a social myth – Russia, the Workers’ State.”
The assassination of Trotsky was possible because the resources of a whole state were brought to bear upon him. Gorkin estimates that the assassination ultimately cost $600,000 – a price which Stalin assuredly considers a cheap one. Yet, for all of this, it was crudely done and crudely motivated. The only interesting element, in one respect, is that the Stalinist versions of the murder could be so easily imposed upon the followers of the CP and upon others not politically committed.
One of the most chilling scenes – for this reviewer, at least – concerns the preparations for the first murder attempt when Siqueiros’ gunmen were trying on the uniforms which helped gain them entry into the Trotsky household. One of the participants is talking:
“‘On Siqueiros’ orders, we tried on the uniforms. The one intended for me fitted me very well. Pujol put on an Army lieutenant’s uniform, the others policemen’s uniforms. We laughed and joked as though it were a feast day ...
“‘Towards two o’clock Siqueiros came back wearing a major’s military uniform; he did not tell us where he had put it on and we did not ask him. He wore a raincoat, glasses and a false mustache. We greeted him with great bursts of laughter. Turning around a little he asked us: “How does it suit me?” We replied in chorus: “Very well.” Then we went out into the street, in uniform and well-armed.’”
The attempted machine-gunning of one of the most gifted men of our times followed in a few minutes.
The story, of course, is an unfinished one. Among other things, the threads which lead to New York, to Europe, and to Russia have yet remained to be traced. It would indeed be interesting to know the full story of the activities of GPU bodies like Jack Stachel, Alex Bittelman, Eugene Dennis, and several score others, including the reprehensible Earl Browder and the sanctimonious Louis Budenz.
Yet out of this bloody tale of the actions of debased men and women emerges an intimation of the glory and promise of 1917 – of Trotsky, master of the political moment to the very end, and of Natalia, his selfless wife and co-thinker. Her statement describing the day of the assassination, which forms a chapter of the book, is an almost unbearably moving document. We can only hope that she will commit her memoirs to paper. They would form an irreplaceable record of one of the most ennobling and tragic events in modern history – the rise and decline of the revolutionary socialist movement in Russia.
 

M. Fenwick: Tales of the South Pacific (28 June 1948)      Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page  James M. Fenwick Books You Should Know ... Tales of the South Pacific (28 June 1948)  From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 26, 28 June 1948, p. 3.Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.  Tales of the South Pacificby James A. Michener Pocket Books. 312 pages, 25 cents This is a Pulitzer Prize winner – not the great novel of World War II whose appearance is still being awaited. Tales of the South Pacific is a collection of fourteen short stories (five fewer than in the original edition), given a rough continuity through successively leading up to a story of an assault landing, the account of which forms the climax of the book. Only two stories have much value. The first is An Officer and a Gentle-man. It is the neatly laid-in story of a Princeton man, woman-hungry on a Pacific island, whose Philadelphia Main Line snobbishness prevents him from taking a pretty nurse. The second is Fo ‘Oolla’, a variation of the East-is-East-and-West-is-West theme involving a marine lieutenant, a betel-juice-stained Tokinese named Bloody Mary, and her vision of a daughter. These are good because Michener obviously understands the type involved (John O’Hara’s country-club set from Appointment in Samara who have beaten the draft into the navy) and the problems which confront them. The other stories are not so good. Wine for the Mess at Segi is a banal story of island-hopping by plane all over the jungle circuit searching for Christmas liquor. A Boar’s Tooth is little more than a lecture in anthropology. Frisco is a patronizing description of enlisted men before an assault landing. * What have we the right to demand of a story coming out of World War II? If would seem that if should, at least, accomplish what the great novels of World War I did – debunk the glory. Yet The Landing on Kuralei, the climax of these tales, is crude patriotism, amateurishly evoked. The characters should be authentic. Yet Michener (like the far subtler Stephen Spender in European Witness) treats enlisted men like Shakespearean rustics – as comedy relief. Nor does the author achieve the specific atmosphere of war: loneliness, hopelessness, fear, death. We have the right to expect more, in one respect or another – small things like more realistic dialogue, some understanding of the plight of the enemy, some sort of social insight into the war, an integrating concept – even Ernst Jünger’s fiery vision of the war of matèriel – suitable to the vast totality of this war. Michener does occasionally strike a suggestive chord: the unvoiced fear and the inner gratefulness for those who voice it, the transmission of courage by example, the “inner caves” men fled to, the chain of causation ending at the attack on the pillbox, the chain of consequences which follow, the island loneliness, the primal magnetism exerted by women in combat areas, departures, the jump-off moment, the arbitrariness of death. But these insights are never deepened. What emerges is a marketable collection of gags, alcoholics, the currently fashionable anti-racism, hard-boiled patriotism, sexual freedom (with natives), and musings of the Ye Olde Spittoone Philosopher type. Hollywood take it away!   
M. Fenwick: Off Limits (9 February 1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(9 February 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 6, 9 February 1948, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.


Eisenhower – Liberal Militarist
The last has not been heard of General Eisenhower.
Unless an irresistible draft-Eisenhower boom takes place – and evidences for its possibility are not lacking – Eisenhower’s declination to run for the presidency postpones the beginning of significant political activity on his part until the next national elections. But barring completely unforeseeable circumstances, his candidacy is possible at that time.
How is his exceptional popularity to be accounted for? And it is exceptional. Poll after poll has indicated that he could win the election with relative ease. He was, among other things, “the only Republican favored over Truman by union members, low-income groups and veterans.”
Part of his popularity is unquestionably due to his role in the war. Far enough up in the military hierarchy to have had little contact with troops, he escaped the odium which, for instance, became attached to the name of Patton. And, unlike the ego-maniac Montgomery, lie was judicious in his public pronouncements. Further, he is obviously an intelligent person. He was picked
for his job during the war not primarily for his strategical or tactical abilities – those problems were resolved in lower and higher echelons – but for his ability to mediate among top allied political and military personnel. These qualifications are more or less known to the general population, where they assume a New Deal caste.
 

The Unstained
Eisenhower is commonly viewed as being uncorrupted by party intrigue. And certainly this has been a political year requiring strong stomachs. The previous doubts as to which party he belonged to, and the current Platonic character of his relation to the Republicans, has an undoubted attractiveness. There is a feeling that “he’ll get in there and straighten both of them out.” He appears as a non-partisan candidate.
And certainly one of the factors in his popularity to date is that he has not officially committed himself on any number of important issues.. He has had little chance to offend anybody.
It is difficult to know how much is personal in his declining, and how much has been planned – and there is more than a little evidence of very careful planning. His statement, however, is revealing. The following is the relevant portion:
“It is my conviction that the necessary and wise subordination of the military to civil power will be best sustained and our people will have greater confidence that it is so sustained when lifelong professional soldiers, in the absence of some obvious and overriding reasons, abstain from seeking high political office.”
The year 1952 can well provide the “obvious and overriding reasons” which Eisenhower specifies. That is the year which experts, who may or may not know what they are talking about, have set as the one by which Russia will have developed the atomic bomb. In any event it is a year destined to be one of extreme international tension. From the capitalist point of view, Eisenhower is the ideal figure to rally the people of this country into the war with Russia.
 

Interim Intentions
Were he to serve now (and for the capitalists there would be positive benefits to be derived therefrom) it is possible that by 1952 he would have dissipated a great deal of his attractive force. In the absence of a pressing national crisis there is a great deal of polities currently being played in Congress. The backwoods types Eisenhower would have to contend with could well compromise him. Eisenhower can use the ensuing four years to cultivate the civilian pose and to learn a little about that abnormal world of civilians. His tour of duty at Columbia will serve to remove the military stigma which his letter of declination shows he is uncomfortably aware of. And then ... and then, when the hour strikes, the scholar will reluctantly – but like a good soldier! – heed the nation’s call!
Another possible reason deterring Eisenhower and his backers may be a desire not to precipitate international tensions. England would begin to sweat, for instance, at the pace of events, and Russia could use the Eisenhower election to good propaganda advantage.
In the meantime Eisenhower’s dry run has given his backers a chance to assess his political weight. It is obvious that a certain stratum of the capitalist class has found their man.
With Eisenhower as President, Marshall as Secretary of State and Bradley as Army Chief of Staff, governmental power would be centralized in the hands of three old Army cronies. The militarization of our government, which has been taking place with great deliberation in the last two years, would then be more complete.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits - The 70 Group Air Force Squabble (31 May 1945)      Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page  James M. Fenwick Off Limits The 70 Group Air Force Squabble (31 May 1945)  From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 22, 31 May 1948, p. 3.Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.  It’s the silly season. This is the season when the newspapers announce that eclipses have military value (Solar System Finally Justifies Self!) This is the time of year when Truman goes to church and the scripture text for the service is, “Lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.” This is the month when the Rev. Robert J. White, president of the Chaplains’ Association of the Army and Navy of the United States, flutes,“Our hearts are with all victims of persecution at all times,” but that he does not propose to do anything about segregation in the armed forces. This is the time of year when Churchill, speaking in Amsterdam, brassly trumpets, “I invoke the interests of the broad proletarian masses.” This is the season when a woman in New York sues her husband for divorce because he forced her to read Marx. And this is the season when Congress increases the air force budget and all the leading military figures except those in the air force raise an aggrieved howl. * What lies behind this unwonted opposition of leading political and military personnel to an increase in the air force? Part of the opposition, of course, derives from inter-departmental pride, jealousy – and the consequently sharpened appetite for public funds. Given the air-power hypnosis, it was not difficult for Stuart Symington, secretary for the department of the air, to break the discipline established, alas, but a few weeks ago by the new department of defense, make his bid for a seventy-group air force, and get it overwhelmingly approved by a Congress positively goggle-eyed and red in the face with patriotism. A good part of the opposition was furnished by persons having a more inclusive view of the armaments program. Secretary of defense Forrestal indicated that the establishment of an air force of 21,000 planes would give a false sense of security. Modern wars, he indicated, and especially a war with Russia, cannot be won primarily by an air force. A proper balance of land and naval forces must be maintained. Hanson W. Baldwin, the military analyst, has pointed out that infantry commitments for a war with Russia would be astonishingly large. And hardly a beginning has been made in resolving this problem at home and abroad. Nor has the problem really been tackled of equipping these men with new weapons, without which Russia could strongly oppose the United States. Such weapons include heavier and better tanks, effective anti-tank guns, new communications equipment, and large caliber recoilless weapons. In a recent speech Eisenhower posed another and related problem – an international division of labor to produce such matèriel. * From this there flows another consideration a social struggle, transcending the simple, if es- [Line of text missing – Note by ETOL] Russia into hasty actions which could not be coped with militarily now. Following the successes of the Italian elections, the United States can afford to relax the tempo. It can also look forward to a lessening of tensions abroad as the ERP takes hold. Coupled with this was the alarm expressed by European nations in the U.S. orbit who felt that the belligerent policy of the U.S. would lead to premature clashes with Russian forces and policies which could not be successfully met at the present time. Hence Marshall’s plea for God’s sake not to rock the boat by proposing changes in the UN – changes chiefly involving the exclusion of Russia. And hence the proposal to Russia for conversations. * One of the basic causes for opposition, however, rests upon a recognition of the economic dislocations which such a program would induce in this country, especially if army and navy forces were brought into balance and if economic and military commitments to Europe and Asia were filled. In his statement Forrestal warned that a smaller program was indicated “... in the interest of avoiding, so far as possible, allocations, rationing, price controls and a host of other restrictions ... the demands upon an already practically fully employed and tight economy may produce explosive inflationary consequences ... The military demands must be within the limits of our capacity to produce, or, alternatively, we must accept those controls that are found necessary to channel manpower and materials necessary to insure the desired production.” What this means is that the most responsible (capitalist) leaders of the country fear the social consequences of the program. For implicit in it is the curtailing of civilian production, allocation of raw materials to war industries, rationing, wage freezing and other curbs upon labor – and an inevitable acceleration of the drive to war. Since the tasks are so huge, the restrictions in all spheres involving the working class will be much more extensive and intensive than in World War II. It is the fear of the reactions of the workers which lies behind this argumentation against the seventy-group air force. In sum, congress – and congress in the silly season of an election year – is proving something less than an ideal executive for the capitalist class. This is the burden of Hanson W. Baldwin’s well-reasoned complaint in the New York Times. But there is no law which says that comedians – all unconscious, of course – shall not sit in congress. They too can contribute to the evolution of history. And the contribution of the current set is to bring closer that fateful D-day whose appearance even the somewhat shrewder politicos view with fear and trembling.   
Fenwick: Off Limits – Capitalist Imperialism – The Military Phase (10 May 1948)      Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page  James M. Fenwick Off Limits Capitalist Imperialism – The Military Phase (10 May 1948)  From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 19, 10 May 1948, p. 3.Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.  Capitalist imperialism has passed through several phases. These are not rigidly distinguishable in any particular country since the phases interpenetrate. Nor did the great capitalist powers go through these phases simultaneously. Nevertheless, the history of capitalist imperialism is readily divisible into several distinct epochs. The first was an era of plunder. Powers such as England and Spain ferociously fell upon less developed countries like India and Peru and relieved them of their gold, silver and jewels. These resources exhausted, England and the Netherlands, in particular, turned to a more pacific trade in spices, silks, coffee, and other products. Then followed the epoch which reached its flower during the Victorian era and whose decay we have witnessed in our lifetime. This period of the dominance of finance capital, analyzed classically in Lenin’s Imperialism, was characterized by the investment of capital in the colonial and semi-colonial enterprises. The basically economic character of this imperialism was obvious. At first the military aspects were subordinate, although the relation between military operations and economic interest was an explicit one. The role played by military considerations in this imperialist expansion was reflected in the growing proportion of the total national budget devoted to war purposes.  A Change Begins The increasingly important influence which armaments have begun to exert in national economies was analyzed as early as World War I, notably by Bukharin. By 1914 the opening up of new colonial areas, whereby world capitalism could temporarily avert the maturing of its internal contradictions, had ceased. The great powers began to struggle for each other’s colonies. This stimulated the growth of huge militarized states. Simultaneously colonies became less tractable. Crises in the master countries precluded them from being able to retain the firm grasp on their subject peoples which they once had exercised. The present unstable equilibrium in such countries as India, the East Indies, Korea and Indo-China reflects this tendency. Of the great powers, the United States alone today has the potential for establishing economic dominance over the world. But given the economic collapse in the smaller imperialist countries such as England, France, Italy, and defeated Japan and Germany, even the U.S. finds grave obstacles confronting its pressing desire to exploit the rest of the world. Add to this the fear of a depression at home and the further contraction of the world market caused by Russian expansion in Europe – and U.S. capital is driven to expand armaments production on a grand scale (the production of the means of destruction as contrasted with the production of the means of consumption) as a method of assuring a continued flow of profits. If the ERP is being used to revive European capitalism it is being done only to the extent that it will (1) not regenerate serious economic rivals to the U.S., (2) stave off the Stalinist penetration which is made possible by the miserable level upon which European workers subsist, and (3) stabilize Western Europe as military powers subordinate to the United States and directed against Russia. Capitalist imperialism, today more and more assumes the character of a struggle for military allies, naval, air, and army bases, and strategic raw materials. For the present, direct economic motives are recessive. These considerations influence much of Russia’s policy also, though not to the extent that they influence the policy of the United States. Means are becoming ends. As never before in its history the world is becoming a huge machine for making war. The alternatives confronting humanity, the capitalists do not understand very clearly. But if they do not, we do. Either socialism will triumph, or the world, held in bondage by U.S. or Russian imperialism, will enter into an epoch of twentieth-century barbarism. Thus ends the great saga of capitalism which began in an upsurge of economic activity, culture, and hope during the Renaissance. The wealth of U.S. corporations has increased almost 250 per cent since 1939.   
M. Fenwick: Off Limits - Interlude - Hearts And Flowers (M-1) (1 November 1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Interlude: Hearts And Flowers (M-1)
(1 November 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 44, 1 November 1948, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

We see by the press that an old army buddy of ours has been sounding off again. According to a dispatch from Germany in the New York Times:
“Lieut.-Gen. Clarence R. Huebner, in an address to about 15,000 First Division and constabulary troops who had completed summer maneuvers here, said:

“‘I don’t need to tell you how tense the world is today. I don’t need to tell you how short our ranks are.’

“He asked the men to consider a new Army regulation authorizing the extension of enlistments for six-month periods.
“‘We need you so much,’ he said.”
“We need you so much” – how our old First Division heart beats faster, when we read that! How different from the old days when our contact with the officers was limited to digging their latrines, dragging them to their quarters when they were drunk, and swallowing their insolence! Believe us when we say that when we read that pathetic appeal we threw down the paper and rushed to the recruiting station!
*
We rushed to the recruiting station, we say, and picked up some literature just to see what the new army has to offer an aging pfc. We are compelled to report to our constituents that it is not enough – not enough, at any rate, to impel this (for the present) non-radioactive body to get out of its rocking chair and sign up. Callous as it may sound, we prefer to hear old Huebner second-hand via the New York Times. In these matters we prefer Art to Nature any day of the week.
We did find out something interesting, however, concerning the techniques being used to give the gullible public the heave-ho into the armed forces. There’s not an ounce of idealism in it. It rests on that materialism of which we socialists are so often accused.
“Would it surprise you,” the advertising blurb begins, “to learn that the lowest paid man in the U.S. Army or U.S. Air Force actually has more take-home pay at the end of the year than the average civilian in industry?” And here is the table used to show that a civilian would have to earn $3,587.20 per year to equal the benefits received by a pfc. (“F” stands for “free” and “E” for “exempt.”)



Yearly Expenditures
Army or Air Force Single, Original Enlistee
Private First Class




 


18 Years Old


  


Civilian




Food


F


$592 




Clothing, civilian


$84 


 207




Uniform


F


 




Lodging


F


 381




Medical Care


F


  59




Job Transportation


F


  50




Laundry


 24


  26




Movies


 10


  25




Haircuts


 18


  36




Incidentals


120


 132




Income Tax


E


 455




Insurance


     141.60


     154.80




Annuity (retire after 20 years)


F


 857




Cash left over (including
re-enlistment bonus)


     612.40


    612.40




Total


$1,010.00


$3,587.20



The blurb concludes by pointing out that with promotions, increased base pay for foreign service, dependency allowances, etc., a person can work up to a salary equivalent to $5,000 a year in civilian life.
Without breaking down these statistics, or pointing out some of the not unknown occupational hazards of military life, it is interesting to note that the cost of living has risen to such a point that a plausible case for joining the army can be made on an economic basis.
Still and all, we don’t think there will be any mass rush to the recruiting stations. For our part, old Huebner will have to get along as best he can without us.
We’ve heard that song before.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits - The Nationalist Defeats in China (15 November 1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
The Nationalist Defeats in China
(15 November 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 46, 15 November 1948, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The stunning defeats administered the nationalist forces in China by the Stalinist armies in recent weeks are events of first-rate importance.
With the fall of Mukden the richest and most highly industrialized area in continental Asia fell into the hands of the Stalinists. Along with Mukden went 120,000 troops, bringing to 300,000 the number taken in the past three weeks alone.
The remnants are reported falling back on the Kalgan-Peiping-Tientsin line. It can at best be only a holding operation until troops can be deployed before Suchow, a key railroad junction 170 miles north of Nanking. But even Chinese nationalist sources admit that Stalinist troops are already south of Suchow.
We are witnessing a catastrophe.
The Chiang Kai-shek regime has approached the point where it has neither military effectives, the confidence of the people, or belief in its own efforts.
The Stalinist regime for the first time sees before it as a real perspective the prospect of securing all of maritime China.
 
United States Policy
At this date U.S. aid can be of only dubious value. It is coming too late. The $125,000,000 currently earmarked for nationalist China will meagerly equip five divisions – which represents about one-fourth of the men lost in the past three weeks. Further war material cannot be sent in large quantities because of the depletion of war surplus stocks and the low level of current armaments production. Even were such materiel to reach China, trained units capable of utilizing modern equipment do not exist in large numbers.
In any event, it is a platitude to note that what is basic to Stalinist success is a social program which the Chiang Kai-shek regime cannot match or exceed without negating its own reason for being.
There can be no doubt that aid will be poured into nationalist China. The recent statement of Roger D. Lapham, Chief of Economic Cooperation Administration in China, may be taken as foreshadowing future policy:
“I cannot see that it is to our best interest to abandon China. China, particularly North China, is perhaps the most important part of Asia. We are trying to hold the Iron Curtain in Korea. There is every logical reason to spend the right proportion of ECA aid to hold it on the whole Pacific front, as well as the Atlantic.”
But even at best the war would be one long, grinding campaign after another. The Greek example is instructive in this respect.
 
Effects on Japan and U.S.
One easily predictable result of the recent events will be the military strengthening of Japan. The first step will be the retention of U.S. troops. When Gen. Eichelberger recently returned from Japan he spoke in diplomatic terms of the necessity of protecting Japan from Stalinism internally. Premier Yoshida openly asked for the retention of U.S. troops.
Following this will come the reconstitution of the Japanese economy, paring down of reparations, releasing of war criminals, and all the other requisites for making Japan an ally in the war against Stalinism.
Domestically, a heavy drain on the U.S. economy is indicated. If, as is probable, Stalinist successes in China inspire similar movements in other eastern colonies, the burden will become such as to accelerate tremendously the present inflationary terms.
And finally, the present events heighten the war tension – and illumine the monstrous problems confronting U.S. Capitalism as it prepares to assault its imperialist rival.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits - Prices: They're Off! (29 November 1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Prices: They’re Off!
(29 November 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 48, 29 November 1948, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

We would like to call the attention of C. Wright Mills and the rest of the sociology people to an event of sympathetic importance. We refer, of course, to the recent opening in Newark, New Jersey, of the Man-o’-War Horsemeat Market (“The Fastest Steaks in Northern New Jersey”).
Not knowing much about horseflesh, except for certain parts of the anatomy which we have on occasion been identified with, we dropped into the market the other day to see how things were going.
“What’ll it be, pal?” asked the butcher as we entered.
“I’d like something in a nice, two-pound steak,” we replied.
“You want to eat it today or tomorrow, pal?”
“Why?”
“The paper says rain for tomorrow, pal.”
“What’s the gimmick? Pal.”
“Well, if you want it for tomorrow, pal, I’ll give you this piece here. It’s from a great mudder.”
“YUK, YUK, YUK!” we both screamed.
Having, as we sociologists say, established ourselves on the same – if low – level of abstraction, we got down to more serious matters.
 
Business Is Booming
“How’s business,” we asked, “pal?”
“Booming, pal. We’re going to open two more stores – the Gallant Fox Horsemeat Market, and the High Strung Horsemeat Market.”
“How do you account for your success?”
“It’s economics, pal – that old high cost of living. People can’t afford to buy regular meat.”
“How does the future look to you?”
“Rosy, pal, rosy.”
“How do you figure?”
“Look, pal, the day when you could run a business on – it’s a gag, pal – horse sense is over. You gotta be an analyst.”
“Analyst? Psychoanalyst?”
“BUSINESS analyst, pal – like this Jack Ranger. Boy, what a horsemeat market he could run!”
 
It Means ... More Horsemeat!
“How do you work it?”
“Look, pal, it’s like I’m reading in this quotation from Leon H. Keyserling in an article by Fritz Sternberg in the Nation: ‘Among families with incomes under $2,000 a full quarter suffered actual decreases of income during this period’ – since 1946 – ‘and an additional 40 per cent of these families received no increase in income ... real earnings of all wage earners have declined about 10 per cent since June, 1946! You know what that means, pal?”
“What?”
“Horsemeat, pal, horsemeat. Or listen to this by Sternberg: ‘Radical measures to combat inflation are not to be expected. The power of the big corporations has been so increased that they are able to block any serious anti-inflationary measure.’ You know what that means, pal?”
“Horsemeat?”
“No, pal, MORE horsemeat, MORE horsemeat. If you’d like a gander a little farther into the future, listen to this by Thomas Sancton in the same issue of the Nation: ‘In a future war the anticipated shortages of consumer goods would create a black-market problem and general inflationary bidding for scarce items that would require more stringent controls than in the last war. This short supply of goods, combined with the astronomical expansion of the war debt, would make imperative a drastic tax rate on earnings and salaries.’ And if you want to go still further here’s the U.S. News and World Report sounding off on the post-World War III world: ‘The dollar of today, worth less than 60 cents in pre-war purchasing power, readily could become the 10-cent dollar of the times after World War III.’ You know what that means, pal?”
“Horsemeat,” we whispered.
“Yep,” wound up our butcher friend ... “Yep, grandfather was a dope. When the old gray mare got to the point of not being what she used to be, grand paw never thought of eating her. O tempora, O mores, pal.”
 

M. Fenwick: Peace Prescription (April 1948)





Fenwick Archive    Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Books in Review
Peace Prescription
(April 1948)

From The New International, Vol. XIV No. 4, April 1948, p. 127.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

How to Stop the Russians Without War
by Fritz Sternberg
John Day, New York 1948, 146 pp.
Sternberg’s thesis is that Russian expansion can be stopped short of war. He emphasizes that such a war, while it would be won by the United States, would result in terrible destruction on both sides, and leave this country – her progressive and democratic institutions destroyed – surrounded by a world of barbarism.
There must, says Sternberg, be a basic change in U.S. foreign policy. In China, threatened by Russia, mass support for the Kuomintang government can be gained only through instituting agrarian reforms. Such a change in policy can be effected only by strengthening the “liberal” wing of the urban bourgeoisie. This must be done by reconstruction and industrialization financed by the United States. In Europe the first step toward the containment of Russia is a “united Europe of the sixteen nations plus Western Germany,” organized on a basis of “planned socialism and democratic development.” The “democratic socialism” here envisioned is that of the British Labor Party. Sternberg’s program is to be implemented by U.S. imperialism.
It will suffice to point out that the historic function of U.S. capital is not to usher in socialism. Rather than fool with social forces which might get out of hand, the United States is banking primarily on military methods. It does so cognizant of the dangers which Sternberg indicates are thereby involved. But it can do nothing else; that is one of its inescapable contradictions. The reconstruction of Europe on democratic lines and the defeat of Stalinism remain the tasks of the working class.
As in Sternberg’s The Coming Crisis (a work far superior to the one under review) the descriptive analysis of the present situation has value, while the program of action remains an appeal to the throne-like all such appeals a little stupid, a little pathetic.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits - Students and the War Threat (26 April 1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Students and the War Threat
(26 April 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 17, 26 April 1948, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

“Yes, I was opposed to the war. I am perfectly willing, on that account, to be branded as a disloyalist, and if it is a crime under the American law punishable by imprisonment for being opposed to human bloodshed, I am perfectly willing to be clothed in the stripes of a convict and to end my days in a prison cell.”
That is the voice of Eugene V. Debs addressing the jury of the federal court which sentenced him to prison in 1918 for opposing World War I.
Those words, spoken thirty years ago in a Cleveland courtroom, ring with an ardor and conviction which must seem naive to many in our age of cynicism and broken wills.
For it is true that, given the relative isolation of the revolutionary socialist movement, perspectives capable of setting afire the imagination of youth, and especially of student youth, seem to have historical but not actual significance.
Student movements have customarily been hotbeds of progressive thought. The tradition is a long and honorable one. Alexander Herzen, the inspirer of Russian populism, was first sent into exile while he was yet a student. Thousands were to follow him. In Germany the Young Hegelians of the 1830’s, among whom Marx shaped his thinking, were tempered in the same fires. Hardly a temple of orthodox thought was left standing when they got through. Of necessity developing later, the student bodies of colonial countries have long since discharged their debts to mankind. Among the first were students of China, who in the early 1920’s initiated a surge of colonial unrest which has not yet subsided.
 

The U.S. Student Movement
Marxist ideas (as reviewed in the light of the Russian revolution) first made headway on American campuses during the 1930’s as a result of the depression. Though they had a Stalinist caste which was later to be bled off into the famous “fight against war and fascism,” they were not the gross distortions which the CP currently peddles.
Those were the days when students of the University of Pittsburgh picketed their commencement exercises in protest against General MacArthur’s speaking; when hundreds of Oxford students pledged never to support any war in which England fought; and when the late Frank Kingdom, then president of Newark University, used to lead the student body in picket lines on occasion just to keep the edge on its social consciousness.
But who would think of writing a Revolt on the Campus today? Generally speaking, there is no spirit of revolt on the campus. There is a malaise. It has its origin in the still sinewy U.S. economy, the absence of a serious number of war casualties, the lack of war damage, the social fire insurance provided by the GI Bill, the government war propaganda, Stalinism – and the relative weakness of revolutionary forces who could pose an alternative to Washington and Moscow. But there is no sharply oriented opposition.
 

Wallace’s Foreign Policy
There is an anti-war sentiment on the American campus. Its most articulate and staunch elements are being corralled by the Wallace movement – which is to say, by the CPers, the AYD (American Youth for Democracy) crowd, the PCA (Progressive Citizens of America) – all of whom are subordinating whatever independent activity they may have been carrying on to the Wallace campaign. Since Wallace is the only candidate even advocating a peace program the movement is bound to grow. An elemental task for revolutionary socialists is to win away from the Stalinists such students as have been attracted by their pseudo-peace program.
Wallace’s program resembles the “a” blot used in the Rohrschach tests – everyone can see in it what he will.
The first and foremost fact about Wallace’s program, however, is that his foreign policy is that of Russia. He can fiddle with other parts of his program pretty much as he wishes, but once he tampers with his current foreign policy the Communist Party, which created him out of New Deal mud and gave him his present ideology, will dump him with scant ceremony.
Whatever Wallace’s subjective intentions maybe his present program is designed to weaken U.S. imperialism without similarly weakening Russian imperialism. He does not address the same demands to Russia in regard to the draft, military expenditures, domination of peoples, civil liberties, and interference in the domestic affairs of other countries that he can, with reason, address to the United States.
The CP hopes to utilize the “peace” demagogy in order to recruit members for the time when the internal situation in the U.S. permits it to engage in such activities as we have been witness to in France – all of which have had little to do with the interests of the French worker but a great deal to do with Russian foreign policy. In the shorter term it hopes to stave off war for a period by the pressure exercised by Wallace supporters.
 

Wallace’s Domestic Program
The rest of Wallace’s program is the come-on. It serves the same purpose as the free chinaware at the Thursday night class B movie.
This is Wallace: the wrathful man who is opposed to the use of the atom bomb – and the innocent who helped create it. The crusader against Jim Crow – and the coward who didn’t lift his little finger against it when he was in office. The apostle of the era of abundance – and the great intellect who thought of nothing else but plowing under crops during the depression. The defender of democratic practices – and the man who NOW calls for a convention to choose him presidential candidate and to ratify his platform. The enemy of imperialism – and the scoundrel who wants to make the UN work, that is, guarantee the imperialist status quo. The friend of Palestine – and the hypocrite who, when the need was greatest, raised no campaign for the Jews of Europe. The friend of labor – and ... just what is his labor record?
Wallace is not a new beginning. He is the end product of post-war Communist Party politics. Support for him only cements the hold of Stalinism upon the world.
The task for those among the country’s students who take ideas seriously is, in the spirit of the quotation with which we began this column, to aid in creating an independent party of the working class which is equally opposed to the war plans of Washington and Moscow, and to bring to such a party the full measure of their energy, their courage, and their intelligence.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (19 April 1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(19 April 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 16, 19 April 1948, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Everyone, we suppose, has those days when he feels that the human race is one of the good Lord’s poorer inventions. Here we are crawling around on this earth waiting for the day when pinball machine and Beethoven quartet, the New Look and the Old Urge, the Communist Party and the Established Church will all impartially vanish in an atomic cloud. And yet a body continues to run into persons who chirrup, “Socialism won’t work. You can’t change human nature. Who’d want to collect the garbage under socialism?”
We admit the problem. During the period preliminary to the establishment of socialism, before the garbage disposal units now accessible only to the well-off are available to all, garbage collections will have to be made. A friend of ours who reads all the confession magazines informs us that he learned from Dwight Macdonald’s Politics that Fourier, the great utopian socialist, proposed that thirteen and fourteen year-old children be delegated to the job.
We have a better idea. Why not employ all the scoundrels and fools in public life who have made a career peddling filth of all sorts? We’d like to begin by nominating a few persons from the ranks of those who have been contributing to the present war crisis.
*
First there is John L. Sullivan, the secretary of the navy. This is the character who recently announced that submarines “not belonging to any nation west of the Iron Curtain have been sighted off our shores.” It turns out that “off our shores” when translated from Political English means “in the Johnston-Palmyra Island area southwest of the Hawaiian islands” and “in a vague area defined as ‘off the Aleutians,’ the westernmost of which lies 440 miles from Russian Kamchatka.”
Then there is our old buddy of World War II days, George C. Marshall, now secretary of state. Marshall testified at the same time as Sullivan that the army is “a hollow shell.” This prompted Hanson W. Baldwin, the military analyst, to remark that “the obvious retort of the citizen in this country is an inquiry into the intellectual capacity and administrative efficiency of our military leadership if $10,000,000,000 and $11,000,000,000 defense budgets can buy us only a ‘hollow shell.’”
There is Bernard M. Baruch, with thirty years of war mongering behind him, who recently testified before the Senate Aimed Services Committee that UMT would be useful as a means “of rehabilitating youths with physical and mental defects which can be corrected” ... by such persons as “off-shore” Sullivan, no doubt.
Gen. Eisenhower easily makes the grade by his latest action in accepting membership on the national executive board of the boy scouts, an act calculated to accelerate the militarization of the very young and condition them for the slaughter.
*
Philip Murray, the head of the CIO, is another. Numerous sources report his as ready to dump – what’s his name? Oh yes – Truman and support Eisenhower for president. Such support would be all that is necessary to ensure the success of the strong Democratic draft-Eisenhower boom which is in the making.
Add to the list Republican senator Morse of Oregon who “voiced deep concern over a threat by two Negro leaders to call millions of their race to a sit-down strike against UMT and the draft.” The threat came from A. Philip Randolph, president of the AFL Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, and Grant Reynolds, New York state commissioner of correction. Their purpose, the Negroes said, “is to force an end to segregation and racial discrimination by the armed forces.” This would lead to charges of treason said Morse.
Throw in Professor Arnold Toynbee, who is called as a historian. Toynbee contributes his bit to making the coming war seem more palatable by suggesting that the atom bomb is so horrible it may not be used.
Count in a Mr. A.V. Cleaver, author of a report in the Journal of the British Interplanetary Society who contributes to the general hysteria by saying, “... I find it very easy to believe in a future race to establish national bases on the moon ... This means whoever first establishes a working base on the moon will be able to launch infinitely bigger and better missiles than any earth-bound enemy.”
Then last and least there is Col. H.S. Ruth, General MacArthur’s fiscal director. Late last month all American occupation money defaced with political slogans was called in. Most of the slogans, said Ruth, were favorable to MacArthur.
Yeah.
*
And there are people who think it will be difficult to get garbage collected under socialism!
 

M. Fenwick: Marxist Missionary (1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Marxist Missionary
(January 1948)

From The New International, Vol. XIV No. 1, January 1948, pp. 26–27.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Joseph Weydemeyer
by Karl Obermann
International Publishers, New York 1947
With the murder of Trotsky the last representative of the great revolutionists of the past was cut down. The passage of time serves only to bring their greatness into sharper focus. Possessors of the best in western thought as synthesized with Marxism, infused with an energy and conviction rare in Europe since the French Revolution, these personalities represented the new revolutionary vanguard. They were the first political scientists, in the literal sense of the term. They were the first to prepare the socialist transformation of society through an understanding of its laws of motion.
Capitalism in its headlong decline induces distortion in all concepts – even those held by the revolutionary vanguard. At a time when the Marxist cadre is small and subject to tremendous social and ideological pressures, it is instructive to review the lives of those individuals, great and close to great, who can be placed under the heading: The Revolutionary Man.
In 1842 Joseph Weydemeyer was a twenty-four-year-old artillery lieutenant attached to the garrison at Minden, Westphalia, when he fell under the influence of the Rheinische Zeitung. He soon became a Marxist, crowding his life with the most varied activity until his death in St. Louis in 1866.
His activity in the 1848 events in Europe led to his leaving for the United States in 1851. He plunged immediately into the life of the German émigré groups. Almost immediately he founded Die Revolution (Marx’s The Eighteenth Brumaire was first published in it), the first of a long series of papers with which Weydemeyer was connected.
He continually sought to effect a rapprochement between the more advanced German labor movement in the United States and the English-speaking workers.
Intervening constantly in national matters of interest to the working class, he wrote extensively on the tariff and slavery questions, participated in the opposition to the Kansas-Nebraska bill, organized workers’ militia for defense against the Know-Nothings, aided in the election of Lincoln, and during the Civil War served as the colonel of a Missouri infantry regiment.
Of particular interest in this biography (it is one of the few products of current Stalinist scholarship possessing value) is the portrayal of the efforts of Weydemeyer – as early as 1851! – to introduce Marxism into the American scene. This thorny problem is still with us.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (19 January 1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(19 January 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 3, 19 January 1948, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.


Here Come the Marines!
Equipped with tanks, guns, flame-throwers, bulldozers, trucks, jeeps and other materiel for whiling away the tedium of shipboard life, 1,000 marines left the United States early this year for Mediterranean waters.
Afraid that some idiot somewhere, somehow, sometime might consider the movement a purely routine affair, the State Department declared that it “was a routine administrative action by the Department of the Navy, undertaken without consultation because of its relatively minor importance.”
Almost everybody got the point, including even, battled-scarred Admiral “Bull” Halsey, fresh from his recent encounter with the WCTU, who declared that the Marine Corps might well be making history once again in 1948.
The move was the most recent in the series of steps taken by U.S. imperialism to contain the Stalinist penetration in the Mediterranean area. This latest measure in the cold war conveniently coincided with the establishment of the Stalinist puppet government in Greece.
Other measures taken recently in Greece through U.S. initiative include: a 12,000-man increase in the Greek regular army and an increase in the national guard, bringing it to fifty battalions; the assignment of U.S. advisers for combat operations; and an increase in the table of organization for heavy machine gun and mountain artillery units. In addition, the British have turned 40,000 rifles over to the Greek army.
*
The contemplated retirement of British forces from Palestine is another factor leading to U.S. involvement in that critical area. According to reports from both Washington and Jerusalem, Zionist leaders are beginning a drive to secure arms from the United States for the prosecution of the struggle against the Arabs which flared up as a result of the UN partition decision.
*
U.S. imperialism’s plans for Panama have struck a snag. A treaty for the establishment of thirteen air bases outside the Canal Zone area has been voted down by the National Assembly of Panama, 54 to 0. Frank T. Hines, whose chief qualification for ambassador to Panama was a first-rate failure as Veterans Administrator, has been withdrawn and less crass proposals and methods are being devised. The State Department brass is finding out that South America, as yet at least, is not merely a bureau of the War Department.
 

Notes on World War III
There’s one in every crowd. In the army it was the character who genuinely liked C-ration hash. Among the capitalist politicians it’s the person who doubts the inevitability of World War III. “Unless we behave like raving lunatics,” recently said Sir Hartley Shawcross, the British attorney general, addressing 2,000 school children, “there will not be another war. But there is always the possibility that men may be lunatics.”
We have characters like Shawcross on this side of the Atlantic, too. Listen to the New York Times: “No World War III is expected, according to information available at the Chemical Industries Show.” And why? “No orders have been placed, spokesmen said, either for munitions and explosives or the machinery to make them.” Further – and this is the clincher: “No Russian orders have been received for war materials.”
*
That there is an exceptionally large group of men in this country happy in their lunacy, at least as described by the profound Shawcross, is revealed daily in the paper:
“Washington (AP) – The National Security Resources Board has asked 14 industrial leaders to meet with it next Wednesday to, advise the board on forming a general program for industrial, civilian and military mobilization.”
“Washington (AP) – A group of atomic scientists and a military team of admirals and generals have been assigned to organize and staff the new proving ground for atomic weapons at Eniwetok, in the Far Pacific.”
“Washington (AP) – The highly secret operations at Sandia Base, New Mexico, were referred to for the first time yesterday by the Army as a ‘guided missiles project’.”
“Washington (AP) – Admiral of Fleet Chester W. Nimitz says the United States Navy holds ‘undisputed control of the sea’ and could establish floating air fields off any shore to attack inland areas.
“The former chief of naval operations predicts ... the Navy will arm its carrier-based planes with atom bombs.”
*

Echoes from World War II
“Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, Army chief of staff,” the New York Times states, “is reported by close associates to be on the verge of closing a deal for his wartime memoirs for an amount ‘in excess of $500,000’.” ... INS reports: “House investigators today probed the ‘Mexican promotions’ of several hundred army reserve officers who retired with life-time tax-exempt pensions after receiving last-minute boosts in rank.” ... “House members,” reports the AP, “applauded but rejected today a proposal that they ‘make a little sacrifice’ by giving up their customary mileage allowances.” ... Truman prefaced his State of the Union message to Congress by saying to its members: “I sincely hope you won’t have too much hard work in the coming year.” ... One out of ten World War II veterans is still unemployed. ... 90,000 disabled veterans do not have work ... New York State veterans jammed offices distributing bonus application blanks when they were opened ... Newsweek, discussing the problem of “illegitimate” children of Negro GIs and English girls, says: “The United States Army refused to entertain paternity claims when Negro soldiers were involved. In some cases, their parents wanted to marry and their fathers’ commanding officers refused to permit it for racial reasons.” ... The Christmas amnesty of conscientious objectors heavily discriminated against those whose opposition to military service was not based upon religious but upon ethical, political, philosophical or general humanitarian grounds.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (5 January 1948)      Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page  James M. Fenwick Off Limits (5 January 1948)  From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 1, 5 January 1948, p. 3.Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.   It Says in the Paper ... The Veterans Administration, which, if it does nothing else, certainly cranks out the statistics, recently estimated that by the year 2000 there will be 3,400,000 World War II veterans still alive. * The foregoing figure was obviously computed on the basis of the next fifty years being ones of peace. That business and the military do not quite see the coming years as being of that character is demonstrated daily in the press. According to the New York Times, for instance, the biggest brass in the armed forces has been holding quiet conferences with leading capitalists throughout the country. The most recent conference was held at Omaha, with 600 representatives of business in attendance. Similar conferences have previously been held in Seattle and Chicago. Maj. Gen. Everett S. Hughes, chief of ordnance, stated that “one of the major purposes of the meeting was to enable the military and industrialists to get acquainted and understand common problems.” One of the problems taken up was the dispersion of important industry to, the mid-west. * Newsweek reports that a full-scale “educational” campaign to sell universal military training to the country is about to be launched. Former Associate Justice Owen Roberts of the Supreme Court, and other citizens not obviously tied to big business, will front the campaign. UMT, as currently planned, would train 1,000,000 young men a year at an annual cost of $1,500,000,000. * While money for political and military purposes can be spent without a noticeable howl arising from the capitalist class, the national housing program remains completely stalled. A housing conference has been called by Representatives Javits and Kennedy, and others, to be held in Washington in early March. “We are not mad at anybody, and we hope nobody is mad at us,” said Mr. Javits, declaring that it was not proposed “to hold anything like a protest meeting.” Labor veterans’ committees and the AVC please note. * Further note on the veterans’ post-war world, from the New York Times for December 4, 1947: “The need for doctors in physical medicine for the Veterans Administration ‘continues to be acute,’ and there probably will be shortages in this field for the next four or five years, Dr. A. Ray Dawson, assistant medical director of the VA’s Physical Medicine Rehabilitation Service, declared here yesterday.” *  Officers and Gentlemen All “ATLANTA, Ga., Dec. 21. – Maj. Gen. Leland S. Hobbs, deputy commander of the Third Army, said today that Col. Hugh A. Adair, commander of the Camp Gordon disciplinary barracks at Augusta, Ga., would be transferred in January, but emphasized that charges of brutality there had nothing to do with the change.” “WASHINGTON, Dec. 15. – The Air Force indicated today it has adopted a policy of watchful waiting with respect to one of its farmed-out generals and two former colonels who are under fire ... for accepting priority deliveries on new automobiles arranged through the influence of a W.A.A. contractor.” “WASHINGTON. Dec. 21. – The Army announced yesterday that American occupation forces in Germany are under searching investigation on sensational charges of ‘black marketing, customs violation and similar misconduct ...’ “... it was believed the investigation would cover reports that high-ranking officers, including a general, were engaging in profiteering that would rival the activities of Maj. Gen. Bennett E. Meyers.” “NEWPORT, R.I., Nov. 30. – Brig. Gen. Ralph C. Tobin, 57, U.S. Army, retired, became the adopted son and heir today of Mrs. Hamilton Fish Webster, 80, childless socialite whose husband died in 1939 leaving her a fortune of $1,250,000.” From Newsweek, Dec. 22: “Secretary Forrestal is urging Truman to ask a pay raise of about 25 per cent for Army and Navy officers.” * With the veterans organizations: According to the Veterans’ Bulletin of the UAW the “VFW showed a loss of 685,000 members in the past year.” ... The American Legion’s Veterans’ Homestead Bill was recently subjected to an analysis by Charles Abrams, New York Post housing adviser, who concluded: “The bill is a menace, but one or two clauses may be worth salvaging, it should be redrawn and made part of the TEW bill. And it’s time the Legion made its choice between housing its vets or fattening the real estate boys.” ... Over the clang of the pin-ball machines Warren Wright, national Americanism chairman of the Amvets, recently raised his voice to announce a drive against radicals in veterans’ organizations. “They are usually good speakers,” he said. “By practiced oratory and by knowledge of floor procedure they hope to stampede the rank and file membership. Then, too, they make ample donations to win favor.” That’s how to tell us reds, Warren – look for the big money boys.   
M. Fenwick: Carlson - "Homo Stalinensis" (1948)





Fenwick Archive    Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Carlson: “Homo Stalinensis”
(January 1948)

From The New International, Vol. XIV No. 1, January 1948, pp. 26–27.
 Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The past decade in most capitalist countries has witnessed the emergence of a new socio-political type identified variously by such names as crypto-communist, proto-Stalinist, Stalinoid liberal, etc.
What characterizes these persons is, alternatively, either the pursuit of capitalist aims using the Stalinist deformation of socialist methods, or the pursuit of Stalinist aims by the employment of capitalist methods. Not infrequently both methods are employed simultaneously, especially when the conjunctural interests of Russia and a given capitalist country are the same – for instance, as was the case during the Second World War when both Russia and her capitalist allies sought the defeat of Germany.
Such individuals are most easily observable in Europe, where social tensions are greater. They are particularly definable in England, where the absence of a mass Stalinist party prevents their being absorbed in a larger political milieu. Konni Zilliacus, the “left” Labor Party member; Joseph Needham, the biochemist; or the so-called “Red” Dean of Canterbury are representative types from abroad. Henry Wallace is a good domestic example.
While there is a certain amount of interpenetration with the “fellow-travelers” of the depression period both in personnel and in social characteristics, yet in what may be called the bureaucratic-collectivist man we have a new formation. In the pre-war fellow-traveler was still visible the last flush of socialist idealism. It is not insignificant that even the term has become rarer in the active political vocabulary. The bureaucratic-collectivist type, opportunist when patching up a career, brutal when in power, is a product of the economic, political and moral decline of our times.
The activity of such types in European areas controlled by Russia, and their more circumscribed activity in the United States, lend an interest to studying the evolution of these ambivalent individuals. The development of their mentality is not necessarily a unilinear one. The recently published biography [1] of Evans Carlson, the famous commander of the Marine Second Raider Battalion during World War II, is exceptionally interesting in that it shows the development of this mentality in one of the most inhibiting of all spheres – the military.
 
Gung Ho and Morale Building
Carlson’s fame rests upon two small model operations carried out in 1942: an attack on Makin Island and a long march through Guadalcanal. Though these victories were puffed up by the United States press, since they were among the first victories by American troops after a long series of defeats at the hands of the Japanese, it was recognized that in these victories there was an unusual element which helped make Carlson’s achievement possible. This was the esprit de corps which he was able to establish. It was symbolized in the famous philosophy of Gung Ho! – an expression taken from the Chinese and meaning, roughly, cooperation.
Gung Ho was based partly on practices developed in classic form in the Red Army of Lenin and Trotsky’s time. Says Michael Blankfort, Carlson’s Stalinist biographer, describing the plans for the unit:
“... there would be no caste differences in the Raiders. Officers would be leaders by ability and knowledge and character – and not because they held the President’s commission. They would give no unnecessary orders; they would not order a man to do what they themselves were not prepared to do with him; they would have no special mess or barracks or club. And there would be no unnecessary saluting.”
Before being executed, military operations were explained in their entirety to the men. The political background of the war and Allied war aims were similarly developed.
The ideological investiture was, however, purely capitalist. The polarities were of the standard aggressor-victim and fascism-democracy type. On the personal level there was a total absence of a policy of fraternization with Japanese soldiers. “Can you cut a Jap’s throat without flinching?” Carlson would ask. “Can you choke him to death without puking?” But he would explain, relates his biographer, “that this wasn’t a race war or a war of color against color.” Carlson’s command was, of course, Jim Crow.
Standard military morale builders, such as prayer, patriotism, and unit pride, were applied with maximum intensity by Carlson. Physical conditioning was exceptionally severe. This program was applied to an elite group: one thousand men personally selected by Carlson and his officers among three thousand volunteers from an arm of the service which was itself composed of volunteers, the Marine Corps.
It should therefore be small cause for wonder that Carlson achieved exceptional military results with minimal forces. Other facts are also interesting. The psychoneurosis rate in his battalion was probably the lowest of any combat unit in the United States infantry. Only one man cracked up in the Guadalcanal operation. Carlson’s methods of what he called “ethical indoctrination” were so successful that they formed the subject matter of a Yale study.
 
Carlson’s Road to Stalinism
Though elements of Carlson’s success are obviously due to factors other than his “ethical indoctrination,” the role played by his conceptions and their radical implications were well, if instinctively, recognized by the officer caste in the Marine Corps. After Guadalcanal he was never again placed in direct charge of men. He was discriminated against in other ways also.
Short of engaging in psycho-analytic speculations, it can be said that Carlson’s whole life was molded by the military services, which he joined at sixteen and a half and served almost uninterruptedly until his death in 1947. The chief conditioning factor in his life prior to the army was probably the fact that he was the son of a poor Congregationalist minister. The atmosphere of the Protestant ethic, so well described by the sociologist Max Weber, was unquestionably influential in the development of the democratic aspects of his system.
Early in his Marine Corps career he read Upton Sinclair, Theodore Dreiser and Sinclair Lewis. By as late as 1927, however, when he was witness to the bloody collapse of the revolutionary upsurge in China, he preserved an imperialist attitude toward Far Eastern events. But at this time he fell under the influence of Admiral Mark L. Bristol, a liberal in terms of naval thinking, who did not believe that an emotional attitude toward the Orient was a substitute for a serious study of it. He also initiated an educational program among Marine enlisted men. When he was transferred to Nicaragua Carlson began to apply enlightened methods in dealing with native troops under his command (he spoke to them exclusively in Spanish, for instance), but of course these were democratic methods directed against the nationalist movement. Here also he picked up an interest in guerrilla warfare.
The years 1937–38 in China – years of the decline and Stalinization of the peasant movement – were decisive for Carlson. During this period he traveled with the Stalinist Eighth Route Army as a Marine observer. The results obtained by the limited democracy granted the troops by the Chinese Stalinists (which was, in any case, greater than that in the United States armed forces) could not but impress Carlson. Edgar Snow and Agnes Smedley, with whom he became acquainted in China, also proved of importance in conditioning his thinking. He emerged a proponent of the Stalinist peasant military movement and an opponent of Japan, which the United States was at that time appeasing and encouraging.
Following the war he joined the American Veterans Committee. In 1947 he announced his candidacy for state senator in California, with the PCA backing him and the Stalinists doing the pushing from behind. In the last days of his life Carlson’s thinking took a further turn: he expressed a belief in the necessity of “socialism” – i.e., the Russian system.
The evolution of the bureaucratic-collectivist man was on its way.

Footnote
1. The Big Yankee, by Michael Blankfort. Little, Brown, Boston 1947.
 

M. Fenwick: Truman’s Doctor Intimates Grain Gambling His Best Cure (26 January 1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Truman’s Doctor Intimates
Grain Gambling His Best Cure
(26 January 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 4, 26 January 1948, pp. 1 & 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The grain speculation investigation in Washington has answered at least one question – whatever became of vaudeville? It’s obvious by now that all the former vaudeville artists joined the army and became brigadier generals.
The latest to go through his routine has been that slack wire artist, acrobatic tumbler and dead-pan comedian, Brig. Gen. Wallace H. Graham, whom the newspapers identify as Truman’s personal physician. But he doesn’t fool us – we’d know the Keith-Albee touch anywhere. In fact, we suggest that the FBI investigate this alleged Dr. Graham. He’s probably actually “Dr. Rockwell,” the vaudeville star of blessed memory. It wouldn’t surprise us a bit if at one of the committee meetings he reached under the table, pulled out a banana stalk, and went into that howl of a routine analyzing the ills of the spinal column.
Brig. Gen. Rockwell – or rather, Brig. Gen. Graham is the latest of those scoundrels who have been characterized by Attorney-General Clark as “profiteers in human misery.” The difference between Graham and the others lies in his being more cowardly, more ignorant and more funny – this latter unintentionally, it goes without saying.
 
A Normal Liar
As we have lately come to expect of leading government figures, Graham lies as a matter of routine. After having stated with that cultured elegance of military personnel that he “had lost his socks” speculating in commodities, it later turned out under Senate questioning that this was really just another way of saying that he had cleaned up $6,165 playing the market.
This neat little trick was apparently all done by trap doors and mirrors, since, according to Graham (1) he did not have the slightest inkling of what was happening to his money – a fact which his brokers denied, (2) that even if he did know how his money was being employed he did not know that the cotton seed oil he was speculating in was a commodity, (3) that, in any event, he did not know what all those funny marks on his broker’s slips meant, and (4) that he wasn’t really too sure whether he was in the commodity market at all. The question inevitably rises: who is Graham’s doctor?
Graham’s alibi is such as to make a person wonder if he was transferred from the cavalry and a slight mix-up made as to just what sort of doctor he was. But the statement by this confirmed liar was evidently of sufficient weight as to cause the committee to suspend its investigation of Graham. “Nobody in government employ,” said our hero, “ever gave me information, and if they had I doubt I would have understood them. I am a surgeon, not a financier.”
Our personal opinion is that if his understanding of surgery is equal to his understanding of commodity trading, he shouldn’t even he trusted to carve a turkey. Neither this nor his tarnished professional ethics has so far fazed Truman, however. Graham is to remain the White House physician. Truman seems to be quite at home with persons whom he virtuously castigated only a few months ago as “gamblers in grain” who were raising the cost of food products in this country to their own profit.
 
Elmer Thomas – Scoundrel
Another somewhat better known servant of the people has apparently been caught with his hand in the cash register. He is Senator Elmer Thomas of Oklahoma and the New York Stock Exchange. When this model of civic virtue was attacked two years ago by Drew Pearson for speculating in agricultural commodities, Thomas denounced him as a liar. Only now, after his wife’s holdings were smoked out, has Thomas come forward to confess his market dealings.
He has long been in an advantageous position for speculation. Thomas has been a member of the Senate since 1923 and was for many years chairman of the Senate Agricultural Committee. How Thomas is suspected of having worked is revealed by Oliver Pilat, writing in the New York Post:
“He did have inside information on his own speeches. Frequently those speeches had great market effect. For example, the Wall Street Journal commodities market report for March 29 last went as follows:

“‘Cotton futures rallied sharply to gains of $1.35 to $1.85 a bale, stimulated by the possibility that the Pace bill may be adopted by the Senate. The rally was touched off by the plea of Senator Thomas (D.-Okla) for higher farm prices in support of tacking one of the Pace measures to the minimum wage bill.’”
 

Rogues’ Gallery
Other members of the informal plunderbund which has been using public office to amass a little nest egg for a dishonest and happy old age include:

Will Clayton, former Under-Secretary of State, and now heading the U.S. delegation to the World Trade Conference in Havana.
 
Ralph K. Davies, former deputy petroleum coordinator.
 
Governor H.B. Maw of Utah.
 
Henry Morgenthau, Jr., former Secretary of the Treasury, who has achieved the neat distinction of having emerged as an Honest Man in the current investigation solely on the basis of having LOST money speculation on one occasion.
 

A Few Conclusions
The basic weakness of the investigation is a fact which was fully appreciated only after the investigation got rolling. Under capitalism there is nothing illegal about commodity speculation. And to demonstrate the utilization of inside information by various individuals as a basis for speculating has proved difficult. The concept of just what is “inside information” will, we have no doubt, also prove to be somewhat less than clearcut.
Everybody recognizes that the investigation is pre-election fluff. Had the Republicans been in power, they would be able to present no cleaner a record, as they have more than once demonstrated in the past. In fact, they are currently none too happy over a serious investigation. It is nowhere written that Republicans are mirrors of virtue.
A serious investigation, even one operating under the premises of the current one, would take at least two measures: (1) instead of spot checking, a full investigation would be conducted, and (2) companies engaging in speculation would be investigated to determine their political ties. A point of departure could be provided by Daniel F. Rice, whose activities were recently described in PM:
“Anderson also pointed out that one of the private businessmen listed was. Daniel F. Rice, a member of the Chicago Board of Trade – he held 1,985,000 bushels of wheat and 3.310,000 bushels of corn futures on October 31 – recalling that Rice together with General Foods Corp. and several other traders had been charged with attempting to corner and manipulate the rye market in Chicago in May, 1944.”
Another person who should be investigated from the point of view of his business connections is Henry Morgenthau, Jr. There is a very obvious disinclination to question this figure who moves in the highest financial circles. “As to Mr. Morgenthau,” the New York. Times recently stated, “Senator Ferguson said, in response to questions from reporters, that there is no disposition at present to summon the former Secretary as witness to testify publicly, bat added that he would be interrogated less formally.”
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (15 March 1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(15 March 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 11, 15 March 1948, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.


The Wac and the Wave Program
In a recent article in which he raised a modest alarm at the growing militarization of the United States, Hanson W. Baldwin, the military analyst, made an acute observation.
“There are,” he said, “some purely military measures which ... give a few of our officers – particularly those of our ‘civilian components’ – some disquiet. We are, for instance, planning to perpetuate the wartime Wacs and Waves and to put women into uniform permanently as part of our armed forces – something that would have been unthinkable twenty years ago, and an act of far-reaching psychological importance.”
Baldwin is of course right When he says that such a policy would have been unthinkable twenty years ago. The tide of post-World War I disillusion was then running high. No serious effort to increase the size of the army would have had the slightest chance of success – nor was one attempted. At that time the thought of proposing the addition of women’s units hardly came within the realm even of speculation.
The army was very small, was entirely volunteer, and was largely composed of the flotsam and jetsam of society. The size of the armed forces was governed in good part by the low esteem in which the military life was held, the availability of civilian jobs, and – from the point of view of ruling class – the geographical isolation from the smouldering fires in Europe, a false estimation of the entente forces, and a lack of understanding of the scale of the next war. The problem of augmenting the “manpower” of the army was not even posed.
There also existed at that time considerable respect for the disabilities of women caused by their physiological makeup, their role as bearers and nurturers of children, and their position as homemakers. That there was, also a considerable portion of Male Superiority in all this goes without saying.
 

The Changing Times
In the past twenty years all of these conditions which militated against the creation of such institutions as the Wacs and the Waves have largely disappeared.
Cynicism about war has been supplanted by cynicism-plus-numbed-acceptance. This has been indeed, on the one hand, by the monumental growth of the capitalist state’s powers of physical, mental, and psychological coercion, and, on the other, by the decline of socialist opposition to war and its replacement by Stalinist methods. The inability to oppose war as a whole means the inability to oppose its constituent elements such as the Wacs and the Waves, for instance.
The world-wide commitments of the United States hate destroyed the small army concept. It is recognized that the next war will be more nearly total than the last. England and Germany established the pattern with women units in World War II. Since the manpower commitments promise to be so exceptionally large in World War III, it is important that at least a token Wac and Wave organization be set up now to facilitate the conscription of women which will be inevitable later.
One of the superiorities of capitalism over feudalism was the enhanced status of women which it permitted. The decline of capitalism in the past twenty years has undermined many of the good aspects of standards and practices in regard to women which have been set up. The establishment of the Wacs and the Waves is in part an example of this trend. To the extent which a rational intellectual, psychological, sexual, and marital life is possible under capitalism, institutions such as the Wacs and the Waves inhibit it. It is true that the military life destroys many old fetishes. But it offers little in return other than a brutalizing military atmosphere.
 

Positive Aspects
There is a little matter of dialectics involved here, however. With all its iniquities, the factory system removed women from the stultifying company of children, stoves, husbands, and mops, and brought them in touch with the real world.
The Wacs and Waves performed the same service in World War II. Therein lies the reason why more than one girl with a taste for freedom joined the armed forces during the war. It allowed her to break out of a world of soap operas, doting parents, hysteria, simple-mindedness, and The Ladies’ Home Journal. It gave her in some small measure what the women of Europe have experienced in tragic fullness: a sense of the provisional character of existence in our epoch. It raised their social awareness a little.
Life in the Wacs and the Waves will bcome even more instructive in the future – especially when these services are forced, as they will be, to resort to conscription. The smug complacency of so many American women, based on the unparalleled productive capacity of U.S. capitalism – and so revolting when contrasted with the fate of women abroad – will be submitted to rude shocks. Their social consciousness will be awakened as it never could be under normal conditions.
But these positive aspects of the Wac and Wave program have only latent value in themselves. For their force to be felt will require the intervention of socialist ideology. Otherwise the program will indeed be solely “an act of far-reaching psychological importance.” That is to say, in proposing to establish the Wacs and the Waves as permanent institutions in the armed forces U.S. capital is clearly declaring its intention to draw the womanhood of the country into the next holocaust.
Everything, everywhere for the flames!
 

 M. Fenwick: War Vignette (1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
War Vignette
(September 1948)

From New International, Vol.14 No.7, September 1948, pp.222.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Company Commander
by Charles MacDonald
Infantry Journal Press, Washington, 1947, 277 pp., $3.00.
Here is the best portrayal of the war on an individual level that this reviewer has read, real or fictional.
It is the actual story of I and G Companies of the 23rd Infantry as told by the company command, a young man of 22 at the time. It begins in early October 1944 when I Company moves into a static position in the Siegfried Line, and ends in May 1945 in Radcice, Czechoslovakia.
The tale is observed and recorded with remarkable care. It is highly evocative; the prose is functional; there is a minimum of bathos.
It’s all there: the thousand and one worries of the company commander – the overstretched company front, the short rounds from the artillery, the company strength, the phone linen; the self-doubt; the common experiences; the menace of the fir forests; the query “My god! what was that?”; the relief when the P-47s come over for a strafe job; the shooting of German prisoners; the endless weariness; the three-day rest before being committed again ...
To know the war as it was at the irreducible end of the chain of command, this is the book.

M. Fenwick: “Purgers” Fire Legless Vet (6 September 1948)      Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page  James M. Fenwick “Purgers” Fire Legless Vet Kutcher Case Brings New Low in Disgraceful Witch Hunt (6 September 1948)  From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 36, 6 September 1948, p. 1.Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.  NEWARK – Another disgraceful episode in the government’s hit-and-run campaign against all non-conformist political opinion has just taken place. The victim is James Kutcher, who was fired on August 13 from his job in the Newark Veterans’ Administration. He was accused of being a member of the Socialist Workers Party. “I have never denied my membership in the Socialist Workers Party,” Kutcher stated. “I do not deny it now. On the contrary, I proudly reaffirm it. What I do deny is the false accusation that the Socialist Workers Party is subversive or advocates the overthrow of the government by force and violence.” “You have the right to disagree with my views, but not to deprive me of my job for holding them,” he added. Kutcher, who is the sole support of his parents, is a World War II veteran. He lost both his legs in the fighting in Italy, after having gone through the African and Sicilian campaigns. As a result of his injuries he was hospitalized for two years. A Civil Rights Defense Committee has been set up to fight his case and to work for an immediate hearing before the federal loyalty board. Carl Holderman, president of the state CIO, has pledged support. In a statement on the case, Kutcher said: “I entered the armed forces in January 1941. My draft board did not ask me about my political views or the party to which I belonged; they drafted me. “I became an infantryman. When I was at San Pietro, Italy, in November 1943, the German mortar crew did not ask me about my political views or the party to which I belonged; they fired at me. “The Army surgeons did not ask me about my political views or the party to which I belonged; they amputated both my legs. ”The Army did not ask me about my political views or the party to which I belonged when it gave me the Purple Heart. “I have already been deprived of both my legs and my freedom of movement. I do not propose to have any government official deprive me of my freedom of thought and expression and my right to earn a living. The methods employed against me are those of totalitarianism and not of democracy.” Kutcher also said: “Although I am not in sympathy with communism, I would stand ready to defend any Communist Party member in the same position as I am at present.” Every person possessing a spark of human decency should lend his support to the Kutcher case, which so clearly reveals the reality behind the recent war – which, we were told, was to preserve democracy.   
 M. Fenwick: The Mysterious Bruno R. (1948)      Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page
 James M. Fenwick The Mysterious Bruno R. Footnote on the History of the “Russian Question” (September 1948)  From New International, Vol.14 No.7, September 1948, pp.215-218. Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.
 The mysterious “Bruno R.” is one of the many persons who are remembered today only because their ideas were attacked by Leon Trotsky. The conceptions developed by Bruno R. in his book La Bureaucratisation du Monde (The Bureaucratization of the World) [1] were first introduced to the Marxist public in the United States by Trotsky in 1939, during the great polemic on the Russian question between himself and the minority of the Socialist Workers Party which subsequently became the Workers Party: The book itself was unknown and remained unknown on this side of the ocean until recently.
The disruption of communication with Europe in 1939, the great historic events which followed, and the consequent posing and solving of new and burning political problems, caused Bruno R. to be almost forgotten. The SWP, of course, without knowing anything about him outside of what Trotsky had written, contented itself with making periodic ritualistic references to Bruno R. calculated to ward off the Evil Eye of bureaucratic collectivism.
Even in the press of the Workers Party doubts were raised concerning “the unfindable, unquotable, more or less incorporeal and altogether mysterious Bruno R.” and his views. [2] Now that Bruno R.’s book and a little collateral information on the man himself are available, this is a propitious occasion for straightening out Bruno R.’s place in the genealogical table of the theory of bureaucratic collectivism. Who then was Bruno R.? What were his ideas? What relation do they bear to the theory of bureaucratic collectivism as advanced by the Workers Party? [3]
Bruno Rizzi, Trotsky informs us, was an Italian who at one time belonged to the Fourth International. While earning his living in Italy, the nature of his work apparently enabled him to make occasional trips outside the country, in the course of which he was able to make brief contacts with French, English and Italian Trotskyists. Because of the ease with which he was able to get around, his lack of Italian revolutionary “references,” and his heterodox political views, he was treated with caution by comrades with whom he came in contact. Of his subsequent fate nothing is known.
The evolution of his political ideas is related by Rizzi in his book. He first began to re-examine the Russian question in 1936, when he published Whither the USSR? in Italian. This book was confiscated by the Fascist government, which, says Rizzi, “certainly did not understand the real objective of our work.” [4] In it, he relates, he intuitively arrived at the conclusion that “a new ruling class had been born in Russia.” He did not press the point because Trotsky denied it, and in the preface he “even declared the contrary of what was partly expressed in the book.”
He returned to the question in Is This the Twilight of Civilization? written “to combat opportunism and to lead workers to the Fourth International.” In this work he “dwelt on the question of the new ruling class in the USSR.” Rizzi relates:
“At London in November 1938 we attempted to pose the question of the nature of the Soviet state in the English section of the Fourth International. Unfortunately, the comrades – totalitarian, also! – had already had ‘plenty of discussions’ and were all in agreement with Trotsky. We succeeded in being heard even in a limited way only by the East London comrades. They took us for a petty bourgeois, and obstructionism closed the development of the discussion.”
The Bureaucratization of the World was conceived and written between the end of 1938 and the middle of May 1939. It is, the author says, a film of  his meditations. Let no one be deceived by this quiet affirmation. Those meditations on occasion assume a very gaudy character.  
Rizzi’s Theory of Bureaucratic Collectivism A preliminary summary and evaluation of Rizzi’s leading ideas may prove useful. He believes that a new type of state, which he calls bureaucratic collectivist, has emerged in Russia. This state, which is neither proletarian nor capitalist, is ruled by the bureaucracy, which has assumed a class character.
As far as these two sentences go, they coincide with our own views. Beginning from such an insight into the nature of the Russian phenomenon, however, one can proceed in various directions. And from this point, the Workers Party parts company with the views of Rizzi. We shall see how far afield he goes in his own direction.
For Rizzi, bureaucratic collectivism is historically progressive. This indeed is the prime dividing line. For him, it is a world phenomenon intermediary between capitalism and socialism, partially achieved in Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy and existing in embryonic form in the New Deal in the United States. This new society, whose historic function is to raise the level of world production through the cooperation of several large autarchies, has been made mandatory by the bankruptcy of the working class. The chief task of the working class of England, France and the United States is, therefore, to put pressure on their governments to relinquish living space and raw materials to Germany and Italy – which would permit the dictatorships to relax and world production to rise.
With this birds’-eye view of Rizzi’s conceptions on Russia, we can proceed to a more detailed examination of his ideas. First, as to his argumentation:
The first section, comprising somewhat less than a third of the book, titled The USSR: Bureaucratic Collectivism and subtitled Class Property, opens with a synoptic view of the rise and decline of the Russian Revolution.
“What is the USSR today?” Rizzi asks. “Its economy is not capitalist, nor is it based on private property, but it is based upon the collective ownership of the means of production.” Exploitation takes place through the extraction of surplus value. The cause of this condition lies in the fact that “the country was basically constituted of manual laborers and of illiterates, its industry was greatly inferior to the necessities of a vanguard economy.”
Behind this lies the failure of the world revolution. Within Russia the decline was aided by “the real dictatorship, which was that of the Bolshevik Party and not of the proletariat, a dictatorship which was concentrated in the party branches and not in the Soviets.”
“The state and Bolshevik Party functionaries, in socializing the land and industrializing the country, more and more undermined the power of the workers and finished by having monopolized the state. In this work they had to ally themselves with the technicians; thus was the first great fusion in the process of formation of the new ruling class realized in Russia.”
This class now constitutes about fifteen million persons, among whom workers are conspicuously absent. “The worker has only the right to work ... he does not exercise the slightest control.” The bourgeoisie “does not have the slightest possibility of returning.” The bureaucracy continues to grow enormously. It sets the living standards of the working class, which can no longer even offer its labor power to different entrepreneurs. “From the social viewpoint, this new form of society resolves the unbearable antagonism which renders capitalist society incapable of all progress.” But, Rizzi adds, the necessity for war preparations can negate the advantages of collectivization and planning.
A new class neither bourgeois nor proletarian has appeared on the horizon. This class is fully formed in Russia and “it is also visible in Italy as well as in Germany. The first indications ... are apparent everywhere, even in the countries of the great democracies.” The purges which took place following the assassination of Kirov were “only the civil war necessary for the new class to solidify its power. It is not a question of this being a sign of weakness, but of its being a demonstration of the strength of this class.”  
Russia’s New Class Rizzi then takes up some of the arguments advanced against this thesis, in particular those used by Trotsky in 1938 in his article Neither a Workers’ Nor a Bourgeois State?
“Can the nature of a state always be judged,” asks Rizzi, “without taking into account its political forms?” He replies: “It is a question of seeing to what end the expropriated and nationalized property in Russia is safeguarded from imperialism ...” If “a proletarian state with a bourgeois economy has existed” – as was the case immediately after the revolution – “could not a non-proletarian state with a nationalized economy also exist?”
Why should the new class attempt to denationalize property? “For if the nationalized property and planned economy remain it is because both are in consonance with the regime which holds power.” Even bourgeois states tend more and more to plan and to nationalize property. The Russian bureaucracy may have developed under the pressure of imperialism “but the most important question is to establish if the Soviet bureaucracy does not represent something other than a mere transmitting mechanism for world imperialism.” The numerical size of these “servants of imperialism,” the vastness of the country they control, and the duration of their rule indicate that we are confronted with a class.
Rizzi then takes up the question of class property, that is, property which is neither private nor socialist. He attaches no great significance to the belief that inequities in distribution in Russia may next lead to denationalization of the means of production. “Actually, an exploiting class exists in Russia, having in its hands the means of production and acting as its owner.” “... surplus value goes to the new exploiting class, to the bureaucracy en bloc.” Thus, if “property is nationalized in a non-proletarian regime it also loses its potential character of socialist property; it remains only class property.”
The author next takes up the bogey of capitalist-restorationist trends which haunt Fourth Internationalist thinking. He argues that historically progressive organizations, which increase the volume of production, do not go backward. “Did feudalism ever have the intention of going back to slavery?” Even if Russia were invaded by the Anti-Comintern Pact forces, there would be no reason for the destruction of an “economic system which is in the process of construction precisely in their own countries ...” Why think of the return of the bourgeoisie?
“If a new class has formed, it is because, historically or accidentally, it has a role to play in the historic ascent of humanity ... it is charged with organizing production on the basis of collective property in planning the economy within the state framework, while for socialism there will remain only the problems of international ‘nationalization’ and the socialist distribution of products.”  
Is Nationalization Progressive? Thus far Rizzi. As we have indicated, our common starting point is that Russia is neither a workers’ state (however degenerated) nor a capitalist state, but rather a state ruled by a new class which is extensive, entrenched and showing no serious tendencies toward capitalist restoration. We likewise label this “bureaucratic collectivism.” It must be admitted that Rizzi develops this part of his thesis with not inconsiderable skill and originality.
What distinguishes Rizzi’s views, however, is his acceptance of bureaucratic-collectivist Russia as a progressive phenomenon. This idea – that nationalization of the means of production is, in and of itself, progressive – is the widespread fallacy of our day.
A significant rise in the level of production over previously existing levels (the criterion for judging the progressive character of a given set of property relations) must, in the period of declining capitalism, be decided on a world basis. Seen from this point of view, the expression “politics is concentrated economics” takes on real meaning. The effect of Stalinist politics in the past twenty-five years has been to hold back the establishment of international socialism (a superior mode of production); to facilitate the outbreak of World War II (which has seriously lowered even world capitalist production); and to make World War III virtually inevitable – which, given the present constellation of forces, means the victory of US imperialism and, consequently, neo-barbarism. Only if socialism intervenes can the war be resolved on a progressive basis. From our vantage point we can see the concrete outcome of what to many, nearly ageneration ago, seemed a theoretical quibble – the theory of “socialism in one country,” i.e., Stalinist nationalism.
Actually, despite the limited resemblance between the Russian position of Bruno Rizzi and that of the Workers Party, in estimating Russia’s historic role he is much closer to the position of Trotsky and the Socialist Workers Party, for whom also the nationalized means of production form the decisive criterion of historical progressivenees, than he is to us.
* * *
At this point in the showing of Rizzi’s “film” we have to apologize to our audience. A complete reel of the meditations of Bruno Rizzi is missing. His Part II was to deal with the totalitarian state and fascism. Rizzi did not include this section in the book. Whether it was ultimately published separately, as he intended, we do not know. Nor do we know whether his failure to include this section was prompted by the difficulties inherent in the development of his concepts, or by other considerations.
Rizzi has indicated, however, what his leading idea is: “Our conclusion is that, in Italy as well as in Germany, capitalist society is being destroyed day by day, while the corresponding crystallization of a new society replaces it, with economic characteristics identical with Soviet characteristics, even if they are still partial.” This does not prevent Rizzi from speaking elsewhere as if his bureaucratic collectivism were a finished formation in these and other states. He says, for instance: “Nevertheless, while the work of Stalin, Mussolini, or Hitler is everywhere described as socialism or capitalism, it is a question only of bureaucratic collectivism.” The first formulation is, however, the one most generally sustained throughout the book.
Since this point, which is crucial for Rizzi’s general thesis, is asserted rather than developed, briefest of remarks on it will be sufficient. Unlike Rizzi, we cannot consider bureaucratic collectivism a world phenomenon intermediary between capitalism and socialism. We concur with Trotsky that state intervention in the fascist countries was primarily to coordinate the interests of the capitalists – and mainly for war purposes. Certainly to date bureaucratic collectivism bears the label “Made in Russia.”  
“Embryonic Bureaucratic Collectivism” A hoarse question opens Part III of the work: “Quo vadis, America?” Rizzi asks, and he adds “Is It Really a ‘New Deal’?”
“If we have begun Part III,” says Rizzi, “it is only to confirm in the ‘New Deal’ the signs of that bureaucratization which we view as a world phenomenon.” He is struck hard by the crop and farm-animal destruction program. This state intervention, he indicates, is paralleled by banking control, devaluation of the dollar, recall of gold certificates, wages-and-hours laws and labor legislation. “The process of envelopment by the state has hardly begun; but it will not stop ...”
Rizzi notes the uneasiness of the future bureaucrats over their glaring contradictions. [5] They enunciate “an anti-capitalist philosophy which is – in part at least – consonant with the coming society and for which, moreover, they have a vague and inspired intuition, but which remains in open contradiction with their governmental work.” Fortunately for the New Dealers, droughts, floods and foreign armaments orders come to their aid. But the growing war economy “has as an economic consequence the accentuation of nationalizations and the concentration of the economy in the hands of the state itself or at least the accentuation of state intervention.” Terrible political battles, says Rizzi, are foreseeable between the bourgeoisie and the New Deal, which the former recognizes as a potential enemy.
This section of the New Deal, by the way, manifests a tendency which becomes worse as the book progresses: Rizzi substitutes arias for argumentation. The text is filled with evocations of orchestras tuning up before the maestro raises his baton (capitalist anarchy before the dictator takes over), the Forest Murmurs from Siegfried (bureaucratic-collectivist tranquillity), Mephistopheles and Faust contesting for Marguerite (capitalism and bureaucratic collectivism struggling for the working class), etc. [6] We shall confine our criticism to the political plane.
The tendency for the state to intervene in the activities of capitalism has long been a commonplace in the Marxist movement. This was construed as being “anti-capitalist” only in the sense that individual capitalist excesses were legislated against, or weak sections bolstered, in the interests of capitalism as a whole. That this tendency is less pronounced in the United States than it is in the other major capitalist powers is indicative of the relative strength of capitalism in this country.
Intervention by the state has taken place only during periods of crisis. The New Deal represented such an intervention. We amply demonstrated at the time that despite the howls, of the “unreconstructed” capitalists it was the large insurance companies, the banks, the great agricultural and milling interests, and big business as a whole which benefited from the New Deal measures enumerated by Rizzi. Who among the capitalist spokesmen now wrings his hands over state intervention? Of this sort of “anti-capitalism” we have seen even more stringent examples since the demise of the New Deal. And nobody murmured.
That “politically the New Deal represents the beginning of the installation of a new ruling class” is equally false. The political purpose of the New Deal was to make possible the execution of the economic measures previously mentioned, by means of a political program directed to the working class and the petty bourgeoisie. The history of the past ten years has all too clearly demonstrated that. Rizzi’s evaluation of the New Deal rests on the moat impressionistic of bases.  
Program of Appeasement In the next reel our author moves on to the plane of Historical Generalization. Like a Real Thinker. Deep. As witness: Russia is the archetype of the new autarchic bureaucratic-collectivist state. It needs neither “further territory nor raw materials, but only to work tranquilly and intensely, exploiting the natural riches found in its domain.” Japan is following the same course. If Germany and Italy are threatening to overrun the world it is because they lack living space and raw materials. Small states are being engulfed.
“But if world peace and the increasing development of production are desired, a peaceful means must be found to give living space and the necessary raw materials for the building up of the German and Italian autarchies.”
The new ruling class must not seek to amass individual riches but be satisfied with good salaries while seeking an absolute increase in production. “Its historic function will end when it reveals itself incapable of pursuing this end.”
“Nationalization, statification of the major means of production, economic planning, and production for non-individualistically speculative ends represent the trump cards, of bureaucratic collectivism. In a political climate of reciprocal confidence among the autarchies, founded on sure economic bases, all possibilities for increasing production are offered to the new ruling class. From a historic point of view this class has the task of increasing the total world production in an organized manner ...”
This bureaucratic state is historically necessary, but the “last ruling class in history is so near to the classless society that it denies its class and ownership characteristics.”
There has been a leveling process throughout history, says Rizzi, tending to bring all ruling classes to the level of the working class, to the point of identifying themselves with it. “The ruling class in the coming society is nearer the worker than it is to the bourgeois ...” Nevertheless, he agrees that the working class must have the right to strike, and the unions must be free of state control. They will serve as instruments of social control and criticism. State control of the unions in totalitarian countries must be relinquished ... This serves to remind one that Rizzi is trying to think like a socialist.
The first task of the working class, then, says Rizzi, is to secure a redivision of the living spaceand raw materials of the world. To achieve socialism the world must first be rationally industrialized. This new cycle between capitalism and socialism is historically necessary. The workers of France, England, and the United States must “make themselves master of their state and impose at least a workers’ and technicians’ bureaucracy” but one which “will always permit proletarian control of the basic bodies.” The seven or eight autarchies could then arrive at a working agreement with each other.  
Rationale for Fascism This progressive step is being threatened by world capitalism, which is opposing the fascist movement. The real enemies are not Hitler and Mussolini, who have, after all, “set out with the German and Italian workers on the new social road to the new world.” “All feelings of bitterness or of hate” in regard to Stalin, Hitler and Mussolini must disappear. “They too will begin to pardon and to preach the law of Love which is the great law of Life, as well as social collaboration.” Blinded by party passion we have failed to understand and to honor the fascist fallen. The job of the French, English and US working class is to force their capitalists to relinquish living space and raw materials to Germany and Italy. These latter countries would then reintroduce democratic regimes. Workers and the new rulers could then rationalize production. Bankers would be pensioned off. Rizzi concludes this frenzied rapture: “Mussolini and Hitler extend their hand to Lenin.”
The Hitler-Stalin Pact is predicted. [7]
“The workers will never be a ruling class ... they will only have the supreme honor of ‘ruling’ a classless society!
“The Russian experience shows us that the dictatorship of the proletariat changes into a new ruling class: that of the bureaucrats, while the proletarians are transformed into citizen workers.
“The fascists have committed the theoretical error of wishing to collaborate with the bourgeoisie, whereas they should liquidate it and have already half killed it.”
When “the new class has provided for its material, intellectual and moral needs, it will obviously take pleasure in continually elevating the working class materially, intellectually and morally.” This section contains the essence of Rizzi’s program: a “socialist” rationale for fascism.
A few questions, even if they are necessarily rhetorical, are in order. Setting aside for the moment the not-slight consideration of the rights of colonial peoples, would not the transfer of territory from one power to another at best redress the balance in one country – only to shift the unbalance to the country which relinquished the “living space and raw materials”? If stability were reached, however, what would prevent the autarchies from clashing? Perhaps “reciprocal confidence” engendered by the workers of England, France and the US, who will “make themselves master of their states and impose at least a workers’ and technicians’ bureaucracy”? But if that is possible, why not strike out for socialism directly? And Hitler, once he secured Lebensraum, did he begin preaching the gospel of Love or the gospel of Auschwitz, Buchenwald and Mauthausen? [8]
The basic premise underlying Rizzi’s whole structure, that the working class has demonstrated its inability to take power, is equally impossible. Though no socialist revolution issued from World War II. and though bureaucratic collectivism extended its hold over now areas in Eastern Europe and heavily influences the working class of Western Europe, it is a fact that the working class of Germany and Italy and the colonial peoples of the world are in a better position to regroup themselves than they were before the war. Immense potentialities yet repose there, as is true of the working  of France, England and the United States. And even in the Stalinist structure, fissures are beginning to show.  
Rizzi Corrects Hitler on Racism Next in Rizzi’s film of free association is a short subject, rung in, apparently, to drain off the emotional tensions of his elegiac lines addressed to the fascist dead. It is titled The Jewish Question.
“All the racial theories of Rosenberg, Hitler, Italian racists, etc.,” cries Rizzi in a big tutti passage, “have not been able to resist the slightest scientific attack. Questions of blood, of origin, etc. ... are, in our modest opinion, only empty words.” Nevertheless, it must be said that the Jews are the “most jealously racist nation in the world and they have even claimed to be more intelligent than the others.” In a big majority of cases Jews have been capitalist types. The struggle against capitalism must therefore be strongly identified with .the struggle against the Jews. A mass campaign against the Jews must be initiated. “Hitler is right and we are wrong.” But this should not be understood as advocacy of pogroms. Workers should not fall into the trap of treating all Jews alike. Jewish workers must be taken in marriage in order to regenerate them more rapidly and to eradicate them from the face of the earth!
“We respect and honor Marx and Trotsky and a few others of our obscure friends of the Jewish race. Certain isolated and very beautiful flowers can grow in dung heaps, but as a whole the Jewish people have become a capitalist dung heap.”
It is clear to what vile lengths of anti-Semitism Rizzi is led by his fatal acceptance of the “progressiveness” of Stalinist, nationalization and fascist “statism.” Of the degeneracy of his thinking it is enough to remark as did Dean Mucks of Grant’s Tomb: “It’s a tour de force, gentlemen. You cannot alter it in any way without improving its proportions.”
* * *
In anticlimax, at the very end of the film of his meditations Rizzi undergoes a conversion. Having thought the whole matter over, he says, he now wishes to revise the opinions which he had previously elaborated. The involuted motivation for the change in Rizzi’s ideas we shall not pause over. The change briefly consists in regarding bureaucratic collectivism in its Russian, German and Italian variations not as a socially progressive formation intermediary between capitalism and socialism but as a parasitic phenomenon. At the same time he still believes that “the petty bourgeoisie (technicians of production and distribution) must form an anti-capitalist bloc nationally and internationally” and that “workers not yet subjected to a totalitarian regime must trade their ‘living space’ for their chains and the chains of their comrades who have already fallen into a new slavery.”
Rizzi concludes with An Appeal to Mankind. He asks the bourgeoisie to repent, for they must know that a collapse is coming if they do not grant ‘living space’ and raw materials to Italy, Germany and Japan. If this is done, the dictators will relax their regimes.
“We do not believe that in the bottom of their hearts, and as men, Stalin, Hitler and Mussolini are happy with their regimes. ... The New World which we desire will liberate even these great prisoners ...”
And so, as all good films should, it is on this note of Love that we come to The End of the film of meditations of an isolated man who tried to think like a socialist under fascism – unsuccessfully.
  Top of the page  
Footnotes 1. La Bureaucratisation du Monde, by Bruno R., published by the author, Paris 1939, 350 pages.
2. In Reply to Grant by the mysterious Max Shachtman, New International, February 1947.
3. It has been assumed by some comrades both here and abroad that Trotsky’s attack on Bruno R.’s theory of bureaucratic collectivism was in fact directed against the Workers Party’s views. This is an error in chronology. Actually the very first draft of what was to become the WP position did not appear until December 1940, i.e., after Trotsky’s death. In the 1939 dispute Trotsky tried to use Rizzi’s book as a stalking-horse. In his opening gambit, when he thought that the axis of the discussion was going to turn on the theory of the Russian state. However, the discussion which ensued revolved around the political-programmatic question of defense of Russia in the war. Rizzi therefore disappeared from view; he is not even mentioned in the last two-thirds of Trotsky’s In Defense of Marxism, for example.
4. This curious statement will become clear when we elaborate upon Rizzi’s views.
5. The evidence rests, it is exceptionally interesting to note, almost solely upon the windbagging of Henry A. Wallace, whom we have elsewhere characterized aa a neo-Stalinist (i.e., neo-bureauuratic-collectivist) type.
6. It is obvious from the book on a whole that when the Fourth International gained a poor critic somebody lost a fair tenor.
7. This is in contrast to his co-thinker James Burnham, who three years later, in a dashing elenchus, proved the inevitability of the Hitler-Stalin Pact AFTER it had taken place – and shortly before it blew up. Readers who cultivate submarginal political literature will note the striking resemblance between the views of Rizzi and of Burnham – the Burnham of The Managerial Revolution of course. How much Burnham owes to Rizzi we do not know; in any case it is of no great importance. The ideas were in the air at the time. It was inevitable that they be systematized – scholastically by Burnham, operatically by Rizzi.
8. In view of there formulation and several others, which Rizzi develops later, how Trotsky could treat Rizzi’s ideas as if they fell within the broad bounds of Marxism is a little obscure. No less obscure is the casual way in which Trotsky could link Rizzi with the Workers Party, without indicating: the entirety of Rizzi’s position. One thing is certain: had Rizzi’s full position been known, even less attention would have been paid to the bogy of Rizzi’s “bureaucratic collectivism” than it actually attracted.

M. Fenwick: Off Limits - Dangerous Times, Mate (4 October 1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Dangerous Times, Mate
(4 October 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 40, 4 October 1948, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

These are dangerous times we live in, mate. Even the most casual act can be fraught with peril. The other day, for instance, we dropped into the five and ten to buy a comb. There amid the combs made of various new plastics was one group labeled “GUARANTEED NON-EXPLOSIVE!” We bought one quickly and got the hell out before a chain reaction let go at the notions counter.
*
“Concrete plans,” says the Times, “for a military ‘Atlantic Pact’ that in event of war would pool the global resources of the United States and Canada with those of Britain, Prance, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg have made rapid progress here in the last few weeks ...” Points covered were: “the overall coordination of strategy, plans for the standardization of arms, plans for common supply of material and plans for joint use of overseas bases ...”
Using the excuse of “military security” (a phrase which at the present rate of utilization is going to serve as the epitaph of civilization) the sessions were shrouded in secrecy from the very people who will pay for the war in the dearest sense. The leaders of both the Democratic and Republican parties, however, were informed as to what took place—after the fact, of course. On the question of the slaughter of the peoples the Democratic and Republican party find it very easy to compose their differences.
The dispatch pointedly notes that no public announcement of the pact will be made until after the November elections. This is being done so as not to furnish propaganda material to Wallace, who is trading upon the war fears of millions of people in order to further his program of, appeasement of Russian imperialism.
This plan, says the dispatch, consists of “defense arrangements” and will be taken out of the blueprint stage only “in the event of war.”
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits - The Shadow Before (18 October 1948)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
The Shadow Before
(18 October 1948)

From Labor Action, Vol. 12 No. 42, 18 October 1948, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The creation of a western European military organization is an ominous reminder of the speed and seriousness with which U.S. capital is driving toward war. The circumstances surrounding its establishment afford a clear view of the cold-blooded course which the U.S. intends to pursue. The recent events should prove of special interest to those persons whose revulsion against Stalinism is making them full or reserved supporters of the government’s foreign policy.
The problem attacked by the representatives of France, Britain, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg was primarily set by the necessities of the struggle of the U.S. against Russia. At the present moment the U.S. finds itself without a military force on the continent strong enough to throw on the scales during the political haggling with Russia. Soon political expediency will dictate the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Germany. This will be impossible without a native German militia of some sort, backed up by serious allied troop concentrations elsewhere in western Europe. More distantly, in order to conduct a war with Russia the manpower resources of the countries in the U.S. orbit will have to be utilized. These reasons, immediate and more distant, have motivated the creation of the new military body.
According to Hanson W. Baldwin, who has very good sources among the military, were war to break out now or in the relatively near future, the obvious tactic would be to fall back upon the Rhine. To defend this line would require from forty-five to fifty heavily armored divisions. At present only about fifteen could be mobilized. Hence the recently evinced interest in Spain, where, if worst were to come to worst, the Pyrenees would form an excellent defensive line permitting the build-up of a bridgehead in Europe.
The recent return from Spain of Chan Gurney, chairman of the Senate armed services committee, where he had conferences with Franco and his chief of staff, indicate that despite the denials all around, the qualms of the English labor party, and the cries of injured innocence by the liberals, sooner or later Franco is going to have a democratic coming-out party and be furnished Marshall Plan aid – and armaments.
It is reported that already arms have been earmarked for the five participating countries in case of emergency. The next Congress will inevitably be presented with a new armaments program. Implementing it will further increase the tax burden, cut into consumer goods production, and augment the inflationary trend.
 

Don’t Look Now, but ...
Heading up the new organization are some of the finest authoritarian brains of our times. First chairman is Field Marshal the Viscount (“I am a cad”) Montgomery of Alamein, K.G., G.C.B., D.S.O. During World War II Montgomery achieved the neat distinction of being as cordially hated by the British as by all others he came in contact with. His dispatches were conspicuous for the number of references to himself and God, with considerable ambiguity as to the order of precedence. General de Lattre de Tassigny has been appointed commander in chief of the ground forces. He is notorious in France as a disciplinarian whose inspections are so thorough, so intimate as to raise questions among the enlisted men as to his intentions. These two characters will find themselves right at home with Franco and the survivors of the German general staff in the fight against Russian totalitarianism.
Command of the air forces was given to the British and command of the naval forces to the French. This latter appointment was a sop to the French, who have been worrying that if the British were too much in control they might tend to pull out of the continent and conduct the defense of Europe from England. The Netherlands had difficulty making the first team not only because of its size but because all of its officers are in the East Indies introducing democracy to the natives by force and violence.
Of such is the crusade against Stalinism composed.
 

M. Fenwick: Plunder in Southeast Asia (April 1943)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Plunder in Southeast Asia
(April 1943)

From The New International, Vol. IX No. 4, April 1943, pp. 127–128.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Foreign Capital in Southeast Asia
by Helmut G. Callis
Institute of Pacific Relations, New York City 1942, 120 pages.
Unless it has been destroyed by the Japanese as part of their propaganda campaign to win over Javanese support to the “New Order” in the East, there stands in Batavia, Java, a barbaric stone monument to Dutch imperialist exploitation of the Indies.
The monument, one of those serene expressions of the municipal artistic afflatus, consists of a skull cleft with a spear, and mounted on a wall bearing the following inscription in Dutch and Malay: “As a detestable memory of the punished traitor of his country, Pieter Elberfeld, it is forbidden to build or plant on this place from now on. Batavia, April 1722.” The crime of Pieter Elberfeld lay in arousing the natives against their Dutch masters.
The monument bears eloquent witness to the character of the Dutch rule in the East Indies. Detailed data in English on Dutch rule in these fabulous islands has, however, been surprisingly meager up to the recent past. The same holds true for other colonial possessions in Southeast Asia. It was only with the swift overrunning of the area by Japanese troops that bourgeois ideologists began to bring the area into intellectual focus.
The book under review is one of a series published by the Institute of Pacific Relations on its specialty, the Far East. Its books, as a whole, are products of good bourgeois scholarship. As such, they are a welcome relief from the superficial “I-felt-it-with-my-very-own-nerves” sort of journalism the market is currently deluged with. The Institute’s publications are worth the serious attention of every Marxist – though almost wholly for the factual material contained therein. This holds for Callis’ Foreign Capital in Southeast Asia.
The analytical portions of the book serve only to reveal once more that bourgeois scholarship, with all its alleged objectivity, with all its antitheses in exquisite opposition, is only a more sophisticated apologia for the existing bourgeois order.
 
A “Terra Incognita”
The book offers nothing strikingly new for the Marxist, but it does give valuable data on an area of imperialist exploitation about which there has been comparatively little information available. The field covered includes the following colonies of Southeast Asia: the Philippines, the Netherlands East Indies, Formosa, British Malaya, Thailand, French Indo-China, Burma.
The dominance of finance capital in the colonies, one of the salient characteristics of capitalism in our era, is revealed throughout the book. In Japanese-controlled Formosa, for instance, “... six corporations produce 95 per cent of all the sugar that is produced on the island ... Through their cartel organization, the sugar manufacturers regulate prices and production in order to eliminate competition and to maintain profits.”
That such practices are not merely a cunning device of the wicked Japanese capitalists but are a universal imperialist phenomenon is shown by the following passage on the teak industry in Thailand, where two-thirds of the teak holdings are in British hands:
“Eighty-eight per cent of the teak industry is in foreign hands, 5 per cent under governmental control and 7 per cent worked by private Siamese individuals,” including some old Lao princes and certain local license holders. But only the great foreign corporations undertake the exploitation of the teak forests on a large scale. The number of small concessionaires has been constantly reduced, since they could not carry the financial burden.
The same condition obtained in French Indo-China:
In 1936 an area of 314,000 acres was planted with rubber in Indo-China and only about 3 per cent of this acreage was in the hands of small Asiatic owners. The really great concessions – approximately 45 in number – which are administered by eminent French colonial corpora-lions ... cover several thousand hectares each. The present value of French rubber holdings in the colony has been estimated to be over one billion francs. [1]
 
International Cartels
In consonance with the advanced stage of development of capitalist economy, Asiatic colonies and their imperialist exploiters are linked together through international cartels. The British, for instance, by means of the “Royal Dutch-Shell combine, through Shell ... hold 40 per cent of the capital of the two main oil companies, of the Batavian Company for production, and the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company for marketing.” The British stake in the Netherlands East Indies oil production was recently estimated at twenty-six million pounds sterling! [2] Similar ends were achieved by international agreements restricting production, such as the one restricting the production of tin, signed in 1937 by Belgian Congo, Bolivia, French Indo-China, Malaya, Thailand, the Netherlands East Indies, and Nigeria.
International cartels did not lessen international economic tensions, however. Sparks have flown in more than one collision between Britain and the United States over tin-smelting rights, rubber restrictions, etc. Only the all-menacing economic penetration of the Japanese prevented more serious explosions.
The book demonstrates clearly how colonial government is the agent of what the author terms the “metropolitan” exploiter country, bending everything to serve the economic aims of the latter through the erecting of tariff walls, building railroads at the expense of the native population, maintaining the native population in subjection, etc.
 
The Golden Stream
Naturally, the profits have been handsome. In Formosa: “The rates of profit of the Japanese corporations have averaged 30 per cent. Their dividends have seldom been lower than 10 per cent.” In Burma: “The yearly average dividend of the oil company [the Burmah Oil Co.] on its ordinary shares was 21.8 per cent between 1928 and 1938.” (Note that this covers the worst years of the depression, particularly severe in the colonial countries.) In the Netherlands East Indies: “‘... from one-fifth to one-tenth of the population of the Netherlands is either directly dependent on, or indirectly interested financially in the commerce or industries of Netherlands India.’” (This is probably a moderate calculation.) These super-profits are wrung from a native population which is thereby reduced to economic prostration. Glimpses of the conditions of the native populations can occasionally be caught through the web of the text. In Thailand:
The rice cultivators are heavily indebted and have little or nothing to spend. What little money the lower classes have they bury in the ground or convert into jewelry, while the upper classes are said to send money abroad. “Common gossip gives the foreign deposits at many millions of pounds sterling.”
It is interesting to note that out of a population of fourteen million in Thailand about 3,000 pay income tax.
Formosa neatly illustrates some practices common to the whole area in one form or another: “Administrative and legal means also helped to increase Japanese holdings. The confiscation of all lands and forests for which no written title deeds could be produced is one example of such measures.”
Under such conditions, the struggle of the native masses against their enslavement is bound to make its presence felt, even in a book such as the one under review. And surely enough, running like a dialectical opposition through the entire book is the echo of the insistent voices of the Far Eastern masses.
For this reason, Carl F. Reiner in his introduction feels constrained once more to exorcize the demon of socialism. This he does very glibly, utilizing a convenient fiction of his own creation, a nationally limited, state-capitalist specie of “socialism.” Equally glibly he solemnly advances the following solution for a colonial world crushed by the yoke of finance capital:
We are thus driven to attempt integration by other methods than force. In international relations the state is better adapted to integration by force than to integration by persuasion. Some entity less than the state must be trust with the task of integration if it is to be accomplished by peaceful methods. The business corporation offers the possibility of peaceful integration, and the more so because it is conceivable that the “international” business corporation may at some future time be brought under international control in the general world interest.
The man, it would appear, lives according to the well-known credo of Tertullian: I believe because it is impossible.

Footnotes
1. The good author seems to be a bit dubious concerning the significance of statements such as these. He notes cautiously: “In Malaya as in other colonial areas of Southeast Asia, the metropolitan power is the leading nation in entrepreneur investment. This adds weight to van Gelderen’s opinion that business investments are a form of colonial expansion”! Surely, if this man were a surgeon, he would treat persons for headache by drilling a hole in the skull to let the demons out.
2. Under the circumstances it seems only decent for the British to give Queen Wilhelmina and her hangers-on, now in Canada, bed, board, and, on occasion, an extra-territorial lying-in chamber.
 

: A Lesson from History (October 1942)






Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

J.M.F.
Books in Review
A Lesson from History
(October 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 9, October 1942, pp. 287–288.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The Epic of the Black Sea Revolt
by André Marty
Workers Library, New York, 1941. 47 pages, 10 cents
Early this July, after a siege of nearly a month, the fortress and naval base of Sevastopol fell before the onslaught of the Nazi war machine.
Twenty-three years ago, at the beginning of 1919, French, Greek, Polish, Serbian and White Guard troops were in control of the Crimea. Sevastopol was occupied by the interventionist troops. The French fleet was in command of the port. Yet in a few months, despite the too frequent superiority in arms of the interventionist forces, workers’ power held sway over not only Sevastopol but the whole of Russia as well.
The contrast between the unrelieved defeats of the Russian army today and the Red Army’s smashing successes in 1919 which amazed the world is to be explained not by superior Soviet armament in 1919 (it was generally quantitatively and qualitatively inferior to that of the interventionists) or by superior military thinking (there was that) but especially by the revolutionary propaganda disseminated among the ranks of the interventionist troops.
The chief propaganda whip which Hitler today cracks over the heads of “his” troops is the fear of another Versailles treaty. Yet the threat of another Versailles Treaty is all that the counter-revolutionary Stalin regime, working hand-in-glove with Allied imperialism, can proffer to the rank and file of the German army. Consequently ... the German soldier, weary though he may be of the war and of the totalitarian regime, keeps on slogging forward ...
Andre Marty, today a broken-down GPU pensioner, but in 1919 a proletarian revolutionist and a leader of the Black Sea revolt in the French fleet, has written a small pamphlet which shows with what devastating completeness revolutionary propaganda worked upon the soldiers and sailors of the interventionist armies besieging the young workers’ state.
The pamphlet, The Epic of the Black Sea Revolt, has several defects. It is scattered; it does not have, in the Aristotelian sense, a beginning, a middle, or an end. The pamphlet is obviously a quick job, culled from an earlier work written during the “third period,” and forced into service to help spread the “defeatism without revolution” ideology sown with liberal hand in France during the period of the Hitler-Stalin pact. With all its defects, however, the pamphlet shows the power of Bolshevik policy and indicates what a sharp turn history would take today were such a policy to be applied on the Russian front.
The Black Sea revolt, which ended French intervention in Russia, extended from February to August 1919. Besides the sailors on the ships in the Black Sea, the mutinies involved sailors on French ships at Bizerte in North Africa, Vladivostok, Itea in Greece, and at the great French naval base at Toulon, among other cities. The revolt also involved French troops in the southern Ukraine, the Crimea, and French cities like Toulouse, where they demonstrated jointly with sailors.
 
How the Mutiny Broke Out
The two chief causes of the revolt were the continuation of the war after the armistice of November 11, 1918, and the poor conditions endured by the soldiers and sailors. The intervention of Bolshevik agitators introduced the necessary subjective consciousness which assured the success of the revolt. The attitude of the French soldiers and sailors, and the approach made to them by the Bolsheviks, is revealed in the following passage:
In January the first shots were exchanged with the Red Army and the partisans.
“Our officers have lied to us, they have deceived us!” the French soldiers and sailors could be heard saying everywhere. “We are starting the war here all over again!”
Immediately a leaflet, or a worker propagandist, or a soldier propagandist would appear: “Yes, you are starting the war all over again! The French capitalists are not satisfied with the riches they have stolen with the blood of the soldiers and the misery of the workers and peasants! Look at the mines in the Donetz basin; they are no longer the property of your exploiters – the French capitalists; they belong to the Russian workers. And you have to suffer and die while your family is waiting for you in misery, in order to seize these mines for the 200 ruling families!”
Simple ideas, which everyone could understand. The arrival of reinforcements of men and material further confirmed these statements. The soldiers and sailors now wanted to know against whom they were fighting. Who was the enemy, and where was he? Who were the Bolsheviks? What did they want?
They found prompt and clear answers to these questions in the Bolshevik leaflets.
How effective such agitation was the following description shows:
The agitation was most serious in Toulon [France’s big navy yard on the Mediterranean]. Despite the state of the siege, the sailors held meetings on the glacis of the ramparts, after having driven out the commander of the naval fortress, Vice-Admiral Lacaze. On June 11, demonstrations, of sailors and soldiers took place in the city. The crew of the battleship Provence, the flagship of the first admiral, refused to sail for the Black Sea. The demands were: “Release of all the mutineers of the Black Sea, cessation of the war of intervention in Russia, immediate demobilization.” A committee of sailors took upon itself the functions of a revolutionary committee and invited delegates of the soldiers and the Navy Yard workers to join it. The mounted military police and the cavalry succeeded in preventing an attack upon the naval prison, but only after a real battle with the sailors.
The following scene describes conditions on shipboard:
In the meantime Vice-Admiral Amet, commander-in-chief of the Black Sea fleet, arrived on board the France, accompanied by the commander, his executive officer and first lieutenant.
The mutineers came out to meet him. The sailors and the admiral stood facing each other. The admiral began his speech with an attempt at intimidation.
“There are 200 bad Frenchmen among the crew!” he said.
But he was immediately interrupted with shouts of “Death to the tyrant! Catch him! Death!” The admiral then changed his theme. First he announced that Sevastopol would soon be evacuated. Then he started to describe what Bolshevism meant. When he said that the Bolsheviks were bandits, one of the mutineers interrupted him: “You’re Bandit No. 1 yourself! For having the itch you let me rot in a dark cell! It was you who condemned sailors to five and ten years’ hard labor on the slightest pretext!”
Every phrase of the Admiral was interrupted with shouts and hisses: “He lies! He is trying to sing us a lullabye! What nerve! It’s all lies!”
The admiral, realizing his mistake, changed his tone: “My children, I entreat you to maintain order.”
But he was interrupted again: “This is no time for preaching!” and then: “Death to the tyrant! Bandit! Murderer! Back to Toulon! To Toulonl”
The admiral then asked: “What do you want?”
Notta came forward and courteously laid before him the demands of the crew:

No coaling either on the 20th or on the 21st.
 
Cessation of intervention in Russia and immediate return to France.
 
Shore liberty.
 
No harsh discipline.
 
Better food.
 
More frequent mail service.
 
Demobilization of the old classes, etc.

“The war in Russia is against the Constitution,” he said. “Clemenceau has violated the Constitution.”
Admiral Amet answered by referring to the iron discipline in the Red Army. Notta then asked him how many soldiers had been executed in the French army, particularly after the mutinies of April, 1917. Another sailor interposed: “I spent four months in a cell on board, with only one hour of fresh air a day.” Another sailor shouted: “Beat it, you tyrant!” The demonstrators then turned their backs on the admiral and marched to the forecastle deck singing the Internationale and shouting: “To Toulonl To Toulon!”
The admiral, furious, turned around to leave, threatening Notta: “Tomorrow you’ll repent this!”
The singing was continued on the forecastle deck. Together with the crew of the Jean-Bart they sang the Internationale, the Song of the Beans, and the Song of Odessa.
It is easy to see why in a few weeks direct French intervention against the USSR was brought to an end: the “demoralization” among the soldiers and sailors was complete. The French land and sea forces were withdrawn to the mother country.
There is a lesson for the Stalinists in the history of the Black Sea revolt – were they interested in learning revolutionary lessons. Fortunately, there are those who are interested.
 

M. Fenwick: How the Other 2% Lives (October 1942)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Books in Review
How the Other 2% Lives
(October 1942)

From The New International, Vol. VIII No. 9, October 1942, pp. 285–286.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Wages and Profits in Wartime
prepared by Labor Research Association
International Publishers, New York, N.Y. 1941. 32 pages, 5 cents
Paul Lafargue once said:
“Capitalist development has dragged humanity down to so low a level that it no longer knows, and can no longer know, other than one incentive: money. Money has become the prime mover, the alpha and omega of all human action. Balzac calls it ‘l’ultima ratio mundi’ (the world’s last argument).”
Thurman Arnold recently granted the public a quick glance at this very material basis underlying the business deals between some of the largest corporations in the country and Nazi Germany, with which malicious gossipers (no doubt) would have us believe the country is at war. Labor is also not unaware of the golden torrent which is making the capitalist class rich beyond the dreams of a Fortunatus.
It is undoubtedly a recognition of this awareness existing in the ranks of labor that impelled one of the official simpletons heading one of the prominent corporations of this country to confide to a union friend of ours: “We are not making a penny on our war orders. We take them only as a patriotic duty. Believe me.”
Needless to say, our friend, not being a graduate of the Harvard School of Business Administration, didn’t believe a syllable of what the official said. Which, of course, seemed to the official a very arbitrary attitude to take, as readers of The New International can well understand. The Stalinists, by one of those occasional and fleeting intersections of truth (or near truth) and political expediency which their policy evokes, have published a very useful pamphlet which every trade unionist will find handy in combatting corporation piety on the wages and profits question.
Since the pamphlet was published during the Hitler-Stalin honeymoon and since truth, for the Stalinists, is a function of the interests of the bureaucracy in Russia, it is probable that the pamphlet is not now easily available. Such being the case, fairly extensive quotation will not be amiss.
 
Illustrations of Profits
On profits during the First World War:
Skyrocketing of profits marked the First World War of 1914–18. In this country, net profits of 18 leading corporations shot up from $74,650,000 in the pre-war years 1912–14 to $337,000,000 in 1916–18, a rise of over 350 per cent. A group of electric machinery and appliance companies in 1917 had net income of 18,204 per cent on their capital stock.
On current corporation profits:
A group of 230 corporations producing iron and steel and other metal products, coal and heavy and light machinery showed net profits of $599,152,269 after all taxes and charges in 1940, the best profits in ten years and 71 per cent above the 1939 level. These profits of companies most directly involved in war prodution were more than 450 per cent in excess of the amount earned by these same companies in 1938.
On aircraft profits:
Twenty-four makers of aircraft in 1940 earned $69,866,405, more than double the profits shown in 1939, nearly three times 1938 results and more than five times their earnings in 1937.
On net profits per employee for seven of the largest corporations:



Company


1940 Net
Profit


Net Profit
per Employee




E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co.


$86,945,000


$1,649




Aluminum Company of America


   44,146,297


   1,471




General Electric Co.


   56,241,000


      865




Standard Oil Co. of N.J.


 110,000,000


      820




General Motors Corp.


 195,715,000


      785




American Tel. & Tel. Co.


 188,344,000


      608




U.S. Steel Corp.


 102,211,000


      402



On wage increases as contrasted with increases in net profit:
While in 1940 average weekly wages in all manufacturing rose only 6 per cent over 1939, the net profit of industrial corporations rose by 27 per cent.
In certain industries the discrepancy was even greater. In aircraft wages rose 5 per cent, profits 191 per cent. In iron and steel, wages rose 5 per cent, profits 98 per cent.
On the distribution of corporation dividends:
The government’s Temporary National Economic Committee reported that less than 75,000 persons – fewer than the number employed by, say, Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey – get fully one half of all corporate dividends. It found also that in 1935–36 some 800.000 families, or the top 2.7 per cent of all families in the United States, received 71.2 per cent of all dividends paid.
On the total value of corporation dividends:
Dividend payments, even counting only the New York Times’ incomplete listing, came to the stupendous sum of about $4,888,000,000 in 1940, a rise of 14 per cent above the previous year. No other form of income payments rose so much. Wages and salaries combined rose less than 6 per cent.
On the wages of corporation officials as contrasted with the wages of workers:
Eugene G. Grace, for example, as president of Bethlehem Steel Corp., received $478,144 in salary and bonus for the year 1940. This was $9,195 a week, nearly $230 an hour on a 40-hour week basis.
Weekly earnings of employees in the iron and steel industry in 1940 averaged $29.44 or only about $1,530 for the year.
On the expenditures of the rich – the MONTHLY budget of Gloria Vanderbilt:



Rent


$1,000.00




Groceries


    450.35




Milk


      67.34




Poultry and eggs


    106.58




Fish


      83.44




Coal


      67.34




Telephone


      61.95




Garage


   113.46




Laundry


      10.65




Newspapers


      15.17




Servants (10)


    950.00




Detective


    372.00




Incidentals, etc.


    951.72




Month’s total


$4,250.00



On the contrast between the wage necessary to maintain “the American standard of living” and the actual wage level in industry:
But in no American industry do the wages average as much as $48 a week, the amount required to meet Ezekiel’s American standard of living. In all manufacturing industries in 1940, weekly earnings averaged only $26.05, or nearly $22 below that standard.
 
Income Shares and Other Facts
On the distribution of the national income in 1935–36:
More than a million (1,162,890) families had yearly incomes of less than $250.
Over 19,000,000 families, or about two-thirds of all, had yearly incomes of less than $1,500.
Over 23,240,000 families, or more than three-fourths of all, had yearly incomes of less than $2,000.
A few families were getting all they needed – and more. At the very top was a little group of only 75 families each having an income of $1,000,000 and over. These are the real “Rulers of America,” the richest monopolists, including the Rockefellers, Morgans, Astors, du Ponts, Mellons, Ford and Vanderbilts.
Next came about 384,000 families, less than 1 per cent of all, who had incomes of $10,000 and over. Only about 793,000 families, or less than 3 per cent, had incomes of $5,000 and over.
Taking the whole national consumer income of fifty-nine billion dollars in 1935–36. nearly a tenth of it all went to about 178,000 families and individuals who had incomes of $15,000 and over. This little group of men and women at the top represented only one-half of 1 per cent of the whole population. But they got almost as much income as the whole lower third of the population.
On the standard of living under the war economy:
And Barron’s, financial weekly, January 6, 1941, declared that “the defense program will mean a curtailment of civilian consumption. There can be no sure protection of a subsistence minimum.”
On the tax burden on lower income groups:
Already, the Temporary National Economic Committee has shown, families with incomes of $500 to $1,000 are now paying 18 per cent to 20 per cent of their meager incomes in taxes.
On the assumption that an increase in wages will mean a proportionate increase in the price of commodities:
Since labor costs form such a comparatively small proportion of the value of the product, it is clear that wages paid can rise by a considerable amount and still remain a small percentage of the total value of the goods. Labor cost is only a minor element in retail price. Take the apparel, or clothing, industry, for example, where labor cost is only 19.6 per cent. It is estimated that if the clothing workers win a 10 per cent increase and the manufacturers and retailers pass this entire burden on to the consumer, the increase would amount to only 49 cents on a $25 suit of clothes.
On production possibilities in the United States, based on a survey made in 1934–35:
If the existing plant and manpower in the United States were fully employed in the production of honest goods and services for the consumer, the total output, value in 1929 dollars, would be not less than 135 billions, or an average per family of approximately $4,400.
On the possibilities of securing wage increases in this period:
The Congress of Industrial Organizations, in its Economic Outlook, April 1941, said that it had won in the first four months of 1941 wage increases totaling $380,000,000 annually.
On the utilization of the slogan of “national defense”:
War hysteria is a sharp weapon in the hands of such employer groups. In the name of “national defense” they advocate longer working hours in defense industries and abolition of overtime pay. Speeding up production in their plants because of the “national emergency” often means greater output per hour with no corresponding increase in numbers employed.
On labor’s answer to the campaign of the employers:
Labor’s program in answer to war hysteria and employer attacks on labor standards calls for wage increases and extension of social and labor legislation.
On the answer of the employers and their press to such a program:
The employers will undoubtedly oppose every point of this program. They will continue their blitzkrieg against the economic and legislative gains of the people. In this reactionary drive they will be supported as always by the capitalist press pouring out slander against progressives of every shade whether in the AFL, the CIO or other workers’ organizations.
It seems almost unnecessary to add that time has witnessed the overnight ascendancy of the Stalinists and the Daily Worker to a leading position in the drive against the working class. Today, naturally, they disavow or conveniently forget nearly every point made in this pamphlet.
Lest some naïve individual brusquely conclude that there is a direct connection between the abrogation of the Hitler-Stalin pact and the change in policy of the Stalinists, we hasten to point out that changes of this sort are resolved in the more ethereal realm of Stalinist “dialectics.” The demonstration is very simple: as is well known, truth is not an absolute. What was true and good a year ago may be false and evil today. QED.
One may safely assume that any other explanation is Trotskyist slander.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (24 June 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(24 June 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 25, 24 June 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The photograph set into this column was not taken backstage at a performance of The Student Prince, nor is it from an Erich von Stroheim film. These well-fed army officers, resplendent beneath the Order of Suvorov, the Polish Virtuti Cross, the Order of Bogdan Khmelnitsky, the Czech Order of the White Lion, the U.S. Legion of Merit, etc., are real men from a real world – however it may seem at times to bear the character of dream fantasy.







These men are Marshals Rybalko and Konev of Russia, as seen at a recent reception in Prague. In them is symbolized the whole degeneration of Russia from a country which in 1918 blazed forth as the hope of humanity to a country which in World War II evoked almost nothing but fear and despair from the oppressed masses of Europe.
They are the Russian counterparts of the late “Georgie” Patton of the varnished helmet liner and unvarnished military arrogance, or of the very swish de Lattre, the French general with a pleasant fancy for inspecting his officers’ underwear and for constructing, with the aid of lend-lease equipment and the labor of French enlisted men, huge gardens à la française to while away the time while occupying Germany.
 
Totalitarian Generals
But they are much more powerful figures than Patton or de Lattre, who were, when all is said and done, only the rather badly paid mercenaries of United States and French capitalism. Konev and Rybalko are not unimportant parts of the Russian bureaucracy which maintains a vise-like grip over Russia at the expense of the interests of the Russian workers and of the working class of the world as well.
It is these men who helped formulate and carry out the concept that it was not German capitalism which was responsible for the war but that the whole German nation was guilty. As a result, since the German soldier saw no way out for himself, he fought to the bitter end, causing needless destruction and death.
It is these men who aided in creating such a repulsive regime within Russia that the very name of socialism or communism became defiled. Veterans who were in the ETO will recall the slogans painted upon walls and buildings by Germans in the final days of the catastrophe: “Fight – or Siberia!” “Fight – or Bolshevik Chaos!” The power of this fear was undeniable. What veteran who was in Germany cannot recall the fright of the Germans when a United States unit prepared to move and the rumor spread that a Russian unit was to replace it?
It is these generals who aided in instilling in the Russian troops that fierce nationalism which led to unprecedented orgies of looting, raping and brutality when the Russian armies entered Germany.
It is these gilded representatives of the bureaucracy who helped organize the removal of German factories, food supplies, cattle and railroad equipment to Russia, reducing a once great country to a new barbarism. It is they who have brought into Germany the rule of the NKVD, reopened the Nazi concentration camps for working class opponents of Stalinism, and stifled the development of all independent working class activity.
 
The Fruit of Stalinism
The result is that after the unparalleled destruction, bloodshed and sacrifice of World War II, Europe is riven by nationalist hatreds as it never has been before in modern times, socialist consciousness has all but been destroyed, and World War III is being slowly prepared before the eyes of the whole world.
For this condition these ruthless defenders of the privileges of the bureaucracy, these heroes of the diplomatic vodka bouts and the hors d’oeuvre tables, these warrior princes weighted down by jewelled decorations commemorating the reactionary past of Russia, these perpetuators of all that is rotten in the military tradition, these oppressors of whole nations and exterminators of socialism must bear their full share for the catastrophe of the war that has ended and the cataclysm which is being prepared in the chancellories of the world.
Between the Red Army of Lenin and Trotsky’s time and the Russian army of today lies a gulf as wide as the distance between socialism, the salvation of mankind, and bureaucratic collectivism whose best representatives are pictured at the head of this column.
Every veteran will recognize the type.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – Behind the Battle of the Bulge (1 July 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Behind the Battle of the Bulge
(1 July 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 26, 1 July 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Early in December 1944, after six months of almost continuous
combat ending in the constant drenching rains, the mud and the
slaughter of the Huertgen Forest, our regiment was shifted to a quiet
sector of the front near Monschau in the Ardennes.
It was indeed a quiet area. Too quiet. It was reminiscent of the
“phony war” of 1939. We were uneasy from the moment when,
though we were under full observation of the enemy, we detrucked
without being shelled. The line was very thinly held by a “recon”
outfit. When our men moved into position they found that in many
cases positions had not even been dug in. Patrol activity was very
light. Enemy shelling was desultory, falling harmlessly behind us and
reverberating in the snowy valleys. We were glad to get out of that
eerie atmosphere and move back to a rest area. It didn’t feel
right.
Consequently, we were not unduly surprised on December 16 to have
our passes cancelled and to hear rumors of a breakthrough near
Monschau. The next day we moved out and took up positions at the
shoulder of the bulge, near Malmédy.
 

“General Bradley Was Not Worried”
As the days wore on, the full extent of the Allied debacle and,
with it, the responsibility of the high command became apparent.
Having caught the Allied forces completely by surprise, the Germans,
in some of the bloodiest fighting of the war in Europe, inflicted
exceptionally heavy losses.
Destruction of matériel was equally high, Stars and
Stripes at one time reporting the loss of over one-half the M-1
rifles in the ETO. Confusion was nearly complete. Malmédy, for
example, was bombed on three successive days by American planes
though it was occupied by American troops at the time. So great was
the need for manpower that air corps units in the United States were
combed for men, who were hastily flown overseas as infantry
replacements.
Naturally, the Army general staff has never even suggested that a
blunder was made. Quite the contrary – it maintains that
everything was foreseen, that everything went as planned. The latest
to attempt to disseminate this comforting myth is Lieut.-Gen. Walter
Bedell Smith, former chief of staff of the Allied Expeditionary Force
in Europe and now Ambassador to Russia, where he should find himself
quite at his ease among really experienced myth-makers.
His article on the Battle of the Bulge, recently published in the
Saturday Evening Post, bears a special importance at this
time. Not only does it serve to cover up a bad error of the past, it
seeks to bolster confidence in the somewhat compromised officer caste
which is to play such an important role in United States capitalism’s
current program of imperialist assimilation and conquest.
 

The Alibi as Smith States It
Smith falsely states what is at issue.
“General Eisenhower once said a little ruefully
that he had never known we were in danger until he read about it in
the papers. We were not unduly disturbed over the final outcome then
or at any time.”
Smith’s rejoinder is little short of amazing: “We were
taking a calculated risk in this area.” He continues:
“... It seemed improbable that an attack through
the Ardennes could develop any broad importance in the general
military situation along the entire front. At the very least, Bradley
estimated, the Germans could be stopped on the Meuse, and east of
that line he located no important supply installation.”
What Smith is saying here is that in weakening the lines in the
Ardennes area in preparation for an offensive elsewhere, General
Bradley was prepared to risk an even more severe counter-offensive
than the one which took place, an offensive which would have carried
the Germans clear to the Meuse!
In other words, for the sake of an offensive elsewhere the general
staff would have been quite willing to risk a situation more critical
than the actual one, where the depth of the penetration forced the
command to be split between Montgomery in the North and Bradley in
the South, where heavy reinforcements had to be rushed to the
continent, where terrific casualties were induced and large
losses of matériel were experienced and where the final attack
against Germany was delayed for two months.
 

Losing Equals Winning
Without being a military expert, one can say that this represents
a very curious scale of values. Actually what it represents is making
a virtue out of necessity. Of the same picayune caliber is the
braggadocio of remarks said to have been addressed to Eisenhower on
December 18, when the Germans were sweeping everything before them:
“Our greatest concern at this time was that we had
overestimated the Germans’ determination. We were afraid they
might become discouraged too soon and order a withdrawal before we
were in position to inflict maximum destruction.”
The basic truth is contained in a statement by Smith: “The
staff discounted the possibility of a serious counter-offensive.”
Despite the availability of reserves, which could have been used to
buttress the Ardennes line until the contemplated offensive was
launched, only three infantry divisions were holding some ninety
miles of front through the classic invasion route which Germany had
already used three times – in 1870, 1914 and 1940.
In spite of the manifest successes enjoyed by the Germans in this
area, Smith feels impelled to say: “The Germans could not have
picked terrain less suited to their purpose.” They should, no
doubt, have listened to Smith and other members of the general staff,
who proved to be such skilled tacticians in this matter.
The simple fact is that the Allies, overconfident and
underestimating the striking power of the Germans, committed a
serious error in December 1944. The article by the former chief of
staff only confirms the opinion held by GI’s at the time.
A whitewash was to be expected. American capital needs to
establish confidence in its military chiefs for the coming struggle
for world mastery which lies ahead. Truth has strictly limited value
for capitalism. It paid off dearly, however, to those thousands of
young men who lost their lives or were wounded in the Battle of the
Bulge.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – Veterans’ Attitude Toward Organized Labor (2 December 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Veterans’ Attitude Toward Organized Labor
(2 December 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 48, 2 December 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

For a period following the close of the war the most conscious members of the labor movement worried about the utilization of the veteran by employers as an anti-labor force. These fears have proved groundless. The capitalist class has been unable to mobilize veterans against organized labor.
On the basis of a poll it recently conducted, Fortune, the swank business magazine, wryly concedes that veterans, “who according to some were going to make labor behave, are more friendly to unions than the general population.”
Two statements were posed in the poll: (1) “Labor unions are doing a fine job,” and (2) “While they do make some mistakes, on the whole labor unions are doing more good than harm.” Of the general population 41.8 per cent responded affirmatively. Veterans, however, supported the statements in 49.6 per cent of the cases. A rephrasing of these statements in a negative form similarly confirmed, though not so sharply, that the veteran is more friendly to unions than is the general public.
*
That once out of uniform the soldier would tend to think as do other members of his class, with all the variations possible within the class itself, could have been anticipated. But given the age of the veteran, which meant, in general, that his experience in the shop or elsewhere was often limited; given the anti-labor propaganda to which he was subjected in the armed services; given his explainable envy of those who stayed at home; and given the often disadvantageous conditions under which he had to return to work – the result must be a little surprising and a little discouraging to those capitalists who counted on the returned veteran.
 

Why the Veterans Support Labor
What are the reasons behind the veterans’ support of organized labor? Basic, of course, is a simple economic fact: employment is virtually total, thereby, under the present conditions, forestalling a social crisis in which veterans could be played off against the working class. Further, as a result of the general extension of unionism in recent years, a higher level of union consciousness than has existed for several decades now exists. This was bound to find its reflection within the ranks of a mass army. Moreover, when young worker veterans returned they found the best champion of their rights in the union, which, generally speaking, by correct policies reduced the veteran “problem” to a minimum. Aiding in the integration of the veterans, also, were most of the new World War II veterans’ organizations, which have had a friendly orientation toward labor.
And certainly, as far as the immediate economic problem centering around housing shortages, and rising prices is concerned, the veteran, knowing better than the general public the miracles of production (and destruction!) accomplished during the war, must be less prone to blame labor for present conditions. And where he is not, as may well be the case among many veterans of the middle class, he is victimized, like other members of the middle class, by the failure of organized labor to provide a way out of the current mess other than by support of the Republicans or Democrats.
*

What Will Happen Next?
The real test of the support of organized labor by the veteran will come with the unemployment which accompanies the inevitable and periodic crises of capitalism.
Big business is keeping its eye on the veteran, as the issue of state bonuses in the recent elections attest. Labor can do no less.
The fate of the veteran, whether he comes from the working class or the middle class, is intimately tied up with the working class. Similarly, the fate of the working class depends in good degree, as the growth of German fascism demonstrated, upon the ability of the working class to win the veteran to its standard.
The first step is to break out of the cage of bi-partisan capitalist politics through the creation of an independent labor party.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – A Gl Dad Talks to Sonny (16 December 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
A GI Dad Talks to Sonny
(16 December 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 50, 16 December 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

A GI dad and his young son go a few fast rounds over U.S. foreign policy in Germany:
SONNY: Daddy, can I be a moron when I grow up?
DADDY: Of course not. What do you want to do – run for Congress?
SONNY: You shouldn’t talk like that in front of your son, Daddy. I’m at a very impressionable age.
DADDY: And I’ll trouble you not to sandbag your father with such leading questions. The last time I took one of these socrotic strolls with you I wound up reading Labor Action.
SONNY: Where does it hurt worst, daddy?
DADDY: That will be about enough from the post World War II generation. Now tell me – why do you want to be a moron when you grow up?
 
On the Meader Report
SONNY: Because the more I think about the people who run this world, the more I read about what they do, the crazier they seem. Better to be a moron – and be happy.
DADDY: But when you’re a moron there’s always the risk of becoming a southern senator or a three-star general.
SONNY: Yes, I know, but that’s one of the occupational hazards of the moron’s life which you have to accept.
DADDY: But what has prompted these cynical observations?
SONNY: I’ve recently been reading excerpts from the Meader report oh conditions among our occupation forces in Germany. It bristles with anti-Jewish, anti-Negro, and anti-enlisted man prejudice and rails against some of the unsavory aspects of our rule of Germany: officers who possess eight personal servants, engage in white slavery, buy hotels with black market profits, “burgermeisters threatened and beaten, civilian police disarmed and beaten with their own weapons, women being publicly molested, and civilians being stopped at night by soldiers who examine their passes, then calmly slug them senseless.” The report concludes with some recommendations which it hopes will remedy the situation.
Now, daddy. I’ve a simple solution which will really end all these abuses once and for all.
DADDY: What’s that?
SONNY: Withdraw all our occupation forces from Germany!
DADDY: But you know what the answer to that is: Germany has to be punished and policed for starting the war.
SONNY: But if that’s so, why did the army officially just end the Hate-the-German program among our troops? If the German people really were guilty of starting the war, they should be treated with contempt and loathing.
DADDY: Well, it seems that the capitalists have found out that the Germans aren’t so bad after all. The real danger is the Russians. That’s why we’re beginning to mobilize the Germans against Russia.
 
“Your Logic Is Formidable”
SONNY: But isn’t that Hitler’s program of creating a bulwark in Eastern Europe against bolshevism?
DADDY: Your logic, as my friends from the maquis used to say, is formidable.
SONNY: And so the Russians, our dearest friends of yesterday, are now our deadliest enemies?
DADDY: I drop my eyes in pretty confusion.
SONNY: And the coming war, unlike the last one, will no doubt be a genuine war for democracy against the totalitarianism of our former allies?
DADDY: Anyone who doubts that must be a Russian agent.
SONNY: Doesn’t it all seem a little crazy to you, daddy?
DADDY: It certainly does ... yes ... yes ... Say, go over that moron philosophy of yours again, will you?
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – That Veteran’s Bonus (23 December 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
That Veteran’s Bonus
(23 December 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 51, 23 December 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The following round-up reveals the current status of the veteran’s bonus throughout the country. Clip it out and keep it for those arguments in the shop.
In the recent elections three states approved the granting of bonuses:

Illinois, according to Newsweek, “approved overwhelmingly by referendum a proposal to pay the state’s 916,000 veterans a bonus at the rate of $10 for every month of domestic service, $15 for every month overseas, the total not to exceed $882.50.”
 
Michigan “approved by a nearly two-to-one vote a bonus financed by a $270,000,006 bond issue. Scaled as in Illinois, the top limit was set at $500 ...”
 
Rhode Island, “authorized $20,000,000 worth of bonds to pay 90,000 servicemen and women and more than 2,000 members of the merchant marine cash bonuses, of $200 each.”

Several other states prior to the elections had already voted bonuses:

Massachusetts grants $200 for six months’ or more domestic service and $300 for service overseas.
 
Vermont provides $10 for each month in service, with a maximum payment of $120.
 
New Hampshire similarly grants $10 for each month in the service, but with a maximum of $100.
 


“Nothing’s Too Good for the Boys”
When the number of states which have granted bonuses is considered, and when the size of the miserable handouts is taken into account, it is obvious that the bonuses reflect political expediency rather than the needs of the returned soldiers.
The right of the veteran to be granted a bonus cannot be successfully contested. In most cases he was subjected to extreme dangers. Often he was wounded, or he picked up some recurrent disease like malaria. The vicious military life often evoked psychoneurotic disorders. Away from home for long months and years, living under the maddening army discipline, without women, subjected to many privations and indignities, the soldier or sailor lost years of his life which can never be made up.
While he was in the service he could not save money. During this time his family usually lived in reduced circumstances. When he was discharged he often found himself a man without a skill, without a job, or without seniority on his job. Not halting had his own home prior to the war he many times found himself forced to pay exorbitant rents. The rate of unemployment among “vets is even now higher than among the papulation as a whole. Added to all this is the skyrocketing cost of living, which finds the vets at a bad disadvantage.
Yes, the vet deserves his bonus.
 

The Screamers on This Issue
Those who howl most indignantly, naturally, are the corporations through their paid servants, the newspapers. The capitalists, of course, whose very existence guarantees a succession of bloody wars, made billions in profits during the war and continue today to haul in unprecedented sums. They are interested solely in their profits, not in the anonymous, scared, miserable, human beings who fought their war for them.
The AVC, the most progressive of the current veterans’ organizations is also opposed to the bonus. This flows from several sources: a desire not to appear as indiscriminate freebooters of the treasury, using the veterans as a bludgeon (“Citizens First, Veterans Second!”) a concept which overlooks the special sacrifices which were made by the veteran; the middle-class composition of the AVC, where monetary problems are not so acute as among the working class; the class-collaborationist role of leaders such as Bolte, who get jumpy every time mass action is even suggested.
 

Our Program for the Veterans
The Workers Party bonus program is very simple: $1,000 for every year or major fraction thereof spent in the armed forces. This money is not to be filched from the people by means of a sales tax but is to be equitably raised through a heavy tax on corporate profits. Let those who benefited from the war pay for it!
Any government which can unblushingly spend $2,000,000,000 for the development of the first atomic bomb and can equally coolly contemplate the expenditure of a similar sum for the development of the long-range, remote-control rocket can easily institute such a bonus program.
We admit, of course, to the gravest defect in our bonus program – it won’t kill anybody.
 

M. Fenwick: The Worm in the Apple (24 February 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
The Worm in the Apple
(24 February 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 8, 24 February 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The results of an Army poll taken last fall among
1,700 United States occupation troops have caused considerable
stammering in the capitalist press.
The New York Times, for instance, stated with
its usual combination of malice and falsehood that authorities
“declared it revealed an amazing lack of knowledge of the
causes of the war, and that it appeared to indicate that the United
States soldier in spine cases had fallen for the propaganda of
Germans echoing Joseph Goebbels.”
To lay the blame upon Goebbels is false if for no
other reason than the fact that conversation with Germans –
that is to say, German women – all too generally reached no
higher level of abstraction than was necessary to consummate a few
simple, fleshly pleasures. Discussion on any other level was. neither
intensive nor extensive.
If reactionary conceptions were found present in
the minds of American soldiers, the blame must be placed largely on
the shoulders of American capitalism, which in civil life and
especially in the Army, molded their thinking. For United States
capitalismn is both unwilling; and unable to dispel such reactionary
conceptions.
That is a job which only revolutionary socialists can
perform.
 
Some Ideological Nettles
Fifty-one per cent of the soldiers polled “said
they believed Adolf Hitler did the Reich a lot of good before 1939.”
Only persons who sincerely believed that the war
was fought for human ideals and not capitalist profits have a right
to be surprised at that figure. The capitalist class, for whom the
New York Times adequately, if dishonestly, speaks, never
really worried what crimes Hitlerism committed INSIDE Germany. In
fact, that fascism destroyed the German labor movement, the Socialist
and Communist Parties, and civil liberties was viewed by the real
rulers of the United States with secret satisfaction and envy.
It was only when Germany began to rearm and menace
United States foreign markets that American capital began to get
noisily indignant over Hitlerism. It was, consequently, Hitler’s
foreign policy, Hitler’s war of aggression, etc., which was, in
the main, subjected to a propaganda barrage.
 
The Racial Question
Thirty-two per cent of the soldiers thought that the
Germans had good reasons for the persecution of the Jews or were
undecided on the issue of German anti-Semitism.
There is the symbol of the end result of the great
democratic war against fascist intolerance!
Unemployment and depressed living conditions are
characteristic features of capitalism. German fascism used the Jew as
a scapegoat, loading upon him the blame for these conditions –
blame which normally would, have heen, directed at the system itself.
Only socialism, which alone can permanently eliminate unemployment,
is capable of destroying anti-Semitism. To drive home this lesson
was, of course, impossible for American capitalism.
In addition, no soldier could be expected to take
seriously the propaganda against German anti- Semitism when he knew
that anti-Semitism at home was not a subject for vigorous government
action. He could not be expected to condemn abroad what was accepted
as more or less normal at home.
 
War Guilt
Despite the millions upon millions of dollars spent
on Allied propaganda, whose aim was to din one or two simple ideas
into the heads of the American soldiers, and despite all the dangers
and inconveniences to which they had been subjected by the German
army, thirty-one per cent of the soldiers stated that Germany “had
either some or a good deal of justification for starting the world
conflict,” or said they were not quite sure!'
If that proportion were to hold good for the
entire Army, nearly ONE-THIRD of the American soldiers were
unconvinced of the fundamental justice of the war! There is a real
victory for American capitalism!
The motivating reasons underlying this almost
incredible point of view are suggested by the following:
“Twenty-four per cent of the soldiers
questioned said the Germans had a ‘very good’ or ‘fairly
good’ argument when they said that since Germany was Europe’s
most efficient country, she had the right to be a continuing
influence on the continent. The soldiers compared Germany’s
position with that of England in the British Empire and the United
States in North and South America.”
It would be political wishful thinking to say that
this attitude represents a full-blown insight into the fact that the
recent war was one of imperialist plunder on both sides.
But what it does say is that for nearly one-fourth
of the American soldiers, politically backward as they are, Germany’s
war aims were no better or no worse than those of England or the
United States!
Therein begins working class wisdom.
And therein, for the capitalists, lies the worm in the apple!
 

M. Fenwick: How to Feel Like a Negro (11 February 1946)




Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
How to Feel Like a Negro
(11 February 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 6, 11 February 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

If you were a white enlisted man in the Army, keep on reading. For
you will have a rare opportunity offered you – a chance to
change your skin for the next few minutes, a chance to change your
white skin for a black one. You will be able, in a small way, to find
out what it feels like to be a Negro.
This is possible because the contemptible life led by the white
enlisted man in the army bears a great resemblance to the life led by
the Negro in civilian life.
For the two of them it is a system worked out in the minutest
detail. For the white enlisted man it is summed up in the initials
RHIP – Rank Has Its Privileges. For the Negro it is summed up
in the phrase Jim Crow.
 
A Striking Parallel
Similar social distinctions exist. The best seats in army theaters
are reserved for the brass. The GI’s get the poorer seats. In
civilian life the Negro is either rigidly confined to a certain
section of the theater, as in the South, or “directed” to
the balcony, as in the North.
On railroad trains the plushy accommodations are always
reserved for the officers. The GI gets what’s left. If the GI
walks, the officer rides. For the Negro in civilian life there are
Jim Crow cars and Jim Crow sections on buses, particularly in the
South. And they are universally the worst accommodations.
Officers have separate messes and billets, from which the GI is
excluded, just as the Negro is excluded from the best restaurants and
hotels.
Since they walk in beauty and since their metabolism is of a
celestial order, officers have separate entrances to buildings and
toilets for their olympian bottoms, separate from the GI’s. The
Negro is discriminated against similarly in civilian life.
 
The Bended Knee
Accompanying these caste distinctions in the army is the
servile attitude forcibly imposed upon the enlisted man. It is
designed to keep him continuously aware of his inferior status. He
must always address an officer as “Sir!”, he must always
remove his cap indoors in the presence of an officer, he must always
salute him, he may leave an officer’s presence only when
dismissed, he must submit to the filthiest abuse silently, he must
preserve a deferential attitude at all times, he must leap when
called for. Only a blind person could fail to see that this is the
normal condition of Negroes in society today.
As is done in regard to the Negroes, the myth is carefully
cultivated that the enlisted man is a semi-brute, incapable of
independent thought, and that he must be carefully watched and
restrained lest he step out of his place.
 
Legal and Job Inequality
The Negro in civilian life and the white enlisted man in the
army are both discriminated against before the law. The Negro is
customarily tried before white magistrates and white jurors and
usually receives a longer sentence than a white man convicted of a
similar offense. Similarly in the army! The white enlisted man is
always tried by a board of officers (never by his peers – other
enlisted men) and given excessive jail sentences for offenses which
if committed by an officer are lightly punished – or passed off
merely as a joke.
Like the Negro in civil life, the white enlisted man in the army
does all the dirty, hard, and servile work of the army. He digs the
officers’ toilets and fills them in. He erects the officers’
tents. He cooks the officers’ food. He serves it to them. He
washes the officers’ dishes. He gets their laundry done. He
takes care of their equipment and transports it. He always chauffeurs
them. He takes them to their billets when they’re drunk and
cleans up the filth after their parties.
 
Economic Discrimination
The Negro, of course, forms the lowest paid section of the working
class. As a consequence, his standard of living is low, his pleasures
limited.
The same is true of the white enlisted man in the army. He is
miserably paid. Unlike the officer, he cannot support his wife near
his station if it is in the U.S. His family, in fact, probably has
difficulty in getting along. The soldier himself cannot dress as well
as an officer or as comfortably. He cannot enjoy all those small but
important advantages of travel, food, entertainment, and other
pleasures which are so easily accessible to the officers.
*
How many times have you, as a white enlisted man, under the
pressure of that brutal, boring, dangerous life, felt that one more
minute of it and you would blow your top?
Many times, if you were like me.
Do you know what was happening to you? You were being treated
as the Negro is treated in civilian life, but with this difference:
THE NEGRO ENDURES SUCH TREATMENT, AND WORSE, FROM THE CRADLE TO HIS
JIM CROW GRAVE!
Now ask yourself how it must have been in the army for the Negro,
where he was subjected to all the inhuman treatment accorded the
white enlisted man – but multiplied a thousand-fold because of
the color of his skin.
Do you understand a little better now what we socialists mean when
we speak of the oppression of the Negro?
The regime in the army, which presses down so harshly upon both
white and black, is a reflection of the capitalist society which
produced it.
As long as capitalism exists we shall have wars. And as long as
capitalist armies are maintained to fight them we shall have
authoritarian regimes within these armies.
Only the establishment of socialism will abolish war and all that
follows in its wake.
That is a job for Negro and white workers alike.
 

M. Fenwick: World War I and World War II (18 February 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
World War I and World War II
(18 February 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 7, 18 February 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

In comparing World War I and World War II, one of the most
arresting and obvious differences is that in 1918 the coming of peace
was accelerated by the revolutionary activity of German soldiers and
sailors, while in 1945 the German soldier fought until he was driven
from the last pile of rubble in Berlin.
Despite a two-to-one allied numerical superiority in troops,
complete allied domination of the air, a lack of materiel, the nearly
complete destruction of the homeland, a ghastly number of casualties,
and an unbroken chain of defeats beginning as far back as Stalingrad
and El Alamein, there were no significant signs among the German
soldiers of a revolt against their fearful conditions.
There are even many Marxists who, mechanically drawing
revolutionary conclusions from the deep-going economic and political
decay of capitalism, fail to understand, this characteristic of the
times. The Socialist Workers Party of the United States, for
instance, commits this error. Many French Trotskyists, who are not
ungifted political analysts, expected revolts to break out in the
German army at the time of the invasion of Normandy, and similar
revolts to take place on the German home front. Such actions, we are
compelled to record, did not occur. Why not?
 
Why the Germans Kept Fighting
There was scarcely an American soldier who did not say on more
than one occasion, “Why did they keep on fighting? They know
they’re licked.”
There are several reasons. Among them was the tight control
exercised by the Gestapo and the SS troops. The exceptionally large
number of German troops shot for one form of insubordination or
another is a testimony to the hatred of the war that existed in the
common soldier. The effectiveness of the repressive measures is
likewise apparent.
The maintenance of discipline was facilitated, of course, by the
elimination of revolutionary socialist elements from the population
in the six years of Hitler’s rule prior to the war. The number
of such persons – and they were the most courageous, the most
conscious members of the working class – runs into hundreds of
thousands.
The German was snared, also, by the Hitler demagogy, which
could not be answered effectively by capitalist counter-argument. For
example, take the Hitler demand for Lebensraum (living space)
and for colonies. How could England, for instance, ever plausibly
oppose this demand in the eyes of the German people while retaining
her own crown colonies?
Hitler’s plea could be effectively countered only by
socialists, who demand freedom of ALL colonies. The socialist order,
as contrasted with the capitalist one, is the only one which makes
economic well-being possible without the enslavement of colonial
peoples. Hence, allied propaganda was doomed to remain ineffective.
 
The Decisive Lack
In Russia in 1917 and in Germany in 1918. it was a socialist
agitation which brought, or aided in bringing, the bloody slaughter
to a close. That type of agitation, of course, is impossible for the
capitalists, for by its nature it involves a struggle against one’s
own government as well as the government of the enemy country. The
soldier says, in effect, to the enemy soldier, “Look –
what have we got against each other? Why don’t you fight those
on your side who wish to continue this slaughter. I’ll do the
same on my side, and we’ll put an end to this business.”
Instead, the capitalists up until the last days of the war
ceaselessly sowed the idea that all Germans were guilty. The Allies
were unable (and unwilling) to split the German enlisted man from his
officers and to offer the prospect of a better world. Only socialists
can do that. All that the Allies could promise was the
de-industrialization of a great capitalist country – that is to
say, to introduce capitalist barbarism in Germany.
It is no wonder that the German soldier, deadly tired of the war
as he was, fought hopelessly on to the bitter end.
 
What Might Have Been
Within the ranks of the working class the socialists, and the
Stalinists in particular, who substituted national hatred for
socialist fraternization, bear the heaviest responsibility. The
workers of all countries paid for it in a needless prolongation of
the war.
What might have been achieved by a correct policy was revealed
in action by French Trotskyists. Fraternization was conducted with
German soldiers so successfully that they even aided the resistance
movement with arms, rubber stamps for forging identity papers, etc.
In Paris the French comrades would hold up German soldiers on the
street at night in order to secure their weapons. The following is a
typical episode:
One soldier who was held up, thinking that our comrades were
stick-up men, automatically handed over his brief case, which was
found to contain around twenty packages of cigarettes, which were
very valuable on the black market. Our comrades handed it back.
“We’re not bandits. We’re socialist
internationalists. We have nothing against you. You are a victim of
the war like ourselves. Our enemy is your enemy – the Gestapo
and the SS. We want your pistol to protect ourselves from them, and
to fight them and their counterparts in France.”
“But I’ll be disciplined for turning up without my
pistol.”
“We’re in danger, too. But only in the struggle for
socialism can we bring the war to a close.” They continued the
discussion briefly.
In the end the soldier gave up his pistol voluntarily, shook hands
with our comrades, and wished them good luck.
That little incident multiplied a thousand-fold would have
brought the world slaughter to a crashing stop.
For the lack of it millions of men, women, and children lost
their lives, and the world has posed before it the threat of another
and more horrible world war.
Only the international socialist revolution can save humankind.
 

M. Fenwick: Why We Fought (4 February 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Why We Fought
(4 February 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 5, 4 February 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.




THE PEACE AIMS OF THE UNITED STATES AND GREAT BRITAIN, AS
STATED IN THE ATLANTIC CHARTER BY ROOSEVELT AND CHURCHILL IN 1941:


 


THE REALITY IN 1946:

The United States has seized
and plans to hold through outright control or through
“trusteeship” numerous islands in the Pacific. The
United States and England occupy large parts of Germany. Russia
has seized Esthonia, Lithuania, Latvia, part of Poland and
extensive areas in the Orient. She occupies or basically controls
parts of Austria, Rumania, Bulgaria and Germany. She has raised
the demand for the control of Tripolitania. France demands Briga
and Tenda from Italy. She likewise occupies part of Germany. The
United States, England, France and Holland are busy reconquering
colonial countries wrested from them by the Japanese. An
additional, if less obvious, form of aggrandizement is the
economic domination of almost all the countries of the globe
except Russia by the United States dollar.




FIRST: Their countries seek no aggrandizement,
territorial or other.




SECOND: They desire to see no territorial changes that
do not accord with the freely expressed wishes of the people
concerned.


One-half of Poland, over the violation of whose sovereignty by
the Nazis in 1939 Britain declared war on Germany, has been seized
by Russia without the consent of the people involved. Part of
Germany has been forcibly given to Poland. The rest of Germany and
Austria has been partitioned among the United States, Britain,
France and Russia – without consultation of the people
involved. Bulgaria and Rumania are ruled through “the freely
expressed wishes of the NKVD and the Russian army. The colonial
peoples of India, Indochina, Indonesia and Palestine are
ruthlessly shot down by the imperialists who “desire to see
no territorial changes.” The Japanese Empire suffered
extensive territorial changes, over which its population had no
voice.




THIRD: They respect the right of all people to choose
the form of government under which they will live; and they wish
to see sovereign rights and self-government restored to those who
have been forcibly deprived of them.


What resonant phrases! What a brutal reality! Britain
continues her bloody armed intervention in Greece against the
continuously expressed opposition of the overwhelming majority of
the people. For their crime of desiring to govern themselves,
Britain slaughters Indonesians behind a screen of British
censorship. Indians, who demonstrate because they wish “to
see sovereign rights and self-government restored to those who
have been forcibly deprived of them” (by the British) are
casually shot down. France, completely equipped with American
arms, has been coldbloodedly destroying the Indo-Chinese
independence movement.
The United States occupies and politically dominates the
Philippines and part of Korea, despite the often expressed will of
the native populations. Chinese demonstrate for the withdrawal of
American troops. Russia militarily add politically dominates huge
areas in the Far East and in eastern Europe. Though the political
rule of Hitler has been overthrown, Germany is not permitted to
govern herself.




FOURTH: They will endeavor, with due respect for their
existing obligations, to further the enjoyment by all states,
great or small, of access, on equal terms, to the trade and to the
raw materials of the world


This means, on the one hand, the right of all imperialist
nations to exploit the great raw material producing countries of
the world such as India, Indochina, Indonesia, etc., who are now
opposing this “enjoyment” by armed force. On the other
hand, it means that a country like Germany, whose merchant fleet
has been destroyed, whose country is a catastrophic ruin, has the
right of “access on equal terms to the trade and raw
materials! of the world.” That is pure hypocrisy. The war
was fought for the subjugation of competing imperialisms such as
Germany and Japan, and the right of “Allied”
imperialisms to exploit the colonial areas of the world.




FIFTH: They desire to bring about the fullest
collaboration between all nations in the economic field with the
object of securing, for all, improved labor standards, economic
advancement and social security.


Translated into non-diplomatic language, this “fullest
collaboration” is the same type of collaboration that exists
between the hangman and the hanged. The “economic
advancement” of Germany is furthered by the pillage of
machinery, destruction of plants, limitation of production, and
appropriation of coal. “Allied” countries are
permitted to exist on even a low level thanks only to huge
American loans. Colonies of Great Britain are prohibited by law
from having independent trade relations with other countries.
Everywhere, tariff barriers impede free trade. Where countries
could theoretically engage in trade, the war has so weakened their
economy, destroyed their shipping and prevented the accumulation
of an excess, that trade stagnates.




SIXTH: After the final destruction of the Nazi tyranny,
they hope to see established a peace which will afford to all
nations the means of dwelling in safety within their own
boundaries, and which will afford assurance that all the men in
all the lands may live out their lives in freedom from fear and
want.


Peace! “After the final destruction of Nazi tyranny”
fighting rages in Indonesia, Indodhina, China, India and
Palestine. Even before World War II was over, the monarchs of
capitalism began their hopeful whispering of a World War III
against Russia. Freedom from fear! And the whole world quakes
before the atomic bomb, knowing that capitalism, completely
irresponsible, and caught up in its own contradictions, will
hardly hesitate to destroy the globe itself. Freedom from want!
The Nazi tyranny is dead, and in Europe and the Orient whole
populations, where they are not barely subsisting, are starving
and freezing. Life has coasted almost to a stop.




SEVENTH: Such a peace should enable all men to traverse
the high seas and oceans without hindrance.


“Such a peace” is proving almost unendurable. Who
may “traverse the high seas and oceans without hindrance”?
Only the United States, British, French and Dutch armies of
occupation being sent out to hold down all the colonial peoples of
the globe and the defeated populations of Germany and Japan. (The
freedom for these soldiers to return home is more limited!) Only
the vultures of the foreign offices of the world, busy weaving the
oppression of other peoples, only the inquisitors of world
capitalism, tightening the screws of economic plunder
everywhere – only these are free to travel. But the Jews –
those who are still alive – and the other oppressed people
of Europe who wish to flee the agony of life on the continent –
where is their freedom “to traverse the high seas”?




EIGHTH: They believe that all of the nations of the
world, for realistic as well as spiritual reasons, must come to
the abandonment of the use of force ... They will likewise aid and
encourage all other practicable measures which will lighten for
peace-loving peoples the crushing burden of armaments.


“The abandonment of the use of force” proceeds in
normal capitalist fashion – that is to say, by the
continuing application of it. Demobilization in the United States
and England moves slowly. In France it does not move at all.
Feverish scientific research in armaments continues. As steps “to
lighten for peace-loving peoples the crushing burdens of
armaments,” the War Department plans a 1,500,000 man army by
mid-year, and Truman advocates peacetime compulsory military
training. Every session of the United Nations Organization becomes
a tug of war over the atomic bomb, colonies, sources of raw
materials, and military bases. The complete destruction of
civilization is being prepared!




 


THEY LIED TO US!
The War Was Fought for
CAPITALIST PROFITS!



 

: Irish Trotskyists for WP-SWP Unity (11 February 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

J.M.F.
International Socialist Notes
Irish Trotskyists for WP-SWP Unity
(11 February 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 6, 11 February 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The Revolutionary Socialist Party, the Irish section of the Fourth
International, recently issued a statement advocating the immediate
fusion of the Workers Party and the Socialist Workers Party of the
United States.
A summary of their statement follows:
Though the WP and the SWP differ in their analysis of Russia,
the two parties base themselves on the same programmatic
fundamentals. Yet even though the membership of the WP does not
believe that Russia is a degenerated workers’ state, they
“objectively defend the nationalized property by virtue of the
fight they wage for the victory of the international socialist
revolution.”
“The re-entry of experienced comrades and the addition of
the new cadres recruited by the WP would strengthen the SWP in its
fight to halt intervention” by United States imperialism and
Stalinist Russia – the two most powerful counter-revolutionary
forces in the world today – in the unfolding of the
revolutionary situation in Europe.
The support of the concept of fusion is not decisively based upon
the recession in importance of the slogan of the defense of Russia
and its replacement by the slogan of the defense of the European
revolution from imperialism and the Stalinist state. Were this so, a
turn in international events which would menace Russia would raise
again the question of two separate parties.
 
Fundamental Agreement
“Irrespective of the military situation of the
USSR, the basic revolutionary task of overthrowing imperialism still
confronts the workers of the world and it is because there is
agreement on this fundamental problem that we regard fusion as
imperative.”
Will the danger be created, the statement continues, of internal
controversy paralyzing the work of the party? That is possible, but
it is part of the necessary overhead of a party based upon democratic
centralism.
Would the WP members split the party again? To help guard against
this it is proposed that “the WP leaders publicly, before their
own supporters, admit their breach of Bolshevik discipline in 1940,”
which would in some measure safeguard against this contingency.
“With regard to the dispute over the character
of the USSR, we believe an international discussion should be begun
on this question, published in the theoretical organs of the various
sections. Even though it may be contemplated that no new conclusions
of a fundamental character will be reached, it is still none the less
necessary to review and evaluate the evolution of the USSR since In
Defense of Marxism was written.”
The statement is signed by Robert Armstrong, secretary of the
Revolutionary Socialist Party, Irish section of the Fourth
international.
*
The Workers Party can only commend the general point of view of
the Irish comrades. It is based upon a genuine concern for the
welfare of the revolutionary socialist movement in the United States.
As such it stands in healthy contrast to the majority leadership of
the SWP, which only toys with the question.
In proposing immediate fusion the Revolutionary Socialist Party
confirms what we have contended but what the bureaucratized majority
leadership of the SWP finds it hard to swallow, namely, that our
political differences are not such as to preclude our membership in
the same party.
 
Guarantee of Unity
The best guarantee for the preservation of a united party,
however, we find not in admitting to a non-existent “breach of
Bolshevik discipline in 1940,” but in haying the simple right
to publish our own internal bulletin within the single party.
On the proposal for a discussion within the International of the
Russian question, we are in hearty accord. And not only the Russian
question. There is a series of other problems, among them the
national question, which are of extreme importance. Events have
vindicated the position assumed by the Workers Party on these
questions with exemplary completeness. It is time to draw the balance
sheet and to begin the necessary theoretical rearming of the
International.
The concept of Cannon that we were outside the current of the
Fourth International existed only by virtue of bureaucratic fiat in
any event. Our revolutionary policies are making their way.
The statement of the Irish comrades is ample proof of that. It is
not the only one nor will it be the last one from within the ranks of
the Fourth International.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – Democratizing the Armed Forces (6 May 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Democratizing the Armed Forces
(6 May 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 18, 6 May 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

A great deal of attention has recently been focused upon conditions within the armed forces. Even Hanson W. Baldwin, the New York Times military expert, confesses that “the scope and intensity of the present feeling are unprecedented.”
When Baldwin says, however, that “thousands of ex-enlisted men – and many ex-officers – hate (and the word is used advisedly) the systems which they served with a furious rancor” he is guilty of misrepresentation. It is not thousands of enlisted men who hate the military routine but millions.
That the capitalist class is aware of this feeling and is very concerned about it is evident. It is this awareness which causes articles such as Baldwin’s GI Gripes – Causes and Cures to be written, it is this which induces the War and Navy departments to set up investigating commissions, it is this which causes the chatter in Congress about raising soldiers’ pay, changing the cut of GI uniforms, and otherwise bettering the lot of the enlisted man.
 
Behind the Reforms
It is not compassion which is the compelling motive behind the interest of the capitalist class in the welfare of the enlisted man. It is an interest based upon the bed rock of economic and political realities.
The most far-seeing of the leadership of the capitalist class understand that, unlike after the last war, our huge standing army will not be demobilized. It is no longer sufficient that United States domination of the world be maintained solely by economic power – armed might is needed also. And since the area which the United States intends to police includes virtually the whole world with the exception of Russia, the army and navy must be large.
Unfortunately for the capitalists, whose golden torrent of profits tapered off at the war’s end, the overwhelming majority of the enlisted men in the army and navy are fed up with that dangerous, boring, and brutal slave’s life.
Hence the guilty haste to make the military life look like the Earthly Paradise.
United States capital recognizes that eventually there must be war with Russia for the right to control and exploit the entire globe. The war-weariness of the American people, and the similar war-weariness of the people of Europe and Asia plus a variety of other factors, dictate the necessity of delaying this catastrophe for a while. Russia, in her turn, recognizes the condition the U.S. finds herself in, and bulldozes from the world economic, political, and military bases in preparation for World War III, which is inevitable, unless socialism intervenes.
It is, therefore, from the longer term perspective of a Third World War that the talk of army reforms must be viewed.
That the brass hats will fail in their attempt to make the armed forces popular institutions is a foregone conclusion. Even when it is animated with socialist convictions, as was the Red Army under Lenin and Trotsky, the military life is hardly a pleasant one. But under conditions of modern warfare, in any army which is caste-ridden, filled with inequalities, and is fighting for obscure or invisible aims, life becomes almost unbearable.
The fight for a democratic army is synonymous with the fight for socialism, which alone can bring peace, and make military science a lost craft, and war a subject exclusively for history books and weapons exhibited in museums.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – Wars of Aggression (4 November 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Wars of Aggression
(4 November 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 44, 4 November 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Robert H. Jackson, United States prosecutor at the Nuremberg trial, recently clearly formulated the primary reason for the hanging of several of the leading figures of the Nazi regime.
It was for the “planning, preparation, incitation, or waging of a war of aggression, or a war in violation of international treaties, agreements or assurances, or conspiracy or participation in a common place to do so.”
Despite the musty legal rhetoric characteristic of this parasitic profession, the meaning emerges clearly enough.
Equally clearly stated is that the Nazis were not executed for the crimes they committed against the German people – and, in particular, the German labor movement – except insofar as these acts were part of the war preparations. This concept, said Jackson, with that transcendent historical objectivity of a person who has never had to risk his hide under fascism, “does not fully protect minorities against discriminations and persecutions ...”
But let us overlook this for the time being, as well as many of the other criticisms which have been directed against the trial: the fact that the defendants were tried for an act which was not recognized as a crime in international law when they committed it; the fact that the real criminals, the capitalists, were not put in the dock, etc.
Let’s get down to the nub of the matter – the theory of aggressive war.
*
One simple fact, which all the propaganda whitewash in the world cannot obliterate, reveals the trial as a fraud. It is this: that if aggressive war is a crime the Russian leaders should have been in the dock along with the Germans for their actions following the Hitler-Stalin pact in 1939.
“Jodl was grinning like a fox,” reports G.M. Gilbert, the prison psychologist, “‘So now they want to hide the fact that there was a secret treaty! ... The war probably never would have been risked if Hitler hadn’t had this agreement in his pocket!’”
For almost every crime of the Nazis in “the persecution of individuals or minorities on political, racial, or religious grounds where it is a domestic policy in preparation for such war” a Stalinist counterpart can be brought forward. That Justice Jackson only now announces this reveals that he has not only been chummy with Russian war criminals during the past year but that in our accelerated age foreign policy can rapidly change in the few months since the trial began. Yesterday’s ally is now an enemy. That Jackson does not look very bright under the circumstances is really not his fault.
*
Marxists have long pointed out that it is not aggressor nations which cause war but capitalism itself. Capitalism will only produce goods for a profit. When it cannot dispose of a glut of goods on the home market it attempts to sell them abroad. When it does so it invariably collides with other nations attempting to do the same thing. The result is war. That was the meaning of World War I, which was precipitated by Germany’s attempt to build a colonial empire at the expense of the Allies, and muscle-in on a world market largely controlled by the United States, England, and France. It was the basic cause of World War II.
Viewed in this fashion, an actual aggressor nation, in the sense of a nation which unleashes the armed struggle, usually is the one whose need is greater. It may be seeking booty which another nation long ago acquired and has fattened on. Hence the Nazi diatribes against “plutocratic England.” Both are morally culpable.
The term “aggressor” has very useful propaganda value. Every nation seeks to inveigle its opponent into being an actual aggressor in the military sense. From the point of view of the propaganda fed its own people, every nation has always waged a defensive war. In an age of secret treaties, economic pressure, propaganda, and imperialist diplomacy, every power finds it easy to create this impression in its own interest against an opponent.
For instance, the United States was undoubtedly the victim of aggression at Pearl Harbor, and it was a godsend for President Roosevelt, who was going against the grain of the American people in his war drive. But it was a defensive war on the part of the Japanese, also.
The following report, written from Honolulu by Hallett Abend on the eve of the war, has in it all the simple facts necessary for Japanese leaders to prove to the Japanese people that they were being made the victims of United States aggression:
“... already today, as a result of the freezing of her assets and the cessation of her trade with the United States, all parts of the British Empire, and the Netherlands East Indies, Japan is suffering almost the equivalent of a naval blockade. If it continues for another half year her industries will collapse.”
*
College professors, those nasty old maids of both sexes who wind up in capitalist editorial offices, professional politicians, army and navy officers, and other unclassified organic matter, diffuse the comforting myth that our military leaders are models of ethical thinking and conduct. Such is, of course, far from the truth. The question of defense or aggression is almost solely one of expediency – that is, of weighing against each other the propaganda and military value of following a course of aggression or of defense.
Abend shows the division of opinion which existed on this question just prior to the war: “Not only in the Philippines but in Batavia and Singapore there are few doubts that Japan will take provocative action. In some high quarters there’s insistence that the democracies must take direct action even if Japan remains quiet; that her striking power must be destroyed – now.”
War guilt? It is nothing but the reflex of international policy.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – The Stalinists Woo the Vet (11 November 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
The Stalinists Woo the Vet
(11 November 19464)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 45, 11 November 1946, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Like the average militant worker, when the veteran begins to think seriously about polities, and the hypnotism of the Democratic and Republican parties wears off, he will often turn to the Communist Party. For him the Communist Party embodies that unclear but earnestly desired vision of a better world usually summed up in the word “socialism.”
Thanks to tradition, the anti-capitalist role of the “Communists” in Europe, certain seemingly progressive aspects of the CP program, and the crude election propaganda with which the nation was doused during the recent election campaign, the Stalinists have been made to look like very radical fellows.
And, indeed, on paper at least, it would seem to be true. In their pamphlet Who Ruptured Our Duck? they come out for the following immediate demands: low cost housing, maintenance of OPA rent ceilings, jobs for all, decent wages, a 65 cent minimum wage, a permanent FEPC, $25 a week unemployment compensation, a bonus, cash terminal leave payment, abolition of the draft, withdrawal of U.S. troops from all countries except Germany and Japan, cessation of the manufacture of atomic bombs, etc. The program is certainly nothing startling but it is beyond that of the capitalist parties.
For the realization of this program the creation of a third party is proposed. The final objective is stated to be socialism.
*
That would seem to be a pretty progressive program. It is – on paper. But that’s the program for the sheep. What the program is in practice is entirely another matter. It can be clearly seen in the events surrounding the recent Stalinist-led occupation of the State Senate chamber at Albany, New York.
Seventy-two veterans demanded in this demonstration that Governor Dewey call a special session of the legislature to appropriate $800,000,000 for desperately needed housing. Dewey naturally refused. The veterans then lamely concluded the demonstration by condemning Dewey and congratulating Mead, Dewey’s Democratic opponent for the governorship, “for his promise that if elected he would use most of the $517,000,000 state surplus for veterans’ housing.”
 
Offer Mead in Place of Dewey
Thus the veterans who had marched from the railroad station chanting “No more promises, we want homes” wound up supporting a promise – an election promise, at that! – by Mead on behalf of a party whose record on housing is not a whit superior to that of the Republicans.
This policy of support to the Democratic Party is a national one and is persisted in even where the very much embarrassed candidates repudiate the CP support in the vilest terms.
In other words, for all its avowed turn to socialism, guaranteed by the expulsion of the “right-winger” Browder and the elevation of Foster to the party leadership, the CP today serves as one of the props of one of the main capitalist parties of this country.
How did this come about?
*
Two facts have to be understood: (1) the CP is not a revolutionary socialist party, and (2) it serves only the interests of the bureaucracy in Russia. That is why it should be referred to as a Stalinist Party and not as a Communist one.
Right now the Russian bureaucrats, for all their apparent bluster, are interested in avoiding war against Russia. To achieve this they will use any forces of whatever character who may be opposed to current U.S. foreign policy or who are less ferocious in their attitude toward Russia than the rock-ribbed reactionaries.
That is why they support persons like Pepper, Ickes, or Wallace, and large sections of the Democratic Party. This explains their current anti-war stand. They are not opposed to war; they are opposed to the U.S. waging it against Russia. They’re not opposed to the use of the atomic bomb; they’re opposed to its exclusive possession by the United States. They are for the withdrawal of United States troops from abroad –  but not of Russian troops. And so on ...
For the welfare of the United States vet they have very little interest. For them, their program of immediate demands which has been drawn up for the vet has nuisance value in mobilizing opposition to U.S. foreign policy in regard to Russia. And little more.
 
Tool of Russian Bureaucracy
The Stalinist Party is the tool of the Russian bureaucracy. In the period of the Hitler-Stalin pact the CP was opposed to the war. For the soldier they raised the slogan, “The Yanks are not coming!”
When Germany attacked Russia they overnight became the most brazen patriots. Now that the U.S. is orienting toward war with Russia they are again in opposition. At no time have the policies of the Stalinists served the interests of the American worker.
They do not fight for socialism.
They fight for bureaucratic collectivism, whose regime is as brutal as that of any capitalist one which has ever existed.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – “... And This Is a Boa Constrictor” (25 November 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
“... And This Is a Boa Constrictor”
(25 November 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 47, 25 November 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Boa constrictors are nasty creatures, and, along with several slimy Virginia Military Institute graduates we ran across in the ETO, are nothing a person would want to have around the house. But they are interesting reptiles to study, nevertheless. Any serious practicing capitalist must certainly find much to admire in them. They’re so well adapted for the job they have to do.
For instance, the jaw of the boa can be unseated permitting it to engulf animals several times larger in diameter than itself. Of course, after having swallowed a whole pig, say, the huge snake is temporarily sated and lies around torpidly for hours on end blissfully digesting its meal.
And therein the snake reveals itself as inferior to the capitalist, whose appetite is insatiable. Not for pigs, of course, but for profits, which are the capitalist’s food and drink.
The latest juicy morsel they are slithering up on is the last survivor of the OPA program – rent control.
*
What they want is very plain: “a 15 per cent overall increase in rent ceilings and immediate elimination of rent ceilings on new residential construction.” This proposal has been taken under advisement by the OPA – which in more truthful language means that rent controls will be lifted shortly.
 
Veterans to Be Hard Hit
Veterans will be among the hardest hit for, in general, they have less money to pay rent increases with and are in greater need of new residences.
The Census Bureau recently conducted a survey in New York City and eight surrounding cities and towns which statistically shows the plight of the veteran. The results are revealing.
Of the 765,000 veterans covered by the survey “150,000 married veterans last summer were living doubled-up with friends or relatives or, in. certain areas, in tourist cabins, trailers or rented rooms. Only three per cent of the married veterans owned their own homes, and one-third of them had purchased these homes following their discharges from service.”
In spite of this crying need, however, only “18 per cent of the veterans said they could afford to buy or rent new quarters under prevailing conditions.” Only two per cent “declared that they planned to buy or build homes in the next year if the present prices and quality of housing prevailed.” What these percentages will be once rent controls are lifted is not hard to imagine, especially when it is understood that the veteran’s average weekly wage at the time of the survey was $40.
*
Action Is a Paramount Need
There is dirty weather ahead for the consumer. Just how rough it’s going to get depends upon how long the veteran and other consumers permit the big real estate operators and their congressional cronies to hold on to the helm.
Every veterans’ organization worth its salt should now be drawing up a program to meet the coming assault. The rent strikes which have begun in the West, anti-eviction squads, the squatters’ movement and militant actions for a national governmental housing program are steps in the right direction. Labor is the natural ally of the veteran and should be approached for the formation of a common front.
The veteran in the shop and in his union must popularize the movement for a sliding scale of wages, the escalator clause, the cost of living bonus, or similar measures designed to permit wages to keep abreast of soaring prices. He must know the history and the significance of the UAW program centering around the slogan, “Wage Increases without Price Rises” and introduce the concept into the active thinking of the union membership.
Hope, trust, and prayer have never yet stayed a boa constrictor intent upon gorging itself. Similarly, only direct action by the working class, supported by middle class consumers, who are likewise being victimized by the bounding prices, can put an end to appetites which know no limit.
always and under all circumstances opposed to government interference. Not at all. For example, they would like the benefits of certain tax exemptions on new housing. Again, while they will brook no meddling by the Federal Housing Administration in private enterprise, they heartily approve of FHA as an insurer of mortgages. They are perfectly willing for the government to take the risks of private enterprise.
 
Effects of Rise
How do the strike of the real estate industry, the lifting of rent ceilings and controls on new housing, and a fifteen per cent rent boost affect the veterans and the rest of us? The government has estimated that about four million veterans wanted to build, buy or rent a home this year. With only 800,000 units begun by September, no wonder a group of Pacific veterans at a recent reunion suggested the slogan: “We’ll rent a tree by fifty-three!”
The removal of rent and price ceilings on new homes will make them prohibitive for practically everyone who needs them most. Ceilings now on new homes limit rentals to $80 a month and purchase prices to $10,000 – at least theoretically. According to government statistics, those veterans who want to rent homes have average earnings of $44 a week. Certainly they cannot afford to pay $80 a month for rent. The veterans who would like to buy a house average $48 a week in wages or earnings. People in this income level buying $10,000 homes simply become slaves to their homes for the best years of their lives. So the present situation is bad enough. Now imagine what it will be with all ceilings and controls off.
Finally, it is absolutely impossible for the working people as a whole to absorb a fifteen per cent increase. Already the discrepancy between wage increases and price increases has drastically cut the standard of living. According to government figures, which, be it remembered, never favor the workers, wage increases since 1941 amount to thirty-three per cent in hourly rates, while the cost of living has gone up forty-six per cent. That is neither an accurate picture of the wage nor the price situation.
The hourly rate increases tell nothing about reduced hours and reduced take-home pay. And every housewife can tell you that the cost of living has gone up a good deal more than forty-six per cent since 1941. However, these figures, unfavorable as they are to the worker, still show wages as far behind the cost of living. It is unthinkable for the workers to shell out for a fifteen per cent rent increase.
Such considerations, however, have not deterred the OPA’s Housing Rent Advisory Committee from submitting to the OPA three proposals which could have been written by the National Association of Real Estate Boards. This committee recommends to OPA (1) Elimination of rent ceilings on’ new housing and on converted housing; (2) systematic and progressive removal of property from control where owners offer tenants leases at increases of not more than fifteen per cent; (3) an immediate over-all fifteen per cent increase. These are the measures that OPA is now considering.
There are rumors that OPA will want an overall ten per cent rent raise to the landlords. Intolerable as this Would be to tenants, it would not be acceptable to the real estate interests. They want their full demands, and the administration will give in, as it did to the meat industry. The outcome of the election has by no means stiffened the backs of the executive branches of the government.
 
For Direct Resistance
Relying on themselves, as they have to, what will the working people do to counter the latest raid on their wages and pockets? Undoubtedly, from coast to coast, there will be a storm of demands for wage increases to close the gap between wages and the cost of living. But there must also be direct resistance to the landlords through tenants’ committees working with the unions and taking planned action not to pay rent increases.
Finally, the housing shortage calls for removing the problem from the hands of the profit-poachers and for a government spending program of at least $250,000,000 to construct badly needed homes and public buildings in the next five years. How else can the people hold what they have and get more of what they so urgently need?
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – $417,260,127,310 (1 April 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
$417,260,127,310
(1 April 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 13, 1 April 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Look carefully again at the figure which heads this column. It looks like one of those astronomically large, almost incomprehensible, figures which are used in describing distances between the stars in our universe, doesn’t it?
It represents the amount of money Congress appropriated during the years 1941 through 1946 for war purposes.
To help you realize just how large this sum is, imagine that it were all turned into one-dollar bills. Then imagine you started counting this money at the rate of one dollar a second. Imagine, further that with true capitalist enterprise you worked tirelessly day and night. It would take you 13,247 years to complete the job. You would finish in the year 15,193.
Had you begun counting in the past so as to finish this year, you would have had to begin to 11,300 B.C. – 8,300 years before the building of the pyramids in Egypt, thousands of years before the Biblical flood, thousands of years before the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by “fire and brimstone from the Lord out of heaven,” 13,246 years before the destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by atomic bombs dropped from the heavens at the behest of our capitalist lords and masters.
 
Capitalism – Creator of Death
This dazzling mass of wealth, more magnificent than the wildest dreams of Indian maharajahs or dissolute emperors of antiquity, was used by capitalism to create death and destruction, and hunger, heartbreak and mutilation on a scale unparalleled in previous history.
What wonders could have been worked had this wealth been applied to socially useful ends!
Fifty-five days of such expenditures would have paid for the entire WPA program, which capitalism so begrudgingly allowed millions of workers to exist on during the depression.
Had this mass of wealth been divided among the nearly 35,000,000 families in the United States, each family would have received $11,936.
In other words, every family in the United States – your family! – would have received the following:

A spick and span new $7,000 home.
House furnishings valued at $1,500.
A $1,000 new car.
An educational fund of $1,000 for the children.
A reserve fund of $1,436 in the bank, to be held for 	emergencies.

What a revolution in our lives it would have meant!
 
Socialism, the Hope of Humanity
Why can’t capitalism, which can create miracles of production for war, do the same in peacetime?
The reason is very simple: Capitalism disposes of manufactured products only when it can turn a profit. That is why, though periodically under capitalism huge surpluses build up, and though at the same time millions of people in the United States desperately desire these products, capitalism will not release them.
There is no PROFIT in it. So that is why people go hungry when there is too much wheat, are poorly dressed when there are too many clothes on the market, and go cold when there is an excess of coal.
Socialism destroys the profit system and substitutes production for use. Under socialism, goods which are produced will immediately flow into the hands of those who desire them without being dammed up because of the necessity of extracting a profit.
For desiring such a social system, socialists are called visionaries, crackpots.
Capitalists, of course, are notoriously sane – sane, that is, if you consider the spending of $417,260,127,310 for the destruction of human life a mark of sanity, sane if you consider the feverish preparations for atomic warfare the sign of a balanced mind, sane if you consider toying with the disintegration of the globe itself a national act.
IN SOCIALISM ALONE RESTS THE HOPE OF MANKIND!
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – A May Day to Remember (29 April 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
A May Day to Remember
(29 April 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 17, 29 April 1946, p. 4-M.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

May 1, 1916. That was thirty years ago to the day – a whole generation as our grandfathers reckoned time, and in terms of working class political consciousness it seems ever more distantly remote, so severe has been the ebb of worldwide revolutionary thought in our time.
May 1, 1916, found Germany caught midway in the horrible carnage of World War I. Though the war was not to end for two more years, the German workers and soldiers, then the most politically educated of the entire world, were already deadly sick of the seemingly endless slaughter.
Betrayed by the social democratic party, which had preached international Socialism before the war and had turned rabidly patriotic when war was declared, propagandized by the German capitalist press, and enslaved by the notorious discipline of the German military machine, thousands of German workers were waiting only for leadership to demonstrate their international working class solidarity.
Their chance came.
 
Potsdam Square, May 1, 1916, 8 p.m.
Posters, illegally printed and bearing the following words. “All out for the May Day demonstration,” appeared in working class neighborhoods. Leaflets were distributed by militant workers saying, “All who are against the war, come to Potsdam Square, May 1, 8 p.m. Bread! Liberty! Peace!”
The posters and leaflets were the work of Karl Liebknecht and the Spartacists. Liebknecht, a member of the social democratic (socialist) fraction in the Reichstag, was the first parliamentary representative of the German working class to oppose the imperialist war. The Spartacists were the members of the social-democratic party who were opposed to the war on a Marxist basis.
On the evening of May 1, despite masses of mounted and foot police who had been ordered out, ten thousand Berlin workers mobilized on Potsdam Square to demonstrate against the war. At eight o’clock Liebknecht, who had been drafted by the government so as to curb his activity, appeared and began to speak.
He was able to shout only “Down with the war! Down with the government!” before he was pulled down by the police and arrested. The police then attempted to break up the crowd, but they continued to march around the square demonstrating for two hours before they were dispersed.
Simultaneous with the Berlin demonstration, similar mass meetings were being held by the Spartacists all over Germany – in Dresden, Jena, Stuttgart, Magdeburg, Braunschweig, Leipzig, Kiel, Bremen and Duisburg.
 
The Rising Tide
After a prolonged trial Liebknecht was sentenced to four years in jail. Shortly thereafter his associate, the famous revolutionist, Rosa Luxemburg, was similarly sentenced to jail, as was the courageous Franz Mehring, the brilliant scholar and internationalist, who was then a man of seventy.
But the tide was not to be turned.
As the butchery continued anger continued to mount. The October revolution in Russia added fuel to the fire. On October 21, 1918, Liebknecht was liberated from prison through the pressure of the masses, though only half his sentence had been served. Finally, mutinies broke out in the navy and revolts in the army. The German capitalists, faced with allied military superiority and the opposition of workers, soldiers, and sailors, had to sue for peace.
The bloody butchery was over.
 
A Lesson for Our Times
Contrast the course of events in Germany in World War II with the events of World War I. In this last war, despite the unparalleled length and frightfulness of the destruction, for lack of a socialist consciousness in Germany the Wehrmacht fought from the last pile of rubble in Berlin.
For lack of socialist consciousness among the ranks of the workers, soldiers, and sailors of allied armies the slaughter of the workers of the world was allowed to continue unhindered.
Only socialism can ultimately drive war from our planet.
Let every veteran who has seen the horrors of the recent simple war of mechanical force, ponder those facts carefully in the face of war of atomic force which our capitalist masters are coolly preparing for us unless socialism intervenes.
 

M. Fenwick: An Heroic Record of Revolutionary Resistance Against Fascist Terror (1 April 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
The European Trotskyists During the War
An Heroic Record of Revolutionary
Resistance Against Fascist Terror
(1 April 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 13, 1 April 1946, p. 4-M.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

LEON TROTSKY once said that the Fourth International was like the apex of an inverted social pyramid upon which the whole weight of capitalist society pressed down.
Pressing upon the Trotskyists are all the economic and social means of coercion available to the bourgeoisie, the entire apparatus of the trade union bureaucracy, the totalitarian machine of the Stalinists, and all the thousand and one resources current society has at its disposal.
Despite all this, in virtually every country of the globe there exist gallant bands of men and women, inspired by the great emancipating doctrine of Marxism who, resisting all the bribes, threats, and persecution of the enemies of socialism, have chosen as their life work the struggle for the first human society, socialism. They are ranged within the parties of the Fourth International.
In the crucible of war all political parties are subjected to the severest proofs. The Fourth International came through the war incorruptible, able to hold its head high before the tribunal of the working class and say, “We discharged our revolutionary socialist obligations!”
Alone of all working class political parties, the parties of the Fourth International opposed the imperialist war, stating that it was a war for capitalist profits, and calling for the fraternization of workers and soldiers of all countries.
Unlike the social democratic organizations of World War I that collapsed under the patriotic capitalist pressure, the Fourth International opposed the bloody carnage from the earliest hour.
 
The Record of Our French Comrades
In France the first resistance paper to appear in illegality was La Verité (Truth), the organ of the International Communist Party, French section of the Fourth International.
Throughout the war our French comrades worked with model bravery, fighting in the resistance movement, conducting fraternization with German soldiers, taking up workers’ demands in the shops where that was possible, issuing La Verité and other papers, aiding workers sought by the Gestapo, forging identity papers, etc.
For their activity the French comrades paid a heavy price in persons shot by the Gestapo and the Vichy police and deported to the infamous concentration camps in Germany.
Following the close of the war our French comrades continued their struggle against French capitalism. Ceaselessly hounded by the French government, their paper illegal, and persecuted by the Stalinists, our comrades are showing a gratifying extension of their influence as demonstrated by recent election returns.
Though information is scanty because of the war conditions which obtain, news in the capitalist press reveals that our comrades in French IndoChina have been active in the nationalist struggles which have been taking place there. Their work has been complemented by the agitation of our comrades in France who have been waging a campaign in support of France’s colonial populations.
 
The Record of Our Belgian Comrades
In Belgium our comrades were very active during the occupation, especially in the mining areas, where Trotskyist influence has been traditionally strong. Conducting a struggle similar to that of the French organization, the Internationalist Communist Party, Belgian section of the Fourth International, published illegal papers in French, German, Flemish and Polish during the war.
The Belgian comrades similarly paid heavily for their loyalty to the international working class.
Following the war the Belgian comrades conducted agitation against the royalty, for a uniform pension, against the no-strike legislation of the Van Acker government, etc., basing their program upon the transitional demands of the Fourth International.
 
The Record of Our German Comrades
Because of the terrific repression to which German political parties were subjected, and because of the difficulties of communication today, not much is known of the activity of German Trotskyists. A little news has leaked out, however, showing that our German comrades held high the banner of international solidarity under the unprecedented repression of the German capitalists.
At the time of the siege of Aachen, for instance, a group of soldiers under Trotskyist influence deserted and formed a guerrilla band which fought the SS and the Gestapo. Trotskyist activity is likewise being carried on among German prisoners in France.
A great number of our German comrades remain, of necessity, in emigration in France, England, Switzerland, the United States, and South America. The majority of the Spanish section likewise exists in emigration.
 
The Record of Other Sections
Active sections of the Fourth International exist in Ireland and England. In England the group is exceptionally active. It publishes a paper, Socialist Appeal, and a theoretical magazine, Workers International News.
Trotskyist groups exist elsewhere throughout the British Empire. Sections exist in South Africa, Australia, India, etc. News concerning these sections has been relatively scanty up to the present because of war-time restrictions.
Despite nearly twenty-five years of the Mussolini dictatorship, which destroyed so much of working class thinking, a section of the Fourth International has been established in Italy.
A group exists in Holland.
Our Greek section has done heroic work, and has paid exceptionally heavily for it. Not only were our comrades persecuted by the Ovra, Mussolini’s secret police, but over a hundred were slaughtered by the Stalinists during the attack upon the ELAS and EAM in 1944–1945.
Such is the proud record of the Fourth Internationalist movement throughout the world. It is a living testimonial to the desire of the working classes of the world to establish socialism wherever mankind exists.
In many countries such as in the United States, where two Trotskyist tendencies – the Workers Party and the Socialist Workers Party – exist, there is more than one Trotskyist movement. Such a condition exists in Australia, South Africa, and Greece as well. In many of these countries it is heartening to note that unity negotiations are going on.
In the ensuing period we hope to see the political rearmament of the Fourth International along the lines developed by the Workers Party.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – German War Guilt (8 April 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
German War Guilt
(8 April 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 14, 8 April 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Following a recent public meeting in Philadelphia at which the writer of this column spoke, we fell into conversation with a worker who had been an attentive listener and who had actively participated in the discussion following the speech.
“I read Labor Action and your column regularly,” he said, “and on the whole I agree with what you people say. But there is one thing I think I am opposed to you on and that is the slogan, ‘Bring the Boys Home!’ Ordinarily I’d be for bringing the soldiers home immediately, but if we do, isn’t there the danger that Germany, for instance, would stab us in the back and start another war?”
This question, it is hardly necessary to emphasize, is posed not by a representative of the capitalist class, behind whose “realism” lurks the barely restrained lust to plunder the whole world, but by an informed worker genuinely interested in forestalling the frightful terrors of a world atomic war which would reduce Paris, London, New York and all other centers of civilization to historic ruins like Pompeii, Kish, Carthage and Troy.
The problem over which this worker stumbles is a difficult one and one which, thanks to the propaganda of the press, is all too common among otherwise very acute workers.
Behind the idea that Germany must be policed lies the belief that the war occurred through Germany’s policy of aggression.
But the question of Germany’s war guilt is not a simple one, as many GIs found out to their surprise and – many times – anger, while idly conversing with their fraulein following the pleasures of Bavarian love in the cool of a summer evening under a linden tree.
 
German Propaganda Effective
GIs who were in Germany will recall the excellent pictorial propaganda put out as premiums by cigarette companies and directed against England, in which the horrors of industrial capitalism and imperialism were accurately portrayed. It was not difficult for the Nazis to show the baseness of England’s international politics and that Germany was merely seeking her “due” share of the colonial world to exploit – a world selfishly monopolized by England and secured by force years before .
Many GIs heard Lord Haw-Haw on the radio, as we did during the Battle of the Bulge, ripping Britain’s foreign policy apart, pointing out the reality beneath the democratic-sounding phrases. On this occasion he was adequately demonstrating that Britain, which had allegedly started the war over the violation of Poland’s neutrality, had agreed to its partition by Russia.
No, it was not difficult to confuse the average GI. When Germans were criticized for their treatment of the Jews they merely pointed to our treatment of the Negroes. When the German enslavement of Poland was mentioned, they merely made reference to England’s role in India.
 
Real War Criminal – Capitalism
Anyone who thought the matter through had to come to the conclusion that the war aims of all participating countries were base.
Capitalism is the real enemy, for capitalism produces war. That one country does or does not strike before another is merely a matter of preparedness, military or political advantage, or the urgency of the necessity for war.
Germany struck first, not because she was more morally corrupt, but because she needed markets more acutely, wanted to take advantage of the unpreparedness of her adversaries and had to act before the superior industrial plant of her opponents could be brought into operation.
Whether Germany is occupied or whether it is not will not prevent war. Only socialism, which destroys the economic basis for war, can bring peace to the world.
The occupation of Germany, with the economic and political strangulation of the country which accompanies it, produces a national hatred which can only fan the flames of future conflicts, as did the German occupation of France, thereby burying the rudimentary socialist consciousness of the masses of Europe.
Since we believe that the aims of both German and United States capitalism were reactionary, we are for the withdrawal of United States troops from Europe just as we were for the withdrawal of German troops from France during the occupation.
Every nation has the right to govern itself, without foreign intervention. One of the first steps toward the construction of a Socialist United States of Europe must be the reconstitution of Germany as an economic and political unit.
American soldiers are serving the reactionary aim of American capital to dominate the entire globe.
LET THEM BE BROUGHT HOME!
 

: International Socialist Notes (29 April 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

J.M.F.
International Socialist Notes
(29 April 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 17, 29 April 1946, p. 4-M.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.


France
La Vérité (Truth), organ of the International Communist Party, French section of the Fourth International, is the only paper in France today which denounces the crimes of the French army in Indo-China and demands immediate freedom for colonial peoples.
Both the socialist and Stalinist parties have voted war credits for financing the repression of the Indo-Chinese.
Former German soldiers, including 4,000 SS men, have been inducted into the French Foreign Legion and sent to the Far East.
For manifesting sympathy with the Vietnam government, 10,000 Annamite workers out of 12,000 were laid off from their jobs in France, and hundreds were arrested, including many Annamite soldiers. At Oran 500 Annamite soldiers have been locked up with German prisoners or put in concentration camps.
*
In contrast to the cowardly policy being pursued by the Socialist Workers Party of the United States, the French party has begun a campaign of vindication of Leon Trotsky, addressing demands to the prosecution at. Nuremberg for the revelation of the alleged conspiracy between Trotsky and the Nazis.
An article in La Vérité
states in part:
“... the monstrous campaign of lies directed against Trotsky and the Fourth International must be pitilessly unmasked, for it is the very negation of all honestly and all democracy in the labor movement. The International Communist Party, along side the English Revolutionary Communist Party and the Dutch Revolutionary Communist Party, must in its turn address the French and Soviet representatives at Nuremberg to demand the truth, the whole truth, on the ‘proofs’ of the Moscow Trial.”
*
As a result of the policy of the French government, a fascist movement is stirring into life in France. Known as the “Republican Party of Liberty,” its incubation period was shortened recently by a gift of millions of francs from large insurance companies.
Our French comrades have been active in exposing the movement and in rallying workers to the meetings of the fascists in order to combat them.
Significantly enough, the toleration of the open activity of these fascists by a government in which the Socialists and Communists are a majority coincided with the prohibition of the publication of La Vérité.
*
The French party has announced the coming publication of Lenin’s pamphlet, The Threatening Catastrophe and How to Fight It. It is a real event, for the occupation destroyed all Marxist literature. There is a terrible dearth of theoretical material in France. Even the Stalinists, with all their resources, have published strikingly little. The republication of Marxist classics, difficult though it is in impoverished France, is a necessary step in the political rearmament of the French working class.
*

England
The Socialist Appeal, organ of the English Revolutionary Communist Party, recently reported interesting data on the strike of Singapore workers which began on the 29th of January and extended for several days.
“Over 200,000 workers participated in the struggle, including the engineers, dockworkers, public employees, and even domestic servants and the shopkeepers responded to the call.
“The strike had been called because of the continued refusal on the part of the British authorities to release 14 trade union leaders and militants who had been imprisoned for their participation in a previous strike in December, which took place on the issue of higher wages and better conditions for the workers.”
The following appeal was addressed to British and Indian soldiers by the native workers:
“The workers of Malaya humbly request you to give us every possible help in the present ‘strike’ to raise our standard of living. You shall perform your duty in saving humanity from the imperialist yoke. If you are not in a position to help us, please be neutral. The British government may force you to open fire upon the unarmed and innocent people. Dear brothers, keep up the name of India and save mankind from poverty and death.
“Your brothers who are struggling for better living and New Democracy.”
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – Super-Seniority – Divide and Rule (22 April 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Super-Seniority – Divide and Rule
(22 April 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 16, 22 April 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

“Divide et impera” – divide and rule – the motto of Louis XI of France, has been an operating principle of despots from the earliest times.
Today the capitalist class of the United States is attempting to apply that principle by pitting veterans against civilian workers through super-seniority.
What is super-seniority? It is, as a CIO pamphlet puts it, a “scheme under which veterans – regardless of the length of their employment and military service – would automatically outrank all other workers.”
It was announced in 1944 by the notorious Major General Lewis B. Hershey of the Selective Service System in Local Board Memorandum 190-A. The motivating reasons, of course, were of the highest order. George Romney, managing director of the Auto Council for War Production, wept warm tears, and “came out vigorously for super-seniority, attacking the unions for their stand and declaring that returning veterans will face ‘an unbelievable injustice’.”
 
The Real Reasons
The actual reasons, of course, lie closer to the real seat of a capitalist’s emotions – his pocketbook. The capitalist class has been persistently attempting to utilize the veteran to chip away the union movement. The veteran has been encouraged to scab through being refused unemployment benefits while on strike. He was systematically propagandized against unions while in the Army. The super-seniority hue and cry is the latest manifestation.
Nobody should believe that the current controversy over super-seniority results from a “misunderstanding” or conflict between various government agencies such as the War Department and Congress, for instance. It is a carefully thought- out plan by the capitalist class and was consciously introduced.
If the plan is defeated it will not be through action of the capitalist courts, where the question of super-seniority is now being strangled by the tentacles of suit, counter-suit, appeal, delay and contradiction. It will be defeated solely by action of the unions in demonstrating that they intend to have no part of the super-seniority, union-breaking plan.
 
The CIO Plan
Fortunately, the organized labor movement has generally adopted a correct position in regard to super-seniority – one that veterans who realize where their real interests lie should be glad to accept. It contains two simple points:

That time in military service should be counted in computing 	the seniority of veterans returning to their old jobs.
	 
That veterans who did not work prior to military service 	should acquire seniority based upon their time in the service, once 	they have Secured employment.

This system protects the veteran from being penalized for his period of service in the armed forces, it protects the civilian worker, who is often a man with family responsibilities, it protects the seniority system, which is the backbone of any union structure. And it helps to forestall pitting the veteran against the civilian worker – from which only the bosses can profit.
That the, veteran has special problems and special demands which he can make of the government is recognized by any union worth its salt. The union should be in the forefront in protecting the rights of veterans in order that the veterans will not be won over to the side of reaction.
The super-seniority problem could only arise in a capitalist society like ours, where there is a shortage of jobs. The final answer to the “veteran’s problem,” of which super-seniority is a manifestation, is JOBS FOR ALL.
And one of the first steps which labor must take to realize this objective is the creation of a Labor Party, independent of the two capitalist parties and fighting for a workers’ government, which will put the immense productive machinery of the United States to work in peace as our capitalist government is able to do only for war.
Under socialism there will be no “veteran’s problem.”
 

: International Socialist Notes (1 April 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

J.M.F.
International Socialist Notes
(1 April 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 13, 1 April 1946, p. 4-M.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.


England
Readers will recall that the Revolutionary Communist Party, English section of the Fourth International, recently addressed a letter to the British government, asking for representation at the Nuremberg trial
Representation was desired so as to be able to question the prominent nazis on trial there, with whom Trotsky, the famous revolutionary leader, was accused of conspiring by the Russian prosecution in the Moscow frame-up trials in 1936, 1937, and 1938.
Readers will likewise recall that the famous Dewey Commission absolved Trotsky of these slanders.
Representation at the Nuremberg Trial was denied by the British government. The reason is not far to seek. The British government is not interested in rehabilitating the memory of a famous Marxist who was a pitiless enemy of everything for which British capitalism stands.
Furthermore, Britain is not anxious to cross Russia unnecessarily in the mortal chess game she is now, along with the United States, playing with Russia. For Trotsky was the hated enemy of the Russian bureaucracy as well. And in the fight against Trotskyism – that is to say, against revolutionary socialism, the hope of mankind – the Russian bureaucracy can never make a concession.
*
The Socialist Appeal, the Trotskyist organ in England, recently welcomed the impending repeal of the Trade Disputes Act, passed by the British government in 1927 in reprisal against the well-known general strike of 1926. Of the action against the bill by the labor government, the Socialist Appeal said: “There are few measures that the Labour Government takes to which we Trotskyists give wholehearted support. The Repeal of the Trade Disputes Act is one of them.’’
The Trotskyists, interestingly enough, were the only labor group ever prosecuted under this act. Four comrades were jailed as a result of their role in furthering a strike aimed against the war-time Bevin plan for the conscription of mine labor.
*

France
As the elections approach, our French comrades are being subjected to increased harassing by the French government, acting upon provocations caused by the Stalinists, wjo fear the significant influence shown by the French party in previous elections.
La Véritè (Truth) was recently seized by the police for appearing as a non-authorized journal. La Vérité, the first resistance organ to appear under the occupation, is the only labor paper denied publication in France today.
The seizure by the police was preceded by attacks against sellers of the paper by Stalinist thugs, who also made an attempt on the party headquarters.
Such attacks are witness to the actual and potential strength of the French party, which can only increase as the Gouin government demonstrates its inability to cope with the continuing economic crisis in France.
*

Belgium
The coordinated international campaign against Trotskyism which has been unleashed by the Stalinists has borne fruit in Belgium also.
As a result of a Stalinist pressure campaign carried on in its press, necessary signatures for the placing of our party on the ballot in Brussels were invalidated.
At Charleroi, however, where the Belgium party ran candidates. 1,109 Trotskyist votes were secured in this densely populated working-class area.
The comrades conducted a model campaign, funds for which were over-subscribed. A sound truck was used for the first time in the history of the organization and 50,000 pieces of literature were distributed. A mass meeting of 600 at Gilly was the largest held by any party there.
*
The capitalist courts of Belgium have just acquitted two collaborators whose names were a stench in the nostrils of all Belgian workers during the occupation.
They are Bologne and Destexhe. They turned over to the Gestapo the names of numerous Stalinists, Trotskyists, and other militants during the war.
Trotskyist families, whose sons or husbands were taken by the Gestapo as a result of these denunciations, were not permitted to testify at the trial.
Capital, whether it worked for Hitler or not, knows who its friends are – and its enemies.
 

: Fourth International Notes (14 January 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

J.M.F.
Fourth International Notes
(14 January 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 2, 14 January 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.


France
The International Communist Party, the French section of the Fourth International, recently opened a campaign for the establishment of a fund of one million francs (about $8,400 at the new rate of exchange).
The fund will have a twofold purpose: (1) to conduct a membership drive to extend the influence already revealed by the party in recent elections and in the acquisition of old-time members of the French Stalinist party who recently joined the French Trotskyist movement, and (2) to prepare for the election of several Trotskyists to the Constituent Assembly, the elections for which are scheduled to be held in five months.
The call for the campaign concludes with a demand for the utmost efforts from all so that “after so many years the voice of communism will once more ring from the tribune of bourgeois parliament.”
*

India
The Socialist Appeal, organ of the Revolutionary Communist Party, British section of the Fourth International, recently revealed that our Indian comrades, despite their having to work in illegality, and despite the imprisonment of leading comrades, continue their revolutionary work.
Permanent Revolution, the theoretical organ of the Indian comrades continues to appear. Other publications include the following: A 200-page book by K. Tilak titled, From the First to the Fourth International, a brief history of the international working class movement; a hundred page pamphlet by C.R. Govindan, The First Round of the European Socialist Revolution, a study of recent developments in Europe; and an agitational pamphlet entitled, For an Anti-Imperialist Left Front.
In the last named pamphlet our Indian comrades call upon all anti-imperialist organizations for a united front on the following basis:

Opposition to the Gandhi “Constructive Program” for revolutionary mass struggle.
 
Opposition to the attempt to bring trade unions and the Kisan Sabhas (organization of the small, land-owning peasants) under capitalist control or domination.
 
Release of all political prisoners.
 
Repeal of all repressive legislation.
 
No compromise with imperialism.

 

M. Fenwick: The Brutalization of the American Soldier - III (7 January 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

The Brutalization of the American Soldier

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Part III
The Brutalization of the American Soldier
(7 January 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 1, 7 January 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

What is the reason for the boorish and brutal behavior of so many American soldiers in Europe? Joe Weston, writing in Life magazine, accuses
“... American educators and American parents and American propagandists – the movies included – of selling an America which does not exist, not only to the world but, what is worse, to Americans as well. When, if ever, the time comes that we Americans can see ourselves as we are rather than as we ought to be, then stories like this will never again have to be written.”
In other words, American soldiers behave despicably in Europe because Americans today really are a debased people. Fortunately for humankind, this is a lie. If it were not, how explain that Americans when in the United States do not behave in a similarly primitive fashion?
The blunt truth is that the blame must be squarely laid upon capitalism, which in its nurturing of the individual member of society, its nationalism, its military system and its wars debauches the human personality to the low level we are witness to in our time.
 
The Economic Basis of Morals
United States capitalism, like all capitalism, is unplanned. As a consequence, even in what capitalist economists call “normal” times, millions of persons are unemployed and further millions exist on a terribly depressed economic level. And almost everybody, except the inaccessible, shadowy titans who really control the country, lives under the constant, wearing threat of unemployment.
Money becomes the be-all and end-all of existence, for money means security. The acquisition of it, in normal and perverse forms, is the theme of a major portion of the movies, books, pulp magazines and radio serials produced in this country.
It should not be a cause for wonder, then, that almost every soldier, supported by official propaganda as to the guilt of the Germans, and made uneasy by the recognition that he would have very little money when he was discharged from the Army, looted watches, jewelry, money, bolts of cloth or almost any portable object of value.
 
The Virus of Nationalism
In order to preserve and extend its profits, United States capitalism must export. In doing so it inevitably comes into conflict with other capitalist countries such as England, Germany or France. Many times this conflict rests on the plane of economic struggle. Often it breaks out into war.
In either case the economic or actual warfare is accompanied by official and less conspicuously organized propaganda whose aim, in one degree or another, is to discredit virtually every aspect of the life of the opponent country and to exalt one’s own. The intensity of the propaganda varies, of course, with political necessity. England, a capitalist ally, for example, currently enjoys the wry blessing of American friendship. Nevertheless, along with other countries, England is subjected to the corrosive action of American propaganda, chiefly transmitted through the press and the radio. In the end, the dislike of foreign countries attains the ingrained strength of an eleventh commandment, as unquestioned and as unquestionable as the other ten.
It is this seed which grows so violently when the American soldier comes in contact with the “Limies,” the “Krauts” and the “Frogs.” Additionally handicapped by the reactionary barrier of language, contemptuous of the low standard of living of foreign countries in comparison with the United States, convinced that he is risking his life because of quarrels between foreigners in which he has little visible interest and angered by the oftentimes unfavorable rate of exchange, the American soldier is led into excesses over which foreigners are justifiably indignant.
 
Debasement of Women Under Capitalism
Foreign women must endure not only the nationalist contempt of American men but must bear the burden of the inferior status which capitalism ordinarily assigns them.
Nature has given women the task of bearing and bringing up children. Since capitalism cannot raise the average income to the point where all children can be raised in scientifically organized nurseries and schools, they are customarily brought up at home by the mother. For the same reason, much of the drudgery of housework, such as washing and ironing clothes, preparing meals and washing dishes, which under socialism will be done outside the home, is now done by the housewife.
As a result, the average housewife under capitalism becomes the household drudge. She works long hours, becomes prematurely old and, because she lives a life so limited by the walls of the home, inevitably becomes one of the more backward, conservative members of the population. She is, too often, merely the bed companion, the household servant, and the mother of her husband’s children. Seldom does she become a real intellectual and social companion.
As a result, she is commonly considered an inferior being. The double standards of conduct which exist for men and women, of which most men do not have even an awareness, are clear enough proof of this fact.
It is this reactionary concept of women which is the root feeling which, further distorted by the army atmosphere and the brutality of warfare, produces the disgusting, regressive attitude of so many American soldiers toward European women.
 

M. Fenwick: The Brutalization of the American Soldier - VI (28 January 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

The Brutalization of the American Soldier

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Part VI
The Brutalization of the American Soldier
(28 January 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 4, 28 January 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Through normal capitalist nurturing, military training and the experience of combat, unhealthy attitudes were developed in an unpleasantly large number of soldiers in Europe. There is already considerable data available to indicate that: conditions may well be even worse in the Pacific, where the soldier comes in contact with people who are, after all, “only” natives.
Nevertheless, there were also not an inconsiderable number of men who for various reasons did not succumb to these unhealthy pressures. They were the ones who behaved with a decent respect for human dignity, gave clothing, food and blankets to the French, made toys for German children and treated German prisoners as human beings. They were a minority, however.
In battle, prodigies of valor and self-sacrifice were performed, actuated by no other motive than loyalty to one’s buddies. Such loyalty was the closest approximation to a genuine morale which was achieved in the United States Army.
 
The Black Man’s Burden
There was one large entire, section of the American Army, moreover, which must be exempted from the criticisms directed against the American forces in Europe. That section was the Negroes.
Negro troops were unquestionably more popular with continental Europeans than the whites were. Let the rabid Negro-haters in the South, who consider the Negro as a sort of semi-human, ponder that for a while ...
The reason is not far to seek: In France and Belgium THERE WAS NO SIGNIFICANT DISCRIMINATION OF ANY TYPE AGAINST THE NEGRO. Naturally enough, the Negro responded with dignity and consideration, tempered by a sympathetic understanding of the European, who was likewise being victimized by the white American soldier. Any feeling against the Negro as a race was generated by white Americans.
Will the anti-social attitudes created in the Army persist?
Unquestionably a residue, great or small, will always remain. Fortunately, however, the institution makes the man. The soldier who complained about the unions and strikers when he was in the Army becomes the loudest protester in his local union against the boss. A similar change takes place in other attitudes in the new environment. Whether that residue increases or decreases depends upon whether capitalism continues to decline, pulling down all moral standards with it, or whether a path can be broken to socialism.
 
The Socialist Army
Had the American soldier fought in a revolutionary, a socialist army, even that basic residue of undesirable attitudes would almost cease to exist. Naturally, we do not refer here to the Stalinist Red Army, which passed over Eastern Europe like a plague of locusts, laying waste the country and bringing hatred upon the very sound of the word “socialism." We refer to a Red Army such as existed in Russian under Lenin and Trotsky.
First of all, the soldier would be imbued with a flaming conviction in proletarian internationalism. The enemy enlisted man would be regarded not as a mortal enemy but as a victim of the capitalist system and its war juggernaut. Instead of the terrible shelling and bombing of enemy soldiers and civilians alike, which was a blow, not only “against capitalist civilization of the past, but against socialist civilization of the future” as well, the socialist army would use, as a supplement to arms, the most dangerous weapon of all: the socialist idea.
The effectiveness of this approach was demonstrated by our French comrades in a small way during the occupation. Trotskyist circles were formed within the German army who furnished our comrades with arms, official rubber stamps, etc., to pursue the struggle against the common enemy, capitalism. German soldiers on the streets of Paris, who were held up for their weapons, were always told for what purpose their weapons were being taken. Many German soldiers, despite the fact that they knew they would be harshly disciplined for losing their weapons, wished our comrades good luck on parting!
Nationalist hatreds crumble under that attack!
 
Democratizing the Army
Couple with that a democratic regime in the army, one in which there is no discrepancy between the professed aims of the war and conditions within the army—a condition, of course, which is possible only in the army of a workers’ state. Concretely, this would mean abolition of present privileges of the officers: separate messes, distinctive uniforms, exclusive clubs, pay differentials, the courts-martial system, orderlies, separate toilets, the use of the appellation “Sir,” the salute, etc.
The result would be a revolutionary élan, a standard of behavior, which was totally absent in the American Army but whose presence in the Red Army of Lenin and Trotsky’s time permitted it, despite a terrible war-weariness created during the imperialist war and a bad lack of arms and materiel, to achieve brilliant military successes. The Red Army men of those days, armed with a socialist program, came as liberators. They were hailed by the masses of the people, not reviled.
But even when a revolutionary army is waging it, war is, by its essence, a brutalizing process.
Marx’s great collaborator, Engels, with that serene, olympian understanding of the evolution of society which he possessed, once spoke of all life prior to socialism as pre-history. From the point of view of the individual, the human personality in our time develops largely unplanned, at the caprice of economic, political and social forces. Capitalist war, which accentuates all the debased aspects of modern life, cannot but contaminate the average human type.
With the advent of socialism, which means, in turn, the abolition of war, the human personality will develop in planned, unending harmonies such as are almost impossible even to conceive of now.
Only then, as Trotsky once magnificently put it, will we be able, without experiencing a certain embarrassment, to feel free to speak such words as truth, kindness, disinterested friendship, self-sacrifice and love.
 

M. Fenwick: The Brutalization of the American Soldier - IV (14 January 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

The Brutalization of the American Soldier

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Part IV
The Brutalization of the American Soldier
(14 January 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 2, 14 January 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The army is a reflection of the capitalist society which created it – but with this difference: that every vileness is magnified a hundredfold. For almost every civilized norm established by nineteenth and twentieth century capitalism the army substitutes a regressive opposite.
The indoctrination consciously given the soldier by the officer corps of the army, and the corrupting influence of army life itself, are responsible to a grave degree for the bad conduct of many American soldiers abroad.
Military training consists, on the one hand, of the physical hardening and technical preparation of the soldier, and on the other, of his psychological remolding. Progressive human altitudes, carefully built up over the years by parents, teachers, and the workday world are systematically dismembered and replaced by brutal formulas designed to lower the moral consciousness to a more primitive level.
The reason for this, of course, is simple: the capitalist class and its military hired hands, the general staff and the lower ranking officers want to develop as ferocious, and hence, as effective a soldier as is possible within the limits imposed by the present stage of economic, political and social development in the United States.
 
The Highest Good
“Men, you’re here to learn one thing, and only one thing – and that is: how to kill as many Germans and Japs as possible!” This statement is one (of the first pieces of wisdom revealed to the enlisted man in training. In one form or another, it is pounded home daily. Almost all methods of achieving the death of the enemy are considered fair, down to the foulest refinements of dirty fighting such as eye gouging, kicking in the crotch, and garrotting – methods which are of little practical utility but which are useful in establishing certain thought patterns.
To justify the killing of other men an intense propaganda based upon two simple concepts of enemy guilt is tirelessly worked over. These concepts are, first, the German and Japanese initiation of the war, and, secondly, the enemy atrocities. War and its accompanying atrocities, we have explained many times, are inherent in capitalism and will exist as long as capitalism exists. Of course, United States capitalism can hardly be expected to reveal this simple and devastating truth. To do so would be to undermine itself.
Nor does it. Through movies such as the Why We Fight series; “orientation” lectures; pamphlets like Army Talks; Yank magazine; and especially through the pages of Stars and Stripes (which, during the war, was an exceptionally coarse, brutal, and vicious sheet, aimed at extending the worst aspects of the personality) the guilt, of the Japanese and the Germans was ceaselessly repeated. In the case of the Germans, in particular, the guilt was placed, not upon the capitalists, their fascist servants, and the German military caste, where it obviously belongs, but upon the people as a whole.
The reverse of the heaping of hatred and contempt upon the enemy was the exaltation of the American forces which took place. The standard sequence ran as follows: “Remember, men, you’re in the best goddam regiment in the best goddam division in the best goddam army of the best goddam country of the world!” In airborne outfits, as in the Italian Arditi of World War I, this reactionary consciousness was exceptionally highly developed. This led to incidents such as occurred when large numbers of the 82nd Airborne division, for instance, rioted with Negroes in England before D-Day in 1944. Complaints by foreigners against members of airborne units were especially common.
 
“You’re Not Paid to Think!”
Initiative, and thinking in general, are carefully discouraged in training. Generally speaking, unthinking and unquestioning obedience is the ideal sought for. Extravagant penalties are given for such dangerous breaches of discipline as having too much oil on one’s rifle, failing to salute, having a button unbuttoned, etc. Penalties such as being forced to dig a six foot square and six foot deep hole, to cut the grass with a mess knife, or to scrub the barrack’s floor with a toothbrush are known to all GI’s.
For the capitalists, this stupid, maddening sort of discipline is the only one possible. No one, unless lie could be presented with an overwhelming social ideal, would voluntarily subject himself to the danger of death, maiming or wounding; absence from home; unbearable officers; poor pay; endless Waiting, waiting, waiting in lines; deadly monotony; absence of sexual pleasures; perpetual, irrational mix-ups; and hard work which compose army life.
The army was able to create a hatred of Hitlerism. But this was negative. It was never able to create in the minds of a majority of the soldiers a positive conviction in the allied cause. For the most part he was cynical. Hence the enforced, not self-imposed, character of the discipline.
 
Cloud-Cuckoo Land
Under these conditions a certain inversion of values takes place in the army. Though intelligent people, and persons endowed with an understanding of human values often achieve positions of responsibility, many are unwilling to make the necessary compromises with their ideals which are nearly always involved. More especially, the rigid, initiative-destroying “chain of command” creates a system where, as nowhere else in the United States, those who are stupid but obey orders, those who are sucks, those who are brutal, those who are loud-mouthed, those who are cowards, those who are able to give a quick response (whether it be right or wrong) and those who are ignorant and incompetent achieve such relative success so surely. Even good persons who, become officers or non-commissioned officers are victimized by the limitations of the system.
These are the men who are the virtually absolute masters of the rank and file soldier.
It is almost inevitable that the GI, like the Roman slave who vented the whole crushing hatred of his condition on the farm implements, the cattle, his wife, and his fellow slaves, behaves as he does in Europe.
Combat added the final straw.
 

M. Fenwick: The Brutalization of the American Soldier - V (21 January 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

The Brutalization of the American Soldier

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Part V
The Brutalization of the American Soldier
(21 January 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 3, 21 January 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

“Moore, go down into town and pick up my laundry, will you?”
“But, sir, they’re shelling the road and the town something awful.”
“GODDAMMIT, SOLDIER, I SAID GO DOWN AND GET THAT LAUNDRY!”
“Yes, sir.”
In that brief dialogue between my company commander and one of the men is revealed the inescapable fact which dwarfed all others in every waking moment (and so many of the sleeping ones) of every combat soldier. That fact was the constant consciousness of death, the cheapness of life, and how easily it could be dissipated
No soldier could remain in combat long without realizing that whether he lived or whether he died was only a statistical question, that, by and large, whether he was a good soldier or a bad one, whether he was brave or a coward, or whether he was religious or indifferent, didn’t really matter. It was a question only of time.
 
Alone
The combat soldier felt himself alone in his misery and his danger. Consequently, hatred and envy festered in almost every one of them. The hatred and envy were directed at almost everybody, especially those who were more fortunately situated than he. For line company men this included battalion headquarters men (“Those rear echelon bastards!”), quartermaster corps personnel, especially Negroes (“Why the hell ain’t they fighting?’’), strikers, or civilians in general.
The Germans, as the ostensible cause of the war and of its continuation (“Why the hell don’t they quit? They know they’re licked?”) inevitably bore the brunt of the hatred. For that reason brutal treatment of the Germans and looting was looked upon merely as what they justly deserved. Furthermore, the distinction between reducing a town to rubble by aircraft and artillery and doing a little quiet looting seemed the purest metaphysics to the average soldier.
The overflow of this feeling inevitably involved the French and Belgians, since they were felt to be partly responsible for originating the war. This is unquestionably a factor motivating the behavior of American soldiers in France and Belgium at the present time.
 
You Hardly Live Once
Violent living produces violent pleasures. In the presence of death everything seems fleeting. Pleasures are seized and exhausted immediately. Drinking is so heavy because there is so much to forget. Sexual satisfactions are quick and without human, loving overtones. There is not time.
Personal relations are on the most meagre basis. Too close personal attachments are avoided because your closest friend may be dead the next hour. In the face of an unendurable misery out of which there leads no visible path, cursing becomes the normal code of conversation.
Add to this the interminable fear and friendship.
Add the classes in military courtesy, close order drill, care and cleaning of equipment, five mile hikes, and the moronic, nagging discipline imposed by the officers during the occasional three- or four-day rest periods between commitments to battle.
Add the general lowering of the moral level which fascism has introduced into the world.
It does not take a prophet to foretell the results.
 
The Sum Total
Many soldiers, after having experienced all this, have now been assigned as occupation forces.
This means living in a god-forsaken, if intact, German village dating from the seventeenth or eighteenth centuries. Or it means living in a city amid the incalculable ruins which are modern Germany. It means shoving around a hostile, if apathetic people. It means, if one is at all sensitive, to be the daily witness of the most heart-rending poverty and human desolation.
Coupled with this, of course, is the barracks life, the daily bird-brained discipline from the officers, the monotonous and often insufficient food, the royal prerogatives of the officer caste, the frequent lack of proper clothing, the absence of entertainment, the laughable educational program, the loneliness, the lack of a harmonious sexual life, and the bleak and unknown future.
That all of this should result in base acts against foreign peoples was inevitable.
That it should take the form of demonstrations for redeployment home is equally understandable.
That it will assume more politically conscious forms in the future can be predicted with equal surety.
 

M. Fenwick: Politics of the International Working Class (January 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Politics of the International Working Class
(January 1946)

From The New International, Vol. 12 No. 1, January 1946, p. 12.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

La Lutte des Trotskystes Sous la Terreur Nazie
Parti Communiste Internationaliste, Paris, 1945; 30 pp.
Even for the returned soldier, who has seen that silent wasteland which capitalism has made of so much of Europe, it is difficult to comprehend the extent of the destruction which has been wrought. What centuries of work and heartbreak created, six years of capitalist war have reduced to piles of rubble among which old men and women poke and try to make a home.
Along with the material destruction and the human slaughter went a political and moral abasement unparalleled in modern times. Systematically brutalized by capitalist nationalist propaganda, whipped on by chauvinist socialist and communist parties, abandoned by Russia, which has long since cynically trampled under foot socialist internationalism, whole populations have reached new lows of political passivity and contempt for the human personality.
Only the most politically advanced and resolute representatives of the working class, the parties of the Fourth International, in spite of everything, struggled for the cause of socialist brotherhood in a world riven by nationalist hatred. The Trotskyist Struggle under the Nazi Terror, published by the International Communist Party, the French section of the Fourth International, is the proud record of the struggle for socialism by our French comrades during and after the occupation by the nazis.
 
The First Organ of the Resistance
Truth (La Vérité) which began to appear clandestinely in August, 1940, was the first newspaper of the resistance movement to be published. Up until June, 1941, when Russia was attacked by Germany, Humanité, the organ of the French CP, said almost nothing regarding the activities of the nazis in France. In fact, during this period the French CP was negotiating with Otto Abetz for the legal appearance of their paper. All in all, seventy-three issues of Truth were published during the occupation. In addition, several issues of Our Word (Unser Wort) and Worker and Soldier (Arbeiter und Soldat) were published in German and distributed in the barracks in editions of from 5,000-10,000.
In 1940, in action and through its press, the ICP, well before the other organizations of the resistance, began the initial task of aiding in the regroupment of the scattered forces of the working class. Self-defense groups were formed which drove out the fascists from the Youth Hostels, the last remaining free youth organization. The struggle against Hitler and Petain was begun under the slogan of the workers and peasants movement.
In 1941 and 1942 the French working class began to raise its head. Great strikes broke out in the North. The ICP
... supported and increased the militancy of the strikes; fought for a better rationing program; it was the first to call upon women workers to form housewives’ committees and to demonstrate and take into their own hands the rationing program in a fight against the black market and the Vichy officials who were the agents for German imperialism’s requisitioning program; it organized the struggle of the city workers in close alliance with the poor peasants.
But especially, alone among all the organizations of the resistance, alone among all the workers’ parties, the ICP did not separate the struggle against German fascism from the struggle against world capitalism.
 
Against the Stream
At the same time, the ICP conducted a struggle against low wages, the reactionary Charter of Labor, increased hours, and night work. It conducted agitation against racism and anti-semitism. It fought the conscription of laborers for work in Germany. It organized a service for the manufacture of false identity papers, which saved thousands of young workers from deportation and jail sentences. It organized support for the maquis, and individual members fought in its ranks. It called for and engaged in fraternization with German soldiers. In August, 1944, it launched the slogan of occupation of the factories and led several such movements.
Such was, in brief, the activity of the ICP during the occupation. That serious political errors were committed is incontestable, especially in the organization’s failure to appreciate the progressive r61e of the resistance movement and to participate in it as an organization. The negative aspects of their work we shall examine at some future time. What is important to note at the moment is that in spite of the chauvinist tide which engulfed France and in spite of the brutal repression by the Vichy and German police, our comrades remained constant to the great principles of Marxist internationalism.
Needless to say, once France was liberated, the bourgeoisie, assisted in its thought processes by the “suggestions” of the Russian embassy, rewarded the heroic struggle of the ICP with semi-legality: though the party is technically legal, public meetings of the organization have been broken up, the legal appearance of Truth is forbidden, and members of the ICP are subjected to recurrent arrests.
 
“The Barbarians Wished to Kill Them
They Have Rendered Them Immortal”
Our French comrades paid the full price for their struggle against the barbarians of German and French capital. They were among the first to fall under the nazi bullets, two of them having been shot in 1941 in the infamous Chateaubriand executions. Nearly thirty – no small number considering the size of the organization – were executed by the gestapo, died at Auschwitz, Dora, and other concentration camps, died during the insurrection of Paris in August 1944 or were killed by the Vichy militia. Scores of others were imprisoned in nazi jails or were deported to Germany as forced laborers.
To these brave men and women who came from all walks of life to serve the cause of the proletariat may be applied the eulogy paid Marcel Hic, an outstanding founder and leader of the French organization, who died in a German concentration camp in 1944:
For all who knew him, Marcel Hic will always remain the most admirable example of the revolutionary leader and the most magnificent proof that our revolutionary struggle is not only the sole solution for a humanity victimized by the misery of the capitalist agony, but is, also, a school for superior men.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (11 March 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(11 March 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 10, 11 March 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

General Bradley, administrator of Veterans Affairs, recently made public figures on veterans’ unemployment which are of more than passing interest.
There are 1,000,000 veterans unemployed. In addition, there are 1,500,000 veterans who are “not yet actively seeking work.” Further, Bradley revealed, “the unemployment rate for veterans in the labor force is about three times as high as the rate for the civilian labor force as a whole.”
The first point of interest is that despite the enormous strides made in industrial reconversion and despite the large market for consumers goods which exists, United States capitalism is proving unable to furnish work for all those who desire it. Already United States labor is beginning to feel the effects of the enlarged and improved plant equipment created during the war – improvements which were made at the expense of the necessary working force.
What is foreshadowed here is the permanent army of unemployed which characterizes capitalist production in the United States even during the best peace-time years.
 
The Veterans’ Problem
The second point of interest is that unemployment among veterans is three limes as great as among the civilian labor force as a whole. This is due not only to the competitive advantage enjoyed by non-veterans, who had access to the jobs sooner and had more experience, but to a conscious discrimination by many employers, who have found veterans “unstable” – that is to say have found the veterans the most uncompromising in pressing union demands against the employer.
The danger in this situation, and a danger which can become acute in the future, is that the “civilian” worker will be pitted against the worker who was a veteran.
Capital has already made more than one attempt to do this in an effort to divert hatred from the system of capitalism itself, which is the root cause of unemployment, to sections of the working class. Veteran is pitted against civilian worker, and the civilian against the veteran.
 
Seeds of Fascism
This problem existed in classic form in Germany following the last war. Out of the unemployed soldiers, and especially out of those who had been so disoriented by the war as to be unable to settle down to normal living, were combed elements who later helped constitute the fascist movement, which later destroyed the organized labor movement in Germany.
One of the dangers inherent in such a group of unemployed as the 1,500,000 veterans who “are not yet actively seeking work,” and many of whom arc psychologically demoralized, is that they will fall into this method of thinking.
 
What Must Be Done
That is why it is so important for the labor movement to take up and fight for a full program of employment for ALL workers, including the veterans. Labor can afford to overlook the problems of the veterans only at the price of creating a dangerous anti-labor force.
That is why civilian worker and veteran alike must fight for socialism, which alone can end unemployment and war, and the pitting of one worker against another.
 

M. Fenwick: The Veteran and Labor’s Struggle (25 March 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
The Veteran and Labor’s Struggle
(25 March 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 12, 25 March 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The returned veteran is proving a terrible disappointment to the capitalist class.
The capitalists had hoped that the veterans could be developed into a cohesive anti-labor body while they were serving in the armed forces. Through such shoddy journals as Stars and Stripes, and through other forms of indoctrination, the officer dupes of capital continually harped upon the high wages at home as contrasted with a soldier’s pay strikes, which were supposed to have created shortages at the front and slowed down demobilization, and the Earthly Paradise enjoyed by draft-deferred civilian workers.
Such agitation never really took hold, many soldiers in the end having come to believe that it was just one more example of army propaganda. Once home, the veteran was able to see exactly how much truth lay behind it.
With unimportant exceptions the veteran has placed himself in the forefront of recent strike struggles. In the recent G.E. strike in Philadelphia, for instance, it was the veterans who formed the spearhead of the anti-injunction demonstration, courageously breaking the police lines and battling with the mounted cops.
There, where the working class was meeting the blue-coated strikebreakers of the capitalists in pitched battle in the streets, the veterans cast back their reply to the slander of the military propagandists during the war, when all one could do was bite one’s tongue and wait.
 
Labor Must Take the Initiative
Veterans have assimilated themselves into the ranks of the organized labor movement with relatively little conscious intervention by labor itself. More must be done.
History has taught us that the labor movement can neglect the veterans only at,its ownperil. In Germany it was the dissatisfied veteran who formed one of the bases of the fascist movement which finally destroyed organized labor.
The union movement must fight for the progressive economic and political demands of the veterans, beginning with a reform of the GI Bill of Rights where it seeks, io make a scab of, a veteran by refusing him compensation wheh, he is on strike – up to and including a guaranteed annual living wage for all veterans who are unemployed.
Labor should initiate the formation of labor veterans’ posts, which will bring veterans into the closest possible relation with the organized labor movement. Similar close relations should be established with independent veterans’ organizations such as the Amvets, AVC, VLA, etc.
 
A Timely Warning
Gerald L.K. Smith, the fascist, has instructively indicated what the capitalists have in mind for the veteran. He and his associated human filth have been stumping about the country seeking to create an organization known as the Christian Veterans of America.
Basing themselves on well-known grievances of veterans, Smith’s men are seeking to give a yoyitg, militant base to their anti-labor, completely reactionary organization.
Labor should draw the proper moral and orient toward the veteran.
The veteran problem is not small, and it will persist. There were around 14,000,000 men and women in the armed forces of this country in the course of the war – or more than 27 per cent tof the estimated civilian labor force as of March, 1945. At this moment there are 2,500,000 veterans unemployed.
Further, the United States is embarking upon a program which envisages the direct or Indirect economic, political, and military domination of the globe. This means the maintenance of large permanent armed forces by United States capital. It means a continuing and increasing veterans’ problem. It means constant efforts by the bosses to pit the veteran against the organized worker in the unemployment and war crises which are inevitably coming.
The problems of the worker and the problems of the veteran flow from the identical, tainted source – capitalism. For it is capitalism which produces war. It is capitalism which produces unemployment and inhuman working conditions.
The bond between worker and veteran which has been welded on the picket line must be perpetuated by common action in the tempestuous days to come.
 

M. Fenwick: Look Who’s Talking! (4 March 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Look Who’s Talking!
(4 March 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. X No. 9, 4 March 1946, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Brigadier General H.C. Holdridge, after a comfortable army career of twenty-seven years, during which, so far as we know, he manifested no great alarm over the army system, recently groped his way out of retirement to say some very nasty things about the institution which sheltered him so well from the storms of a very chancy civilian life.
Speaking against compulsory military training before the House Military Affairs Committee he said that the army’s “most prominent characteristic is its medieval caste system which sets up unsurmountable barriers between the officer aristocracy and the enlisted man.”
As former commandant of the adjutant general’s school at Fort Washington, and thereby uniquely qualified to speak upon the infamous court martial system of which he was a not unimportant part, he said of the Army’s judicial system that “it is not a system of justice at all, but a system of military discipline and punishment carried over from the days of Gustavus Adolphus by way of the British Army.”
“The Army leadership,” he continued, really getting into his stride, “is class-conscious, ultra-conservative, absolutist,” and the Army itself offers “an excellent breeding ground for totalitarianism.”
 
Unriddling the Riddle
This is mighty strong language, especially when it is recognized that it comes from one of the officer aristocracy” and not from one of us anonymous army serial numbers, who, as is well known, were always complaining.
Many GI’s, while agreeing with Holdridge’s statement, must have wondered what provoked it. Passing over the subordinate personal reasons involved, which we are not in a position to know, and which are, in any event, geared more appropriately to the intellectual level obtaining in officers’ bars, the secret of Holdridge’s hair-raising statement is contained in one of the criticisms he made.
Speaking of the Army, regime, he said: “It promotes class consciousness and class cleavages.”
What distinguishes Holdridge from some of the vicious brutes like Patton is not only the possession of a few brains but a modest awareness of the political and social reality. He recognizes that United States capitalism in the ensuing period is going to be saddled with political commitments all over the globe which will ultimately have to be backed up by armed force.
He also recognizes that an army raised by compulsory methods and subjected to such a regime as now exists in the armed forces will, prove a very unreliable one for the carrying-out of United States capitalism’s plans for world political (and hence, military) domination. “It promotes class consciousness and class cleavages.”
The recent GI demonstrations all over the world, the similar activities in the British Army and the mutiny in the Indian Navy serve as storm signals for persons such as Holdridge.
Hence his proposal for reform of the Army, so as to make it a more reliable instrument of United States imperialism.
 
What Others Are Thinking
There are unquestionably other officers who, starting from the same recognition of the necessity of a large, stable United States Army, are drawing authoritarian conclusions. They desire a less democratic army and a less democratic government.
Both, however, support capitalism, its armies, and its wars.
Only socialism, which will destroy the economic roots of war, roots which are imbedded in the soil of capitalism itself, can bring peace.
Seen from that point of view, Holdridge’s remarks, however well-intentioned, however “radical,” are only a more sophisticated method for preserving United States capitalism with all its iniquities, in a difficult time for world capitalism.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – A Lesson in Politics (2 September 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
A Lesson in Politics
(2 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 35, 2 September 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

A GI dad and his four-year-old son talk over the state of the nation:
SONNY: Daddy, who’s General Omar N. Bradley?
DADDY: Why, he’s head of the Veterans Administration, son.
SONNY: How did he happen to get that job?
DADDY: He was said to be the soldiers’ general – the friend of the veteran.
SONNY: Is that why he was opposed to increasing disabled veterans’ pensions by 20 per cent?
DADDY: I don’t understand where you pick up such cynical remarks. Have you been reading that Labor Action again?
SONNY: But why was General Bradley opposed to increasing the pensions 20 per cent?
DADDY: He said it would be inflationary.
SONNY: Did General Bradley say that the entire $7,091,034,000 budget for the army next year was inflationary?
DADDY: If he did it wasn’t above a whisper, son.
SONNY: Do officers ever whisper, daddy?
DADDY: No, the closest they ever come to it is when they lower their voices to a yell.
SONNY: Then why DIDN’T he say it was inflationary?
DADDY: Because the army budget as a whole brings juicy profits to the capitalists. The pensions don’t.
SONNY: But the capitalists didn’t suffer in the war. It was the veterans who were killed and mutilated.
DADDY: That’s right. But don’t worry – the capitalists take care of their faithful servants. For instance, suppose I had lost a leg in the war. The government would pay me around $120 a month to live on.
SONNY: But you know you couldn’t support yourself, and mother and me, on that,
DADDY: That’s right. But not all veterans are that badly paid.
SONNY: How do you mean?
DADDY: Well, take General Bradley. A grateful government pays him $1,000 a month.
SONNY: But he HAS both legs!
DADDY: It’s plain to see you’re turning into a young troublemaker. Now get back to your volume 1 of Capital. Daddy wants to read about the Philadelphia policeman who is accused of robbing a dead man.
SONNY: What was the policeman’s name – Andrew J. May?
DADDY: No, but I must admit it’s a natural question for a person to ask. Now quiet, son – daddy’s busy.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (23 September 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(23 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 38, 23 September 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Near Salzburg in Austria is the small town of Lebenau. It lies peacefully amid some of the loveliest country in all Europe. It is a land where a person can gracefully and willingly grow old.
Located at Lebenau during the war was a “delinquent women’s institute.” In the final phases of the galloping disintegration of the nazi empire it was used as a way station for men being sent to Dachau. A friend of mine arrived there a few hours after its liberation.
The camp was filled with tottering skeletons weighing barely sixty pounds. Many, too weak to stand, lay in the filth and stench. There was no joy or sadness. There was hardly comprehension. Only total defeat.
*
A tattered Frenchman wandered up, smiling slightly.
“Seen the show?”
“No – where?”
“Over there.”
My friend looked. A crowd of the former inmates were milling around. He walked over. In the center of the crowd, lying on the ground, were two SS guards who had fled to the woods on the approach of the Americans. Hunger had driven them out again. The prisoners, men barely able to stand, were primitively beating them to death with bottles, stones, and clubs.
As the guards were writhing in death a Jewish prisoner knelt down beside one of them and sank his teeth into the guard’s neck. He sucked a mouthful of blood and carefully spat it out. Then he methodically continued.
“I’m sucking your blood,” he said, “just as you have sucked the blood of all the Jews of Europe.”
My friend turned around and threw up.
*
Only those who know nothing of the inferno of Europe will see in that incident anything “abnormal” or “perverse.” With bombs and shells, nationalism, forced labor, anti-Semitism, death, propaganda, Carthaginian ruins, starvation, crematoriums, wandering moral corruption, concentration camps, poverty, and mutilation – with all this capitalism has dragged down human life to new depths of debasement.
On no people did the war press harder than on the Jews. Of 15,000,000 Jews in the world 6,000,000 perished during the war. That epic of heartbreak has yet to be written; then we may understand a little. But there are hundreds of thousands of Jews who have felt on their bodies the tragedy of the past years.
That is why most Jews in Europe, consider that European civilization has ended. There is an almost universal and gnawing desperation to get out. For most, that means Palestine, which beckons like a promised land in a disordered world.
But Palestine remains only a mirage for the masses of the Jews. British imperialism, fearful of the joint action of Arabs and Jews alike against their common oppressor, is striving to prevent the entrance of Jews into Palestine. In doing so they are employing many of Hitler’s weapons against the Jews: concentration camps, deportations, the theory of collective guilt, curfews, courts-martial, and mass searches.
*
Anyone who has seen the newsreels taken of that bitter Calvary which now ends behind the barbed wire in Cyprus, and is not moved to pity, is a slave. Whoever is moved to pity but does not protest is forging his own chains.
A special obligation lies upon all non-Jews to defend a people who have contributed so much to human culture and who have suffered such desperate horrors for the last thirteen years, caught in the vortex of a sinking capitalism.
The doors of all the countries of the globe should be opened to Jewish immigration, but first and foremost,
Open Palestine to the Jews!
Open the portals of United States!
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (9 September 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(9 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 36, 9 September 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

General Omar Bradley who, according to the New York Times, “long since has established his reputation as one of the hardest-headed and sympathetic friends of the veteran” recently stated that abuses of the on-the-job-training provisions of the GI Bill of Rights constituted a national scandal.
There is a scandal, all right, but it does not center around those few individuals in the more comfortable income brackets who have sought to take advantage of the job-training program while holding down very cushy jobs. The scandal lies in the recent sandbagging given by Congress to some 300,000 veterans in the job-training program. The scandal lies in Bradley himself with his generalizations which he is so fond of making.
 
Congress Runs True to Form
Congress wasted no time in picking up the cue given by Bradley. After effortlessly passing the largest peacetime military budget in history, they raised their own salaries from $10,000 to $12,500 a year – plus $2,500 for expenses – and in the last days of the session got down to business and chopped one of the. reasonably good portions of the GI Bill of Rights to bits.
One week after the bill’s introduction into the Senate, and without a single hearing being held on it, the bill was on Truman's desk. Flashing That Old Prudential Smile, Truman quickly signed the bill and then, weighted down by the cares of office, Boss Pendergast’s boy took off for the fair Bermudas.
It didn’t take veterans long to find out what had been done to them.
 
Nothing’s Too Good for the Veterans
It would seem that NOTHING is almost too good for the veteran. Under the amended GI Bill of Rights, ceilings of $175 per month for single veterans and $200 a month for married ones are imposed for the period of training. This figure includes the government subsistence grant as well as the worker’s wages.
The Amalgamated Clothing Workers Union immediately pointed out that this “represents wage cuts ranging from $25 to $50 a month to trainees in the industry.” With the current inflated prices, the difficulties of living on the resulting income are obvious.
Further, subsistence grants will not be paid on programs which last longer than two years: The normal apprenticeship in most trades, of course, runs longer than two years. In the printing industry it is six.
Hardship has been accentuated because in many cases veterans have made commitments on the assumption that the original provisions of the bill were to prevail. Now they find themselves with homes partly bought, furniture unpaid for, babies begun – and a very unpromising future confronting them.
 
A Few Conclusions
If the revised rates for the on-the-job-training program continue it will mean the effective destruction of the program. If the new rates remain, the whole program will turn into a source of cheap labor for industry. The new rates will also serve as a depressant on current union scales.
The only real solution is union control of the on-the-job-training program, just as unions in many trades now control the conditions of apprenticeship.
It would not be difficult for any union to devise a program which would guarantee a living wage, provide for a full apprenticeship program, forestall veterans from being used as a pool of cheap labor, and prevent the veteran from being pitted against the organized worker.
If there is to be a better post-war world it will be hewn out by labor and not by the creatures of capital like Bradley, the United States Congress and ... what’s his name? – Truman.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – The Thieves Are Falling Out! (16 September 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
The Thieves Are Falling Out!
(16 September 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 37, 16 September 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

You can buy dynamite at the drug stores these days. It costs ten cents. All you do is ask for Look magazine. The dynamite is inside!
It’s contained in a series of articles by Elliott Roosevelt, the son of the late president, condensed from his forthcoming book, As He Saw It. Buy a copy of the magazine. You’ll never get dynamite cheaper.
Read part two of the series, called Quarrels at Casablanca and published in the September 17th issue of the magazine.
*
Here, told by an eyewitness who was in an exceptional position to know, is a partial glance into the reality which lay behind the holy crusade against fascism. Every line virtually shrieks: “Remember what we told you four years ago? It was a lie! It was all a lie!” You can almost hear the cynical laughter ringing through the text.
What, according to President Roosevelt, caused the war? “The thing is,” he said, “the colonial system means war. Exploit the resources of an India, a Burma, a Java – take all the wealth out of those countries but never put anything back into them – and all you’re doing is storing up the trouble that leads to war.”
But what of Germany whose aggression, we were once told, set off the carnage? There is literally not a syllable on the subject in the article!
Roosevelt is quoted further: “Don’t think for a minute that Americans would be dying in the Pacific tonight if it hadn’t been for the shortsighted greed of the French and the British and the Dutch!”
And the Japanese? Pearl Harbor? Again – not a syllable!
 

History Is Rewritten
Those statements, recounted by Roosevelt’s son without the slightest tremor, as if they were common knowledge, are genuine stunners. For what is being said is that the war was caused by England, France, and Holland. And we fought on their side! That wasn’t what we were once told!
France, to whose Liberté, Egalité, and Fraternité so many ringing references used to be made, is not spared the lash. “Father remarked,” says Elliott Roosevelt, “on how British and French financiers had dredged riches out of colonies ....” He continued later, “How do they belong to France? Why does Morocco, inhabited by Moroccans, belong to France? By what logic and custom and historical rule?”
Those are brutal words – easily classifiable as German propaganda five years ago.
Churchill and de Gaulle, but yesterday held up to us as the finest representatives of their times, are portrayed as scoundrels. Churchill is described as a man constantly conniving to get U.S. arms to rescue the whole floundering imperialist British empire. “... de Gaulle,” Roosevelt bluntly remarked, “is out to achieve one-man government in France. I can’t imagine a man I would distrust more.”
We have a candidate ...
 

Where Does the Truth Lie?
Was the war caused by Germany, Italy and Japan as was so furiously beaten into our brains but a few months ago? No, that was a lie, as we so often explained. Was it caused, then, by England, France, and Holland, as we are now so blithely informed? No, that is a lie too.
War is caused by capitalism – German, Japanese, Italian, English, French, Dutch, and American capitalism alike. For all must expand or die. And expansion means war. That is the law.
Then what is the meaning of this sudden attack upon England and France? Elliott Roosevelt reveals that, too:
“Father remarked on how British and French financiers had dredged riches out of colonies and raised the question of possible oil deposits in Morocco. He mentioned that the Sultan might engage firms – American firms – to carry out a development program ...”
And later Roosevelt, saying good-bye to his son said:
“This time I’ve tried to make it clear to Winston that while we’re their allies, they must never get the idea that we’re in this war just to help them hang onto archaic, medieval empire ideas. I hope they realize that we’re not going to sit by and watch their system stultify the growth of every country in Asia and half of Europe. Good-bye, son.”
And “good-bye, British Empire,” he might have added. That is what Roosevelt was saying. For through him United States capitalism was notifying England, its closest capitalist rival, that it intended to assume the undisputed mastery of all the countries of the globe.
What Roosevelt said about England and France is quite true. Marxists have been saying it and much more for fifty years. But to say it during the war was almost treason. U.S. capitalism then needed the aid of these countries to defeat the major enemies, Germany and Japan.
With the Axis powers now prostrate, American capital is once again licking its chops and turning greedy eyes on England and France and their colonies. What Roosevelt and his son are saying here is that the day of England and France as independent powers is rapidly coming to a close. They are to be subjugated to U.S. imperialism in its drive toward world mastery just as surely as Germany subjugated most of Europe when it made its bid.
What the Look article seeks to do in its revelations is to prepare the moral basis for the step.
In doing so it says that the last war was not what we were told it was at the time, but a colossal swindle, a swindle whose stakes were the dearest in the world – human lives.
Who dares believe what they say today any more than what they said five years ago?
They lied then. They lie now.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (5 August 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(5 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 31, 5 August 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The article in the paper was plain enough. It read:
“FRANKFORT, July 12 – (AP) – Ninety-six
American soldiers were arrested by U.S. Third Army military police
during the last six days for public petting with German frauleins, it
was announced today.
”The arrests were made following General Joseph T.
McNarney’s crackdown on displays of affection.”
What a madhouse this world of capitalism is! For participating
in the basic and humanizing relation existing between man and woman
anonymous G.I.’s are arrested and fined, or “turned over
to their commanding officers for disciplinary action.” For
having helped organize the destruction of a continent and the death
and mutilation of millions of both Germans and Americans General
Eisenhower is enthroned as a national hero!
And thrice-mad seems a world in which the incident can pass
without even rippling the public conscience.
*
I cannot help thinking of Bavaria a year ago. The war had just
ended. The six-year agony was over. Out of that nightmare of air
raids, constant fear and despair, of husbands or lovers dead or
prisoners in Russia – and good as dead, hunger, destruction,
and a bleak future, German women began to piece together their lives.
It would have been in opposition to all laws of nature had these
women and lonely American soldiers not sought each other out. To see
couples laughing together in the bars, or strolling through the green
shade of the benches in the parks was to reassure oneself that
beneath the fierce nationalistic propaganda of both the nazis and the
American government the desire of the common people of the earth for
peace and friendship would reassert itself.
 
The Army’s Reply
The response of American officers was typical. Normal human
relations with the population were prohibited or discouraged. As a
result, relations between the sexes sank to the level of intrigue or
shabby relations from which all love and companionship soon were
driven.
This policy, of course, was not a product of the arrogance,
petty meanness, and ignorance which characterize the officer caste.
It was part of the plan of United States capital for keeping Germany
in the status of a subject nation powerless to compete with the
United States on the world market.
But every noble political abstraction in Washington ends in most
human consequences in Germany. The result is the punishment of
enlisted men for the impudence of desiring a woman’s warmth,
the commercializing of human relations, the suicides of German women
whose lovers have been redeployed to the United States, and the
driving out of Germany of men who wish to take German women as wives.
There is the world from which hate was to be abolished!
 
The Working Class’ Answer
In the midst of the national hatreds which seethe in Europe the
working class, however, is slowly, very slowly, re-establishing the
great principles of international solidarity.
In Belgium, German soldier slave labor is used to work the coal
mines; Despite despicable threats upon their lives these German
workers recently struck in solidarity with Belgian miners who were
protesting horrible working conditions which produced a disaster in
which many German and Belgian workers were killed. Belgian workers in
turn later demonstrated against burying the German victims separately
in paupers’ graves.
In that courageous action lies the answer to the capitalist
program of hatred in perpetuity in which they would like to drown
every human decency doggedly established by mankind in its long
ascent from primeval darkness.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – The Rich Have Troubles Too (26 August 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
The Rich Have Troubles Too
(26 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 34, 26 August 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

We revolutionary socialists are often accused of being biased, of
being unable to see the capitalist’s point of view. After all,
we are often informed, the capitalists have their troubles too. And,
really – they do.
If you are one of those soldiers or sailors who went through the
recent war and, having seen what nightmarish cascades of rubble so
much of Europe and the Far East were reduced to, break out in a sweat
at night when you think of the horrors of an atomic war – don’t
worry. The capitalists are sweating too.
Of course they are not worrying about quite the same thing as
you are. They have accepted the war itself. What they are mulling
over is another problem which the underwater atom bomb test at Bikini
revealed.
What is worrying them is the deadly radioactivity which is induced
in the sea water, in the atomic cloud, and on the ships by the
explosion.
 

The Burning Problem
“... A new and difficult kind of morale must be
built up to combat the invisible killer, radioactivity,” says
Hanson W. Baldwin in the New York Times.
“Crews doomed to slow death from exposure to
lethal radioactivity are nevertheless able the first few days after
exposure to continue normal duties. The seamen of tomorrow must be
prepared to accept radioactivity as part of the hazards of their
living and be ready to work and fight and save their ship even though
they know they are doomed to slow death.”
So you see it’s not all skittles and beer for the
capitalists, either.
*
The interesting problem of the creation of “a new and
difficult kind of morale” we leave to the generals, the
admirals, and the Hanson W. Baldwins who have so cold-bloodedly
revealed the type of world they are building for us and our children.
Our job is just as cold-bloodedly to create a socialist morale
which will bring a final end to war and change radioactivity from an
atomic pestilence devastating whole peoples to the greatest
liberating force which mankind has yet been able to apply to nature.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (12 August 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(12 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 32, 12 August 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

General Omar N. Bradley, known far and wide by his public
relations office, his relatives and his Ralph Ingersoll, editor of
PM, as “the soldier’s general,” last Memorial Day
chose to enlighten a world in which only a few, alas, can be generals
and so many of us, not smart like General Bradley, must be content to
remain the eternal enlisted man.
“By this time,” he said, “we
should have learned that no one is richer by war. All are poorer
including the victors.”
Such a statement, half insolence and half idiocy, enlisted men
have long since learned to expect from army officers, and General
Bradley may even believe it himself. But no one else is thereby
obligated to believe it, especially since the breaking of the Garsson
case.
“All are poorer, including the victors.” That is a
lie. Only the working class is poorer because of the war. For the
capitalist class the war years were golden ones. The career even of
Murray Garsson, who is, it should be remembered, actually a nobody
among the real rulers of this country – the capitalists –
proves it.
 
Up from Slavery
Beginning only with a non-existent firm’s letterhead and an
unshakable faith in the corruptibility of congressmen, Garsson
quickly ran this into a chain of firms which handled $78,000,000 in
war contracts. Garsson, a former associate of the gangster Dutch
Schultz, did not invest a cent of his own money. The government
financed everything.
Associated with Garsson in his patriotic enterprise were such
typical characters as Benjamin F. Fields, an ex-convict. With such
persons involved, it is not surprising that the business was
conducted on a moral level considerably lower than those noble ideals
for which the war was supposedly fought.
Andrew J. May, chairman, no less, of the House Military Affairs
Committee, accepted bribes from the Garsson firm for “favors”
he was able to extend it.
Albert W. Jacobson, a legal adviser in the Chemical Warfare
Service, who handled contract approving, was paid $20,000 a year by
the Garsson company.
Expensive Christmas gifts were given to assorted generals and
other officers in the Chemical Warfare Service who were in a position
to aid the profit-making activities of the Garssons.
May intervened personally with General Eisenhower when Garsson’s
son, a captain in the Chemical Warfare Service, was
court-martialed.
 
The Real Situation
In short, the Garssons and their political and military friends,
like the capitalist class as a whole, of which they are a small part,
emerged from the war richer than ever before.
They should have, for World War II was their war. It was fought
primarily to contest the world trade market menaced by the expansion
of German and Japanese capitalism.
“All are poorer ...”? No, only the working class of
all countries is poorer. For it was they who were killed and
mutilated in the war, it was they who worked long hours in the shops,
it is they who now are confronted with inflation, poverty,
destruction of their homeland, and the prospect of an atomic war.
The Garssons, their capitalist betters, and their soldiers like
you, General Bradley, emerged from the war quite satisfied.
You will pardon us if we don’t believe you.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (19 August 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(19 August 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 33, 19 August 1946, p. 2.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Maj. Gen. Alden H. Waitt
Chief, Chemical Warfare Service
U.S.
Army
Dear General Waitt:
To tell the truth – and don’t let that strange word
“truth” frighten you, dear general! – I never
expected to find myself writing to an officer in the U.S. Army.
After all, as a former pfc I have a certain self-respect to
maintain, especially since it turns out that you and other
untouchables who had the power of life and death over us in the
recent war, seem to have been pretty chummy with Murray Garsson, the
war profiteer, who numbered among his friends ex-convicts and more
amateur scoundrels like representative May, chairman of the House
Military Affairs Committee.
But you seem so dishonestly confused and ignorant on the career of
the 4.2 mortar which was supposed to be your specialty that I cannot
resist writing. Of course, to do you justice, you may be quite
honestly confused or ignorant. Those qualities, in fact, along
with several other nasty characteristics, seem to be an occupational
disease with army officers. But in either case a letter is in
order.
 
To Refresh Your Memory
One of the facts you seem especially vogue on is the number of men
killed by premature explosions of defective 4.2 shells. I was not
with a chemical mortar battalion during the war, I was with the
infantry. But out of my limited experience I want to give you a few
names, a date, and a place, in order to refresh that conveniently
poor memory of yours.
On September 15, 1944, the second battalion of the 16th
infantry was on the outskirts of Brand, Germany. Its attack was being
supported by the 81th chemical battalion. (Its field code name was
Camel White.) In the midst of the heavy firing a 4.2 shell exploded
prematurely, killing one enlisted man and wounding seven others.
I remember the incident as if it were yesterday, dear General
Waitt, because of a little act of bravery and self-sacrifice which
occurred and which must be so incomprehensible to a person like you.
One of the wounded men who was being loaded on a jeep-ambulance rose
up on his elbow on the stretcher and said, “Take care of the
other group first. They’re wounded worse than I am.”
 
A Few Reflections
I have often thought of those men who died or were wounded in that
pleasant field in Germany on a sunny September afternoon. Do you know
what conclusion I’ve come to? Those men were killed or wounded
through their own negligence. They just weren’t very smart.
Because if they had been smart they would have chosen rich parents
like Murray Garsson, who manufactured those same 4.2 mortars. Then,
like Captain Joseph Garsson, his son, they would have had friends
like Andrew May, chairman of the House Military Affairs Committee,
who would have seen that they were “protected and taken care
of” while they were in the army – especially from those
notoriously treacherous 4.2 mortars.
And if they had been court-martialed they would have had you to
intervene directly with General Eisenhower, as you did for Captain
Garsson, carrying a letter from representative May asking for a
special investigation because Captain Garsson’s father “is
one of my warm personal friends.”
So that’s why I always come back to the same conclusion:
those men who died or were wounded weren’t smart. They chose
the wrong parents. They should have chosen parents like the Garssons,
with their hired fixers in Congress, their army lickspittles like
you, their gilded women, their buddies from the underworld, and their
Wall Street friends – all of whom “took care” of
themselves very well during the war.
Yes, they “took care” of themselves very well –
and far better than those men of the 87th chemical battalion lying
dead and wounded in a now forgotten field in Germany two years ago
were able to.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – Slave Labor ... (7 October 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
Slave Labor ...
(7 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 40, 7 October 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

That eighty years after the abolition of slavery in the South slave labor should reappear in the western world is an index not only of the sapping of moral values which has taken place since 1914 but of the economic disintegration which European capitalism in particular is experiencing.
The conscription of slave labor in our times, of course, was begun by the Stalinists in Russia who organized vast prison camps in the north under the control of the NKVD. Here millions of Russians labored and died under the most primitive conditions, felling timber, digging canals, and doing other exceptionally arduous work. The Nazis followed the same pattern, first employing Germans and then, as Europe fell beneath their armies, nearly all the peoples of Europe.
These inhuman practices called forth the condemnation of the allied powers during the war, who spoke with professional horror of the forced labor system. But, it turns out, the English government is not averse to the use of such labor either. One out of four farm workers in Great Britain, for instance, is now a prisoner of war. In other words, twenty-five per cent of English farm workers are slaves.
*
That despite “repeated questions in Parliament just before the current summer recess” no steps have been taken to send home these men who are suffering for the guilt of their untouched capitalist masters in Germany, indicates that these PW’s supply a definite economic need.
Under “normal” capitalist conditions to employ PW’s would be unprofitable. To do so would only increase the army of unemployed which characterizes capitalism. It would thereby provoke undesirable clashes between labor and capital over the issue. Because of lower wage rates the market for goods would be curtailed. Further, slaves, having little stake in the job, are notoriously poor workmen.
That is under “normal” conditions.
But today conditions are far from normal. First, because of deaths in the war, a large army stationed all over the world, a reduction in hours worked in comparison with the war years, and the withdrawal of women from industry there is a shortage of workers. This is especially acute in the agricultural areas. Because of the less desirable working conditions in these areas workers tend to migrate to the cities. Capping all this is a large backlog of demand for civilian goods difficult to meet because of an adverse position in the foreign trade market in relation to the United States, a large, parasitic army and navy, and relatively antiquated plant equipment.
Under these conditions the employment of PW’s becomes economically feasible. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that the government is intending to increase the number of PW’s in farming until they account for one-third of the farm labor force.
The United States government is a partner to this crime. Prisoners supposedly being sent home from the United States have been retained in England and put to work. They have been informed that they will spend one to two more years in England!
*
Thus some half-million Germans find themselves virtual slaves in England reconstructing houses and working on farms at twenty-five cents a week. This silent chorus of 500,000 men forms a suitable background for the dapper Sir Hartley Showcross at Nuremberg as he thunders against Sauckel, the former organizer of the German slave labor corps.
Capitalism in its decline is poisoning the world’s conscience. Accompanying the world economic disintegration is both an inevitable and a calculated progressive moral anesthesia. What once could electrify the best men and women of a generation – a czarist pogrom, an Amritsar, the anti-socialist laws of Bismarck, chattel slavery – now provokes only a shrug of the shoulders. The atomic war is being prepared before our eyes. Lacking a politicalized working class to inform it, mankind stumbles toward a new cataclysm.
Socialism represents the economic, and hence the moral, salvation of our times. Every socialist, every worker who is beginning to recognize that capitalism is the common enemy, and every veteran who is beginning to realize that the German GI was as helpless a victim of the capitalist military machine as he was himself, is obligated to defend the German PW’s.
They who were the first victims of fascism, who served in the military machine so long, and whose world is bounded by a few faded photographs, fading memories, and an occasional letter out of a shattered homeland should be allowed to return home.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits (14 October 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
(14 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 41, 14 October 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The Negro Digest recently conducted a poll among Negroes on the question, “Should Negroes support compulsory army training?” The poll, taken in April of this year, showed an overwhelmingly negative vote. The percentage breakdown by geographical areas was as follows:



 


Yes


No


Undecided




North


4


93


  3




West


5


90


  5




South


8


82


10



The almost total opposition to compulsory military training is very impressive. It is all the more indicative when contrasted with polls taken among the general population, where a good two-thirds support compulsory military training. Further, Negro opposition has increased since October 1945, when a similar poll was taken.
The figures are also interesting in showing the higher level of consciousness existing in northern Negroes in contrast to those of the South, where opposition to military training is eleven per cent less than in the North.
 
Reasons for Negro Opposition
The reason for the opposition to military training is simple. It lies in the army policy of Jim Crow, which during the war reached the absolute but logical madness of Jim Crow blood plasma.
The end of the war did not mean the end of Jim Crow. It merely took other and additional forms. Recently, at a time when selective service pools were running low, it was announced that no more Negro enlistments would be accepted. Further, Negroes will no longer be sent to Europe – only to the South Pacific.
The reason for barring Negroes from the ETO is obvious. The Negro quickly learned in Europe that discrimination as practiced in the United States was virtually non-existent. That is why many Negro troops took their discharges in Europe to settle there. Europe puts ideas into Negroes heads – strange ideas about equality.
For that reason the army brass considers the South Pacific a better place for them. The caste lines with native colored populations have been sharply drawn there. Further, life on some Godforsaken atoll is rude and uncivilized compared to life even in devastated Europe. Hence the assignment of Negroes to the more primitive areas of the world.
It is not difficult to see why Negroes do not take seriously the present airy chatter about democratizing the army.
*
Why Negroes Enlist in the Army
If this is so, then why are Negroes attempting to join or rejoin the army in such large numbers? For it is a fact that the re-enlistment rate is proportionately higher than among whites. Negroes constitute fourteen per cent of all persons who, following the war, elected to remain in the army.
Some, of course, hoped to get. to Europe, where despite the insane discipline of the army and the infuriating Jim Crow, a Negro can more nearly hold up his head like a human being. But the desire to enlist persists even after the chance to go to Europe has disappeared.
The main motive for joining is an economic one – as it is among an increasing number of white troops. With the new pay schedules which prevail, the dependency allotments, and the army food, a Negro and his dependents can very often live better than in civil life. This is especially true of the depressed Southern Negro whose miserable job opportunities are even worse than those of the Northern Negro.
There are few worse indictments of the evils of life under capitalism than that a man should join the army to escape them.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – War Guilt of Military Leaders (28 October 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
War Guilt of Military Leaders
(28 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 43, 28 October 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

When the Nuremberg trial verdicts were announced recently, General Eisenhower stated that he was “a little astonished” that the sentence of death was imposed upon field marshal Keitel, the former chief of the German high command. “I was surprised,” he said, “that they found it so easy to convict a military man. I thought the military would provide a special problem for the tribunal.”
Cheered by the tribunal’s ruling that the German general staff and the high command were not criminal organizations, Colonel D.F. Fritzsche, deputy American intelligence chief in Europe, more fully expressed the idea behind Eisenhower’s statement.
“It is very encouraging to any staff officer,” he fluted, “that the court has not set a precedent under which he might some day be prosecuted just for doing his job in helping plan the military defense of his country. This phase of the trial affects all members of the military profession in all countries who might be on the losing side some time and be prosecuted for it.”
Now this is a really remarkable statement. Among other things – it says in passing – as befits a mere trifle! – that the trial was a frame-up and that the defendants were prosecuted not for waging aggressive war but for being on the losing side. We shall return to this subject in the future. It is an important one. But what interests us now is the concept enunciated here: that the military bear no responsibility in waging modern war, that the staff officer is “just doing his job.”
*
Just what is the role of the staff officer, what is his responsibility?
In one sense the staff grade officer in all countries is only a hired hand of the capitalist class, whose inescapable quest for markets, raw materials and peoples to exploit inevitably leads to war. The capitalist is the real criminal. The economic needs of the capitalists determine basic policy, which is carried out by the military.
The politicians are likewise merely the hired hands of the capitalists, doing their basic bidding. This applies to a Churchill as well as to a Goering. In terms of actual economic weight in a country they are, more often than not, insignificant.
The military and political leaders of a country are specialists hired by the capitalist class as a whole (much as the individual capitalist may hire a time-study man or engineer to run his factory efficiently) to prosecute the capitalists’ internal and foreign policies most effectively. But they share the guilt of the capitalist class just as certainly as Al Capone’s triggermen shared his.
Though the officer caste is essentially the servant of a country’s ruling class it often has great independent power. The. military has always been prominent in governmental affairs. One has only to recall such diverse names as Napoleon, Frederick the Great, or Gustavus Adolphus to verify that fact. In World War II there was not ah important conference held, such as at Teheran, Casablanca, or Potsdam, without the presence and active participation of the military.
*
The military assumes a prominent role especially in times of crisis, when class tensions become sharp. Kapp, Ludendorff, and Goering in Germany; de Gaulle, Darlan, and Petain in France; the regime of the colonels in Poland; Franco in Spain; Badoglio in Italy; Batista in Cuba; Chiang Kai-shek in China – all witness the responsibility of the military in the events of our time.
The tendency for military men to intervene more and more in the economic and political life of the United States is very pronounced today. Unlike following World War I the generals have not disappeared into the Sargasso Sea of civilian life. They form important sections of the governing personnel of the country.
One has only to recall the pro-consul role being placed by MacArthur in Japan, the intervention of Marshall in Chinese affairs, the power exercised by Clay in Germany, or the constant trips of Eisenhower throughout the world cementing military and political ties to recognize this fact.
The increased specific gravity of military personnel on the home front – now largely in preparation for war against Russia – is also manifest. Their influence is constantly being exerted everywhere. A casual reading of the paper is enough to show that.
*
No, whatever persons like Eisenhower may care to make us believe, the higher echelon officers are doing more than just a job. They are an integral part of the capitalist war machine and, along with the capitalists and their political servants, bear their share of the responsibility for the horrors of modern warfare.
Just as he was to be hanged at Nuremberg Julius Streicher said, “The Bolsheviks will hang you one day.” We can safely let Colonel Fritzsche and his associates among the Allies worry about the legal justification which the trials may give the Russians for such an action.
The socialist movement has long since rendered its verdict on all war makers, German, Russian, English, and American alike:
They’re all guilty.
 

M. Fenwick: Off Limits – A Polish Problem – in England (21 October 1946)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
Off Limits
A Polish Problem – in England
(21 October 1946)

From Labor Action, Vol. 10 No. 42, 21 October 1946, p. 4.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Never in modern times has a numbed world witnessed such mass migrations of human beings as took place during World War II. They continue today. Faithfully reflecting the magnitude of imperialist ambitions and operations, millions upon millions of persons have been herded about Europe like cattle, at the whim of military and political fortune.
Torn away from their homes, their work, their friends, their memories, jammed in ships’ holds, loading down freight trains inside and out, these exiles with sacks on their backs symbolize the fate of huge masses of people of the old world.
Small states have particularly suffered in the warfare of the big powers. None have suffered more than Poland. Victim of numerous partitions in the past, object of almost constant foreign oppression, traditional battleground of East and West, Poland was an early casualty in World War II.
The face of our times can seldom be more clearly seen than in the odyssey of the Polish troops who fought in the English army during the war and are now stationed in England. To trace their journey will not only refresh our minds on recent history but will illuminate some dark corners of current European events as well.
*
The story begins in 1939, when, as the London Economist accurately summarizes:
“... Russia in agreement with Germany overran and annexed to the existing Ukrainian and Byelorussian Soviet Republics slightly over half of the territory of pre-war Poland with a population of 13 millions, of whom about a third were ‘racial’ Poles (momentarily increased by great numbers of refugees fleeing before the Germans) from western Poland ... The ‘racial’ Poles, except for a small number of Communists, regarded both Russian and German invaders alike as national enemies repeating the former partitions of their country.”
There was, naturally, widespread opposition to Russian rule. The bureaucracy responded brutally and typically by deporting an estimated one to two million persons to arctic Russia, central Asia and Siberia. Here they were employed under the most excruciating conditions as slave laborers in projects such as the one at Moldiak, where 10,000 persons grubbed in the gold mines. The death rate was twenty per cent.
The Polish soldiers now in England, the Economist points out, “have either themselves suffered in the mass deportations from Soviet-occupied Poland in 1939–41 (and emerged from the Soviet Union after being ‘amnestied’ under the terms of the short-lived Stalin-Sikorski Pact, when Hitler attacked Russia) or have had their families deported (for in 1939–41 the families of Poles who escaped abroad to fight against Germany with the French and British forces were automatically listed as ‘anti-Soviet elements’) ...”
*
Under these conditions it is not surprising that the Polish troops in England have strongly resisted efforts to repatriate them. Their resistance, in a land where opinions can largely be freely voiced, also goes a long way toward explaining the difficulties which the Stalinists are meeting in Poland in consolidating their regime. These troops symbolize the active movement for national liberation which exists in Poland and whose substantial presence even the recent rigged referendum could not hide.
Miserably paid, lacking civil rights, victimized by the Stalinist pressure for the dissolution of the Polish Resettlement Corps, which was allegedly designed to facilitate his integration into civil life, the Polish soldier is caught in the cross-current negotiations for his settlement in the dominions and South America, domestic opposition to his remaining in England, demands for his incorporation into a depleted manpower pool, and covert desires to retain him in a fighting unit for future operations on the continent. He remains the plaything of imperialist politics.
He should be granted full citizenship rights in England and the right to emigrate to wherever he pleases. In his interest all labor organizations should demand the withdrawal of Russian troops from Poland. The Polish people should be permitted to decide their own destiny.
 

M. Fenwick: The War and Priorities (December 1941)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
The War and Priorities
(December 1941)

From The New International, Vol. VII No. 11, December 1941, pp. 295–9.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

AMID THE FLESHLY DELIGHTS of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York City, God was enthusiastically chosen as an honorary member of the National Association of Manufacturers at its 1941 convention held in December. God was able to make the grade after all these years because, in the words of Dr. George B. Cutten, president of Colgate University, who made the proposal, “God is a reactionary.” If any one has any doubts as to the qualifications of the learned Dr. Cutten to determine the class sympathies of the Lord, no one, certainly, can question the credentials of Tom Girdler, who introduced Dr. Cutten to the members of the convention.
(Note: In view of the current drive for the seven day work week, it is to be doubted if God is the type of person the capitalist class wants as an honorary member of the National Association of Manufacturers. The reader may perhaps recall what Paul Lafargue once pointed out – namely, that God himself worked for only six days creating the earth and then rested for all eternity!)
More than one pointed lesson could be drawn from this small but brazen incident in the activity of the capitalist class. To invest one’s mercenary activities with the aura of divine concurrence, even if, as in this case, it looks suspiciously as if God had been dragooned into the job, is a time-hallowed practice. Viewed broadly, however, the incident is merely a part of the mobilization of the mind of the capitalist class for the prosecution of the war, and therefore, as a corollary, the similar mobilization of the mind of the working class.
Underlying, and determining, the character of this very necessary “head-fixing,” as the old socialists in the United States used to put it, goes the basic material necessity of converting the “peacetime” economy of the United States into a total war economy. This conversion had begun, if in a temporizing fashion, prior to the outbreak of open hostilities. With the opening of the war in the Pacific, however, and the accompanying revelation of the strength of United States imperialism as consisting of not too much material and a great deal of incompetency and braggadocio, the tempo of conversion will accelerate tremendously.
Naturally, this change-over will produce severe dislocations in the economic structure of the country. When one of the business men’s confidential letter services predicts “economic dislocations as yet undreamed of,” it is stating nothing but an obvious truth.
The conversion will complete the victory of the colossus of finance capital over the small business man. The armaments industry will dominate the whole industrial horizon. Consumers’ industries will be operating on an “iron rations” basis whose level will be determined largely by the militancy of the working class in resisting the lowering of its standard of living.
It is practically certain, likewise, that taking into account the manpower necessary to oppose the Axis powers, and the production workers needed to equip such a force, unemployment will virtually reach zero under the conditions of a total war economy. Such a condition obtains in England today, where there is, in fact, a shortage of labor.
The qualified benefits of this prospect, however, lie entirely in the future. Confronting the working class today is not only the unemployment typical of capitalism in even the best of times but a phenomenon new to the United States known as “priorities unemployment.”
Priorities unemployment is not, however, uniquely a property of that best of all possible capitalisms which exists in the United States. It occurs whenever there is a sudden acceleration in the conversion of a “peacetime” into a war economy. England, for instance, felt its effects at the beginning of the intensification of the war effort in September, 1939. Of this period the magazine United States News recently said: “In England this transition lasted for a number of months and brought with it a good deal of hardship, both for individuals and for industries.”
The same magazine added: “There is nothing to suggest that the transition in the United States will be less painful or less disruptive than in England. High officials are warning that it may be more so, because fewer plans have been made to cushion the shock.” Such has proved to be the case. And it can be expected that in the near future the acuteness of priorities unemployment will be accentuated. The reason for this lies in the industrial dislocations which will be caused by the stepping up of armaments production as a result of the opening up of the war in the Pacific.
 
The Origin of Priorities Unemployment
What is priorities unemployment? It may be defined as a more or less temporary form of unemployment occurring in the period between the curtailment of civilian production and the expansion of armaments production to the point where it will absorb all of the workers laid off as a result of the curtailment of civilian production made necessary by the capitalist preparation for total war.
The United States is being placed on a full war economy basis as quickly as capitalist idealism and an infallible sense of where the profits lie can do it. In the era of total war this means the building up of armaments goods at the expense of consumers goods. Business Week, a magazine for industrialists, recognized this early last fall, when it stated: “And seemingly the question of butter versus guns has finally been resolved ... Clearly, defense now comes first, civilian needs second.”
(Note: The reader will perhaps remember with what scornful hoots the bourgeois press greeted this program when Hitler first advanced it. Other times, other customs.)
In addition to placing armaments needs first, the putting of the United States on a war economy basis means that the conversion be accomplished as quickly as possible. So far as heavy industry – the decisive sector of United States capitalism – is concerned, there is no advantage from the point of view of either profits or military strategy in tapering oft civilian production and concurrently absorbing laid-off workers in armaments production as the tempo of production increases. To think that big business would attempt to solve the priorities unemployment problem in this fashion can hardly be called thinking.
Consequently, if the supply of any given raw material is insufficient to serve the needs of both armaments and civilian production, civilian production is cut the requisite degree. For instance, as was pointed out in Forbes for September 15, the copper available in the country in August was 110,000 tons. Armaments production took 88,000, leaving 22,000 tons for a market which ordinarily takes 75,000 tons. As this difference has to be absorbed by civilian production, obviously unemployment results, because the pickup in armaments work does not necessarily have to occur in the location where the layoffs were made, or result in an equivalent number of workers being hired. This is the situation which produced the recent unemployment among the zipper workers in Meadeville, Pa.
Similarly, 21,000,000 tons of nickel is needed annually; 15,000,000 tons is available. The demand for zinc is 1,200,000 tons annually; 900,000 tons is available. Business Week has listed no less than 260 critical items ranging from acetone to zinc – and all of them are taking their toll in unemployment.
There are other factors which increase priorities unemployment. In spite of the fact, so well known until recently at least, to our rear-admirals of the Navy and to our (truth to tell) hardly less qualified naval experts of the newspaper syndicates, that the Japanese are congenitally poor marksmen who would be quickly defeated in any full-scale modern war, rubber imports from the Far East will be non-existent in the future. This circumstance brought to an even keener edge the sharpness of the priorities unemployment crisis confronting the rubber workers.
The necessities of maintaining the Roosevelt “good neighbor” policy in Latin America, founded, alas, on such material considerations, further aggravate the priorities unemployment problem. Despite the fact that tin is a scarce commodity, thousands of tons are being shipped to Latin America for use in making tin cans, and for other civilian purposes.
The monopolist control of heavy industry is a large factor in the creation of shortages which brought quick curtailment of consumer goods production. Alcoa, for instance, opposed the erection of aluminum reduction plants by rival concerns out of fear of post-war competition. Big industry likewise declined to add to present plant capacity out of its own resources because it did not want an unproductive and gigantic elephant on its hands following the war. Hence the construction of plants out of government funds, with private corporations operating them on a lease basis. These plants being government property, it is guaranteed that they will become neither competitors in the post-war period, nor useless, idle instruments.
Big industry likewise piled up huge inventories of basic materials, in this fashion freezing out smaller concerns, which had to curtail production – and thus augment the number of unemployed. Big business has likewise piled up fantastic backlogs of orders which it has refused to sub-contract, an act which would serve to take up some of the unemployment slack. The Vultee-Consolidated merger, for instance, placed at the disposal of Tom Girdler, the newly chosen chairman of the board, over a billion dollars in unfilled orders, a sum achieved, no doubt, as a result of Girdler’s thrift and abstinence in early youth.
In armaments production big business is in the saddle and is riding hard. Last November, Phillip Murray pointed out in the CIO News that according to government figures for May 1941 just six companies held 31.3 per cent of the armaments contracts, and that 56 of the nation’s 200,000 corporations held approximately 75 per cent of the dollar value of all armaments contracts. This control of armaments production by big business makes it very difficult for small business men to land armaments contracts. Since their production for civilian needs has been curtailed, layoffs of workers result.
 
Big Business Tightens the Noose
Murray’s figures also show very sharply how the war economy is hastening the consolidation of monopoly capitalism at the expense of small business. Big business is winning all down the line. That small business is uncomfortably aware of what is being done to it is reflected in an editorial by the New York Times, which says of certain of the small business men who went to Washington in an effort to hook some of the tempting contracts being landed by heavy industry: “Some of those who made the attempt have returned convinced that the big business men in OPM were deliberately trying to freeze out small business.”
Peter R. Nehemkis, one of those bright young men of the OPM who, having a warm little nest in the government bureaucracy, can view things sub specie aeternitatis, as it were, cheerily announced recently: “It is one of the profound ironies of our defense effort that its total effect may well be to move toward obliterating smaller business enterprises from the American scene.”
It is, of course, due not only to the more complete control of the government and to the more complete access to government offices that gives big business its virtual monopoly of armaments contracts. Its political power and its industrial dominance over small business are both due to basic economic factors. Big business has inestimable competitive advantages over small scale production. Big business possesses its own sources of raw materials, machine tool departments, shipping lines, railroads, research laboratories, training schools, marketing outlets, etc. Generally speaking, in relation to these important necessities small business can be squeezed out in any number of obvious ways: machine tool companies may be occupied with other orders, raw materials may be subject to priorities, etc. Small business has a fatally dependent character. Overshadowing everything, of course, is the simple but all important economic fact that as a general rule, unit for unit, small industry cannot produce as cheaply as big business.
Small business, however, is not an unimportant factor in the economic life of the nation. And it has been squealing like a pig caught under the fence, as even a cursory glance at business journals will show. Certain concessions are being made to it. This is the meaning of the appointment of Floyd B. Odlum of the Atlas Corporation as the head of the OPM’s defense contract service. It is Odlum’s job to farm out judicious amounts of armaments work to small business, in order to stop the worst of the screaming. Anyone familiar with Odlum’s record – and it is fully in the best tradition of capitalist legalized piracy – need have no fears as to the amount of relief Odlum will afford small business.
(Note: Readers of The New International who are interested in the genesis of a modern capitalist are earnestly advised to read the biographical sketch of Odlum contained in the November issue of Nation’s Business, the organ of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States. This Wall Street wolf, who is to shepherd the lambs of little business, has a personal fortune estimated at between $4,500,000 and $5,000,000. He annually creams off $100,000 from the Atlas Corporation alone. “If he had paid much attention to public opinion,” the article significantly says, “he would not have the $5,000,000.”
(His career begins in the traditional Horatio Alger style with Odlum as a boy riding an ostrich against a horse at the Grand Rapids fair, at fifty cents a race. In college Odlum engaged in such enterprises as taking over fraternity houses during the summer and running them as tourist homes. In the depression years 1930 to 1933 Odium took over 22 investment trusts. “He seldom paid more than fifty cents on the dollar, sometimes as low as twenty cents.” He wound up controlling or having a hand in Bonwit Teller, Warner Brothers, Loew’s, TWA, Greyhound Bus Lines, and Madison Square Garden, to name a few businesses he muscled into. It might be remarked, parenthetically, that he almost got into Curtiss-Wright, but, in the scientific terminology of the article, “the stockholders rallied and warded him off.” We can well believe it.
(“For relaxation,” says the article, “he makes clay models, which he generally destroys.” Odlum, as may be imagined, is surrounded with a fine circle of sycophants. “Associated with Odlum in the new job” – as head of the defense contract service – “are Sidney Weinberg, a partner in Goldman Sachs, and Ed Weisel, Chicago lawyer. Weinberg is not only an inseparable companion but a vocative admirer. He was tremendously impressed when Odlum picked up the $22,500,000 Goldman Sachs Trading Corp. at a bargain price. Now, at every opportunity in a business meeting or a social gathering, he points admiringly at his boss and chants: ‘Fifty-Cents-on-ihe-Dollar Odlum.’” A man, one sees, for the ages!)
Of course, small business will be pulled into the armaments effort because of the demands of total war. But it will be done on a modest scale, in no wise comparable to the tremendous and increased activity which big business will be engaged in. Should United States capitalism weather the war, small business will find itself utterly dependent on big business, with no resources, a vanished market, a plant worn out and tooled solely for armaments work, and faced with the cold realities of a competitive market which had been foregone to a certain degree at least, during the hectic war days. Small business will collapse, never to be revived. Naked monopoly capital will hold undisputed sway.
 
The Extent of Priorities Unemployment
It is difficult to state the exact extent of priorities unemployment as it exists now or is anticipated in the near future. No real breakdown of national statistics on this problem has been made. The government, of course, is quite willing to let the whole problem be forgotten amid the pandemonium of the war. In mid-year, 1941, Leon Henderson, the Administration’s general utility man, estimated that priorities unemployment might reach 2,500,000. Shortly afterward, in August, Barron’s stated: “One thing seems probable on the basis of our investigation: Mr. Henderson’s estimate is low.” Since the issuance of these figures there have been few official statements on the subject.
A tew concrete cases of priorities unemployment serve to illumine the situation. The United States News notes, for instance, that 175,000 silk workers were thrown out of work last July when the silk processing industry was shut down by government order. There were 16,000 workers in the aluminum cooking utensil industry which was wiped out altogether when priorities were imposed. According to government figures, priorities unemployment in the automobile industry was to reach 130,000 workers in Detroit alone at the end of 1941. The figure for the state of Michigan was set at 206,000. Current statements by the government on the unemployment situation in the badly hit rubber industry contain nothing but a great deal of rosy optimism and a too typical absence of concrete data.
Among industries already hit by priorities unemployment are the following: home construction, refrigerator, vacuum cleaner, washing machine, automobile, rubber, aluminum utensil, zipper, etc. And the list will increase.
Mention should be made of another aspect of priorities unemployment – what might be called secondary priorities unemployment. This unemployment does not occur at the point of production but occurs at the point of distribution as a result of curtailment of production at the factory proper. For instance, the Wall Street Journal pointed out last July, when the curtailment of automobile production was first broached, that the effects would immediately be felt by 44,000 dealers and 380,000 salesmen, auto mechanics and office workers. To this list can be added the gasoline station attendants and other workers servicing automobiles, who will be hit in the future when the supply of tires runs out.
It should be noted that the sharpness of priorities unemployment is often masked by the spreading of work down to three or fewer days per week per worker.
A few weeks prior to the war in the Pacific, Representative John H. Tolan, chairman of a congressional committee investigating unemployment throughout the Midwest, stated that “the situation ... is apparently going to take a turn for the worse in the near future.” Some authorities expect the real crisis to occur this spring. The intensification of the war effort as a result of the opening of actual hostilities can have only a sharpening effect upon the crisis, as has already been demonstrated in the case of the rubber industry.
 
The Effect Upon the Working Class
In the long run, priorities unemployment will, of course, disappear because of the huge armaments output which will be necessary. The National Resources Planning Board estimates that by 1944 there will be no unemployment, that the entire 60,000,000 available labor force will be employed at that time. Some industrial sources, however, are already predicting the exhaustion of the reserve labor supply in 1942, if for no other reason than because of the drafting of additional men into the armed forces.
All things, however, are resolved – in one fashion or another – “in the long run.” But, unfortunately, the gas bill, the rent bill, the grocery bill and all the other insistent big and little bills have to be settled in the very much here and now. The one to eight months, or longer, of unemployment necessitated because of the imposition of priorities, has severe consequences for a worker who has travelled the rocky path out of a depression, into a recession, and out of a recession into the ethereal price levels of a war economy. In addition to the prospect of eviction – in a time when housing is extremely scarce – the danger of repossession of his furniture and car, and the scrambling to find money for food, clothing, rent and coal, the average worker will be saddled with a debt burden that will take him many months to discharge.
 
Business Offers Its Solution
To expect business to worry over the problem of priorities unemployment as it affects the worker is like expecting rain to fall upward. What business is worried about is business. What happens to labor is no serious concern of business. Consequently, all its proposals consist merely of plans to land armaments contracts. When business touches upon priorities unemployment directly it is only to moan about its effect upon retail trade. The Wall Street Journal, which clasps all the poor and suffering capitalists to its bosom, even has tears for the plight of the bloodsucking finance companies in Michigan, which are going to be so cruelly hit as a consequence of priorities unemployment among the workers. It’s enough, no doubt, to make the Wall Street Journal question the equity of the present order. Whenever the problem of priorities unemployment is otherwise dealt with by business it is to assure the public that it is really not unemployment but disemployment (Business Week) or to point out that everything will come out all right in the end – just wait and see (Barron’s).
Occasionally government and business pool their rich experience and produce something like the seven-day wonder known as the Buffalo Plan. The Buffalo Plan was brought forward as the answer to the layoff of 3,200 men at the Chevrolet plant in Buffalo as a result of an eight-month retooling program for armaments production. The essence of the plan was the payment to each worker of $15.00 per week for retraining, pending absorption in the aircraft industry. At the end of two months – the period necessary to absorb the laid-off workers, according to business spokesmen – the box score stood as follows: 650 workers were still unemployed, 1,000 did not register for the plan at all (presumably preferring to look for work elsewhere rather than to attempt to exist on $15.00 a week), and the union movement was making vigorous protests over the discrimination against union men in the operation of the plan.
 
The Program of the Government
The government has pursued an eclectic course, each phase having the common attribute of affording no real relief for the worker during the period of unemployment.
One method employed is to award armaments contracts to “distressed areas,” usually one-industry towns in which business activity was threatened with complete cessation as a result of priorities rulings. Manitowoc, Wis., for instance, received $3,000,000 in orders. The washing machine industry as a whole received a $12,000,000 armaments order. These contracts are let within a 15 per cent upward tolerance of the lowest bid received, since, generally speaking, small industry is at a competitive disadvantage with big industry. By early December, eleven distressed areas, involving 125 plants and $135,000,000 in contracts, had been certified by government agencies.
Another step taken by the government is the changing over to a system of allocating materials, rather than letting the system of priorities determine their distribution. Under the system of priority ratings, concerns having higher ratings would pile up huge surpluses of materials at the expense of the smaller firms. Under the system of allocations small firms are thus to be allowed a certain minimum of production. How seriously the allocation system can and will benefit small business is another question.
Further than this, the government maintains a madhouse of boards, bureaus, offices, committees, agencies, directors and investigators – all singing like sirens in an effort to lull an alarmed labor movement, and all trying to devise ways-painless to everybody but the workers involved – of transferring laid-off workers into armaments production. It’s a field day for the career boys.
 
The AFL and the CIO Programs
The program of the American Federation of Labor was announced in detail in the October issue of The American Federationist. Basic to the plan is the demand for labor representation on government boards to run industry which would, in the opinion of the AFL, facilitate the achieving of labor’s objectives during the war period.
The second aspect of their program concerns itself with proposals for “rationalizing” production, so that (1) the production of armaments will be speeded up and (2) priorities unemployment eliminated. Objectively, the program is one for the rescuing of small industry. It provides for the breaking up and sub-contracting of huge Army and Navy contracts now held by a few giant corporations. It proposes to institute negotiated contracts instead of the present competitive ones which work to the advantage of big business. The program proposes that scarce materials be allocated. Under the plan, armaments contracts are to be let in areas where the priorities unemployment pinch is being felt. Plant conversions are to be less sharp in character. Small business is to be involved in the armaments effort. In sum, planning is to be more thorough and more smoothly done, thus cushioning the shock of priorities unemployment.
For labor, the AFL proposes retraining for armaments jobs without loss of pay, the preservation of jobs and seniority rights when the worker’s plant begins armaments production, surverys of the unemployed labor market, labor intervention in the securing of armaments contracts, etc.
The CIO proposals, whether they are the generalized formulae of the Murray Plan or the more concrete proposals of the UAAAIWA – the union in the CIO which is being hardest hit by priorities unemployment – are basically the same as those of the AFL: (1) Labor participation on boards, along with representatives of government and business, which will run industry, (2) more efficient organization of armaments production to soften the effects of plant conversion upon employment, and (3) protection of workers’ job rights.
 
Good and Bad of the Union Programs
The dangerous aspect of the union proposals which sprang up out of the priorities unemployment crisis, and one which will expose its reactionary character even more clearly later on, is the demand for the seating of labor representatives on war boards along with representatives from the government and from business. By participating in this fashion in the war effort labor would take an integral share of the responsibility for a war, and for the conduct of a war, in which it has absolutely nothing to gain but misery and death. As members of the joint boards, labor would be bound to participate in decisions whose effect would be the lowering of the standard of living of the masses, and to share in the responsibility for these decisions. Moreover, the abolition of strikes, the most decisive means at the disposal of labor for the enforcement of its most elementary needs, would receive official labor “governmental” endorsement and leave the trade union movement prostrate at the hands of big business. Labor would always be a minority on the boards. The government, as was amply demonstrated in the handling of the miners’ strike in the National Defense Mediation Board, is not a neutral party, but a faithful servant of its master – big business.
Today and in the future, members of the trade union movement must oppose the participation of labor on the war boards. Only by refusing to be the captive of the government and business representatives on the boards can labor begin to exert any real influence on the economic and political problems of the day.
Of the more immediate and concrete demands raised, labor is of course a thousandfold right in firmly demanding the retention of seniority rights the securing of jobs near at home, so that workers will not have to travel distances up to 50 miles from home in order to get work – or even have to move to a new town, in order to secure employment retraining at industry’s expense; hiring at armaments plants on a seniority basis; and all the other rights won by labor in many hard struggles over the course of years.
 
Proposals on Priorities Unemployment
Where labor has been too modest is in failing to demand that government and business jointly pay the unemployed worker his regular scale of wages until he has secured re-employment. There have been half-hearted attempts in this direction, such as the demand raised by the United Rubber Workers in Ohio, that severance pay be given to workers until unemployment compensation benefits (a miserable dole, it should be noted) begin coming in. But only by receiving full pay when he is unemployed can the worker escape the hardships which unemployment imposes in a period of rising prices. To raise demands for the breaking up and sub-contracting of the armaments orders of the trusts has only a limited utility. The time lag is too great; the worker benefits only after the contract is landed, the raw materials received, and the plant tooled up.
”And where,” we can hear the capitalist representatives crying out in genuine anguish and alarm, “can government and business get the money to make such payments?” Our reply is very simple: Those payments would consume a very minute portion of the profits on a truly Arabian Nights scale of magnificence which are pouring into the coffers of American capitalism as a result of the war boom. They would likewise consume a very minute portion of the taxes being spent by the government for armaments. And unlike armaments expenditures, these expenditures would be used for constructive, not for wholly destructive, ends. It is entirely proper that workers affected by priorities unemployment should receive this small share of the profits of industry – profits which are, in any event, possible only through the capitalist exploitation of the entire working class.
As a matter of fact, labor should demand, not only the payment of its regular scale of wages during the period of priorities unemployment, but a 100 per cent tax on all profits of the war industries. If workers are being conscripted to sacrifice their lives in the war, let business make the much less serious sacrifice of foregoing its war profits. Let there be no profit in the taking of human life! Revenue from such a tax would amply take care of workers victimized by priorities unemployment, with hundreds of millions of dollars left over to be used for socially constructive purposes.
* * *
Viewed broadly, the struggle around the question of priorities unemployment is only one of the first of a series of actions which will be precipitated by the attempts of the capitalist class to unload the whole crushing burden of the war upon the backs of the working class. The working class will resist – no doubts need be held about that. How well it resists will depend upon how well it understands the meaning of phenomena such as priorities unemployment and other similar phenomena which will arise. And flowing from the understanding of these events will come the higher understanding that the only way out for a world that is threatening to destroy itself lies in the victory of socialism.
 

M. Fenwick: The Voice of Richard Wright (November 1941)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
The Voice of Richard Wright
(November 1941)

From The New International, Vol. VII No. 10, November 1941, pp. 287–8.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

Bright and Morning Star
by Richard Wright
International Publishers, New York City. 48 pages, 15 cents
AMONG ALL THE THOUSANDS of authors turning out short stories and novels today, Richard Wright is one of the few who stir the depths of one’s pity and anger.
Wright’s stories shoulder their way through the aimless mass of current fiction fundamentally because he works with a great theme. His tragedies are not the personal tragedies of a white novelist like, say, Thomas Wolfe. Nor are they the basically personal, if more complex, tragedies of Langston Hughes’ Negro bohemians, in which the race questions adds a certain piquancy but does not become the fiery question of all questions that it does in Wright’s novels and stories.
Wright’s characters come from the ranks of that poverty-cursed nine-tenths of the Negro population that lives below the “talented tenth” which has managed to elevate itself a rung on the lowest levels of the social ladder. His stories portray the oppression, and the struggle against oppression, of an entire race. His stories therefore achieve a scope and an intensity and hence a universality impossible in stories whose tragedy is only a personal one.
Wright’s tragedies, however, are not those of meek submission before overwhelming injustice. His characters are of heroic, Promethean stature. His men and women go down, but they go down fighting back. This revolutionary morale, consciously or unconsciously expressed by the characters, infuses all of Wright’s stories. It prefigures the heroic rôle that the Negro masses will play in the social struggles of the future.
Given the knowledge of the Negro possessed by the average white party member and sympathizer of our movement, Wright’s stories take on an added interest. Here is a Negro telling of the thousand and one ways the Negro is discriminated against in daily life; showing how the Negro’s psychological pattern is socially determined; exposing the defense mechanisms the Negro adopts; revealing the lynch mentality of the rabid Southern Negro-haters; showing the hatred and courage that simmers in the Negro, waiting only to be tapped.
Part of the impact created by Wright’s stories comes from his almost complete lack of compromise in attacking the race problem. He takes the worst possible situations for the presentation of the case of the Negro: the murder of a white man, a rape, a love affair with a white woman. Using these events – which bring into play all that codified prejudice which is so omnipresent in bourgeois society that most whites think of it as a moral absolute – Wright, in the course of the development of his stories, captures the sympathy and understanding of his readers despite these very same prejudices.
The force of this impact is heightened by Wright’s unwavering path to the logical but unpleasant end of most of his stories. He makes few concessions to that inner censor of ours which would like the story to end ... well, not quite that way. He recognizes in that censor an unconscious instrument (compounded of bourgeois prejudice and the common human frailty of substituting hope for practically any type of thought process) for the maintenance of racial oppression. To give in to it would destroy the whole point of his writing. He writes of things as they are, not as we might like them to be.
 
Qualified Bourgeois Appreciation
That is why the success of Native Son, for instance, was in part a succes de scandale. Bourgeois readers enjoyed the book in the same way that they enjoyed the assault on their nerves committed in the shocker, The Postman Always Rings Twice. At the same time, because Wright hews to the class line, the average bourgeois reader was, in addition, left with a somewhat queasy feeling after having finished the book. He has seen the smouldering volcano.
Wright’s style is lean – excellent in conveying the unadorned reality of his stories. There is little lyricism. There are few descriptive passages. His Negro and Southern white dialect are accurate transcriptions. He understands white psychology very well. Nowhere does Wright moralize; the point is conveyed in the action of the characters.
Some critics have found Wright’s stories melodramatic. It is true; they are melodramatic. And it is also true that his stories are melodramatic because the reality he portrays is surcharged with melodrama, as is all reality when social tensions are high. What, for instance, is more melodramatic than the social revolution itself?
 
Art versus Propaganda
Wright’s stories are an excellent refutation of the scholasticism of bourgeois critics who pose the conception of art and propaganda as mutually exclusive opposites. All literature is propaganda for some idea, political or otherwise. That a great idea such as the struggle for power by the working class (in all its political and personal aspects) should not form the structural basis for a great novel is comprehensible only as an expression of the literary struggle against the working class on the part of the bourgeois literary critics. Wright’s stories dramatizing the struggles of the Negro masses are just as much art, if on a smaller scale, as Aristophanes’ plays championing the cause of the Greek landowning aristocracy.
A good example of Wright’s artistry is the short story, Bright and Morning Star. It is an excellent pamphlet to put in the hands of people moving toward the Workers Party. The central characters in the story are communist party members, but the form the story takes casts them in the rôle not of Stalinist followers but of genuine revolutionists locked in a struggle with the worst elements of the bourgeoisie. The Stalinist political line is a completely unimportant factor.
 
“Bright and Morning Star”
The story of Bright and Morning Star is a simple one. The following synopsis, however, can give but little indication of its power:
Aunt Sue, an old, Southern, Negro woman, has recently joined the Communist Party. One of her sons, Sug, has already been jailed for revolutionary activity. As the story opens, her other son, Johnny-Boy, is out organizing a meeting to be held the next day. Late in the evening, as Aunt Sue is waiting for him to come home, Johnny-Boy’s white girl friend, Reva, comes to Aunt Sue’s house and tells her that the meeting has to be called off because a stoolpigeon has informed the sheriff of its being called. Johnny-Boy returns but goes out again to warn the comrades to stay away from the meeting.
While he is gone the sheriff and a lynch gang come looking for him. They beat up Aunt Sue and leave. When she comes to, Booker, a new white recruit to the party, is bending over her. He tells her that the sheriff’s men have caught Johnny-Boy in the woods. Then Booker forces her to tell him the names of the other party members in order, he says, that he can warn the comrades. He leaves. Reva returns with the news that Booker is the stoolpigeon.
Fortified by her belief in the revolutionary movement, which has replaced her old, compensatory, religious exaltation. Aunt Sue hides Johnny-Boy’s revolver beneath a sheet which the sheriff had previously tauntingly advised her to bring for the body of her son. Taking a short cut through the field, she finds the lynch gang before Booker can arrive. The sheriff demands that she ask her son to give the names. She refuses. They break both of Johnny-Boy’s legs with a crowbar in an effort to make Aunt Sue beg the information from her son. She says nothing. Then they break his kneecaps. They break both his eardrums ... Booker arrives. Before he can reveal anything, she shoots him and tries to shoot her son, who is in agony. The lynch gang shoot her son, then her. She dies, defiant: they didn’t get what they wanted!
* * *
Writing from London in a recent issue of The New Republic, George Orwell notes in the younger English writers “the absence of any feeling of purpose,” and states that there “seems no chance of any major literary work appearing until the future is more predictable and thinking people have less feeling of helplessness.” George Marion O’Donnell in an anthology of poetry published by New Directions expresses this same feeling of helplessness in American writers with the question: “What action now means act as a man should?”
In these comments Orwell and O’Donnell reflect very well the bankruptcy of bourgeois literature, which, confronted with the greatest crisis in world history, has nothing to say.
Let those who can, learn the meaning of Richard Wright’s stories: only the revolutionary word has significance today.
 

M. Fenwick: The Happy Hypocrite (November 1941)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
The Happy Hypocrite
(November 1941)

From The New International, Vol. VII No. 10, November 1941, pp. 286–7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

You Can’t Do Business With Hitler
by Douglas Miller
Little, Brown & Co., Boston, 1941. 229 pp., $1.50
THIS IS THE BOOK that has been causing such a flutter in the bourgeois literary dovecotes. Writing recently in the dreary and reactionary Saturday Review of Literature, William L. Shirer solemnly said: “It’s a book that ought to be on the desk of every business man in the country.” Even Roosevelt has recommended the book – a form of criticism in itself.
The author explicitly directs the book at American business men, stating that they are – surprise! – “one group in America which has not been adequately brought face to face with the facts. Having spent fifteen years as a commercial attaché at the United States embassy in Berlin, Miller comes well equipped with first-hand data on the Nazi regime. The book serves as an economic rationale for the holy onslaught against German capitalism which American capitalism is preparing.
In order to prove his complete competency to prescribe to the American capitalist class, Miller hurriedly establishes in the very first of the book the moral basis for his judgments on the present world crisis. “I confess,” he says – in sharp contrast, we assume, to the amoralism of the Bolsheviks, which we hear so much about nowadays – “a preference for a little civilized hypocrisy once in a while, to conceal some of the ugliness of the world. If we cannot always act according to the highest standards of ethics, the least we can do is to be ashamed of ourselves and conceal our shortcomings as much as possible. Such hypocrisy is much better than openly wallowing in evil and claiming that this is an honest and natural way to live.”
Having established his moral authority to speak on the issues of the day, Miller hastens to prove in a hundred and one ways the hypocrisy of the war “for democracy against fascism.” The whole burden of his complaint can be summed up in a sentence: Hitlerism prevents the United States from exploiting Germany and it will shortly prevent the United States from exploiting the rest of the globe; therefore, the sooner that Germany is destroyed the better.
The chapter headings give an idea of the field covered: Nazi Aims and Methods; Nazi Plans for World Expansion; The New Order in Europe; Hitler Reaches Out for a New World; and The United States Under Nazi Pressure.
 
A Primer for Innocents
Even as a capitalist analysis of German fascism the book is a superficial job. It was apparently dashed off as a fitting addition to the reading of those persons whose political education has been gained from a year’s subscription to Reader’s Digest. The book contains the standard bourgeois analysis of Nazi racial theories, the leadership principle, Hitler’s treaty-breaking and lying, religious persecution, etc. In these there is nothing more than the standard newspaper treatment.
The most usable sections of the book are those describing fascist economic life. How Germany acquired raw materials necessary for the creation of her war machine through exchange control, manipulation of clearing agreements, the use of the blocked mark, price fixing, job freezing, dumping, wage fixing and export subsidizing is briefly shown. These sections demonstrate very clearly that Hitler’s “planning,” which seems to charm certain “left” liberals as a snake does a bird, is the crudest sort of improvisation based upon severe exploitation at home and the baldest sort of racketeering on the international economic arena.
These sections of the book, however, are inferior even to those contained in such a study as The Vampire Economy by Guenter Reimann, whose contribution to the anti-fascist struggle consists in solicitously warning American capitalists against supporting a fascist movement in this country in view of the simply terrible things that the Nazis are doing to German capitalists. Daniel Guerin’s Fascism and Big Business, despite certain defects, such as a failure to analyze the rôle of the Social Democrats and the Communist Party in the rise of Hitler to power, remains head and shoulders above the rest of the books in the field.
Miller’s book contains an adequate account of the economic consequences to Europe, Africa, South America and the United States of a Hitler victory over Britain. He shows the economic necessity for world domination which inevitably brought Germany and the United States into mortal struggle. His argumentation, incidentally, effectively destroys the case of the isolationists, if only from a capitalist point of view.
It is a simple matter to snap the backbone of Miller’s reasoning. Miller becomes righteously indignant at the brutality of Hitler’s rule, present and future. But in condemning Hitler for certain practices he blithely overlooks these same practices when indulged in by Britain and the United States. Miller condemns Hitler’s barbaric racial methods; he has not a word to say about the treatment of the Negro in the United States. He recoils in horror before Hitler’s future treatment of the colonial population in Africa; he is silent on “democratic” England’s bloody subjection of 400,000,000 people in India. He is shocked by Germany’s economic penetration of South America; he is clamorously silent on the unsavory record of the United States in that sphere. This smug hypocrisy permeates the book.
 
Remedies Worse Than the Disease
Since the origins of Hitlerism are not approached from a Marxist point of view, Miller cannot show its rise as an inevitable necessity for the preservation of German capitalism. Neither dare he show as the was an inevitable consequence of the struggle for the colonial markets if the world, if German, British, or American capitalism is to survive at home. Having only a capitalist perspective, he can promise nothing following the current war but that a “continuance of economic nationalism, reinforced by the new high-pressure tactics which the totalitarian states have worked out, is very possible. It is too likely to happen to suit me. The passions unleashed by war, the hatreds and fears of a hungry, disillusioned world, create national antagonism and national barriers. It must be plain that after this war there will be more hate, less trust and confidence and more suspicion, less friendship. After this war it will not be a case of getting the lions and the lambs to lie down together. The lambs will be mostly all devoured. There will only be well-armed but torn and angry lions left.” This is all he can promise – plus a dubious hope that “a decent measure of international co-operation” will be established.
And what changes does Miller propose which will have to be made in this country in order to achieve this new barbarism?
“I feel that it would prove necessary for us to abandon at least for a time many of the liberties to which we have become accustomed ... This involves the censorship in our own country of activities which have been guaranteed under our Bill of Rights. We should have to suspend or amend our Constitution, creating a new system of bureaucratic control over the individual. We should undoubtedly be forced to have a federal police force, fingerprinting everyone. We might even have to extend police power, requiring that every citizen report his movements, that every arrival and departure at hotels be reported to the nearest police station, and that an American equivalent of the Gestapo or OGPU be called into existence to combat actual or potential fifth-column activities. We should have to sacrifice a goodly portion of our treasured liberties in order to preserve a certain remnant of them. This is not a pretty picture.”
Quite true; it is not a pretty picture.
It is the face of FASCISM!
 

M. Fenwick: A Chorus of Mixed Voices (October 1941)





Fenwick Archive  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

James M. Fenwick
A Chorus of Mixed Voices
(October 1941)

From The New International, Vol. VII No. 9, October 1941, p. 255.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the ETOL.

The Pocket Book of the War
edited by Quincy Howe
Published by Pocket Books, Inc., New York City, 1941. 372 pages, 25 cents
What a torrent of scribbling the war has let loose upon the land! Typical of this new and booming “defense” industry is The Pocket Book of the War. The book is an anthology composed chiefly of selections from the writings of leading bourgeois journalists. Included are several articles by some of the higher paid but less endowed amateurs such as Roosevelt, Churchill, and Hitler. The book’s avowed aim is to give a panoramic view and interpretation of the current war from the Munich agreement of September 30, 1938, through the Roosevelt-Churchill eight-point program of August 14, 1941.
The following titles and authors taken from the table of contents give a sampling of the field covered: The Tragedy of Munich, by Dorothy Thompson; Stalin, by John Gunther; Poland – The First Victim, by Otto D. Tolischus; How England and France Were Separated, by André Maurois; Behind China’s Lines, by Edgar Snow; Britain’s Revolution by Consent, by Edgar R. Murrow; Propaganda and Organization, by Adolf Hitler; The Eight-Point Program, by Roosevelt and Churchill.
The most that can be said about the book is that occasionally it rises to the level of good bourgeois reportage. Whether it be the refined hysteria of Dorothy Thompson, the embarrassing belated bohemianism of Vincent Sheean, the barely controlled casualness of Alsop and Kintner revealing to a presumably bug-eyed public what the pajama-clad Roosevelt said to that lucky devil Berle late one evening after having drafted a message to Congress, or the penetrating psychological insights of John Gunther exposing that poor dupe Trotsky, “an incorrigible romantic,” wanting “permanent revolution as a perpetual honeymoon” – it all comes down to the same thing: the best of the bourgeois journalists writing today are neither willing nor able to see beyond the most superficial aspects of the tremendous events which are recasting the entire world.
 
The Method and Its Conduct
Lacking an understanding of historical materialism, they can neither understand the origins of the war nor can they envisage any alternative to the barbarism of Hitler other than a tremendous war – with whose consequences they dare not confront either their readers or themselves. Consciously or unconsciously they are literally only the hired hands of monopoly capital. War exposes many shams, among them the myth of bourgeois individuality.
The best sections of the book are Edgar Snow’s Behind China’s Lines, Otto D. Tolischus’ Poland – The First Victim, and a valuable chronology of the Second World War. Snow’s article reveals very dearly the opportunist Stalinist policy applied in the “Red areas” in China. There are good passages on the economic structure of these areas and on the guerilla warfare. Snow’s article is the only one which deals at all directly with the proletarian masses. Tolischus’ article is interesting in being an early and detailed account of the blitzkrieg tactic-confirming again the now apparent fact that only the ignorant should have been surprised by it. Buried throughout the other articles lies confirmation after confirmation of the Marxist analysis of the pre-war and the war period – the complete absence of chauvinism among the masses, the fear of revolution endemic among the bourgeoisie, etc. – but so buried beneath journalistic rubble as not to be worth the labor of extracting it.
After nearly 400 pages of this fluff, how refreshing it is to re-read the documents of the recent convention of the Workers Party! In a few brief pages the whole anatomy of a dying social order is laid bare. Logic emerges from what seems to be but the play of blind forces.
Daily the unique superiority of the Marxist method once again demonstrates itself. One is proud to belong to a party whose animating force is revolutionary Marxism.
And these bourgeois journalists with their slick style and vapid content?
Buffon once said, “The style is the man.” And one might add, “And the man is the product of his class.” The bourgeois class is a body fallen into decay. Bourgeois journalists can only articulate its corruption.
 

