


I am standing for the NEC of the Labour Party, having been nominated by the Fire Brigades Union, and am seeking your support.
At a time when the people of this country are faced with mass unemployment, bad housing, school closures, the National Health Service is starved of finance, and the industrial base of the country destroyed through lack of investment, the Labour Party needs a fighting programme based on the needs of ordinary working people and a willingness to implement such a programme, from the leadership of the Party.
As a member of the NEC of my union and a working fireman, I have been involved in a fight over many years to improve the conditions of my members. As a result, I believe that a return to incomes policy, or public sector cash limits, on the part of the next Labour government, would be a tragedy for the trade union movement, and the lower paid sector in particular.
I stand in support of socialist policies – of accountability at every level and the right to recall elected representatives – for CLPs to select the candidate of their choice and in total opposition to witch-hunts in the Labour party, and for the Labour party to campaign around a socialist programme to force an election and drive the Tories from office.
However, at a time when the right-wing of the Party pays lip service to ‘Unity’, in the same breath it launches a vitriolic attack, in the pages of the capitalist media and in the same language as those patently opposed to the Labour party and to socialism, against members of the Party who have been members for many years and who have fought to have Labour MPs and councillors elected, campaigned to recruit into the Labour Party to create a mass socialist party and fought for democracy within the party.
The disastrous effect of such a witch-hunt would split the party at a time when the call for ‘unity’ should be heeded; but unity around socialist policies to defeat the Tories and their Liberal/SDP allies.
I believe that the decisions of conference should be translated into action, and the whole labour movement should struggle on radical socialist policies in the interests of the majority in society, and break the grip of the parasites who currently control finance, industry and the monopolies. The wealth created by the workers should be put to the use of the workers, and their families, but this can only be achieved by a Labour government taking over the ‘commanding heights; of the economy and drawing up a socialist plan of production to implement such reforms. Labour must act with the same enthusiasm and commitment on behalf of workers as the Tories do their friends – big business interests in this country and abroad.
It is with this in view that I appeal for the support of the Trades Union section in the election to the NEC.

FOR A DEMCORATIC SOCIALIST PARTY TO DEFEAT THE TORIES!!
 
FOR THE RIGHT OF CLPs TO SELECT THE CANDIDATE OF THEIR CHOICE!
 
DEFEAT THE WITCH-HUNT!

 




“ONE OF my constituents was diagnosed as suffering from cervical cancer in January. In February it was confirmed, but this woman must wait until December before she can start to receive initial treatment to combat that potentially killer disease.” – Terry Fields in Parliament on 8 July.
“President Reagan has had a third recurrence of skin cancer on his nose and will go into hospital tomorrow to have more tissue removed.” The Independent, 31 July.
Speaking in Parliament on 8 July, Terry Fields, MP for Liverpool Broadgreen, demanded that the inquiry by Liverpool Regional Health Authority into the recall of 487 women for cervical smear testing be made public, and a system of recall screening be established nationally.
“Cervical cancer is a cancer of the neck of the womb, or the uterine cervix. It is one of the most common causes of the premature death of women. Over 2,000 women die unnecessarily of cervical cancer every year. Those deaths are preventable, provided adequate screening techniques are used and women receive appropriate treatment ... it is incorrect to assume that only older women are at risk. A woman becomes at risk when she begins sexual intercourse, which varies widely from person to person.
Therefore, there should be no minimum age limit for women requesting a first smear, and publicity should be given to the need for screening from at least the age of 20.
 
Investigation
In 1987 the Liverpool area health authority revealed that, during the 21 months between March ’83 and December ’85 nearly 800 cervical smear test slides had been passed as ‘normal’ when in fact abnormalities were present which required further investigation. The health authority decided that 487 should be recalled.
One hundred of those people have since received, or are receiving, treatment and some have had hysterectomies. One can imagine the distress and worry if one’s wife, daughter or grandchildren, or if my wife, had that problem. Tragically, there have been reports of at least one death, if not more, within the Liverpool area.
.. The error which puts hundreds of Liverpool women at risk, must be thoroughly investigated and the findings acted upon by providing screening services throughout the country. The internal review conducted by the Liverpool health authority is totally inadequate for that purpose ... The two most vital things that are required... are a public inquiry and a national quality control scheme to ... ensure that monitoring of the results is carried out...
On 3 July the Minister reported that 75 health authorities were now computerised... 75 out of 191, which is equal to 39 per cent of all area health authorities. That means that the other 61 per cent are not computerised.
The Minister also reported that 19 of those 75 health authorities had call and recall systems. That means that nine per cent of the 191 authorities are attempting to deal with the problem of cervical cancer.
This is an exposition of scandalous complacency by a woman Minister dealing with a problem that affects the nation’s women... I am making ten demands on behalf of the women’s council, the community health authorities in the Liverpool area and Liverpool women:

A national, integrated, NHS-based call and recall system.
 
Mobile screening units to visit estates and shopping centres.
 
Health authorities to seek out women at high risk, not depend on women volunteering themselves.
 
Screening facilities available at the workplace, or time off to visit a clinic.
 
Well Woman clinics operating throughout the country.
 
Women doctors available wherever possible to carry out the tests.
 
Follow-up tests to be done with sensitivity, explaining if it is due only to a technical problem.
 
Use of the most up-to-date equipment available.
 
Counselling for women when cancer is detected.
 
Oppose the privatisation of NHS services and support the public ownership of supplies to the NHS.”

 




Terry Fields MP (Liverpool Broadgreen)
“I first started reading the Militant during the fireman’s strike on 1977 and then, as now, I found that it was the only paper which really put the workers’ case and, more importantly, provided a programme and a way forward.
“The kind of socialist policies that the Militant advocates can win support of working class people, as our election victory in Broadgreen testifies. Militant is a lively and refreshing answer to those cynics in the labour movement who try to portray socialist ideas as an electoral liability.
“Young workers, school students and pensioners should all read Militant – there’s something in it for all of us, because all working class people need socialism.”
 

      Liverpool City Council’s stand against the Tory government has been an example to every Labour-controlled local authority. They were elected to create jobs and build houses, to defend and expand services; that is what they have done. On Thursday 7 March their fight enters a new stage, when the council meets to agree its budget. Their insistence on standing for the interests of the workers who elected them will mean bitter struggle with the Tory government.    * Supporting the council to the hilt have been the city’s MPs. On 21 February, Terry Fields, MP for Broadgreen spoke in Parliament in an adjournment debate on Liverpool. He described the state of the council in 1983 when Labour took control after ten years of Liberal and Tory administration ... The 10 years of decline in Liverpool under the Tories and the Liberals resulted in the axing of 1,000 local authority jobs, with vacancies in the council’s establishment being left unfilled, the abolition of the direct labour organisation and the privatisation of certain services which resulted in job losses. This happened at a time when more, not fewer, jobs were needed in Liverpool. The rates increases since 1979 were used to compensate for Tory cuts in grants. None of that money was used for improvements in Liverpool. Liverpool city council could provide no cushion.  No mean feat We have come a long way during the 20 months that the Labour party has been in power in Liverpool. We are proud of our achievements. At a time when unemployment is rising nationally, this is no mean feat. The 1983 general election which brought so many Conservative members to this House has to be set against the Labour victory in Liverpool. It was the Labour Party’s first victory in Liverpool for 10 or 15 years. That landslide victory was continued in the local authority elections in 1984. Five out of the six members of Parliament for Liverpool represent the Labour Party. For the first time in 120 years there is not one Tory member of Parliament for Liverpool. It indicates the trust of the people of Liverpool in the Labour Party, both nationally and locally. It is proof that a socialist programme is not a liability at either national or local elections, as our opponents would have us believe. What is even more important is that it has highlighted the political awareness of the people of Liverpool as a result of the experience of having the city run by Liberals and Tories, of having a Tory Government in power and the defections to the Social Democratic Party. The turnround in the fortunes of the Labour Party has been an inspiration to the city council and to workers in the Labour movement, both nationally and internationally. An opinion poll commissioned by Liverpool University showed that 73 per cent of Labour voters, 62 per cent of Liberal voters and even 48 per cent of Conservative voters felt that the Government were largely to blame for Liverpool’s problems. During the last 20 months Liverpool city council has created 1,000 jobs. It has also prevented 1,000 job losses which had been inherited. It has also boosted employment in the private sector. By 1988, 17,000 jobs will have been created by the council’s house-building programme and by its provision of sports facilities. There are 136 apprentices, and 100 sixteen-year-olds are on YTS schemes. Their wages have been topped up to £52 a week and they are guaranteed a job at the end of their training. We are introducing a minimum wage of £100 for local authority workers and a 35-hour week. During the last year 1,057 new houses have been built, and a further 1,211 are to be built in 1984–85. We have provided additional nursery accommodation and reorganised education in order to ensure that every child in Liverpool is provided with the best education that is available. What is surprising is that with only 30,000 council houses estimated to be built in England and Wales in 1985, over 2,000 of these will be built in Liverpool – that is, one in 15. It is a testimony to the work that the Liverpool City Council is doing and will continue to do, despite the opposition of the Government. We are in a crisis in Liverpool at the moment; we face a financial crisis that is worse than last year’s crisis. To balance the books we would require 6,000 redundancies or 220 per cent rate rises. That is because of the 10 years of Tory and Liberal rule. The Government target of spending is totally unrealistic. The Government impose penalties for spending on essential services, and there is a totally inadequate rate support grant. The Government have reneged on their agreements of last July, when the Secretary of State, having toured the city’s black spots, said: “I have never seen housing conditions the like of those I have seen today.” Yet our resources for housing have been cut by 34 per cent.  Impossible gap This year the Tories have set us an arbitrary spending target of £220 million, yet we need to spend £270 million just to defend existing jobs and services. There will have to be a 220 per cent. rate rise or 6,000 jobs will go. Last year the Secretary of State said that it would be impossible to run the city with less than £245 million. With inflation, that would give us this year £255 million. But to maintain that we would have to put up the rates and every time the rates go up money goes off the rate support grant, creating an impossible gap for us to fill. Since 1979 the Government have withdrawn £320 million from the city in rate support grant, housing improvement programme allocation, housing subsidy, and education grant. What we are saying in Liverpool is that we want that money back; it is as simple as that ... ... In the Liverpool city centre, 170 of the 680 stores have already shut, more “Closed” signs are going up and, with the rate increases forecast by the Government, more jobs will go in the Liverpool area. In addition to that, we are being threatened by the Government. The Secretary of State visited Liverpool in 1984. He gave pledges. In a letter to the leader of the Liverpool city council he said: “I can give you an assurance that I will do my very best to ensure your allocations in Liverpool next year under the housing investment programme and the urban programme. Taken together, they will enable the council to make positive progress in dealing with the city’s severe needs.” He said that in Liverpool. He came down to London, reneged on his commitment and denied that he had ever made those statements ... ... the Secretary of State’s latest pronouncement, reported in The Times of 19 February, is an indication that he has firm backing from the Cabinet to take direct action if the Liverpool administration is breaking down. We are well used to threats from the Minister, but this is the second time that the Cabinet have discussed the situation in Liverpool. The first time was in 1981, after the Toxteth riots, when the then Secretary of State (Heseltine), said that it took a riot to make the Cabinet take the problems of Liverpool seriously. Given the background and history that we have gone through in Liverpool, is that the only language that the Government understand when talking about the problems of places such as Liverpool?  We are ready Perhaps the Secretary of State is envisaging a Molesworth type raid in Liverpool. Perhaps he envisages dressing up in his predecessor’s combat jacket. If he comes in the still of the night we shall be ready for him, whenever he comes. Why is he making attacks on us? Why has he launched the so-called investigation into town hall corruption and listed Liverpool as one of the places to be investigated? Why was that announcement made? Why is he using the Local Government, Planning and Land Act, with threats of commissioners against us? We believe that this is a pre-emptive strike against the Liverpool city council and the Liverpool people. We have the support of the people of Liverpool, the trade unions and the people on the estates. We have seen the hypocrisy of this Government in this respect. But Liverpool exemplifies, perhaps in advance of other parts of the country, the processes which are taking place in this country today. The elected representatives of Liverpool will not let the people down. They have been let down too often in the past and they deserve better. We are not going to dirty our hands doing the Tories’ butchery of jobs and services in an already ravaged Liverpool. As far as the Government’s threats are concerned, it will not be dented shields they will have to deal with, because our shields were forged in preparation for the heat of struggle last year and those preparations are going ahead. The Government thought that we would go into battle then. To quote Mrs Thatcher’s soul mate, “You ain’t seen nothing yet”. Liverpool’s people will not be crushed by this or any other Government.  My heritage I WAS born in a dock area before the war. My father was a docker, so I feel qualified to speak on some of the matters on which I hope to enlarge. I remember, as a young person, seeing around the Pier Head, the Goree Piazza and the Strand, shackled to the wall, bolts where slaves were tied up in the lucrative trade in human misery. The docks epitomise what is wrong in Liverpool – lack of investment of the profits created by Liverpool people. It is all very well for the Secretary of State for the Environment to talk about us whingeing and whining about our lot, but we are hard working people. During the war and the national dock labour scheme from 1947 to 1964, my father used to stand in the pen with other dockers like a choice animal, waiting to be picked out for work. My father was proud, and characteristic of the spirit of people in Liverpool. We had dignity and got through decades of struggle. I have never known anything other than bad housing, high unemployment and lack of opportunity for Liverpool people. However, we have learnt lessons. One is that the ravages of the system to which we belong bleeds working people. Indeed, it is responsible for their death.  Catalogue of crimes In 1965, the docks employed 13,589 people. That industry today employs 2,086 – a reduction of more than 80 per cent. There have been corresponding job losses in associated industries and services. There has been no let-up in the de-industrialisation of Liverpool. Between 1971 and 1981 the city lost 90,000, or one quarter, of its jobs. Manufacturing jobs have declined by nearly 40 per cent. and blue collar jobs by 30 per cent. Between 1979 and July 1983, 33,220 redundancies were notified by firms in Liverpool. The catalogue of job losses is endless. Since 1979, the city has lost one third of its manufacturing jobs and half of the jobs in the city’s largest industries – food, drink and tobacco. Between 1975 and 1982, the city council shed 4,400 jobs through natural wastage. The council is now the largest employer on Merseyside, providing socially useful jobs for 31,000 people. It employs one third of all public sector workers in the city. I have a list of 23 industries in which jobs have been lost. They include vehicles, metal goods, coal and petroleum, chemicals, electrical goods, leather goods, clothing and timber. The latest figure of unemployment on Merseyside – 100,000 – is an obscenity when it represents decent people who are eager to work. When they are provided with jobs by the council, they show that they can work. Housing in Liverpool is believed to be among the worst and yet the most expensive in Europe. There are 22,000 people on the council’s waiting list for houses. Urgent repairs are needed to 20,000 council houses. Liverpool has the highest percentage of old, privately rented houses in the country, with the exception of London. Its housing investment allocation has declined, in real terms, from £47 million in 1980 to £28 million in 1984 – 85. But the real decline in its housing investment allocation is highlighted by the fact that the city’s allocation in 1980 was half that which it received in 1974. Since 1980 Liverpool has lost £63 million in housing subsidy. In 1980 the Government contributed £20 million to the city’s housing services. In 1984 if fell to £5.5 million. The catalogue of crimes against the people of Liverpool goes on and on.   






THE FOLLOWING article, is a letter the CSDC received from Terry Fields, MP for Broad Green, who has tabled a number of questions in Parliament on the question of Chile, and has always used his position as an MP, to highlight as much as possible the struggle the Chilean workers are going through.




The overthrow of the Popular Unity government in Chile in 1973, leaving over 50,000 workers murdered, was a huge blow to the international labour and trade union movement. But despite threats of detention, murder and torture, Chilean workers continue to struggle against the regime. Their courage and determination is an inspiration to all of us, and is a confirmation of the fact that no amount of killing can destroy the will of the workers to struggle.
The essential foundations for building of links with Chilean workers in their struggle to rebuild their organizations, were laid by the Labour Party Young Socialists during the 1970’s. I think that the Chile Socialist Defence Campaign, in continuing this work, has an enormously important role to play in this; by building links with Chilean workers and giving them direct support for their work and by offering a political perspective, using the important lessons taught to us by history.
As a Labour MP and a Socialist, it is my duty to support not only those struggles waged by British workers, but those waged by workers and oppressed peoples everywhere. Despite the hostile atmosphere in parliament, which is so divorced from the everyday lives of ordinary people, I have attempted to use all the means available in the House of Commons – through debates, motions, parliamentary questions etc. – to raise those struggles, and to gain the ear of ordinary people.
Last month I introduced a motion on the question of the links between the Tories and the Chilean regime, following press reports that the Tory government, in exchange for the use of bases and intelligence duringÂ· the Falklands war, had made a deal with Pinochet not to pursue the issue of human rights violations in Chile. Thatcher’s attempts to justify the war waged in the Falklands by saying it was a fight against Fascist tyranny, whilst at the same time relying on the repressive regime of Pinochet to continue the war, just shows the rank hypocrisy of the Tories.
 
Britain exporter of torture equipment
Britain is the second largest exporter of equipment for torture, “or internal security equipment” as the government prefers to call it. These exports go unchecked and despite efforts to discuss this issue in Parliament, a veil of secrecy shrouds the whole dirty business. British companies continue to manufacture gas chambers, guillotines, thumbscrews, leg irons and gas chains. Equipment such as this offers rich rewards to big business, and the Tory Party – as the political representative of big business – stays silent on the question of human and democratic rights violations. They prefer to ignore the atrocities of the Chilean government and other brutal regimes in Latin America such as El Salvador and Paraguay, to name only two.
The state of siege, imposed last year has been extended for a further three months in an attempt to hold down the protests against the regime which have taken place, with systematic dawn raids being carried out on the shanty towns, taking away hundreds into internal exile. I myself have written letters of protest to the Chilean government on this and other questions.
Pinochet, who even his traditional supporters amongst the ruling class have now branded as a “lunatic”, maintaining his rule under the bloody heel of military repression, is now battling under a deepening economic crisis which has meant soaring unemployment and poverty for the working class.
Every “remedy” has been tried to alleviate the deepening crisis without success – for example the “rescheduling” of foreign loans (in other words putting off the debt until later), which has resulted in a record national debt – all of which will only further deepen the problems, as foreign creditors demand repayment of their loans. Even the British mouthpiece of big business – the Financial Times recognises what this will mean for the Chilean people – “there will be no financial carrots to ease unemployment. The poor and the regime’s supporters may find themselves even more squeezed.” (FT, 31 January 1985)
Chilean workers and particularly the youth, who’ve both been hardest hit by the policies of the regime, have proved during the recent period that they will no longer tolerate the military dictatorship. Elections are not due until 1989, but in view of the tremendous traditions of the Chilean workers, I think it is unlikely that they will be prepared to wait that long.
I will continue to use every means I can, to condemn the methods of repression and torture and the collusion of this and other capitalist governments and the Chilean regime. In the long run, nothing will be able to stop the massive power and strength of the Chilean masses in their fight to rid society not only of that bloody dictator, but also of the rotten economic system which brought him to power.
WORKERS OF THE WORLD UNITE!
 







TERRY FIELDS spoke in Parliament recently about the decline
of Liverpool’s industry and against the redundancies put forward
by the Labour council. He was attacked by the press and the Labour
leadership but few of them reported what he actually said.
Militant reprints part of his speech.




CONSERVATIVE MEMBERS say, “I taught in Liverpool,” or “I
went through Liverpool on a bus,” but we have lived there all our
lives and have seen the conditions of our constituents.
We do not need lessons from Tories representing the ruling class
to tell us what is in our best interests. Since 1983, in local and
general elections, the people of Liverpool have consistently shown
that the Tories have no place in Liverpool politics.
We are asked to attack the trade unions in Liverpool. We are being
asked on all sides to sack workers in a city which, on everyone’s
evaluation, has been impoverished over decades.
People in my city are trying to resolve the problems, but all that
we get is a pantomime from Conservative Members who have no
cognisance of the conditions of our people.
They do not know what they are talking about. My father was a
docker; he lived and died on the docks. He worked like a horse and
was treated like an animal in the pens by them and their class, so
they should not tell us about the docks. They have starved the city
of finance and they have created poverty, bad housing conditions and
unemployment. Now, almost like voyeurs, they are coming back to the
scene of the crime.
The Conservatives boast about investment in Liverpool, but they
have crippled the city. They understand that I know what they are
about and which class interests they represent. I represent my class
proudly, standing up to defend workers and the city of Liverpool. We
have defended it against all corners. We fear none of you – you
have done all you can.
I am sorry about the parliamentary courtesy but when I see my
class enemy face to face, I sometimes lose my cool.
We shall not solve the problems of Liverpool in this bear garden
or through the Liberals and Tories, but through a Labour Government
implementing socialist policies with the same enthusiasm as the Prime
Minister and his predecessor have represented their class, the money
fellows in the City, the Saunders’ and all those who are screwing
my class. We shall never forgive you for it.
The decline in the economy has had adverse effects on the city of
Liverpool. That has been mentioned time and again. The Member for
Sheffield, Brightside (Blunkett) said in Labour Briefing in 1984:
“The difficulty with the Liverpool situation is that it
is unique. Not simply in its financial position, taking over a
Liberal budget with a Labour programme, having no reserves or back up
funds to survive the coming year, but because Liverpool is a living
tribute to private enterprise and Tory policy in the destruction of
the economy and industry.”
He went on to say that we should be looking for ways to support
the Liverpool councillors in their struggle against the Government as
part of an on-going programme by other Labour-controlled authorities
to assist and to stand with Liverpool against the Tories.
We are told that Liverpool is a debt-ridden city because of the
policies of Militant and the extremists. That is not true. I
take as my source the municipal year book, which compares 1980 and
1990. In fact, Liverpool’s debt is less than Manchester’s; it is
almost equal to that of Leeds and is exceeded by Coventry’s.
Liverpool’s debt is no more or less than that of the majority of
local authorities. If we are looking for criticism, we do not need
the Tories to tell us how to run a sound economy in our city because
they bankrupted the country and continue to do so with their economic policies.
Redundancies are a crisis for Liverpool. I do not believe that it
is right that a Labour authority should make people redundant when
there are jobs to be done for the council.
The reality is that, in Liverpool, there are unfilled vacancies on
the work list. Other vacancies are coming up because of natural
wastage, and 500 jobs will be found and (the council) could employ
those workers if it wanted to.
We need a Labour Government elected at the next general election –
the sooner the better – as a starting point to regenerate
inner-city areas.
We must give notice to the incoming Labour Government not to
follow the path of the Wilson or Callaghan Administrations, which had
to face, on the one hand, the demand of big business and the
International Monetary Fund and, on the other, the hopes and
aspirations of working people which had built up after 13 nightmarish
years of Toryism.
If we are to make any deals, they will not be with those in the
City. Let us have our discussions with the working class, the
disfranchised, the homeless, the poor, with those who are crippled by
the mortgage interest rate and with those small business people who
cannot afford to run their factories.
Those people are our wonderful constituency, but we will not
control what we do not own. Conservative Members understand that point.
Our programme for the future is the nationalisation of the
commanding heights of the economy, with workers controlling the
management and planning for need, not greed.
That is the only solution to Liverpool’s problems. It is the
only solution to the problems of the working class. The clowns on the
Conservative benches have nothing to offer us that would help to
solve our problems.
 







TERRY FIELDS has sent this message to all his constituents
explaining why he had refused to pay the poll tax



To the residents of Broadgreen,
You will know that I have been sentenced to 60 days in prison for
not paying the poll tax. As the media will misrepresent my actions, I
am writing to each family in Broadgreen.
I have been jailed for my principles, for defending the people who
elected me. I am not the first to suffer class injustice. Pensioners
and other impoverished people have been imprisoned for the so-called
‘crime’ of being unable to pay the poll tax.
Workers were jailed for organising the first trade unions – and
since. Women were jailed whilst campaigning for the right to vote.
But for people who were prepared to put their principles before their
self-interest, we would not have any democratic rights today.
I was the victim of a kangaroo court. My solicitor showed that the
poll tax authorities have acted illegally – but the magistrates
chose to ignore this. They were out to make an example of me, to try
and intimidate ordinary people into paying the poll tax.
You elected me as your MP in 1983 and again in 1987. I promised to
be a workers’ MP on a workers’ wage. Since then I’ve remained
on the wage of a firefighter, not the £28,000 that most MP’s live
on. I remain true to the people of Broadgreen, remaining in touch
with your conditions.
Since you elected me I have seen the savage attacks on workers,
pensioners, the unemployed and our children. The poll tax is the
worst of these attacks. It aims to pauperise the already needy and
line the pockets of the super-rich. The vast majority agree that it
is the most vicious law imposed on the nation.
14 million ordinary people banded together in mass civil
disobedience, refusing to pay. They caused the downfall of Thatcher.
Mass non-payment forced the Tories to concede a £140 rebate to all
poll tax payers. It forced the Tories to promise poll tax abolition.
But the poll tax remains for two years. I have pledged to stand
with those unable to pay – the low-paid, the pensioner, the
housewife, those on benefits. For those law-abiding people it is not
a question of breaking the law but their inability to pay. For me it
is a question of not abandoning them but of standing shoulder to
shoulder with them.
I am no martyr. I did not wish to go to prison, to be separated
from my family. I know from many of my constituents just how
appalling prison conditions are. But I was elected to defend your
interests. If imprisonment is the price for being principled, for
saying what I mean and meaning what I say, so be it. Hopefully my
stand will hasten the complete abolition of the poll tax.
The Tories and their rich friends in industry are the ones who
should be on trial. They have destroyed our NHS, underfunded our
education system, condemned our children to a life on the dole. The
fat cats in industry reap in profits one day, award themselves
obscene pay rises and sack workers the next. These are the real
criminals, guilty of crimes against all of us.
I remain at your service, standing with you against injustice,
feeling privileged to represent you. I will not rest until all my
constituents are free from the fear of poll tax debt, bailiffs and jailings.
Stand up to the Tories!
Terry Fields MP
 







TERRY FIELDS MP is serving a 60-day sentence in Walton jail for poll tax non-payment. From his cell, Terry has sent a message to other poll tax prisoners. Jailed poll tax activist Eric Segal sent a copy to Militant.




My dear comrades, brothers and sisters,
I am writing to you collectively because collectively we are standing together in defence of our class against the most vicious attack upon the poor and the old in society by this Tory government.
My heart goes out to the pensioners and members of my class whose only crime is to be poor and who I know are sharing the same deprivation as myself. I hope that in the areas you are incarcerated, the support and demonstrations continue and that the people outside let you know that you are not forgotten.
Like myself, I’m sure you are sustained by the letters and messages of support from the millions of people we represent. I hope these continue.
These past 12 years have been a nightmare for the very people who are now at the sharp end of this Tory class-based legislation.
For the more far-sighted, this nightmare is unending, even if the next election brings in a Labour government which, for whatever misguided reasons, fails to learn the lessons of history and refuses to tackle the root-cause of the misery for millions of our fellow citizens – the rotten exploitative capitalist system which governs and controls every aspect of our lives.
A system which nationally and internationally can see people starve to death whilst health and affluence drips from a small minority. A system where families in Britain have to decide to pay the poll tax or feed their children. A system where pensioners will die of cold and neglect this winter because Tory Britain has no further use for them. And a system where the future for working-class youth is non-existent.
You will know from letters received that your sacrifice and resistance has encouraged millions throughout the length and breadth of the British Isles and internationally.
At last people are reflecting. The spirit and traditions of our class are far from dead, the flame still flickers.
I am proud to share this experience with you all but like you, I suffer the temporary separation from family and loved ones. Your sacrifice, more than mine, will be remembered long after the siren voices of faint-hearts have faded in the memories of ordinary decent people.
Stay strong. Be confident. They can imprison the body but the minds and hearts of we comrades-in-arms remain forever free.
My heartfelt and comradely greetings to you all and your families. I have nothing but respect and affection for you.
DV 3695 Fields T.
 




“THAT THIS House strongly condemns the appalling police activities during the current miners’ dispute, notably in Yorkshire village of Fitzwilliam, in which nine young people were arrested for breaching the peace, and many others manhandled by the police; notes that this incident is unfortunately only one of many in which the police have behaved provocatively and excessively in mining areas, and which innocent people have been arrested on trumped-up charges; notes that bail conditions have been severely restrictive, making normal freedom of movement impossible; urges Her Majesty’s government to (i) effect an amnesty for those arrested or convicted in the present strike, (ii) end police occupation of, and withdraw all outside forces from, mining areas, (iii) act to ensure the re-instatement of those sacked through conviction or victimisation, (iv) introduce democratically elected police committees to oversee promotion, discipline, equipment and policing policy.”
 
This motion was put forward by Terry Fields MP for Liverpool Broadgreen. He also wrote the following letter to Home Secretary Leon Brittan:
12th November 1984
Dear Home Secretary
I am writing to protest about the activities of the police during the current miners’ dispute.
I want to refer in particular to the incidents which occurred in the Yorkshire village of Fitzwilliam, where dozens of riot police literally ran amok through the streets and the local pub. People, young and old, men and women, miners and non-miners, were indiscriminately beaten and altogether nine were arrested. As if this weren’t sufficient, stringent bail conditions were imposed on those arrested, which were designed to make it extremely difficult for them to pursue a normal life.
These nine young people are to be tried in Castleford on 3rd December, on charges of breaching the peace. As far as I am concerned, there was indeed a breach of the peace in Fitzwilliam on 9th July, but it was certainly not committed by those facing charges, but rather by the police.
I would not claim that Fitzwilliam is an isolated incident. On the contrary, I must protest about the constant mass deployment of police for purposes clearly quite different from that police are normally supposed to undertake. One example that particularly shocked me was that on August 20th, 1,500 escorted one working miner to work at Gascoigne Wood pit; while the very same day is was announced that only 500 men nationally had been detailed to hunt for ‘The Fox’, a perverted individual responsible for the rape of six women and who was widely presumed at large in Yorkshire.
I am certainly not opposed to the police catching criminals and protecting the community from crime in general. But thousands of miners and families, through their own recent experiences, are now permanently embittered towards the police. This will make the task of fighting crime in mining areas, once the strike is over, much more difficult.
I would therefore urge that you launch an immediate investigation into policing methods used during this strike, in the light of the very disturbing events at Fitzwilliam. I would also request that you direct that all charges against the ‘Fitzwilliam 9’ be dropped.



 


Yours sincerely
Terry Fields M.P.



 




PEOPLE TALK about the rule of law and parliament but this
government was elected in 1983 with a reduced majority from 1979; a
big majority of the population didn’t vote for them.
In Liverpool there was a swing to Labour in the council elections
despite a national swing against. In the general election there was a
two and a half per cent swing to Labour in Liverpool. In my
constituency, Broadgreen, we had a four and a half per cent swing.
That is an indication that the programme we have gone out on at
local authority and parliamentary level is one that people have been
prepared to support.
Even in the Liverpool Echo we have a statement from a Tory
so-called ‘dossier’ that the policies of Labour have been known
at least since 1981. An article by Derek Hatton in the Echo
then indicated what Labour would do.
In Liverpool there have been a whole series of public meetings,
mass rallies, reaching all sections of the community. Despite the
press lies, the unions and the mass of the rank and file are coming
fairly and squarely behind Labour.
Over the past months there has been a wide programme of activity
by Liverpool city councillors who have gone to every
Labour-controlled authority in the country.
In the last week I and other people have addressed a number of
meetings in London to explain Liverpool’s situation, and received
magnificent support. We have got Labour MPs from the London area,
from the Campaign Group of MPs, London councillors and local
authority workers to come to Liverpool before the 29th to support the council.
When all this is going on it is a scandal that we have got people
on the council prepared to stab the movement in the back. What is
even more scandalous is that they have had the opportunity over the
past months, indeed since last May, to raise any reservations about
the policy, and got support from certain Labour Parliamentary spokesmen.
Liverpool’s five Labour MPs are solid in support of the city
council. We were elected to fight for the people of Liverpool, not to
carry out the dirty work of the Tories.
 







THE ANNUAL Conference of the Labour Party opens as the miners begin the 30th
week of their strike.
The strike will cast a long shadow over the proceedings. The fight of the miners and their communities raises the whole question of the direction in which society is moving and the role and purpose of the Labour Party itself.



*
Labour’s right wing always bleat about strikes being “electorally unpopular”, so they have kept their distance from the miners in the last six months. But precisely in this period, because a significant section of workers have taken on Thatcher, the Labour Party has overhauled the Tories, even by the rigged opinion polls of Fleet Street.
More importantly, the miners have clearly had the backing of the great majority of organised workers. Including official loans and donations given by union leaders to the NUM, there must be approaching a million pounds a week going to help the miners, mostly from the pockets of ordinary working people.
 
Tory splits
This rank and file support especially of transport workers and dockers, and probably soon power workers, will deny the Tories the triumph they so arrogantly expected over the miners.
The high-handed attitude of MacGregor and Thatcher has so enraged even the union of pit deputies, NACODS, that some of its branches in Nottinghamshire voted by as much as 90 per cent for strike action over pay and closures.
Growing misgivings within the Tory Cabinet and support given to the miners by the likes of the Bishop of Durham are also reflections of the visible social discontent with the policies of Thatcher and her hangers-on.
Although the Labour Party leadership have been equivocal, the rank and file have backed the miners all along.
One of the prime aims at Blackpool must be for delegates to put overwhelming pressure on the Party leadership to back the miners with the same enthusiasm.
But the issues go wider than the strike. Thousands of miners are drawing direct political conclusions from the struggle into which they have been catapulted. Many are joining the Labour Party. They understand that if there are no fundamental social changes, then they, like other workers, will have to go through the same fight all over again, at some later stage, to safeguard their jobs.
 
Capitalism in crisis
The system that the Tories represent cannot sustain the living standards painstakingly built up by workers over the years. The miners’ strike is a stark indication of the movement of society towards greater instability and upheaval as workers have no choice but to fight.
What future does capitalist Britain offer, especially to youth? Only greater unemployment, dead-end jobs, homelessness, despair, and the only alternative being heroin, glue or worse. The Tories have brought a living nightmare to workers’ families in the last five years, but that nightmare only reflects the collapse and decay of the system itself.
The Labour Party conference will have the attention of all the most active workers in this coming week. A way must be shown out of the impasse of Toryism.
The conference above all must raise the banner of change. Workers must be shown that there is a sane and rational way to run society.
Socialist policies must be brought forward involving the democratic planning and use of all society’s resources, manpower and wealth for the benefit of all. Clause IV, part 4 of Labour’s constitution, the fundamental socialist aim written on every Party membership card must become the cornerstone of the programme and policy of the Labour Party.
 
Socialist policies
The miners’ strike is a milestone in the development of social relations in Britain. The priority of the conference must be to build a Labour Party worth of the aspirations or the working class, a socialist party.
 




The main debates, as I see them, will focus on four key issues facing members as firemen and trade unionists.
After our historic strike, we won a pay agreement that was to bring us in line with the ‘upper quartile’ [the highest paid quarter] of manual workers, in two stages.
Last year we received the first instalment. But will we get the rest, or will the Tory government try to interfere? How much will be paid?
The biggest question is what the ‘upper quartile’ really represents and how the government statistics are arrived at. Our settlement is based on what amounts to a comparability exercise, but the survey of firemen’s pay is worked out on a sample of 240 firemen. Who and where they are and how representative their pay rates are, we have no way of knowing.
We must call for trade union control over the collection of these statistics and drawing up of our claim.
Cuts are another major threat. There must be total opposition to all redundancies, voluntary or otherwise. We must fight all cutbacks which deprive the public of protection and us firemen of jobs. The full weight of the union has got to be thrown into the fight to defend jobs.
We have long fought for a shorter working week. While accepting the 2 : 2 : 4 system – working two days, two 6.00 p.m. to 9.00 a.m. nights, then four days off – is a vast improvement, it is not the end of the fight.
If we won a 1 : 1 : 4 arrangement, I’m sure members would grab it with both hands, and it would bring us a lot nearer to the 35-hour week that we, with all other unions, should be fighting for throughout industry.
The fight on wages and jobs and to maintain and improve standards is tied up in a cause and effect process. Low wages and poor conditions are not heaven-sent: they are caused by the government and the system we live under. So workers are forced to fight again and again for better wages and to defend our jobs
In the long term therefore, the most important resolutions will be those on government policies and continuation of the programme to fully democratise the Labour Party, with a firm commitment to Clause IV, part 4 of its constitution, for socialist public ownership of the economy.
This alone would make it possible for people to be treated with dignity and compassion, and not as now, as so much garbage to be disposed of by the Tories and big business.
 

   The trade union leaders have called on workers to protest against the Tories on May 14 – the call must now be for a 24-hour general strike on this day, with the TUC giving decisive leadership, spelling out clearly why the Tories must be confronted and liking it to a political struggle. Many labour activists support this view: [Feature includes comments from LP/TU figures including Emlyn Williams, Terry Fields, Tony Saunois, Tony Mulhearn] Terry Fields [FBU National Executive] “The situation as far as our executive is concerned is that we have taken a decision that on 14 May the firemen nationally will be on a work to rule, answering emergency calls only, although he decision has not been yet finalised. I think it’s crucial that the firemen should be included in it, and that we are seen to be participating. “A 24-hour general strike call is certainly not premature. Some people are accusing us of being extremists, and over-reacting to the situation, but if you see my home area of Merseyside, for example, you’d understand that people are fed up with the way a whole area has been ravaged by the Tories. I think it’s long overdue, but it’s got to be co-ordinated properly. The leadership up there say get involved locally in your local cuts committee etc., but a definite need for a national strategy could be laid down – hopefully by the conference called by the Liverpool Trades Council and Labour Party, to co-ordinate activity will get a good response nationally, and put pressure on the national leadership to really take this thing on board fully. We’ve got to get it well orchestrated because there’s no way that you can just push the problems around and then forget all about it.”   



Complete banning of the right to strike and a crippling of free
trade unions! That’s what the reactionary bosses’ government in
Sri Lanka wants.
But hundreds of thousands of workers are still out in a
magnificent general strike called by the Joint Trade Union Action
Committee [see page 8].
British trade unionists will not stand by and let their brothers
in Sri Lanka be ground down and stripped of all democratic trade
union rights. Already several trade union general secretaries have
sent telegrams of protest to the Sri Lankan government.
The Fire Brigades Union have given moral and financial support to
the workers and the Bakers’ Union Executive will take up the matter
next week. A deputation from the Labour Party NEC will meet the High
Commissioner in London soon.
Meanwhile, dockers, airport workers and Post Office workers are
discussing the possibility of blacking Sri Lankan trade. The
Merseyside Docks shop stewards’ Executive were due to discuss
action this week, and the Post Office Engineers Union members are to
propose cutting communications.
Every trade union branch, Labour Party and Young Socialists branch
should immediately rush protests against the Sri Lankan government’s
anti-union attempts to: Sri Lanka High Commission, 13 Hyde Park
Gardens, London W.2.
Messages of support for the union should go to JTUAC c/o United
Federation of Labour, 17 Barrack Lane, Colombo 2, Sri Lanka. Please
send copies of these messages to Wesley Mutiah, 19 Hawthorn Avenue,
London N.13.
Make sure that your national trade union leadership sends a
message too! Black all Sri Lankan goods, finance and services for the
duration of the general strike!
The government has frozen the funds of the trade unions and seized
twelve union headquarters. Financial assistance is desperately
needed. Please take collections and rush donations to the United
Federation of Labour, c/o Wesley Muthian [address above].
 







When the government declared its aim of limiting public sector pay increases to 9.6%, the Fire Brigades Union, whose pay settlement is due in early November, responded immediately with a statement setting out their opposition.
Terry Fields, a member of the FBU executive, explained the union’s position to Mike Lawson, a Merseyside fireman.



*
The nine-week strike in 1977/78 was the first in 60 years of the FBU’s history. We returned to work without achieving our instant demand but on the understanding that in two stages, over a two-year period, firemen’s average earnings would fully equate to the average earnings of male manual workers.
The Labour government’s pay policy, restricting settlements to 10%, was the stumbling block to us obtaining in 1977 what was rightfully ours. We had been through enquiries and arbitration which made recommendations in our favour in this respect.
The two-year staging was therefore a face-saving compromise, which took cognisance of the tremendously serious implications that repeated industrial action by firemen would have,
There was a paragraph in the agreement which pledged, roughly, ‘thereafter to maintain firemen at that appropriate level in the pay scales.’ The FBU hold that formula as the key to stability and peace in the fire service as far as wages are concerned.
Whatever figure is thrown up through the various calculations, that pay rate for those in the ‘upper quartile’ will be legitimately ours as a right. It was fought for and won after nine hard weeks on strike. Interference with that formula should be met with fierce opposition by firemen.
To be kidded into believing that sacrifice by firemen this year would be met by a redress in that imbalance in later years, would be lunacy. To give up the formula this year would be to say goodbye to it forever.
With this in mind and carrying out its responsibility to show leadership, the National Executive of the Fire Brigades Union are serving notice on the Tory government and the employers of the possible serious consequences such interference would cause.
More importantly from the rank and file point of view, this should give warning of the need to maintain the formula this year, or by default slip once again into the pre-strike situation where firemen’s families were eligible for social security benefits etc., as our living standards slumped because we refused to fight for what is legitimately ours.
To show any weakness now would give the green light to the government and employers for further savage attacks.
Reviewing the present political scene we discussed how we could call a halt to the pernicious assault on the working class by the Tories.
I was delighted to hear that the FBU is supporting the Bakers Union resolution at the TUC, with an amendment. This resolution, calling for organised joint action by the TUC and the Labour Party, correctly points the way forward to the working class by initiating a movement to bring down the Tories.
It clearly identifies the need to couple the day to day struggles of the workers with the need to change society. The call for a Labour government committed to clause IV part 4 is also essential, and the trade union movement, having learnt the lessons of past struggles and the current Tory attack, should rally to support the Bakers Union resolution as the only way forward for us all.
 




Tragically Terry Fields has died from lung cancer at the age of
71. Terry was a supporter of Militant, forerunner of the
Socialist Party, and a defender of the working class. In 1983, after
many years as a lay official for the fire fighters’ union, he was
elected as an MP for Liverpool Broadgreen on a clear socialist
programme. His campaign slogan was “vote for a workers’ MP on a
worker’s wage”.
There was no doubt in the minds of the Broadgreen electorate that
Terry was a dyed-in-the wool radical socialist, because it was
published in his campaign material and the capitalist press told them
so. Terry was celebrated for his dedication to workers in struggle.
He was a regular on the miners’ picket line. He supported the
printers at Warrington when they fought Eddie Shah, the stalking
horse for the press magnates who were preparing to smash the print unions.
It wasn’t only British workers who enjoyed Terry’s support and
solidarity. He was invited in 1990 to a conference in Novokuznetsk
setting up a Confederation of Labour of the USSR. As a socialist and
internationalist he addressed the 600 delegates and visitors –
mostly mineworkers – congratulating them on their strikes and
struggles to throw off the old, parasitic bureaucracy. He warned them
against taking the “road to the market”, and defended the ideas
of genuine socialism against both Stalinism and capitalism.
In addition to fighting for a remedy to the problems facing
working-class families in his constituency, he gave unconditional
support to the Liverpool 47 in their titanic battle with the Tory
government and Labour right wing. The Liverpool 47 were Liverpool’s
socialist councillors who built five thousand houses, created
thousands of jobs, and opened many nursery schools in 1983–87.
Terry kept his pledge to take only a worker’s wage and donated
the remainder back to the labour movement. On this score he invited
the bile of career MPs whose snouts in the parliamentary pig trough
have been an ongoing scandal.
Terry played a leading role in opposing Thatcher’s hated poll
tax. The non-payment campaign eventually defeated both the tax and
Thatcher. Alongside 18 million people he refused to pay the tax. For
this he served 60 days in Walton jail. In his response to Terry’s
imprisonment, former Labour Party leader, Neil Kinnock, showed his
true colours. His reaction was not a condemnation of the poll tax,
but an attack on Terry for breaking the law!
Terry supported the slogan of the imprisoned Poplar councillors of
1919, adopted by the Liverpool 47: “Better to break the law than
break the poor.” He pointed out that if people had not been
prepared to break unjust laws in the past there wouldn’t be a
Labour Party for Kinnock to lead.
He refused to pay his poll tax even though some, who later
deserted Militant’s ranks, urged him to pay it.
 
A role model for today
Standing over six feet, Terry was a big man in every sense. His
lifestyle was that of the working class. Not for him the fancy cars
and silk suits. In fact he was known in parliament, to the annoyance
of the chief whip, for wearing his trademark leather jacket.
He had a deft turn of phrase. At a meeting to mark the 20th
anniversary of the 47 councillors’ surcharge he said: “Neil
Kinnock had been a young firebrand with socialism spewing out of
every orifice – but he finished up with something else spewing out
of every orifice!”
In his private life he enjoyed a social life in the local club
mingling with working people from the community. He was a good singer
and sang with a skiffle group in the 1960s, and he was no mean bingo caller.
These days there are calls for millionaire professional
footballers and other sporting celebrities to act as role models for
the youth. Terry Fields was the perfect role model for today’s
young people who look for a solution to their everyday problems of
work and security for the future. But they look in vain at the
current crop of parliamentary miscreants.
 







TERRY FIELDS, Labour newly elected MP for Liverpool Broadgreen, described to Militant what it was like to enter Parliament.



The first day back after the election was obviously exceptional, with hundreds of new MPs trying to find their way around. It was a real madhouse. I’d have been completely lost if a member of staff hadn’t showed me around.
The first thing that strikes you is the ecclesiastical atmosphere, and the cloistered feel of the place. It’s known as the most exclusive club in Britain, and that’s true. Everyone is very chummy – MPs meet up with their buddies from all parties. It was like an old boys reunion.
Everyone was rushing around trying to get all the form filling and formalities out of the way, mixed up with loads of flunkies and officials dressed in archaic fancy dress. I see the opposition as class enemies, and though I’d obviously expected it, it was still quite a shock to encounter the chummy relationships between the “old hands”.
There was a long queue with MP’s pushing and shoving to take the oath of allegiance to the Queen and the law. More than one Labour MP took it with fingers crossed and standing on one leg.
The atmosphere in the Chamber is unreal. People just jeering and shouting at each other. It is all very sixth form debating society ‘Yah-boo’ mentality. A lot of business seems to take place in the tea rooms. For people used to democracy and fair play of the labour movement the conduct of the debates and standards of speeches is quite a shock. If you are isolated you’d be intimidated and soon conform to the atmosphere and ritual nature of the place.
However I’m concerned with the United Biscuits closure in Liverpool, and I’m hoping to make my maiden speech soon on that issue.
 







THE voice of workers anger reached the hallowed chambers of
the Houses of Parliament on 24 June 1983, when Terry Fields, MP
for Liverpool Broadgreen, spoke for the first time in the Commons.
His speech accurately reflected the hatred of the Merseyside
workers for the Tories and their system. Here is his speech below
in full:



I am grateful to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, for you having called me
in this debate for this, my maiden speech.
I wish to make it clear from the outset that making my maiden
speech is not a formality. Maiden speeches are supposed to be
non-controversial but having listened to the cant and hypocrisy from
the Conservative benches it is difficult to keep my temper let alone
observe the proprieties of this place. For the working-class people
who have sent me down here to represent them, matters in our area are
far too pressing and urgent.
The solutions that I will be proposing to the problems of our
people will be controversial to the government but not to the people
of Broadgreen and Liverpool. Because of those policies, we obtained
victory in Broadgreen in the general election. I should like to
record my gratitude and thanks to the people from all over the
country who worked to ensure that we gained victory in Broadgreen.
My first task as a Member of Parliament, apart from dealing with
the appalling housing conditions inherited from the Tory-Liberal
alliance which ran Liverpool for a decade, was to deal with the
closure of Crawfords biscuit factory, in Liverpool with the loss of
2,000 jobs, which was announced on Tuesday 14 June. Those
circumstances are typical of what has happened to ordinary decent
people all over Merseyside. The workers at the factory have had no
major industrial disputes since the turn of the century. They have
accepted shift change patterns with the loss of £40 a week in
earnings. They have adapted to flexible working agreements. They have
cooperated in the shedding of 1,000 jobs already and now for their
pains and for their co-operation with management they are threatened
with the sack.
Unemployment on Merseyside has been mentioned on many occasions in
the House, and as recently as 20 April by my hon. Friend the Member
for Liverpool, Riverside [Mr Parry]. Since that debate a further
3,555 jobs have gone or will be lost in the area. I am saddened and
angered to hear from my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Walton
[Mr Heffer] that a factory in his constituency has been notified
today that it will close, with the loss of a further 350 jobs.
Conservative members talk about privatisation. Let us call it by
its proper name – asset-stripping. It is the reward and rake off
for those who gave £20 million in handouts to the Tories to fight
the election. I hope that members of the Post Office Engineering
Union and other organised workers will stand up and fight the
government’s proposals to close their industries and sell them to
private individuals.
Since the Tories came to power in 1979 Merseyside has lost 48,000
jobs. One firm a week has closed its doors. About 12,000 jobs a year
are going – that is 33 jobs every day of the year, Unemployment on
Merseyside is currently about 150,000. In some areas 94.7 per cent of
young people are unemployed. That is the grim reality of Tory Britain
for the people whom I represent.
The heartless, cynical response from the government in the debate
on 20 April, talking about the demise of the Kraft factory in
Liverpool, was to say that such events were unavoidable and involved
commercial judgements. What judgement do Tory members put on human
dignity when adults at a factory like Crawfords are reduced to tears
of despair and anger because their factory is closing?
The Pontius Pilates of the Tory government attempt to shift the
blame from themselves and their system to the world crisis. The truth
is that unemployment is not an act of God. It does not fall from the
sky, but it is symptomatic of the system they defend, typified by the
world crisis of capitalism and the even deeper malaise of British
capitalism. The government’s policies have contributed to the misery
of working people on Merseyside. They have no solution for working
people. A Select Committee, chaired by the right hon. Member for
Taunton [Mr du Cann], clearly states that 50 per cent of
unemployment in Britain is the direct result of the government’s
monetarist policies. Many people looked to the Queen’s Speech for
some direction for the millions who are unemployed or face
redundancy. We warned during the general election campaign that if
the Tories were elected on 9 June closures and redundancies would
happen immediately, but in Liverpool we did not expect it to happen
so soon. It is no coincidence that the announcement of the closures
came after the election result and the return of Labour members from Liverpool.
There is no hope in the Queen’s speech for ordinary working
people. For the government it is business as usual with policies the
same as before. On 5 May in the local government elections the people
of Liverpool ditched the Liberal-Tory ruling alliance and elected a
Labour-controlled Liverpool City Council to fight to reverse the
decline of our once great city.
On 9 June the people of Liverpool elected five Labour members out
of a total of six. They had campaigned uncompromisingly on socialist
policies, which the electorate of Liverpool have accepted as the only
hope for the majority in society in the face of heartless Toryism.
Workers in Liverpool who have had to suffer longer and harder than
workers in most areas from the excesses of capitalist exploitation
have turned correctly to a political solution for the resolution of
their problems.
The record of this government and the big business interests that
they and the Liberal-SDP alliance represent hold out no hope for the
majority of workers.
There has been a 29 per cent fall in investment over the past four
years. The patriotism of capitalism has been exposed as a sham. A
total of £29 billion has been exported – that is, wealth created
by the workers but shunted abroad – aided and abetted by the Tory
government. The living standards of ordinary, decent, working class
people have been driven down, despite officially doctored statistics.
I assure Tory politicians that it is no good just reading about it.
You have to live in those conditions to understand what the majority
of people are going through. It is in those circumstances that small
business men have been driven to the wall by bankruptcy.
Despite the Tory victory on 9 June, we give fair warning that a
large majority in Parliament will not save the government when the
true effects of their policies are felt by British people. The
government of 1924 had a majority of 200. Stanley Baldwin thought
that he could savage the living standards of ordinary people. Do the
Tories now think that they can do the same, perhaps in a more brutal
fashion? Baldwin’s actions provoked the 1926 general strike. This
government’s policies will provoke even greater reaction from working
people. Of that there is no doubt.
Events shape history. The nostalgic yearnings for the 1950s and
60s, when times were good, which moved people to vote Tory at the
last election will finally wear thin and the hard facts will emerge.
Then, the inability of the Tories and their system to satisfy the
expectations of workers in their belief that things will turn out
right will explode in Tory faces. There are no solutions in the past;
Tory policies will provoke a social upheaval in Britain. Neither
monetarism nor Keynesianism can solve the problems of working people.
You have tried and failed. When will you learn your lesson?
The experience of working people under the government will teach
them that there is no solution under capitalism. Increasingly they
will turn to the socialist alternative and the labour movement – to
the benefits of democratic public ownership based on a planned
economy – when the needs of the majority will be fulfilled. Then,
the mayhem and lunacy of the present system, like Conservative hon.
members, will be cast into the dustbin of history. Ordinary decent
people will be heard and the voice of Liverpool – with the message
of hope that turning to socialism will bring – will act as a beacon
to the rest of the country.
At the start of the election campaign in Perth, the Prime Minister
said that she was giving the British people an opportunity to banish
socialism and Marxism from the land. Others stronger than she have
tried and failed. Labour may have been defeated at the election, but
socialism and Marxism have not been, and will not be, defeated in the
eyes and hearts of the working class.
My election victory in Broadgreen, which for many decades was a
marginal, refutes the Prime Minister’s boast. The victory in
Liverpool for working people is the music of the future.
The media and my political opponents during the election, in
seeking to denigrate me and the socialism I stood for, made great
play of the label ‘militant’. Let me make my position clear. I wear
the badge of a militant with honour, and do not forget that a
militant is only a moderate who has got up off his knees. In time,
the whole of the working class will arise from their knees, and you
will not be laughing then.
 

   Militant interview with Terry Fields, Labour candidate in Broad Green, Liverpool * Militant: “What are the main issues?” Terry Fields: “On the doorstep you often hear the cry ‘you’re all the same’. Well in Broad Green I am to restore the confidence of the electorate in an MP who is committed to carry out his pledges, who shared their experiences and who lives their lifestyle. If elected I will only accept the wages of a skilled worker, and donate all the rest back to the labour movement. “In Liverpool the twin fight has been for a Labour council and for a Labour government. We’ve got the first, now we’re going to win the second. It’s the only way to solve the major problems facing ordinary people – unemployment, housing, prices, and disarmament.” M: “What should be the priorities of a Labour government?” TF: “First tackle unemployment. The Labour government should take a leaf out of the book of Liverpool City Council which is putting into train an immediate programme to create an extra 1000 jobs in the city. If the Labour government did this it would create confidence amongst workers. The main priority must be to carry out in full its manifesto and not renege on any commitments.”  Unions support M: “What help have the labour and trade union movement promised to help you win Broad Green?” TF: “After the local elections there is a great confidence we can win Broad Green. The Trade Unions for Labour Victory (TULV) is playing an important role. Senior trade union officials of the TGWU, GMBATU, National Union of Seamen, UCW and UCATT have been designated to work here. “My union, FBU, are giving magnificent support in this key marginal. The GMBATU have offered a room in their regional offices which is situated in the Broad Green constituency, as a headquarters of the local Labour Party during its campaign. GMBATU stewards at Cammell Lairds have promised to send a busload of stewards into the constituency to help in the campaign. Other workers facing the threat of redundancy have said they will help. “Six weeks ago, Broad Green constituency did not exist. Now we can create history, by electing a workers’ MP here to represent the working class.”   



Despite the overwhelming opposition of local district health
authorities, doctors, health workers and the community as a whole,
the Tories are determined to go ahead with big cuts in the funding of
Liverpool area health authority. The significance of these cutbacks
to the service provided to working people can be gauged by some of
the comments, reproduced here, of Merseyside Labour MPs speaking in a
special Parliamentary debate on the issue last week.
The key element, however, in the fight to retain the standards
of service and NHS jobs – in Liverpool and nationally – will be
the struggles of the wider trade union and labour movement, and
especially of the workers in the NHS trade unions themselves.



[The below is part of a feature with messages from six
Merseyside MPs which also included Robert Waring, Eric Heffer,
Robert Parry, Eddie Loyden and Robert Kilroy-Silk – ID]




Terry Fields MP (Liverpool, Broadgreen):
The government must be warned. The fight back has already started
in Liverpool. Although people are on their knees, they are prepared
to struggle and to take on the government and those acting on their
behalf in their attacks on the health service.
Liverpool has suffered a cutback of 422 hospital beds, including
20 per cent of medical and geriatric beds.
There has been a cut of 25 per cent in surgical beds and 22 per
cent in children’s beds. Also, 273 psychiatric long-stay beds for
the elderly and mentally ill is a long way short of the recommended
level. The Liverpool health area will suffer staff cuts of about 679.
Having spoken to those involved, I believe that the figure will be
closer to 1,000 ...
I have spoken not to the consultants but to the workers, to NUPE
and to COHSE. They are prepared to fight and struggle for their jobs,
irrespective of whether the Government or the regional health
authority are trying to take them away. They care about the people in
their hospital beds and the people of Liverpool who will lose the
services. They are prepared to take on the Government.
... We are on record as saying that, although we have to fight the
Government’s legislative proposals in the House, Liverpool Members
will be back on the picket lines with those workers defending their
jobs and services in our area.
We are prepared to fight for the workers. We warn the Government
now that their policies will lead to confrontation in areas such as
Liverpool. We shall be four square behind those workers.
 







The Police and Criminal Evidence Bill was debated in the
House of Commons on 7 November at its second reading.
The Bill proposes drastic new laws covering the searching,
arrest and detention of suspects. It removes many safeguards and
tries to “solve” the enormous social problems in Britain by a
greatly strengthened police force.
We print below the speech by Terry Fields, Labour MP for
Liverpool Broadgreen which shows clearly why workers and
socialists argue for accountability of the police in the community.
The speech infuriated certain members of the Conservative
Party front and back benches. One Tory MP Tony Baldry, the MP for
Banbury said he was tempted to invite Terry Fields to his
constituency and pay his expenses so that the public could hear
the real voice of the Labour Party!
Mr. Baldry, for once, is correct. This is the voice of the
organised working class. The Labour Party should ensure that the
arguments used by Terry Fields are given wide publicity in the
campaign for the defeat of the Police Bill and for full
accountability of the police.




THE discussion about accountability and lack of accountability
is not new.
It has been going on throughout the history of the police force
and the various vested interests which have been pulling law and
order about during that period.
The police have not always been unaccountable to local pressures
and local democracy. When the Metropolitan police and the police
forces up and clown the country were created in 1829 they were under
the control of watch committees made up of local councillors who
fixed pay and conditions and looked after the everyday running of the
police forces.
When the county councils were formed in 1880, they had standing
joint committees – 50 per cent county councillors and 50 per cent
local magistrates – with powers similar to watch committees and
absolute control over the running of those police forces.
Chief constables made weekly reports to the county councils as a
duty, but continuous pressure from government to establish greater
central control, as today, was resisted by local interests.
During the 19th century the Home Secretary’s main role was the
maintenance of adequate police forces and establishments. Perhaps
that is what certain Home Secretaries should be confining themselves
to in modern times.
The relationship at that time was not only a matter of convenience
but a reflection of the balance of class forces in society and the
political relations that flowed from them. At that time borough
councils were dominated by industrialists and commercial capitalists
who paid the police out of the rates and therefore legitimately
insisted on democratic control over the police.
The industrial middle class was suspicious of government which it
associated with extravagance and unnecessary expenditure – a crime
of which it would not accuse the present government – and which it
feared would interfere in its affairs on behalf of the aristocratic
oligarchy which dominated government at the time.
The demand again was for local democracy and accountability. This
was before the working class became an independent political
force in society.
When the majority of the working class obtained the vote in 1918 –
women obtained it in 1928 – there was a complete change of tune on
the part of the ruling class of this country. It arose not out of a
fear of the aristocrats, who had served their purpose and no longer
posed a threat, but out of a fear of the growing strength of the
Labour movement.
 
The myth of neutrality
At the end of the first world war Labour councillors were elected,
and in some areas there were Labour-controlled local authorities. The
attempt by the state to take control out of local hands and to
centralise it was made even more urgent after the police strikes of
1918 and 1919, which were a reflection of what was taking place in society.
After the strikes, the Desborough report made recommendations for
the overhaul of the structure of the police force. It made
recommendations on appointments, promotions and discipline within
police forces.
There was an attempt to take those responsibilities out of the
hands of watch committees and to give them to chief constables to
interpret, which was resisted in the House until 1964.
During that period, the powers of chief constables were
strengthened and the element of democratic control through watch
committees was strangled. The demand for democracy brought about a
Royal Commission in 1960 which identified the main problem as the
control of chief constables.
The Royal Commission’s idea of resolving the problem was to make
chief constables more accountable to central Government and not to
the watch committees made up of local people with an interest in
their localities. Despite all that, the local authorities still had
to pay 50 per cent of the cost.
At that time, we saw the establishment by chief constables of the
principle that operational matters were beyond the purview and
outside the scope of police committees. The new police committees
that were set up were not even made up of local councils and
councillors but were independent statutory bodies divorced from local
councils and local affairs.
Chief constables have consistently resisted attempts at democratic
control by local authorities and councillors. In so doing, they have
suggested that such accountability would make them subject to
political pressure and control.
In effect, they are perpetuating the myth – which is important
for them to gain public acceptance of their role in the past – that
the police are an arm of a neutral state, above politics and removed
from the everyday events in society.
Let us look at the reality of that so-called neutrality, in the
stormy events of the 1970s and since. We saw a new decade of crisis
which brought real and significant changes in planning and the
training of our police.
If we look at the events of 1971, with the government of the right
hon. member for Old Bexley and Sidcup (Mr Heath) and his Industrial
Relations Act, we see that the police came into sharp conflict with
the trade union movement.
That was brought to a sharp point in 1972 with the miners’ strike
and the battles at Saltley gate where the police were defeated and
forced to retreat by miners with the support of the trade union movement.
It is with no great pleasure that we talk about the defeat of a
group of workers. We identify the police as workers, subject to the
same economic pressures as any of us, our families and others in
society. Such a defeat of workers gives us no pleasure.
More important, the defeat of the police and the Heath government
was a crushing blow to the Tories. It demonstrated the weakness of
the capitalist state when faced with an organised and mobilised
labour movement.
It brought about an immediate review of security policies. We had
the police on the streets to deal with insurrection, a national
security committee was set up and in 1977 we saw riot shields on our
streets for the first time.
To protect the working class? Certainly not. It was to protect
Fascists in Lewisham. Anti-Fascist demonstrators were subjected to
oppression by the police and there were deaths on the streets.
Also during that period, we saw the army supporting the police in
their repressive attitudes towards the working class and the general
public. Of course, not only the outlook of hard-line police chiefs is involved.
The events of the 1970s opened a new perspective to the ruling
class. They saw that social peace and the post-war boom were over,
and they saw the onset of crisis in our society, which is endemic in
the system.
They foresaw a catastrophic decline in our economic base, the
inevitable erosion of living standards of ordinary people, and a
headlong clash with organised workers and the labour movement.
 
The fears of the ruling class
In August this year the Liverpool Echo carried an
exclusive article revealing that the ruling class – people like
Basil de Ferranti, Sir Hector Laing and the Duke of Kent – have
regular meetings with the Duke of Edinburgh in Buckingham Palace.
They are worried about what is happening in the inner city
areas such as Liverpool and they fear what will come about because of
unemployment and social unrest. Those statements were made not by me
but by the Liverpool Echo.
The article added that the police and the armed forces were
prepared to go on to the streets when industrial or civil unrest took
place. No attempt has been made to hide their views.
We must look at the myths and realities of the present situation.
On one side we have the law and order lobby, the so-called supporters
of peace and democracy, and on the other we have us scallywags on the
Labour benches.
Any criticism of the excesses of police constables are attacked as
an attempt to undermine the fight against crime. The previous Home
Secretary told the Tory Party conference in 1977 that it was a
Left-wing mythology that there was something despicable, almost
immoral, in discussing the prevention of crime at all.
We are not opposed to the police taking action to catch criminals
and to protect people’s safety and property. Working people are
naturally worried about crime and increasing violence, but the
Conservative benches and Tory Party spokesmen elevate moral issues
and abstractions of law and legality and seek to turn attention away
from the social roots of crime.
We are not just do-gooders. We live the experience of people in
inner cities. We do not pass through in our cars occasionally and
get lifted by the bobbies.
In an article, not written by a left-wing lunatic or a Marxist,
the Boston police commissioner, Robert Di Grazia, said:
“We are not letting the public in on our era’s dirty
little secret, that those who commit the crime that worries citizens
most – violent street crime – are, for the most part, the
products of poverty, unemployment, broken homes, rotten education,
drug addiction and alcoholism, and other social ills about which the
police can do little, if anything.”
The same applies in Britain. After the Brixton disturbances, the
Prime Minister talked about the breakdown of respect for the law, and
the erosion of moral values. She and her Government cannot accept
that their economic policies have had a shattering effect especially
on youths and have helped to create the conditions for conflict on
the streets.
If there has been a breakdown of previously accepted social norms
of behaviour and of traditional morality, the Government have failed
to see that the terrible alienation of young people, created by the
profit system, has been a powerful contributory factor.
We will not solve such problems by arming the police, or by
providing them with riot gear, better water cannon, more CS gas and
plastic bullets. I am supported in that proposition by ex-Chief
Constable Alderson of Devon and Cornwall, who is perhaps persona
non grata with some other chief constables. He said: “One
thing is certain, it is no answer to resort to brute force to control people.”
He may be in the minority and considered to be a do-gooder or a
liberal, but nevertheless his view is supported in our society. The
emphasis should be on crime prevention, and unless the police have
the confidence and support of the people whom they protect, there is
no hope of fighting crime.
Recent events do not show that the public support the police
massively. Some chief constables are coming to grips with the fact
that society cannot put the emphasis on social welfare, and are
preoccupied with the task of defending the status quo and of
upholding authority, which they define as law and order.
They are not concerned with the protection of ordinary people from
violent assault, burglaries and so on.
I emphasise the fact that it is not Labour members or people such
as myself who make such statements. On the BBC Question Time
programme on 16 October 1979 the following statement was made:
“I think that from the police point of view that my
task in the future ... that basic crime as such – theft, burglary,
even violent crime – will not be the predominant police feature.
“What will be the matter of greatest concern to me
will be the covert and ultimately overt attempt to overthrow
democracy, to subvert the authority of the state, and, in fact, to
involve themselves in acts of sedition designed to destroy our
parliamentary system and the democratic government in this country.”
Chief Constable Anderton of the Greater Manchester police force
said that. That is the real role and perspective of some chief police
officers. In reality, to the police sedition and subversion mean
attempts by working people to use their democratic and trade union
rights to defend themselves, their interests and the interests of
those whom they represent.
Recently, chief constables have resorted to the blanket use under
the Public Order Act 1936 of bans on demonstrations and general
street activity by trade unionists and the Labour movement. They have
done that on the pretext of attacking and banning fascist
organisations that have come on to the streets.
But there are similar bans against democratic organisations of the
Labour movement which have a far more serious effect on democracy.
However, on several occasions we have seen enormous numbers of police
officers being used to escort those Fascists, marching in small
numbers through the streets. Again, that is done in the name of
so-called democracy.
While chief constables and others pretend that everything is hunky
dory and that we have no problems, the police are being tooled up and
geared up to take on the working class in later events.
Recruits are advised to:
“Watch out for people who, although not dishonest in
the ordinary sense, may, owing to extreme political views, intend to
harm the community you have sworn to protect.”
The manual also states: “While there are subtle differences
between these type of extremists and thieves, it is difficult to put
one’s finger on the material distinction.” That is routine
policy in some sections of the police.
Some time ago, while travelling from Preston to London, I
overheard a conversation that perhaps I should not have heard between
a cadet at Hendon police academy and one of his friends.
He informed his friend that during one of their lectures a police
sergeant had told them that since the Americans had intervened in
Afghanistan, the working class of Britain would be out demonstrating
on the streets.
He said that the cadets were the protectors of law and order, that
there would be battles on the streets, and that the police should
prepare themselves for it. That is an example of the education in our
police establishments, which is preparing the democratic police for
events that will unfurl as time goes by.
Accountability and control will lead to the strengthening not
the diminution of democracy in Britain.
The nature of society and the motives of the Tories and the ruling
class are clearly characterised and put to the front in this Bill.
The Bill contains draconian measures to stop, search and arrest;
it provides for detention for four days without charge; it provides
powers to search and fingerprint; and it provides for access to
personal files.
The Labour movement does not condone violence, but it condemns the
appalling counter-violence fostered by business interests through
films, television and the media.
Nor does the movement, while understanding the causes for crime,
support robbery as an individual way out of the problems that face
workers. We have no sympathy with the vicious criminals who are as
much a menace to the workers as are the big property owners, and
whose activities provide the state with excuses for strengthening
repressive powers.
However, the need to counter criminal activity does not give the
guardians of law the right to act as though they were above that law.
Fighting crime does not justify the harassment and ill-treatment of
suspects, or the denial of legal defence or the fabrication of
evidence against them.
 







TERRY FIELDS, Labour MP for Liverpool Broadgreen, a former fireman, has condemned the Tories’ record on health and safety, especially on cuts in fire prevention. This is an edited extract from his speech in Parliament.



*
TONIGHT’S DEBATE takes place in the shadow of the tragedy at King’s Cross. It is set against the background of cuts in the fire service which will affect the ability of fire prevention officers adequately to look after the health and safety, not only of firemen but members of the general public.
The government’s continuing attack on the fire service, through their intention further to reduce expenditure, will affect standards of fire cover and fire prevention departments that already cannot cope with the requirements of public safety.
Instead of carrying out their traditional role of examining the efficiency of individual services, inspectors arc carrying out exercises at the government’s behest to discover how to cut jobs in the fire service.
That culminated a short time ago in South Wales, where, because of a threat of industrial action, a local authority sacked the whole fire service. That is what the government’s cost-cutting is about. My union, the Fire Brigades Union, will not co-operate with inspectors who try to cut jobs in the fire service.
On Friday last, the nation mourned. I am not ashamed to say that I cried, too, when I saw my comrades in uniform on the streets of London at the funeral of that brave fireman.
We mourned then, but today we have from the government report that 800 jobs are due to go in the same London fire service that we applauded for its courage and heroism last Friday.
In West Yorkshire, South Yorkshire, the West Midlands and on Merseyside fire brigade jobs will go. It is estimated that between 2,000 and 3,000 firemen’s jobs will be lost.
The lesson for firemen is that no section of society is immune from the economics of this Tory government and the cuts that flow from their policies.
The devastating effects of the cuts in the fire service will be seen increasingly – God forbid – in more King’s Cross-type tragedies. deaths and sufferings. It is intolerable that fire prevention and health and safety should be treated in that way.
In 1985, in his New Year message, Dr John Cullen, the chairman of the Health and Safety Commission, said:
“If 1985 follows the pattern of previous years then some 500 people starting back to work this January will die as a result of accidents at work before the next New Year celebrations. The pressure of today’s economic climate must not prevail over the essential needs of safety.”
The philosophy of the government prevails over the safety of ordinary people. The Prime Minister is on record of saying that it is her intention to rid Britain of socialism.
For ‘socialism’ substitute health and safety at work. the National Health Service, the welfare of the people. state education and the protection of old-age pensioners. because that is the socialism that the Tory Party wants to get shot of.
Each day the chaplain comes into the Chamber and prays for five minutes. The worthies on the government benches pray with him for divine intervention. After five minutes the chaplain leaves the Chamber and the government go about the business of attacking the living standards and the health and safety of our working people.
What religion do the Conservatives follow and to what god do they pray? Perhaps during the five minutes in the Chamber the incantation should be: “For those whom we are about to deceive let the Lord make us truly thankful.”
The system that the Tories support is built on exploitation and profit. The unpaid labour of workers is the wealth creamed off by the big business interests that the Conservatives represent. One cannot hope that the wealth creators, the wage earners, working people, will be treated any better than plant and machinery or a commodity that is bought or sold.
Things are bad now, but in the inevitable slump that will follow the crash in the world’s stock markets, the problems facing us all will increase and health and safety will be even further disregarded in the pursuit of profit.
By their policies since their election in 1979, the government have shown a callous disregard for the dignity of working people. Inevitably the number of accidents and deaths will increase.
Public relations exercises such as the Prime Minister dressed in black or the Minister for Health visiting hospitals are seen by ordinary people for what they are a return to the scenes of the crimes. Increasingly working people see them as a cynical self-publicising exercise.
Despite the Prime Minister’s claim that she will rid Britain of socialism, workers will realise from their own experience in the past eight years and from the difficult period ahead, that the general conditions of life including health and safety cannot be maintained, let alone improved. in this system.
As members of the Labour Party. we must say consistently that only through the socialist transformation of society will working people be afforded the dignity that they deserve and that we demand.
 




“The air was positively electric at 3 o’clock when we were due to start off. But with the numbers coming in from all over France, however, the start was delayed.
“From every side street there seemed to be people trying to get into the main avenue off the Place de la Republique. It was well past six when we arrived at our destination.
“There were old workers, retired workers, families, all participating in the march, sometimes forty deep across the road. The streets were lined with people applauding, shouting, chatting ...”
This was Terry Field’s impression of the massive March 23rd trade union demonstration in Paris organised in protest against catastrophic redundancies in the French steel industry which would devastate towns like Longwy in the Lorraine. Over 100,000 people marched on the demo.
Terry, a member of the Fire Brigades Union Executive, was in Paris as a fraternal delegate to the Triennial Conference of the public sector unions of the CGT [the CP-led general confederation of labour].
“We had been there all week and we certainly expected the demonstration to be the highlight of our visit.
“The most unanimous [1] sign for us, returning to Paris on Thursday, the evening before the demonstration, were the units of riot police heading towards the city on the main roads.
“By the early hours of Friday, there were literally tens of thousands of people assembling. Children with their parents had come to see the sights. There were banners and posters everywhere. The atmosphere was lighthearted, festive, throughout.
“Along the route there was no trouble. The largest contingents were from the CGT, and were well marshalled.
“Later on in the evening, around seven, there was rioting and the police were involved. You could see the police up the side streets, standing pretty much close to the march. The marchers were chanting: “No! No! No! to provocation!”
“Riot police concentrated so close was a definite provocation.
“When we spoke to leading members of the CGT public sector workers that evening, they had evidence of police involvement in the demo as agent provocateurs. In one case, they had details of a man armed with a revolver who was most probably a police agent.
“The press have reported the gangs of youths with balaclavas on their heads and wielding iron bars or chains. But the CGT was so well marshalled that I don’t believe that anyone from the CGT could have been involved in such a totally useless form of activity which is used by the media to try to discredit the demonstration.”

Note by ETOL
1. This should probably be “ominous”.
 







“An ounce of experience is worth a ton of theory.” Since
the firemen’s strike ended three weeks ago many members of the
FBU have been drawing the lessons of the dispute and thinking of
the future. In this EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW with Terry Harrison and
Richard Knights, TERRY FIELDS, FBU Executive Council member,
describes some of the conclusions that have been drawn from the
experience of the strike.




Terry was asked what he thought of the strike, the settlement,
and the future.
The settlement itself, whilst doing nothing to improve firemen’s
wages, for the next twelve months, certainly, if followed through to
its conclusion, will put firemen on a better footing than they’ve
been in the past.
The future of the fire service is dependent on this present
government carrying through its promises. The vagueness of the
Tories’ statement, with regard to their commitment to us, leads us
to believe that should they come to power, we might be in a different
ball game again. Obviously a strike would be looming in the
background of such a situation.
 
Labour Party
We’ve learnt some very valuable lessons about how to strike and
I think we’d be more engaged in a guerrilla war than an all-out
strike. With regard to the support we got, I must say we are really
indebted to the Labour Party locally, the District Labour Party, the
Labour Party Young Socialists, and a lot of other support.
Having come out of the background and into the forefront of
political activity we’ve found a difference between the support of
the Labour Party locally and the support we would hope to get from a
socialist Labour government. But there isn’t a socialist Labour government, it’s proved that it’s
tied up with big business, more concerned with the strictures placed
upon it by the IMF and less with health, safety and life in this country.
So it’s a bit of a setback having brought the lads out and
realising that there is support for them, and that there is an active
trade union and labour movement, but to find that the government
militates against us, and has used the whole pressure of the state
machine to beat firemen into submission.
 
What was Terry’s attitude now to Labour Party affiliation and
the political levy to the LP in the trade unions?
My commitment is to remain in the Labour Party, the argument for
leaving could apply to the union, men are a bit distrustful of the
Executive Council. But the only way to change the EC is to be part of
the decision-making process. The same is true of the Labour Party,
and rather than withdraw from the Labour Party, I would contend that a greater involvement by trade
unionists and our people in particular, would bring about changes.
We must see to it that in the selection of candidates the proper
man goes forward. Rather than someone remaining there year in, year
out, as a matter of course, he is pulled back, and his constituency
looks at his performance and sees to it that he reflects the views
and aspirations of the ordinary rank and file members of the Labour Party.
The government has really done a disservice to the Labour Party,
and I think if an election was called tomorrow, irrespective of the
commitment we’ve got from the Labour government to carry out its
pledges with the firemen’s pay, then you’d literally have 30,000
votes going against the Labour Party, simply on this one issue.
The same sort of accusation can be levelled against the leadership
of the TUC. Trade unionists, locally, the rank and file, have been
giving us financial support, but they’ve been hog-tied, with regard
to involving themselves in industrial activity, because of the
constitutions of their own unions. We’ve got the trade union
leadership playing the government role, maintaining Labour in power,
no matter what colour, simply so we can have a Labour government.
We found that the trade unionists locally at the shop floor were
really involved with the firemen’s struggle. The TUC leadership has
really betrayed firemen, bearing in mind the resolution 7 passed at
last year’s congress on a return to free collective bargaining. We
believe that the trade union movement has got serious questions to
ask of its leadership. I would hope that democracy will reign in the
trade unions, and these people who have sold out the working class
will be brought to book by the rank and file.
 
What did Terry think about the role of the TUC and the trade
unions in the strike?
As a socialist I believe that the socialists in the trade union
movement could well at the end of the day come to our assistance.
The response locally – the march through town and the conference
– was not supported by the trade union movement, and it raises
serious questions. Were those Executive Council members who had no
contact with the trade union movement in their own regions, said
there was going to be no support, with hindsight now they can say
“well we told you so.” They can say that they were never going to
come to our assistance in any case.
That was a lesson we had to learn, one way or the other. We had to
carry on like a Greek tragedy, and play out the final act, and
perhaps find at the end of the day, and I’m sad to have to say
this, that the trade union movement nationally would not have
responded to the firemen’s plea.
The other side had all the big guns, the state machinery – DHSS,
the media, everything else levelled against us. We believe that our
brothers should have turned round and come to our assistance.
 
Let Down
So it was very, very disappointing that the trade union movement
didn’t respond on a basic trade union principle like this. Indeed
you must draw a parallel with the Grunwick situation, those people
have been left there on a basic trade union principle.
I’ve done my share of making excuses for the trade union
movement. We said that with Christmas coming up, they’d be loath to
get involved, they’re not relying on low basic pay and reliant on
overtime, and we’re not going to jeopardise that – we made all
these excuses both locally and nationally.
Believing as I do in socialism and basic trade union democracy, if
these people did in fact support us then they should have come out
physically in support of us, in the end they
let us down, through bankrupt leadership at the top.
The vote on the General Council of the TUC was just a conscience
vote, it was a cover up, they wanted to be seen to be giving support
to the firemen but not in sufficient numbers, which would have been
an active demonstration by the whole of the trade union movement, in
support of the firemen.
 
Troops
The controversy about Daly and Gormley voting different ways,
bears out what I am saying, it was a conscience vote, to lead the
firemen into believing, yes the trade union movement is behind you,
but on a democratic vote. This wasn’t the case.
Our lads were very disappointed and indeed disgusted, that for the
first time in their history they’ve looked around for trade union
support and that has been denied them. The first time they’ve been
on strike, and a government, to prove a phoney point, has beat them
back into the dust, and beat them into submission in this way.
The troops were used to undermine what we were attempting to do. I
think in supporting the troops and in raising their voices anytime
we’ve attempted to picket army barracks, they showed that really
they did not want us to go on strike. They did not allow us to get on
with the true fight of stopping strike-breaking.
It’s a most extraordinary case firemen going on strike, but we
never got a fair crack of the whip, either from the Labour Party or
the trade union movement. I think people will have a lot to answer
for when the history books are written.
 
What conclusions can you draw from the strike regarding the
need for democracy in the trade union movement?
We’ve always believed, certainly in the Merseyside area, that we
did have democracy as far as we were concerned. The intrusion of the
rank and file movement was rather insulting to the trade union leadership on
Merseyside. But it encouraged men to become involved in their
branches, which is necessary.
I think it left me in no doubt at all, attending so many meetings
at branch, division, brigade and regional level of the views of the
membership. I think if an EC member removes himself to a great extent
from his membership, he’s out of touch and really can’t reflect
what’s going on.
 
Rules Revision
At the end of the day, the vote at the recall conference on the
12th January bore out the stand that those individual EC members too.
They took a balanced judgement on what they believed their membership
would accept and the membership responded by voting in favour of what
they’d had to say.
I think as far as this union is concerned, we’ve got one of the
most democratic in the country, direct access to the highest pinnacle
of the organisation. Anyone can pick up a phone now and speak to the
General Secretary, virtually any hour of the day or night. I think
this is lacking in some unions, that’s for their own members to put right.
Some of the rule book changes at our annual conferences, you see
foisted on the membership by the EC of the unions. It’s our rule
revision conference this year, and bearing in mind the experiences
we’ve had over the past ten weeks, our members will be seriously
looking at ways of amending, if they feel that democracy is lacking
in some area.
 
What was Terry’s reaction to the attitude of the Fire Officers?
It’s a shame that certain officers should forget where they’ve
come from, and turn their back on the firemen. NAFO locally did take
a decision that they wanted to go on strike, and put this to their
executive, their ballot rejected this philosophy.
 
Memories
We believe that our officers on Merseyside should have taken
unofficial action. Our fight is their fight, their claim was 40 per
cent and now they’re stuck with 10 per cent. It’ll be a long day
before some of the memories are forgotten, and the brigade and the
fire service is going to suffer because of this.
 
What was the main lesson of the strike?
We’ll be looking at ways and means of keeping money aside to
help other trade unionists when they go on strike. We realise the
importance of cash when unions haven’t got a strike fund. It’s
inexplicable when you’ve got a union with a million pounds
invested, and all we hear of is the complications of getting this
cash out to pay strike money.
There’ll have to be a strike fund because I don’t believe
this strike is the end of strikes in the fire service. Not that we’re
strike happy, but we don’t believe that our future is as golden as
the offer would make out. I think that some time in years to come
we’ll have to be going on strike again.
 

TERRY FIELDS was an FBU Executive member

 




Terry Fields (Merseyside FBU) spoke to Terry Harrison
The officers on Merseyside who are breaking the strike are few and far between, compared with the total numbers. The lads on the division know who these men are, they have seen them pushing their way past firemen with abandon, doing their own thing, abusing firemen and rubbing their noses in it, in an attempt to break our strike.
Firemen come in on the job on a one tier system. It is in the capability of everyone to reach officer status. People in officer status should remember their background and remember where they came from, remember they have got to work with firemen.
Our main concern after wages is the future of the British fire service and if we have no respect for our officers then the British fire service has had it. And we have certainly no respect for strike-breaking scabs of officers who have been pushing their way past firemen on picket lines, insisting on doing a job of work quite outside the bounds of the national agreement we have had with the National Association of Fire Officers.
 




Firemen in Merseyside have been working to rule for the last two weeks. Terry Fields, Regional Secretary of the Fire Brigades Union, spoke to Militant on the situation:
“We’ve done all the talking we can do; we’ve marched through town, talked to MPs and councillors, we’ve gone to all sorts of people. Firemen have reached the end of their tether.
“Our resolution to the recall conference was going to be “strike from the 7th November”. The Executive of the FBU decided they would call the recall conference on the 7th November. That left our lads with a cleft stick. What we managed to do was to call off the strike action from 9.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m.
“I’ve had firemen ‘phoning to support us from as far away as Devon, and that’s as remote as you can get industrially. It’s certainly a barometer as far as I’m concerned. It’s not just a case of Merseyside militants. All firemen are similarly affected, and we are telling the truth when we talk about the deprivation suffered by their families. So we’ve reached the end of the line.”
Explaining the fireman’s case he said:
“We’ve had that many scares, that many false promises in the past that firemen are sceptical when people promise them things. We had a gentleman called Sir Robert Holroyd and his infamous Holroyd report into the fire service. He said we should be getting the rates of pay that other outside the service were. That was in 1967–68.
“We didn’t get the money and by 1970 we reached another critical situation. So they set up a commission under Sir Charles Cunningham and in 1973 we had the Cunningham report. He suggested all sorts of training and qualifications before we could be considered firemen. We went along with it.
“1975 came, the recall conference. We were told that Denis Healey was going to put the shutters down. Loyalty was being stretched to its furthest limits and lo and behold we get Phase 1 forced on us. Since then we’ve had the evaluation of the fireman’s job by Lord McCarthy, a well-known figure in the labour and trade union movement. He pontificated and said we should take the ‘broad bench mark of industrial payments for wages’.
“We’ve gone through all the processes, we’ve had all the enquiries we ever want to see. With regards to hours they are now talking about looking at this in 1978. We’ll take the cash this year and solve the hours problem next year.”
 




Terry Fields, Regional Secretary of Merseyside FBU, talking to Terry Harrison on the first day of the strike
*
The labour movement in Merseyside is 100% behind the firemen. Terry Fields, regional secretary explained:
“The labour movement can see through the smoke screen that it is really big business that is at the back of this propaganda campaign. It is big business that has the most to lose, and big business is only tied up with £sd. Human life comes second to them.”
Terry has no quarrel with individual soldiers. He pointed out that:
“... the young elements in the army are there today because there are no other jobs for them. We’ve seen the recruiting campaign having great effect in the Kirby area. There you have a community with nowhere to turn for jobs because the jobs have been ripped out by big business.
“Obviously people in their own neighbourhoods are going to rally round in the event of a fire. But for volunteers to come in and act as fire brigade personnel, or some of these part-timers, certainly we’ve no time for them. They are just strike-breakers.”
He pointed out that part-timers get a wage in industry in which they work, negotiated by their trade union. They work for the fire service on a voluntary basis, getting an annual retainer, turning-in fees and an hourly rate that is in excess of what a qualified fireman receives.
But Terry was extremely pleased at the volume of support that they had received. He was adamant:
“It is not through economic pressure that they are going to force firemen into the dust: we live on starvation wages anyway. Far be it from us to welcome support from the state. Our members have no alternative but to take support from the state in the form of rent and rates rebates, free school dinners, and family incomes supplements.”
Commenting on the General Secretary’s statement that if the government came up with the right kind of offer, the basis for a return to work could be achieved, Terry said:
“As far as our General Secretary is concerned, the offer has to be good before we would even consider it. We have not closed our ears to negotiations. They will have to go on before this situation is resolved. The sooner the better.”
 

