


The decisive defeat of the Iraqi army by Iranian forces in the second battle of Khorramshahr (May 23–24) has opened the way for explosive upsurges throughout the region. It was an effect of the momentum of the mass mobilization unleashed by the Iranian revolution.
The Iranian victory would not have been possible without the unity of the entire population of Iran in defense of the hopes represented by the revolution and their readiness to make heroic sacrifices to defend it.
Even sections of the population at war with the Khomeini regime, such as the Kurds, refused to cooperate with the Iraqi invaders.
For the imperialists, it is now essential to stop the conflict as quickly as possible and try to slow down the political processes inevitably generated by the Iraqi defeat. That explains the combination of threats and blandishments directed at the Iranian government by U.S. imperialism and its allies. It also means that direct imperialist intervention has now become a danger once again in the Persian Gulf area.
In an editorial May 28, the New York Times tried to cover up the defeat suffered by U.S. policy and present an argument that all the forces in the area interested in preserving the social status quo should now get together.
“Much as Margaret Thatcher’s Britain is slowly reversing the land grab by Argentina, Ayatollah Khomeini’s Iran has been heaving back an invasion by Iraq at vastly greater cost. You don’t have to like the ayatollah to welcome his military good fortune or the rebuff to the effort of Iraq’s Saddam Hussein to shatter Iran.
“Like the war in the Falklands, the Iraq-Iran conflict left the United States with no happy choices. Its interest in preserving Iran as a buffer between the Soviet Union and the Gulf justified rooting for Iran. But the United States should be just as intent that Iran not mount a revolutionary crusade against the surrounding Arab monarchies.
“Stability is a tough hand to play in an unstable region, but so far so good. The first requirement was that Iran, beastly government and all, survive the Iraqi onslaught. Its once-Americanized armed forces rose to the challenge; the Russians supplied weapons through Syria and North Korea, and the United States quietly sent its share, with the help of Israel and other unlikely allies ...
“For all the resentments that Americans and Iranians bear toward each other, they were thrown to the same side by overlapping interests. But their joint interests stop at the Iraqi border, which is where diplomacy should now make sure that the war ends.”
The claim that the U.S. was “rooting for Iran” during the war was really laying it on thick. Washington clearly hoped that Iraq would deal the Iranian revolution crippling blows, and did everything in its power to assure that.
However, it is also true that Washington also gave clear notice to the Iraqi regime that it would not tolerate any major annexations that would undermine the stability of the area or of Iran as a national state.
The detachment of the Arab-inhabited area along the Persian Gulf, where nearly all Iran’s oil is located, would obviously have made the country as it is now constituted unviable.
The U.S. imperialists did not want that; it clearly did not accord with their basic interests or what they could hope to gain from the Iran-Iraq war.
The principal historic strategy followed by Washington in dealing with revolutions, especially in countries the size of Iran, is to isolate them, wear them out, and promote the tendencies within them that are heading in a conservative direction. Such a strategy is particularly recommended when the leadership of a national revolution is socially conservative, which the Khomeini regime clearly is.
This strategy requires a double game, such as the one the New York Times cheerfully admits.
There have been a number of examples of two-faced operations by the U.S. in the Near East in particular. One example is the Kurdish rebellion in Iraq in the 1970s, in which the CIA and the shah encouraged the insurgent leader, Mullah Barzani to believe he had their support.
Statements of officials that have come to light since then make it clear that Washington’s interest was that “neither side win a clear victory.” Barzani was eventually sold for a deal with the Iraqi regime.
In the Iran-Iraq war also, a decisive victory for either side was not in the U.S. interest. The breakup of the Iranian state would have released processes whose development could not be predicted. Now Washington faces such a prospect in Iraq and the Gulf emirates. The momentum of the Iranian revolution produced a decisive defeat of the Iraqi army, which is a disaster for Washington’s policy in the area.
The Iranian government’s claims that the Iraqis counted on the support of the Kurds and a broad spectrum of opposition forces in Iran to overthrow the Islamic republic are clearly designed to serve their needs of maintaining control over the Iranian masses. Neither U.S. imperialism, nor much less the Iraqis, are capable of such revolutionary adventures. The Iraqis, for example, face a bigger Kurdish problem than the Iranian rulers.
The imperialists and their allies may make maneuvers with such forces, but they remain limited by their nature. And sometimes, it’s mostly hot air.
For example, New York Times columnist William Safire, close to powerful right-wing circles, wrote on March 16:
“Logic also suggests that America should encourage support of the valiant Kurds, as well as the leftist but non-Communist Mujahadin on the ramparts of the counter-revolution.”
The fact of the matter is that the left Kurdish nationalist forces formed the first stumbling block to the Khomeini leadership’s attempt to restabilize the neo-colonial capitalist state in Iran. They defeated the military forces of the Islamic republic in a three-month combined mass struggle and guerrilla war that culminated in August-September 1979 with uprisings in the major Kurdish towns.
At that time, U.S. officials and authoritative commentators in the U.S. capitalist press made it quite clear that Washington was far from favorable to a victory of the “valiant Kurds,” but rather regarded the success of the Kurdish struggle as a major destabilizing factor in the region.
And they were right, the victory of the Kurds defeated the Khomeini regime’s first attempt to restabilize the state in the face of the Iranian masses of all nationalities set in motion by the revolution. After that, the Khomeini regime was forced to step up its anti-imperialist demagogy in order to retain control of the masses, and that brought it into sharper confrontation in fact with imperialism.
Moreover, it was the Mujahadin and Fedayan, the revolutionary guerrilla groups, that played a leading role in the mass uprising in Teheran that resulted in a clear victory of the people over the dictatorship, severely damaging the state repressive apparatus.
What the Khomeini leadership wanted, and what U.S. policy at the time was designed to achieve, was a cold transfer of authority from the old regime to the bourgeois group around the ayatollah.
Moreover, in the decisive battle in the first stage of the Iran-Iraq war, the heroic defense of Khorramshahr that broke the momentum of the Iraqi victories, activists in and around the Mujahadin and Fedayan were in the forefront.
Now that the neo-colonial Iraqi state is faltering under the impact of its defeats, the first forces that have launched attempts to bring it down are the left Kurdish nationalists led by Jelal Talabani, who made a significant contribution to the struggle of the Iranian Kurds fighting the Khomeini forces.
Agence France-Press reported May 15:
“Conflicts have been growing in Iraqi Kurdistan for three weeks. On April 24 in Qala-Diza the forces of order opened fire on a march of several thousand persons who wanted to com- menorate the massacre perpetrated here in 1974 ...
“After the attack on this march, strikes and demonstrations have spread to several towns in Kurdistan ...
“The Voice of the Iraqi Revolution, the radio run by Jelal Talabani’s Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, is continuing to call on both the Arab and Kurdish population to stage a general uprising ...
“Since the recent Iraqi defeats, a two-sided phenomenon has appeared. The security forces, thinking about their future, have appeared to make tacit compromises with the Kurdish resistance. On the other hand, there has been growing activity by the population, which seems no longer to fear the wrath of the Baathist government.”
At the same time, signs are appearing that another Near Eastern neo-colonial regime is moving in to keep things from getting out of hand and maybe grab some advantages for itself in the bargain. In the May 28 International Herald Tribune, Claudia Wright reported:
“... crack Turkish forces are moving steadily into bases within range of northern Iraq and there is a strong view among nationalist Turkish commanders that for the first time since World War I they have a chance to recover the ‘lost’ provinces – Iraq’s oil rich governorates of D’hok, Arbil and Sulaimaniya – taken from the defeated Ottoman empire by the British and the League of Nations.
“As surprising as a Turkish move into northern Iraq might seem to Iraq’s current Arab allies ... this might be preferred to the possibility of a realignment of political forces in Baghdad.”
Ankara also has reasons to fear the victory of a Kurdish revolt near its borders.
In its report on the Iraqi defeats, Hemmat, a fortnightly magazine published in Tehran that reflects the views of the Hezbe Vehdete Kargare (HVK – Workers Unity Party), stressed the uprising of the Iraqi Kurds against the Saddam Hussein government. This was in the context of the Khomeini government’s constant attempt to portray the Kurds as allies of the Iraqis.
There are two sides to the Iranian victory. One is the encouragement it gives to the masses. The other will be attempts to reinforce the Iranian bourgeois state and leadership.
The Khomeini regime made a certain progress in re-consolidating the capitalist state during the twenty-month war, and is now moving to make sure that this is not endangered after the end of the hostilities.
For example, the mid-May issue of Hemmat refers to a circular from the Ministry of Labor banning the organization or reorganization of workers councils (shoras) in factories.
The fact is that over the past two years, repression has grown steadily more extensive in Iran. It spread from the Fedayan, who were involved in the struggles against the new regime in Kurdistan and Turkmenistan; to the Mujahadin, who were connected to liberal and left elements in the clergy, represented by Ayatollah Teleghani; to include even those groups on the left that support the regime, such as the Tudeh Party and the “Central Committee Majority” faction of the Fedayan.
Attacks by the right-wing Khomeini forces on the Mujahadin began as early as May 1979, with the kidnapping of Teleghani’s children. They intensified until the middle of 1981, when the Mujahadin became involved in a guerrilla campaign against the regime, with apparently the usual disastrous results of such private wars by left groups against the para-police forces of neo-colonial regimes.
That is, the effect was the strengthening of the state repressive forces, and the isolation and slaughter of large numbers of revolutionary activists.
The Khomeini regime moved against the democratic gains of the revolution almost immediately after the insurrection. The Shiite clergy dismantled and broke the factory and neighborhood committees. The newly freed mass circulation press became the target of mob attacks directed by the clergy.
Massive censorship was imposed when the first Kurdish war was launched by the new regime in June 1979. But even then the left papers that did not criticize the regime were not closed down and their street sellers were not attacked. That is no longer the case, as shown by the attacks on the Tudeh party and its publications.
In mid-March, Kargar, the weekly paper of the Hezbe Kargarane Enqelabi (HKE, Revolutionary Workers Party), was shut down after it published an interview with Bahram Atai, one of its leaders released not long before from Evin prison. Atai told of witnessing mass executions and torture of anti-imperialist militants. He was rearrested and jailed along with the printer of Kargar on charges of slandering the regime.
According to the mid-May Hemmat, both Atai and the printer were still in jail.
Now, the fact that the Iraqi invasion is obviously no longer a threat creates a new political situation in Iran. The defeat of Iraq weakens the regime’s pretext for repression and it encourages the masses to press forward.
It will now be tested how politically cohesive a force the new army is that was forged in the heat of war.
Le Monde’s correspondent Jean Gueyras described the situation in the military forces in the May 3 issue of the Paris daily:
“The quite recent introduction of bassijs (members of the Mobilization of the Disinherited) onto the battlefield has enabled the Teheran leaders, who have tight control over them, to play another card to ease the rivalry of the army and the revolutionary guards....
“Another element favoring better cooperation among the elements of the armed forces is the thoroughgoing purge of the officer corps ...
“Paradoxically, the clergy in Teheran seem more mistrustful of the revolutionary guards than the officers ... A half dozen representatives of the clergy have recently been nominated to the supreme council of the guards ...
“Colonel Shirazi, commander in chief of the land forces, a captain before the revolution and – rumor has it – the real victor at Dezful (which opened the Iraqi rout), is the prototype of the young officer loyal to the Islamic regime. He waged a pitiless war against the Kurdish guerrillas and is a strong partisan of a new homogeneous army, whose backbone would be the revolutionary guards. This idea seems to have been rejected by both the military hierarchy and the clergy who fear that a united army might succumb to the temptation of bonapartism.”
Gueyras’ report indicates that while progress has been made in rebuilding an effective bourgeois army, it is not enough to assure success in restabilizing the neo-colonial state.
What happens in Iran now will depend on the emergence of a new leadership. Past experience has shown that it is not automatic that the regime will lose control of the masses in an upsurge or period of renewed confidence. After the Teheran insurrection itself, the conservative Khomeini forces quickly housebroke the mass organizations, except among the minority nationalities, which had, to one degree or another, independent leaderships. The best conditions for the emergence of such a leadership are a minimum of imperialist pressure and a strong fight for democratic rights.
The Iranian victory was clearly as a result of the revolutionary enthusiasm of the masses, and in turn will reinforce that. The test of the political effectiveness of this pressure will be whether Teheran makes a settlement of the war designed to stabilize the region.
But this does not depend only on the relationship of forces in Iran. The most immediate question is what the Iraqi masses will do now that their neo-colonial state and demagogic leadership have been weakened. If there is an explosion, the Kurdish revolutionary organizations will likely play a major role. This would have important effects in Iran.
By the victory that they have won by their courage and sacrifice, the Iranian masses have deepened the crisis of neo-colonial rule in the Near East. As a result, they have improved their chances to gain control of their own struggle and achieve the hopes for a better life that have inspired their sacrifices. It is the task now of all forces throughout the world that support such a fight against imperialism, and for democracy and an end to exploitation, to provide aid for that struggle. The only way to do that is to oppose all attempts of U.S. imperialism and its Turkish ally to intervene against the Iranian revolution.
 




Over Warsaw’s clandestine Radio Solidarity, Zbigniew Romaszewski, a member of the regional leadership of Solidarity and organizer of the station, spoke:
“We are broadcasting today on the eve of the working-class holiday, May 1. When we were looking for a theme song for our radio station, we realized that there was no tune loved by every Pole that had not been used by official propaganda. The society has been deprived of all its important symbols. They have all been taken by the regime. This is also true of May Day. We have decided to take back these symbols.
“Today is also the 31st anniversary of the death of one of the main leaders of the Polish Socialist Party, Kazimiez Puzak, who was tried in the Moscow trials and whose health was broken in the Stalinist prison at Rawicz, where he died.
“Every year, comrades faithful to Polish socialism put flowers on his grave and sing the old workers’ song, The Red Flag. Let this tune be the theme song of our broadcast this May Day. Let it be a warning to all those who want to force the workers to their knees and terrorize the society. On their red flag, the one they will carry in their march tomorrow, is the blood of the workers of Poznan, of the Baltic Coast, the blood of those who have fallen in the war they declared on their own people.”
* * *
The mass demonstrations in Poland on May 1, 3, 9, and 13 mark the start of a decisive test of strength between the underground movement for workers democracy and the bureaucracy.
Tens of thousands of people came out onto the streets in cities across the country in defiance of martial law and a regime that has shown its determination again and again to strike out violently against any attempt by the population to organize or protest.
The people are no longer afraid. That was the feature of the demonstrations that struck observers. For a regime that staked everything on an attempt to terrify and humiliate the population, the implications of such defiance are dramatic.
In the wake of the December 13 military crackdown, the workers at the giant Nowa Huta steel works in Cracow issued a statement that said:
“The battle is one of fear. Hiding behind their masks, their clubs, their riot shields (literally, the glass panes used on reptile cages), they are afraid of us! There are not many of them. Pistols, tanks, clubs are no good against a unified people. They are counting on fear ... If we want to remain free, we must ... conquer fear. Even if they go to the last extreme, our quiet courage will bring victory, today and forever. We are not fighting for big words, we are fighting to remain human beings.”
What the early May demonstrations indicated precisely was that the battle of fear has been won by the Polish workers. Le Monde of May 5 published the following eyewitness account of the way the May Day demonstration developed in Warsaw:
“At about 4:00 in the afternoon, on May 1, the crowd started to assemble on Castle Square, which soon filled with demonstrators who unfurled banners. Among the slogans was ‘Give us back Lech!’ There were also red and white Polish flags. The police surrounded the square, barring the adjacent streets. Soon another demonstration formed behind the police lines, the demonstration of onlookers who started shouting: ‘Gestapo, Gestapo,’ ‘Down with the junta!’ ...
“From the top of armoured cars equipped with water cannon, the police called on the groups to disperse. As if with a single voice, the two crowds answered with shouts of ‘Gestapo!’ The police lowered the visors on their helmuts. They picked up clubs and a supply of tear gas grenades.
“At 4:22, the tanks began advancing toward the demonstrators. The crowd massed in Krakowskie Przedmiescie street. It answered the police again with shouts of ‘Gestapo!’ and whistling. Two lines of police now separate the two groups of demonstrators. One of the tanks points its water cannon at the crowd of onlookers.
“Ten minutes later, the order to go into action is given to the police. Tear gas grenades were fired at the onlookers, who retreat in disorder. The police attack the demonstrators with grenades and clubs and use their water cannon. Some of the demonstrators retreat toward the Old Market, others counterattack. At 6:00, two thousand people wearing Solidarity badges are still in the square. But the fighting is dying down. However, battles are still going on in other parts of the city.”
Le Monde cited an AFP dispatch about the battle at the Old Market.
“Several thousands of youth mounted an assault on the Old Market, where the ZOMO (the special police) were hiding behind their plastic shields from an avalanche of stones, bricks, and objects of all sorts. Armed with flag poles, the demonstrators charged the forces of order, who retreated under the pressure. The youth take the square. The flag of Solidarity flies over the Old Market square; thousands of hands raise in the victory sign.”
Shortly after that, there was a huge traffic jam near the Old Market, with both automobile and bus drivers blowing their horns in a sign of sympathy for the demonstrators.
In Gdansk, where it was more difficult for foreign reporters to circulate, the correspondent for the Paris left daily Liberation watched the fighting from a distance.
“When we left the cathedral, it took a half hour to reach the church of Saint Brigitta, the parish church of the shipyard area, also it is quite close. In every street, the same scenario was repeated. The police standing a ways off, and young demonstrators throwing paving stones at them. The most striking thing was the hatred and determination of the youths.”
From the church, automatic weapons fire could be heard. One person came in and said that he had seen a group of young teenagers knock a policeman unconscious. A passerby protested: “No matter what he is, he’s still human.” The youth answered by kicking the cop in the face.
In Szczecin, a crowd reportedly burned down a ZOMO headquarters.
The regime arrested hundreds of people and made a major display of force in the attempt to head off the demonstrations planned to follow the May Day ones. Since those protests had a more passive character, it is harder to assess their effect from outside. But it is clear that the confrontation is continuing to develop.
Both the regime and the underground Solidarity leaders knew that a collision of this type was unavoidable. In a statement written in Bialoleka in February, Jacek Kuron, who was the main ideologist of the pre-crackdown Solidarity and an advocate of compromise with the government, wrote:
“No appeal will prevent the youth who want to fight from doing that. If it is effective enough to deny them other means of fighting, it will throw them into the impasse of terrorism. No appeal can defuse the explosive combination of dis- pair and hatred that exists.
“Our poverty is a result of the state of war, as well as the terror. To the violence and poverty inflicted on it, a healthy society will respond by fighting. Today there is only one front. We are in Poland. In this country, as history teaches us, oppressors can establish calm only by blood and ruin lasting for a generation.”
Wladyslaw Hardek, leader of the Warsaw region organization of Solidarity also favors a national accord with the government. But he explains that in order to be able to achieve such an agreement, Solidarity has to conduct confrontations with the regime on both the regional and national levels.
“In the south, very diverse clandestine groups have arisen, which for the moment follow the decisions of the National Coordinating Committee, in the hope that coordinated actions will lead to results. But if the government takes these actions lightly, these groups may get out of our control, and we will see acts of sabotage and terrorism.” (Liberation, March 11)
In fact, over at least nine months before the bureaucratic crackdown, every time the Solidarity leadership appeared to have reached a modus vivendi with the government it found itself outflanked and forced to step up the level of its confrontation with the regime. The Bydgoszcz events in March 1980 and the hunger marches that started late in the summer of that year are cases in point.
Michnik, along with Kuron one of the most prominent historic leaders of the anti-bureaucratic opposition, lamented this in a statement he wrote in prison in February:
“The constant strikes provoked by the power apparatus wore out the society, which was already exhausted by the difficulties of daily life. The lack of positive results in terms of the quality of life led to a polarization ...
“Some said: ‘No more strikes, that is getting us nowhere.’ Others said: ‘No more indecisive strikes.’ It is hard to say which were in the majority. But certainly the latter made themselves more heard.
“These people, most young workers from the big factories, demanded more radical action from the Solidarity leadership. And it became harder and harder to hold this back (although both Walesa and Kuron tried to).” (Der Spiegel, March 8)
There has obviously been a lot of thinking going on both in the prisons and in the underground Solidarity organizations about the lessons of the crackdown.
In the March 15 issue of Wola, a Solidarity journal published in the Warsaw area, Krzysztof Piotrowski wrote that there had been stages since the crackdown.
In the first, most Solidarity members thought that the state of siege was only another in the series of confrontations between the movement and the government since August 1979. The second was a period of despair. The third was the period of reorganization:
“This phase covers the entire month of January. It is the period of the formation of the clandestine groups. They were built up mainly on the basis of formerly existing trade-union structures. In certain plants, the leadership of these bodies was given to the union leaders, but more often it was given to less-known activists ...
“Another element in the resistance was the building up of organizations in the housing projects. In the first case, it was the experience of the union structures that helped. In the second, it was the curfew that strengthened the ties between the people living in the big housing projects. It was in this phase that the printing and distribution of an underground press began.”
The start of the fourth stage, that of expansion and consolidation of the resistance, Piotrkowski wrote, was marked by:
“... the days of action in solidarity with Solidarity and the introduction of the price rises at the end of January and the beginning of February. These events led the different groups to coordinate their activities in order to build common actions with a mass character. The most important ones were the general strike on January 19 in Wroclaw, that affected 90% of the plants; the street confrontations that occurred in Gdansk on January 30; the mass demonstrations in front of the Poznan monuments on February 13; and finally the boycott of the television news that began in Swidnik, and then in Lublin, and Pulawy.”
One of the factors in the development of the resistance was the spread of information about the scope of resistance to the crackdown.
“As information spread, not only did the illusions of the first phase disappear, but also the psychology of failure. It became clear that despite the lack of communication, the arrest of the Solidarity leaders, despite the threat of draconian penalties – including the death penalty – people in total isolation from each other reacted in the same way, by strikes everywhere. According to the most recent information, more than 80% of the plants were struck.”
Solidarity had made an error before the crackdown, Piotrkowski wrote:
“December 13 showed the total lack of preparation by Solidarity in the fight against the violence of the regime. Although this was totally in accord with the principles and statutes of Solidarity, it nonetheless testified to a naive belief that it would be possible to prevent the state apparatus from resorting to violence, even when its rule was in danger. This reflected the illusion that the will of the entire society could impose democracy without the need for resorting to force.
“So, the opportunity to set up clandestine structures capable of organizing prolonged resistance while there was still relative freedom was wasted, and now we have to start form square one in immeasurably more difficult conditions. It was only in the Wroclaw region, and at the last moment, that preparations for work in underground conditions were made. The result of this, therefore, is particularly conclusive.
“This was an error identical to the one made in 1939. While people were aware of the unfavorable relationship of forces, nothing was done to prepare the way for the future resistance movement ... and it was necessary to start from square one under the occupation.”
However, the resistance to the “internal occupation” had developed more rapidly than the resistance to the Nazis:
“To realize the breadth of the resistance that is growing up, you have only to remember that at the beginning of 1940, there were about 200 resistance organizations in Poland. Today, on the basis of the number of underground journals published, there are 1,700 resistance organizations in the country.”
Piotrkowski mentions that one of the illusions of the period immediately preceding the crackdown and the first week after it was that the army would go over immediately to the people. It did not happen just like that, although there were many cases of insubordination.
It is notable that the May Day demonstrators in Warsaw directed a lot of their slogans to the soldiers. In the May 14 issue of Rouge, the weekly paper of the French section of the Fourth International, Cyril Smuga pointed out: “The underground Solidarity bulletins are publishing more and more reports about what is going on in the barracks.” He cited one such report from the March 22 issue of the Cracow regional leadership of Solidarity:
“Our correspondents in the paratroop regiment inform us that the soldiers have recovered from their first shock. After a period during which the soldiers were terrorized by the state of siege, informal groups of soldiers formed, which were subjected to active persecution by the officers. The commanders informed them informally that two soldiers were executed for refusing to obey orders.”
The Cracow regional leadership also issued a leaflet for soldiers that began as follows:
“Polish Soldiers!
“There are orders that you must not carry out, even under threat of death!
“You do not have the right to knock down the walls of factories with tanks! You do not have the right to arrest Polish patriots! You do not have the right to lift your hand against workers! You do not have the right to fire on the working people! Refuse to carry out such orders.”
The leaflet went on to explain how soldiers had refused to fire on workers in the 1970 strikes and how they dealt with officers who tried to force them to at gunpoint.
With the increasing explosiveness of the situation, the Catholic church authorities have expressed a fear that things could get out of control. For example, on May 2, Archbishop Glemp said to a crowd of a hundred thousand people in Cracow:
“We beg the Holy Mother that our youth will not go out in the streets with stones, that nobody will throw stones or other objects at anyone.”
Glemp even suggested that the youth could be manipulated by unnamed clandestine forces, echoing the bureaucracy.
“We know how numerous are those who would be ready to give their lives for their country. But another which would exist inside our society may want to manipulate this patriotism.”
The Western governments also could be expected to be worried by the May demonstrations, Leopold Unger wrote in the International Herald Tribune, May 12:
“Western governments may soon learn that the psychological repercussions of the recent demonstrations are international, and that it was wishful thinking to imagine that ‘normalization through force’ could quickly – or ever – lead to business as usual.”
 




In the sixteen months between the August 1980 strikes and the unleashing of massive repression on December 13, 1981, the working people of Poland recovered their sense of human and national dignity, their confidence in themselves, their class, and their country.
“Poland is herself again,” Solidarnosc activists told me in August. “We are the only country that kept its honor throughout the second world war. It was possible to impose totalitarian tyranny only because the country was totally destroyed.”
One-fourth of the Polish population was killed in the second world war. After the heroic uprising of 1944, Warsaw was leveled, and its surviving population deported to Nazi concentration camps.
The war was followed by purges, terror, and continued penury. In August, a forester in the Carpathian mountains complained to me that he had not had a single easy day since the Nazi invasion.
After the workers forced the government, temporarily, to accept their right to organize and express themselves even in a limited way, a profound sense of dignity and consideration for other people, a determination not to be dehumanized and humiliated again, pervaded Poland. Not even increasingly desperate shortages could break down this intense feeling of human worth and solidarity. The Polish people were acutely conscious of the need at all cost to maintain relationships of dignity and mutual respect among themselves.
Now, the regime that declared war on its own people in order to stop the rise of the democratic workers movement has launched a ruthless campaign to destroy the sense of dignity and honor in the Polish workers and the Polish people.
That is why the regime is forcing the workers to do their jobs under the guns of the military. It cannot run an economy at gunpoint. But the Polish Stalinist bureaucracy can only hope to survive if it can humiliate the masses of working people, destroy their belief in their own worth, and that of their fellow workers and their fellow Poles. Only then could the small minority of totally corrupt bureaucrats and their servants feel safe in Poland.
One of the bureaucracy’s main devices is a familiar one in the history of the trade unions in most countries: the “Yellow Dog” contract.
Workers returning to their jobs after the military crackdown were required to sign a declaration saying:
“I hereby state that I have taken cognizance of the note of the administrative chief of the cabinet of the Council of Ministers dated December 17, 1981, and I affirm that I am fully aware of the duty incumbent upon me to behave in accordance with the principles of people’s legality.
“Taking as my guide the interests of society and the principles of building socialism, I pledge always to uphold the authority of the people’s power and to execute scrupulously the orders of my superiors, and to keep uppermost in my mind always the socialist development of the People’s Republic of Poland and loyalty to the people’s state.
“Considering that many leading organs of the trade-union Solidarnosc have openly acted against the constitutional bodies of the state and administration, seeking, on the basis of counter-revolutionary positions, to overthrow the socialist system, I declare that I have resigned from this union.”
A government document smuggled out of Poland by Solidarnosc sets down the procedure for “interviewing” state employees. Among other things it says:
“... during the conversation, the special responsibilities of every employee of the central administration must be stressed and the interviewee should make a formal pledge to carry them out ...
“The following promise should be obtained, that the interviewee will not have anything to do with Solidarnosc, neither while it is suspended nor afterwards if this union is not permitted to organize among state administrative employees.
“Workers who do not give the required response cannot be maintained in the central state administration.
Like the late shah in Iran, General Jaruzelski has carried his repression so far that he has made possession of camping equipment a political crime, according to a January 5 UPI dispatch. The general is especially interested in knacksacks. Solidarity activists use them to carry leaflets. In fact, the practice is so widespread that the underground union has called on Poles to carry knacksacks whenever they can so as to provide cover for its couriers.
The regime also has to try to intimidate the young people of Poland. One of the baying hounds of the degenerate regime, Anna Powloska, a writer for the party paper, Trybuna Ludu has taken up the problem of the youth who “developed a taste for expressing themselves in strikes and protests.”
In this context, the report cited in a January 8 Prensa Latina dispatch that “soldiers are taking part in meetings with students to explain to them why the state of siege was declared,” assumes sinister implications.
After the military crackdown, callers to certain numbers found themselves being informed “this conversation is under scrutiny.” The only purpose such a practice can serve is to create an atmosphere of fear.
All journalists are being subjected to special interrogation. According to a Los Angeles Times Service dispatch of January 12, about half the staff of Kurier Polski survived it. The questions included: How do you assess Solidarity? How do you assess the events of December 13? And: Should a journalist simply inform his readers or should he try to shape their opinions?
Such questions are obviously designed to make journalists crawl on their bellies. What they test is the flexibility of the “interviewee’s” spine.
Even in the first days of shock and disarray after the mass arrests and military attacks on factories, the scattered leaders and activists of Solidarity began to fight this attempt to break the moral integrity of the Polish people.
In Katowice a Solidarity bulletin issued December 21 included the following point: “Don’t distrust your neighbor – your enemy are the cops, the careerists, and informers.” It also advised: “Shun the company of careerists, informers, and the commissars.” It called on its readers to “help in every way the families of those arrested, wounded, and murdered.”
In an open letter circulated by the clandestine Solidarity, Zbigniew Janas, one of the leaders of the URSUS plant, wrote on December 17, to the new plant manager, a certain Stawoszykiewicz:
“I was surprised to learn that you have taken over Director Wilk’s job since he was fired. I wrote him letters which he was unfortunately not there long enough to get. In the name of our past work together, I am writing you on the same subject. For some days, I have been pursued like a thief or a bandit simply because I wanted to rebuild our country after it was so efficiently wrecked by the Communist Party. But I am not afraid. I have been educated by the opposition and forged in the struggle against this inhuman and anti-national regime ...
“Today they have put you in Director Wilk’s place in the hope that you will be able to oppress people with sufficient force. I would not like to think that you were deceiving us these past months. I would like to believe that you remember all we talked about. Solidarity is not dead and will not die. The time will come when all of us will have to make an accounting and say what they did to help people, how many people they saved from losing their jobs. And no one will be able to justify themselves by saying that they were afraid and could not do anything.
“Remember that your duty and that of those working with you is not to prevent people from organizing to aid the families of those that have been arrested. It is your duty to make sure that these families get ration cards, even if you and your fellow directors have to give up your own.”
Janas went on to say:
“You should do what I have said, as a man and as a Pole. Do not forget that this country cannot long be governed at gunpoint. The tears that are shed in my house and those of my friends, known and unknown, will turn into stones that will batter down the ambitions of the enemies of the people who know no tolerance but understand only force.”
The January 15 issue of the Paris daily Liberation reported that the first time Western journalists were able to visit Poznan, a Solidarity leader, Zdzislaw Rozwalak, told them in front of party officials that he was renouncing the oath of allegiance that he made to the military regime on December 13: “I made it under duress before I knew what was really happening in the country.” The dispatch said that in the Cegielski factory many workers openly wore Solidarity badges and some even the initials “AE,” �which stands for “anti-socialist element” and is worn to show contempt for Stalinist propaganda.
Thus far the government has been resoundingly unsuccessful in getting Solidarity leaders or activists to “confess” and “repent.” In fact, it has been unable even to erase the symbols of courage and defiance.
“In front of the gates of the Wujek mine in Katowice where seven members of Solidarity were killed,” Le Matin’s special correspondent reported January 20, “a tall cross has been erected, and seven miners�helmets put with it. Many people come to place flowers there. The inscription on the cross remains untouched. It says ‘they died for freedom’.”
Once the government succeeded in taking Solidarity by surprise, once it was able to cut off communications throughout the country and disorganize the union, the sit-in strikes in the strongholds of the workers movement had no chance of success. But the desperate resistance of these groups of workers has left an example of courage. Some of the hardest and most prolonged fighting took place at the giant Nowa Huta factory in Cracow. The statement issued by the workers there is still circulating in Poland. Among other things, it says:
“The battle is one of fear. It is not surprising that we are afraid. We have families, wives, children, jobs. And we know what they are capable of, because we know the history of our country. But remember, they are more afraid than we are. Hiding behind their masks, their clubs, their tanks, their riot shields (literally, the glass panes used on reptile cages), they are afraid of us! ... There are not many of them. Pistols, tanks, clubs are no good against a united people. They are counting on fear ... If we want to remain free, we must remain calm, dignified, we must conquer fear. Even if they go to the last extreme, our quiet courage will bring victory, today and forever. We are not fighting for big words, we are fighting to remain human beings.”
The same theme was repeated in a call for organizing a mass resistance movement issued by the underground leaders of Solidarity which reached the West late in January.
“Clandestinity must not become a mask for fear ... From the beginning, underground activists must learn that arrest and interrogation are not the end of the struggle but the beginning of a new struggle, still harder and more lonely ...
“The regime thinks we are slaves. We will never accept that role.”
The fact that after more than a month of a massive military crackdown and the reinstitution of totalitarian repression a national leader of Solidarity, Zbigniew Bujak, is still free and issuing political statements, testifies that the “quiet courage” the Nowa Huta workers talked about has not been broken. Such a thing would be impossible without countless acts of quiet heroism and sacrifice by thousands of ordinary people.
Even in their present state of disorganization and uncertainty, the Polish masses have been able to force the mad-dog Stalinist dictatorship of General Jaruzelski to back off to a certain extent in its repression and attack on their standard of living.
That is the achievement and strength of Solidarity. It is the sort of power that makes revolutions in large and modern countries. Trotsky, the organizer of the first workers army, stressed this in opposition to the elitist and romanticists, to the high priests of Stalinist mythology.
However, this power has to be directed, focused, concentrated. This requires a leadership forged in struggles and having a clear perspective. It also requires a conviction driven deep into the masses that there is no hope but to fight for victory regardless of the cost. Before the struggle for workers democracy can be won, those basic moral and political victories have to be achieved.
The Polish working class and the Polish people have been well prepared by their history and the development of their country to emerge strengthened from this test and to lead all humanity forward to the achievement of their ideals of justice, dignity, and freedom.
 




Introduction
For almost four years one of the most acute social crises in the Western world has existed in Ireland, concentrated in a few relatively small communities in the northeast corner of the island that remains under British political control. In editorial after editorial, the voice of the most powerful imperialism in the world, the New York Times, has expressed concern over the developments in this tiny and economically almost insignificant region. The second most powerful imperialist country in the world, Great Britain, has found itself forced to put an unprecedented strain on its military machine. It has even been threatened with having to withdraw some of its troops from the border of the “Free World” in West Germany to maintain “order” in its oldest colony.
Violence is endemic in Northern Ireland, which was created to block the Irish people from achieving their full national aspirations and to maintain the religious caste system that has been the bulwark of British rule for more than three centuries. Repression and discrimination are an essential part of the system, which involves permanent violence against the almost 40 percent nationalist and Catholic minority. It was this minority who were the main losers when the Irish national revolution went down to a partial defeat in the ebb of the wave of revolutions that followed World War I. But in the period leading up to 1968, the dominant forces in the society thought that the time was ripe for reinforcing their political position.
For their own purposes, the Irish and British ruling classes wanted to clean up the image of the Northern regime by eliminating some of the more obvious religious bigotry, which served as a living reminder of the worst features of the old imperialist system. The Catholic bourgeoisie was in the process of dumping the last vestiges of Irish national aspirations and of coming to a full and final reconciliation with British capital. It was embarrassed by the brutal oppression of the Northern Catholics.
But in this attempt, the Northern regime and its British backers ran into two difficulties: They created expectations among the Catholic population that they could not meet. And they alienated sections of the Protestant establishment that saw their interests dependent on maintaining the old system unaltered. So a split in the Unionist apparatus went hand in hand with an increasing radicalization of the oppressed minority. Moreover, the status quo in Western Europe had become unstable. In this situation, only a few months after the upsurge in France in May–June 1968, a mass movement developed among the nationalist minority in Northern Ireland.
The rise of this movement also reflected other changes that had been accumulating beneath the surface. After the failure of the 1956–62 guerrilla campaign, the traditional nationalist movement, the IRA, had been forced to rethink its historic positions. In this process, it moved away from concentrating exclusively on guerrilla warfare in the name only of national unity and full independence. It began to develop a program of political action based on the immediate needs and aspirations of the mass of the people. This new orientation enabled it to become the backbone of a movement that could appeal to the majority of the nationalist population in the North, who had lost their belief that a united Ireland could be realized or was even worth fighting for. But while being based on the most modest democratic demands for equal rights for Catholics, this movement, the civil rights movement, touched off the most powerful revolutionary upsurge in Ireland since 1918–21.
One of the first effects of the massive fighting that developed in August 1969 was a split in the IRA. The rise of communal warfare encouraged some of the veterans of the 1956–62 campaign, who had been opposed or indifferent to the new orientation, to break away from the Official movement and form a Provisional IRA. Although they, too, have been changing under the pressure of the situation, the Provisionals have generally stressed military action as the main form of fighting the oppression of the Catholic community. The Officials have tried to combine commando group activity with peaceful mass action.
But in general, the distinction between the two groups has been seen in terms of mass action vs. guerrilla warfare. Smaller socialist groups, which had tended to discount the revolutionary potential of democratic demands, have found themselves either isolated or drawn into the orbit of one or the other militant nationalist organization, since this was the arena where the struggle for leadership was centered.
A number of key. lessons have been established over close to four years of struggle in which the Irish vanguard has been severely tested again and again. If traditionalism is not dead yet, the pressure of events and the spread of new ideas seems to have dealt it a mortal blow. In the future any radical organization in Ireland will have to stand on its political program and not its historical credentials. Now that an ebb in the struggle has set in, marked by the pro-government vote in the Common Market referendum in the South and the “peace offensive” in the Northern Catholic ghettos, it is essential to try to sum up these lessons.
Gerry Foley
* * *
Problems of the Irish Revolution
It was the public reaction to the execution of nineteen-year-old William James Best, who was shot as a spy May 19, 1972, by the Official Irish Republican Army unit in Derry, that apparently led the national leadership of the revolutionary organization to announce May 29 that it was suspending armed offensive operations in Ulster.
The IRA said that it was taking this step in response to an appeal from the executive of the Republican Clubs in Northern Ireland, the political organization of the movement in the area. The statement, quoted in the May 30, 1972, New York Times, said: “The executive proposed to the I.R.A. that in view of the growing danger of sectarian conflict the I.R.A. should immediately suspend all armed military actions.” The announcement continued: “The I.R.A. has agreed to this proposal, reserving only the right of self-defense.”
Since the Official IRA has stressed repeatedly that it was following a defensive strategy, the effect of this decision seems to be to call off retaliatory terrorist actions against the repressive forces.
The possibility of sectarian warfare, of course, does not depend on the policy of the IRA but on the intentions of the imperialists and their local allies, to whom large sections of the Protestant population are bound by their caste prejudices. But the renunciation of terrorism could improve the political position of the IRA by making clear the real source of the violence in Northern Ireland. It is doubtful that this will impress sections of the Protestant community imbued with a caste mentality, but it could have a positive effect on the nationalist community and world public opinion.
It seems clear that the retaliatory strikes of the Official IRA have not helped to further the struggle of the nationalist population, which is the main potentially revolutionary force in Ireland at the moment Instead these actions have helped the imperialists and the Catholic “moderates” to split and demobilize the nationalist population. The reaction to the Best shooting is only the latest and clearest example of this.
The May 29 statement of the Official IRA was, thus, politically unclear. By claiming implicitly that the movement had changed its policy out of concern over the reaction that might be provoked from the Protestants, the pronouncement turned the issue on its head and opened the way for dangerous confusion.
This confusion was made worse by the fact that the May 29 statement did not explain whether the Official IRA had changed its concept of organizing armed action. Thus, it is unclear whether the Official IRA is rethinking its traditional positions or simply responding to pressure, which would be a very dangerous course in a situation as complex and volatile as the one in Ireland. In any case, in the wake of the Best shooting and the successes of the “moderate” peace offensive, it seems apparent that the republican movement is trying to reorient itself. It faces some profound problems; it also has some substantial achievements to build on.
To try to estimate what turn events are likely to take, now that the situation is shifting so rapidly in Ireland, it seems necessary to reach some judgements about the policies of the Official republican movement, since it has provided the main political leadership to the struggle so far.
It does not seem justified, for example, to view the Best shooting as a local and accidental error. It is true that the Derry unit, which carried our the execution, is not typical of the Official IRA. Among other things, British ultra-leftist and workerist groups have exercised a more marked influence in this area than in other parts of Ireland. Despite this, the shooting of Best seems to flow logically from some of the basic policies of the Official IRA. This act was merely the latest of a series of assassinations of British soldiers. The rationale was the same as in other cases. “The army of the people” had punished the people’s enemies.
When the Official IRA bombed the British paratrooper base in Aldershot, England, killing a number of non-military personnel, it defended the action on the grounds that the base was a military target, that the paratroopers had gunned down Irish people, and that in acts of war, harming innocent persons cannot always be avoided. Fundamentally, the defense of the Aldershot action was a moralistic one, in line with the ideology and traditions of terrorism. The Russian Narodniki could claim equally valid moral justification for gunning down or bombing the czarist hangmen. In both cases, the result of these actions was the same – they tended to substitute for and disrupt mass political activity. Furthermore, they prevented the development of armed action by the masses.
If the IRA had taken advantage of the political mood that prevailed in the wake of the Derry massacre, they might have been able to organize mass self-defense, and in that event it would have been difficult for any of the repressive regimes active in Ireland to prevent them from arming a large section of the population. This opportunity was wasted for the sake of the essentially moral satisfaction of killing a few British soldiers, with politically negative and militarily insignificant results. Instead of being buoyed up by the upsurge that followed the Derry killings, the Official IRA found itself again isolated from the masses.
Like the team that bombed Aldershot, the members of the IRA court that condemned and executed Best were acting “on behalf of the people,” since the republican movement in Derry has been unable to win the full, conscious involvement of the community or to give impetus to mass democratic organization of the people.
Such terrorist actions flow from the historical character of the IRA. Building a secret army that does not grow out of the struggles of the people and that engages in daring armed operations that are not an integral and natural part of mass struggles – that is, not the acts of armed detachments of the people – can hardly help but lead toward elitist militarism. This holds true regardless of the social and political conceptions of those who lead this clandestine force.
The republican movement has a long experience of the results of recruiting on the basis of the appeal of armed action. Once individuals begin to act in the name of the masses, but without being under effective popular control or under the discipline of a mass revolutionary party, it is practically inevitable that they will engage in politically harmful adventures. It is all too easy, moreover, for politically untrained or miseducated youth to become so dazzled with armed initiatives that they lose all taste or aptitude for the tasks of political propaganda or organization. Under these conditions, any propaganda that is put forward is likely to be reduced to romantic extremist appeals that cannot educate the masses.
The fact that the Derry unit of the Official IRA chose to carry out an action like shooting Best, apparently on its own, illustrates another key political weakness that has appeared more than once since the Irish crisis began – the inability to see the political situation in Ireland as an organic whole. Among other things, this was shown by the political character of the Official IRA’s Intervention in the Mogul silver mine strike in July 1971.
In this long, bitter strike against a foreign company, the Official IRA applied its policy of using terrorist methods in support of popular struggles. They tried to blow up a transformer supplying electricity to the mines. In itself this was not an unusual act of industrial sabotage in hard-fought strikes. Unfortunately a young IRA man, Martin O’Leary, was killed in the operation. At his funeral, the chief of staff of the Official IRA, Cathal Goulding, hailed O’Leary as “the first martyr of the new campaign in the South,” a campaign against the “capitalist vultures” by means of the “bomb and the bullet.”
The IRA had intervened in a similar way in the Shannon electrical workers’ strike in 1966, but that action had not provoked the threat of a general repression. In 1971, however, Goulding received a summons on a sedition charge, and this move by the government seemed to fit into a general build-up for the introduction of the concentration camp system for political suspects in both North and South Ireland. The government in Dublin retreated when the extent of the resistance of the people in the North to internment became evident. But the situation in the summer of 1971 was extremely dangerous in the formally independent part of the country.
In the conditions since 1969, when a general crisis in the imperialist control of Ireland began, the intervention of the Official IRA in a local strike offered the Dublin government the opportunity it was looking for to move against the developing revolutionary forces. The whole system was at stake and the authorities moved in a concerted way to remove the threat. It was the revolutionists who could not see the implications of their action in the context of a unified strategy – a serious failure, certainly, from a military point of view.
The fact that the local labor leaders approved the action did not change its political effect It is a syndicalist delusion shared by most of the left groups in Ireland that if they can align themselves with the workers in some partial struggle, the government will automatically be embarrassed or discredited and restrained from attacking them. The fact is that the whole history of trade unionism shows that among the workers there is a fundamental difference between economic and political consciousness. This has been shown time and time again in the most dramatic way by unions giving political backing to bourgeois and reformist politicians directly responsible for strikebreaking and even atrocities against the striking workers.
At the same time, one of the justifications given for actions like the dynamiting at the Mogul mine was a certain conception of the unity of the imperialist system in Ireland. Since it is imperialist capitalism that holds the country in bondage, according to this view, national liberation fighters should engage in all concrete forms of struggle against exploitation. In a general sense, no revolutionary Marxist could dispute this.
Moreover, the Official IRA has been anxious to reorient its members from the traditional pattern of concentrating on military struggle in the North toward fighting the imperialist system in the South and understanding that the Dublin regime is just as important an obstacle to national liberation as the fortress state in the Six Counties. This is also correct in a general sense. But the problem is that these conceptions are too static and general and, as such, in practice they cannot serve as a guide for a unified strategy.
It is true that the neocolonialist regime in the South is essentially part of the same system as the Unionist setup in the North and that an essential part of defeating Unionism is to mobilize the people in the South against the dependent capitalist system that exists in their own area. However, the whole development of the crisis since 1969 shows that there are important practical differences between the Belfast and Dublin regimes that revolutionists cannot ignore.
Despite the repressive legislation and inclinations of the Southern government, republicans have been able to operate more or less legally in the formally independent part of the country. It is ironic that this fact should be underestimated by the republicans while they place so much stress on the need for achieving the right of legal political activity in the North.
It is true, moreover, that it is the same capitalist-imperialist system which oppresses the Irish people in both parts of Ireland. However, this system has political and ideological aspects as well as directly economic characteristics, and it has a certain specific historical form in Ireland. The fact is that the crisis of capitalism in Ireland has arisen from the struggle of the nationalist people in the Northern ghettos. This was the weakest point of the sociopolitical system of imperialist capitalism in Ireland, and the cracks are spreading out from there. The crisis is not developing gradually in direct conjunction with general economic conditions but explosively as the historical lines of cleavage widen, partly under the impact of economic changes but also in response to political and social factors.
While the Mogul mine strike was related to the general economic problems of the Irish nation, it had no clear specific connection with the fight in the North, which was, and is, the main factor affecting the political thinking of the people throughout the island. Thus, it did not challenge the system in Ireland in a direct way, did not point toward a solution of the crisis, and apparently did not increase the support for the IRA to any significant degree.
 
THE SAME KIND OF one-sidedness seems to have paralyzed the Official IRA’s political strategy during the upsurge after the Derry massacre in January 1972. As angry crowds of thousands and tens of thousands of people gathered in early February to demonstrate against the British atrocity, the Official IRA called on them to vote against Common Market entry in the May 9 referendum. That was its main demand. The republican speakers argued that if the crowds wanted to oppose British imperialism, they should oppose the plans of imperialism for Ireland, that is, Common Market membership. This appeared logical, but it did not take into consideration the political dynamic.
Mass upsurges also have their logic. By nature they are short-lived. They dissipate harmlessly unless they are given a concrete and immediate focus. In the week after the Derry massacre, there was a mass challenge, in essence, to the system in Ireland. The Official republicans did not understand how to direct this pressure against the weakest point of the capitalist-imperialist structure as a whole at that particular time and thus they seem to have failed to make any substantial gains from one of the most powerful upsurges in recent Irish history.
Thinking in general concepts divorced from dynamic realities, the republicans display an essentially schematic and static notion of the way social change takes place. The same approach is shown in the Official IRA’s slogan of reconquering the country mine by mine, factory by factory, and so forth. The other side of this in the North is the idea of building people’s power street by street and neighborhood by neighborhood.
By trying to develop the primitive forms of popular power that have arisen in the embattled nationalist ghettos, the Official IRA has shown its devotion to the ideals of revolutionary democracy and in some cases has responded very effectively to the challenge of the state’s policy of all-out repression. But unless the concept of revolutionary democracy is integrated into a general strategy based on politically educating and organizing the masses of the Irish people for a centralized assault on the entire imperialist system, the policy of the Official IRA is apt to end up in a utopian impasse.
The barricaded areas are politically important primarily as a challenge to the state and the status quo. By showing the power and logic of an independent mobilization of the masses under the leadership of sincere revolutionary militants, the incipient forms of popular self-rule that have appeared in Derry, in particular, point the way toward a new and higher form of society. However, the barricaded areas are the front lines of a bitter struggle that will decide the fate of the Irish people; they cannot be the models of the liberated society itself.
It is a dangerous delusion to think that just by “running their own lives” on a few streets or in a few besieged neighborhoods people can make any basic and lasting improvement in their condition. Instead, the politically most advanced section of these communities can wear themselves out in isolated community-betterment projects and in maintaining the basic services, while under the pressure of the surrounding society, life becomes more and more difficult for the general population and the politically backward masses slide into indifference and eventual demoralization.
Inevitably, the people of these small, isolated, marginal communities will tire if they do not see their fight as part of a much larger struggle that has a chance for victory and offers a real possibility for solving their social problems. Eventually it will be easy enough for sections of the community to begin to say: “Let’s just have peace and leave the street cleaning to the corporation.”
Rooted as it is in an essentially vague and static conception of society, the populist notion of people’s power spreading from neighborhood to neighborhood seems to be sort of a left version of the concept of revolutionary “stages” that underlies the Official republican strategy in the Northern conflict. According to this theory, the British have to be forced to introduce bourgeois democratic freedoms in Northern Ireland before a revolutionary struggle in the full sense of the word can take place; civil equality for Catholics is necessary to eliminate the sectarian divisions in the working class; republicans have to have the opportunity to talk to the Protestant workers in order to be able to win them over to the idea of a united Irish workers’ republic.
This concept was expressed clearly in the January 1972 issue of the Official republican organ, The United Irishman, where the editors argued that it was impossible to think in terms of a socialist revolution in the North as long as the Protestant and Catholic workers were not united. By reducing the working class to a populist abstraction, this approach also distorts the nature of social evolution. Just as the struggle against imperialism is supposed to proceed in regular steps, so the unity of the working class is expected to develop in a steady progression as the result of propaganda and piecemeal economic struggles.
This scheme of things seems reasonable enough from a pragmatic point of view. Obviously we have to be able to walk before we can run, as the saying goes. Furthermore, the whole ideology of bourgeois society inculcates the idea of “progress,” in the sense that the present society is supposed to be in the process of steadily “evolving” into something better. The pragmatic approach, moreover, can have its attractions when the only alternative presented is ultra-leftist disregard for the real process of the masses learning through experience.
But an objective look at history shows that it does not move in such neat patterns. In the twentieth century in particular, there has been a succession of great social crises throughout the world that have either led forward to a fundamental change in the organization of society or backward to even more brutal forms of repression and exploitation.
The revolutionary theory of social change, Marxism, denies that history moves in even patterns. It distinguishes certain general phases of historical development in order to determine the direction in which society is moving and the underlying tendencies. But the essence of Marxist analysis is to show, by referring to those abstract patterns, how these phases combine in the real world. Marxists see society as a dynamic, constantly shifting balance of forces that inevitably develops in an irregular pattern, where long periods of slow evolution lead up to abrupt leaps forward – or backward – that is, to a period of crises.
In the long phase of capitalist stability and expansion in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, a tendency developed in the workers’ movement to interpret Marx’s concepts as meaning that social evolution was a simple, automatic process. When the capitalist system went into a deep crisis with the outbreak of World War I, it became apparent that this interpretation was an adaptation to the trade-union and party bureaucracies, which had acquired a certain stake in the established order of things and a routinist and legalistic mentality.
One section of these “progressives” saw a German victory in the war as the way forward, since Germany was economically the most advanced of the contending powers and had the best-organized working class. Another section looked to the Western allies, which had long since passed into the “democratic stage.”
Along with James Connolly, Lenin was one of the few leaders of the pre-war socialist movement to reject such “stages” theories. Lenin’s opponents, the Mensheviks, argued that since Russia was a backward absolutist state, there was no possibility for making a workers’ revolution until a long period of bourgeois democratic development had been completed and the working class had become the majority of the population.
Lenin and Trotsky argued, on the other hand, that the capitalist system had already reached the phase of a global system – imperialism – to which the primitive repressive systems in the colonial and semi-colonial countries had become adjuncts. The war, in fact, had shown that bourgeois democracy was beginning to decay even in the countries of its birth. Therefore, despite the terrible difficulties of making a socialist revolution in a backward country like Russia, with all of its bitter internal national divisions and religious fanaticisms, there was no other way forward.
Since capitalism as a world system was in crisis, moreover, the fight to overthrow it had to begin where the contradictions were most acute, where the lines of cleavage had first opened, and it was highly likely that the political situation would be difficult and complex precisely in those places. The regeneration of the workers’ movement also had to begin there, since the parties that had failed to respond to the revolutionary challenge of the war had shown that they were no longer workers’ parties in the political sense; that is, they were not ready and determined to intervene in the crises of capitalism to overthrow the system. They in fact functioned as part of the system, siphoning off its discontents and diverting the revolutionary aspirations of the oppressed strata.
Moreover, since revolutionary opportunities arose in abrupt and relatively brief crises, because of the irregular movement of history, parties had to be created at once to lead the workers in the task of overthrowing bourgeois society. Since the capitalist system had become reactionary on the world scale, every deep social crisis now posed the possibility of a fundamental attack on the system itself. A leadership was needed that clearly understood the dynamics of society and knew how to orient the revolutionary forces in time. Only a well-timed, well-coordinated, and well-planned political offensive could lead to victory. The party had to help prepare the workers to strike with daring and decisiveness at the proper moment, concentrating the political blows on the key lines of cleavage in bourgeois society.
Against this revolutionary conception of social development, the opportunists and pacifists who led the bureaucratized workers’ parties in the West raised vague schemata that put off any possibility for socialism to the indefinite future. In the countries where the deepest crises occurred, the reformists could argue that the “democratic stage” had not been completed. In the case of Austria, where the crisis was exceptionally violent, the centrist leadership tried an approach somewhere between pure reformism and a revolutionary program. They tried to guarantee that the “bourgeois-democratic stage” would be carried through to the end by maintaining soviets, the apparatus of a workers’ government, parallel to the regular bourgeois institutions. They even had a militia. But the bourgeoisie was not willing to accept halfway solutions. Because of its slowness and indecisiveness, the workers’ movement was crushed, opening the way for fascism.
To prove that they were the authentic Marxists, the opportunist leaders could argue that they led mass workers’ parties. They commanded a vast network of trade unions and educational institutions. They had in some cases shown their abilities in leading the economic struggles of the workers. If the socialist revolution was going to come about as a result of the development of the working class, surely they would lead it. In any case, there would be no socialist revolution until all the workers wanted it, and the fact that the evolutionist parties retained their hold on a large section of the working class proved that they did not. In some cases, as in Austria, even Catholic parties and unions maintained their grip on many workers. How could you make a socialist revolution when sections of the workers were still under the influence of clerical reaction?
And most important, how could it be hoped that a socialist revolution could occur in Russia when the working class there was relatively so small and culturally backward? The Russian workers would have to wait at least until their Western brothers and sisters were ready to join in the fight with them. Wasn’t it proof of the non-Marxism of the Bolsheviks that their support tended to be among the youth, the intellectuals, and marginal layers of the working population, rather than in heavy industry and the most powerful unions? Such forces could never make a revolution.
To these arguments, the revolutionists replied that Marxism was not a form of vulgar materialist sociology. Such a view, in fact, could only give an essentially static picture of the world and could never serve as a guide to revolution. Marxism, in contrast, was a method of analyzing social development that took into consideration the underlying tendencies and the interrelation of all factors. Since it saw society in motion, it also saw that every fact of life had its contradictions. Since the world capitalist system as a whole had become reactionary, the most backward areas were likely to be the places where the most acute contradictions existed – the weak points of the whole interlocking machinery of world capitalist society.
However backward the consciousness of the popular strata in these areas, they could not solve their elementary problems without striking out against the capitalist system as a whole, which condemned them to permanent misery and slavery. Therefore, not only was it likely that revolutions would occur first among backward sections of the workers, it was likely also, for better or for worse, that the more advanced workers would have to be set in motion under the impact of these rebellions. Calling on the disadvantaged sections of the workers to wait until more powerful but conservatized sections were ready to move meant in fact turning off the driving force of revolution.
Thus, the process of the world revolution itself would be irregular, involving violent conflicts and splits in the working class before higher unity could be achieved. Uniting the workers would not be the result of routine propagandistic and trade-union work, as the reformists claimed. Unity could be achieved only through a complex and often violent, and above all political, struggle, in which the revolutionists would have to stand resolutely on the side of the interests and aspirations of the most exploited and oppressed sections of society. Full unity might in fact only be achieved after the completion of a successful socialist revolution.
 
AS HE MOVED AWAY FROM the economic schematism of his earlier work toward an understanding of the place of national revolution in emancipating the Irish workers, James Connolly also came to understand the contradictions in the working class of his own country. In his article British Labour and Irish Politicians, written in May 1913, he wrote:
From time to time I propose to give some attention to the elucidation of the problems peculiar to Ireland and particularly to this part of it [the North]. For the present it is sufficient to emphasise the fact that the religious affiliations of the population of Ulster determine their political leanings to a greater extent than is the case in any part of Europe outside the Balkans. But the manner in which this has developed is also unique. I believe that it is true to say that, politically speaking, the Protestantism of the North of Ireland has no parallel outside this country, and that the Catholicism of the Irish Catholics is, likewise, peculiar in its political trend.
To explain – I mean that, whereas Protestantism has in general made for political freedom and political Radicalism, it has been opposed to slavish worship of kings and aristocrats. Here, in Ireland, the word Protestant is almost a convertible term with Toryism, lickspittle loyalty, servile worship of aristocracy and hatred of all that savours of genuine political independence on the part of the “lower classes.”
And in the same manner, Catholicism, which in most of Europe is synonymous with Toryism, lickspittle loyalty, servile worship of aristocracy and hatred of all that savours of genuine political independence on the part of the lower classes, in Ireland is almost synonymous with rebellious tendencies, zeal for democracy, and intense feeling of solidarity with all strivings upward of those who toil.
Such a curious phenomenon is easily understood by those who know the history of Ireland. Unfortunately for their spiritual welfare – and I am using the word “spiritual,” not in its theological but in its better significance as controlling mental and moral development upward – the Protestant elements of Ireland were, in the main, a plantation of strangers upon the soil from which the owners had been dispossessed by force. The economic dispossession was, perforce, accompanied by political and social outlawry. Hence every attempt of the dispossessed to attain citizenship, to emerge from their state of outlawry, was easily represented as a tentative step toward reversing the plantation and towards replanting the Catholic and dispossessing the Protestant ...
Then the Protestant always saw that the kings and aristocrats of England and Ireland were opposed by the people whom he most feared, and from recognizing that it was but an easy step to regard his cause as identical with theirs. They had a common enemy, and he began to teach his children that they had a common cause, and common ideals ...
The Catholics, for their part, and be it understood I am talking only of the Catholic workers, have been as fortunately placed for their political education as they were unfortunately placed for their political and social condition. Just as the Socialist knows that the working class, being the lowest in the social system, cannot emancipate itself without as a result emancipating all other classes, so the Irish Catholic has realised instinctively that he, being the most oppressed and disfranchised, could not win any modicum of political freedom or social recognition for himself without winning it for all others in Ireland. Every upward step of the Catholic has emancipated some one of the smaller Protestant sects; every successful revolt of the Catholic peasant has given some added security even to those Protestant farmers who were most zealously defending the landlord. And out of this struggle the Catholic has, perforce, learned toleration. He has learned that his struggle is, and has been, the struggle of all the lowly and dispossessed, and he has grown broad-minded with the broad-mindedness of the slave in revolt against slavery.
Connolly used the historical Marxist method; he did not argue about the real economic differences in the position of Protestant and Catholic workers like a vulgar bourgeois sociologist. Of course, he ended his article with the assertion that with the prospect of home rule, that is, democratic reform of the British system, the differences between Protestant and Catholic were fading away. But from his own argument this seems to have been just a hope. And the “civilization” he saw coming to Ireland with this reform has not only been delayed in that country but throughout the world; civilization in general has tended to go backward. The age of reform was already over when Connolly wrote those lines. In the age of capitalist decay, it is hard to imagine the British ruling class definitively giving up such a strong prop of reaction as the Orange caste, at least not as long as there is any threat of a nationalist revival in Ireland.
 
LENIN AND TROTSKY DID NOT see the working class in a romantic glow that concealed its contradictions and weaknesses. Most of all, they looked at the workers from the standpoint of the system as a whole. They knew that the workers had had to fight sections of their own class in Russia in order to win. They knew that the working class revolution had been inseparably and directly combined with struggles for civil rights and national liberation. They knew that when the working class itself melted away in the civil war, the party representing the historic interests of the class had preserved the historic foundations of workers’ power. They had no sympathy with the successors of the Narodniki who thought that the party should “serve the people.” Russian Marxism was built in a fight with this theory of dissolving into the masses and carrying on an aimless round of economic struggles. The party had to be the general staff of revolution and intervene in history in a single- minded, purposeful, and scientific way.
When the Stalinist bureaucracy rose to power in the Soviet Union and destroyed the party that had made the revolution, workerism and the “stages” theory made a comeback. These concepts served the Soviet bureaucrats in the same way they had served the trade-union bureaucrats and electoral politicians of the Social Democracy – as a justification for reformism. The Kremlin bosses lost all interest in extending the revolution, which might endanger their positions by reviving the revolutionary aspirations of the people they ruled. Like all intermediate social layers – including the conservative “nationalists” in Ireland – they maintained their position by balancing between the fundamental forces in society.
By exploiting the prestige of the party that they in fact liquidated, the Stalinist bureaucrats were able to inculcate reformist concepts into the minds of generations of militants who may have begun with revolutionary aspirations. These false ideas have become part of the general baggage of the left. In some cases, they have even had a fitful revival in the recent period, as some youth have tended to romanticize the Stalinism associated with the great class battles of the 1930s and the expansion of the Soviet sphere of influence immediately after the second world war. A reaction against the ultra-leftism of the early phases of the youth radicalization has also produced a certain nostalgia for the “organization” of the Stalinist parties and the “realism” of reformist trade-unionists.
The romantic populism and workerism of some young radicals fits in very well with the general underpinnings of Stalinism, just as many aspects of Narodnikism did with Stalinism during the period of the rise of the bureaucracy. (The theory of Socialist Realism, for instance, represents largely a revival of Narodnik theories that were combated by Russian Marxists, including Lenin.)
Although reinforced by general pragmatic ways of thinking, the “stages” theory in the Official republican movement clearly has a Stalinist source, although it may not be direct. The formulation in the Manifesto of the Irish Workers’ and Farmers’ Republic, reprinted in August 1971, is the classical Stalinist one, touched up with some of the scholastic fuzziness typical of the British Communist Party:
Both the national independence revolution and the socialist revolution are two stages of one democratic transformation of society, separate in time, each stage of which entails political and economic change in the interests of the mass of the people. How long a time elapses between the establishment of real national independence and unity and the establishment of a socialist form of society will depend on the interaction of the democratic forces of the Irish people and British imperialism together with the allies and clients of the latter within the country. In favourable conditions this may become a matter of gradual steps; it is not possible to be dogmatic about it.
By stressing the separateness of the two stages of the revolution, this passage in effect denies that socialism or socialist demands and perspectives have any relevance for the present, except as ideals. In the last sentence, it even holds open the prospect of peaceful evolution to socialism. The concept is clearly a reformist one in all its practical implications.
Because of that, this dogmatic approach can paralyze practical political action. In an age when capitalism as a whole is in crisis, partial struggles cannot be conducted effectively unless the leaders understand that any mass struggle tends to run up against the system, reaching a point where it can only be carried forward by raising socialist demands.
Whether or not the possibility exists for carrying the process all the way, at such times important ideas can be gotten across to the masses and advanced positions gained for the next wave of struggles.
However, unlike the Communist parties, it seems that most of the membership and leadership of the Official republican movement have not drawn outright reformist conclusions from this and other formulas. In fact, the “stages” theory seems to have had a rather contradictory history among the republicans.
To the extent that the republicans learned that there are different phases and levels of social struggle and different tasks appropriate to each, the “stages” theory was at least an advance over the previous romantic and moralistic absolutism of the republican tradition. At least partially under the influence of this theory, they seem to have moved away from the old dead-end notion of trying to restart the guerrilla war of 1919. They moved instead toward the idea of mass social struggle based on demands arising out of the most acutely felt aspirations of the widest possible sectors of the population.
The civil rights movement led by the republicans achieved the first major breakthrough against the repressive system since the war of independence. However, this movement did not achieve the modest goals the republicans set for it; instead it created an explosive, potentially revolutionary situation, which they apparently did not expect, were unable to exploit in any consistent way, and seem not to have wanted. Now the “stages” theory is obviously holding them back. Only a consistently revolutionary social theory explaining the interaction of democratic and socialist struggle can point the way forward.
The Official republicans were proved correct in their fight against the ultra-lefts who wanted to liquidate or divert the mass struggle for civil rights. But by failing to see that in Ireland democratic and socialist tasks are inseparably intertwined, they seem to have promoted dogmatism and adventurism in their own ranks.
In a period of deepening crisis, the lack of a bold and unified revolutionary strategy will inevitably give rise to adventurism in some sections of the movement that are more undisciplined or feel more acutely the forces of “order” moving in for the kill.
Furthermore, the youth in Northern Ireland know that the capitalist system offers no future for them. For three years they have fought the repressive forces largely on their own, without following the directives of any political or military organization. The young intellectuals, in particular, in the midst of this social turmoil can see the capitalist system faltering all over the world. Only four years ago, they saw it come to the brink of collapse in the neighboring country of France. And everywhere they have seen capitalism become steadily more repressive and reactionary.
These potential cadres of the revolutionary movement cannot be persuaded to accept the utopian concept of a long “democratic stage” ahead, especially when the most enthusiastic proponents of this idea are the dismal reformist hacks of the Northern Ireland Communist Party. Only a revolutionary conception of the role of the civil rights struggle can win these youth to accepting the discipline of a revolutionary mass party.
It has to be explained to these youth that by mobilizing the masses around modest and reasonable-seeming demands, they can set in motion revolutionary struggles that can lead to the overthrow of the capitalist system in the “short run,” and not at some problematic future stage. This is exactly what the history of the civil rights movement shows.
It has to be explained also that the basic techniques of making a revolution are political – the science of knowing what to do and when to do it.
In order to train and discipline their revolutionary instincts, the youth need to learn that you can exploit the contradictions of capitalist ideology without becoming entrapped in it. For example, a republican in the civil rights movement does not have to say: “If policemen did not carry guns and were under effective civilian control, they would be respected members of the community.” A revolutionist does not have to say: “All the people want is democracy; they would be satisfied with that.” That is repulsive kowtowing, totally unworthy of honest revolutionists. But a socialist can say: “If the British and the Unionists claim this is a democratic system, they must at least give us all our democratic rights.”
It is not necessary to accept the framework of the parliamentary system to make such demands. There is no point either in relying on paper rights. But you can demand that the British authorities who stand behind the Northern Ireland regime either maintain democratic rights or get out. How they do it is their problem. As long as the mass pressure for democracy is maintained, without making any compromises with the British system, any formal concession will be a spur to further struggles.
On the other hand, projecting complete plans for democratization presumed to be acceptable to one or another section of the British establishment only spreads illusions in the possibility of democracy under the British system. The effectiveness of the new Whitelaw regime in Northern Ireland in using completely false promises of reform to split the nationalist population is eloquent testimony to the dangers of encouraging such illusions.
The problem of revolutionists is not to try to figure out what concessions the ruling class can give, or how to make it easy for them; the problem is to mobilize the masses, to expose the system and prove by experience that it has to be overthrown. In the period of capitalist decay, the imperialists do not give reforms in general because the demands are reasonable; they give them under the threat of development toward revolution. If the leaders of the masses accept the limitations of the system from the start, there is no incentive for the capitalists to grant any concessions.
What is important is that the demands seem reasonable to the masses and that they expose the fundamentally and irreparably anti-democratic nature of British rule in Northern Ireland. This kind of demand can cut the ground out from under reformists, or promisers of reform, who want to split and demobilize the oppressed community. Calls for democracy are entirely reasonable and the opposite of reformist in this context, in that they reach the masses at their present level of consciousness and lead them in a revolutionary direction by exploiting the contradictions of the system. This is the transitional approach, the revolutionary method of mobilizing the masses.
But if mass work is regarded as “reformist” activity by nature, and in the long run subordinate to the revolutionary job of creating a “people’s army,” then it is obvious that as the young members of the republican movement radicalize they will become more and more attracted by “revolutionary” tasks, which are defined by this method as armed action. And, what is equally bad, the leadership in mass work will be left to genuinely reformist elements.
 
AT THE SAME TIME, WHILE the core of the republican movement is organized on a military basis, it is politically very loose. Agreement is on very general concepts: “We are for the ordinary people and against the bourgeoisie North and South; we are for socialism.” Discussion in republican circles seems oddly rambling and narrowly pragmatic, usually confined within the limits of a few commonly accepted assumptions. You seldom hear a systematic analysis of the dynamics of specific situations or an assessment of past predictions. Such an organization cannot help but be politically very slow moving. It cannot maneuver like a revolutionary combat party to take advantage of cracks in the system and respond immediately to new opportunities and new dangers.
If, for example, the republican movement tried at some point to give critical or conditional support to a militant move by a section of the Catholic establishment, a move that might develop under the pressures of the situation, the ranks would be disoriented. All the propaganda is devoted to denouncing these elements without explaining their contradictions in a scientific way. By nature such generic concepts are static. In practical politics, they leave no room for any stance but head- on attack or, perhaps more accurately, marching in place.
In the same way, raising the slogan of uniting the workers without explaining the contradictions in the working class in a scientific way, without explaining the historical dynamics of socialist revolution, opens the way for romanticizing economic struggle, that is, for dogmatism in this field.
It is easy for sectarians to say that the civil rights struggle has polarized Catholic and Protestant workers rather than brought them closer together. Since political struggle against the caste system alienates the Protestant workers, in this view the fight obviously should be conducted on a purely economic basis, or at least there should be a relatively long “economic stage.” On this level it is presumed that both Protestant and Catholic workers have the same interests. If the republicans do not understand what the civil rights movement has accomplished, if they do not understand how it challenges the fundamental structures of the capitalist system in Ireland, they may have a difficult time answering these arguments. The sectarians can also add the emotional argument that civil rights are not going to improve the economic condition of the workers or alter their basic position in society.
In the first place, the republicans could point out that it is an oversimplification to say that all workers have the same interests. Under conditions of scarcity and insecurity, even minute economic or social advantages can cause deep divisions. And, in a stagnant system, it is not going to do very much good to explain how unimportant these differences are in an absolute sense or relative to the advantages all the workers could have if they combined. Such a line would presuppose a socialist political consciousness on the part of the more advantaged workers.
But fundamentally, the republicans could explain that these sectarians have a one-dimensional, static view of reality. Economistic dogmatists cannot see capitalist society as a complete political, social, and economic system. They cannot understand that in historical evolution, while economic forces are the fundamental drive, other secondary factors can reflect back on and even change the course of economic development. If this were not true, the great Marxists have explained, socialist revolution itself would be impossible.
Marxism is not a theory of economic determinism; economic determinism is essentially a bourgeois theory with conservative implications. For the Stalinists and Social Democrats, economism is a way of justifying political immobility. Trade-union activity and piecemeal agitations are presented as the way toward progress. The political party of the working class becomes submerged in the routine of daily work and loses all perspective of making a centralized attack on capitalism. The classical motto of revisionism is that the movement is everything, the goal nothing.
The workerism of ultra-left sectarians is just the reverse of the coin. They arbitrarily interpret all economic agitation as ipso facto revolutionary: every strike is a revolutionary episode. The effect is the same. Motion toward the goal becomes lost in aimless “militant” agitations and phrase-mongering.
The economists of both stripes accuse the republicans of being “inconsistent” in their orientation toward the Protestant workers. Fortunately, the republicans are inconsistent, or their activity would be as sterile as the other idealizers of the Protestant workers. But the situation in Ireland seems to have reached the point where the republicans can go no further unless they develop a consistent approach based on utilizing the positive lessons of the civil rights movement, its revolutionary lessons.
The danger now is – since the civil rights movement has not proceeded as expected and the republican leadership was evidently not prepared politically for the actual results – that disorientation will set in. Under the blows brought on by the political and organizational weaknesses of the movement, the disorientation could quickly become very grave.
If any of the republican leaders are really intellectually committed to the “stages” schema – that is, are ideological centrists in the full sense – the only direction they can go now is toward the right. The course set by one of the republican movement’s political advisers, Roy Johnston, is probably a good example. After resigning from the movement, he published an “apologia” in the March 31, 1972, issue of the liberal Dublin biweekly Hibernia, in which he suggested that the whole idea of a mass, militant civil rights movement was a mistake.
In retrospect, I am now convinced that the timing was wrong. We know that the mixture was explosive, but we understand, seriously, the difficulty of controlling the magnitude and direction of the blast.
If the republican clubs had had a chance to find their feet, get engaged in local political activity, draw a few conclusions for themselves, establish some links with the students, etc., the idea of a civil rights movement would have emerged naturally.
This was beginning to happen. By 1966 the Belfast republicans were beginning to be interested in tenants associations; there had been successful agitations about pedestrian crossings, etc.
The natural tendency for the centrists will be to try to reduce the civil rights movement to a liberal pressure group linked to the “democratic” establishment in Britain. The position of the British Communist party in the trade-union movement and the various respectable left groups will be a key element.
Now that the imperialists have succeeded in splitting the nationalist community and restoring the position of the moderates, moreover, all the pressures of the establishment will be exerted to drive the mass movement to the right and demobilize it.
A New York Times editorial of June 1, 1972, was a good illustration of this tendency:
Catholic leaders are now participating with Protestants in an advisory commission appointed by Mr. Whitelaw and the Social Democratic and Labor party has added its powerful voice to the demand for an end to violence and for Catholic cooperation with the British administration “to give peace a chance.” The Official I.R.A. withdrawal leaves only the Provisionals and the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association as holdouts on the Catholic side.
The deceitfulness of this paragraph is obvious. The Official IRA has, presumably, withdrawn from using terrorist methods. The Provisional IRA is committed to a terrorist campaign. The Civil Rights Association, on the other hand, has only said that it will not cooperate with the government until at least the concentration camp system is ended.
The propaganda line taken by the Times also illustrates the danger in the Official IRA argument that it is essential not to provoke a Protestant backlash. The logic of this argument can be used to push the revolutionary militants further and further onto the defensive and eventually paralyze them.
The altruism of the IRA cannot reduce or head off Protestant reaction. The fanaticism of the pro-imperialist community is not a result, fundamentally, of any “unreasonableness” on the part of the nationalists; it is the result of the historical structure of society in northeast Ireland. If the Orange fanatics see a chance to “put the Taigs in their place once and for all,” they are going to take it, regardless of professions of brotherhood by any section of the nationalist population.
Furthermore, if the British authorities think that a general pogrom can be carried off without serious resistance (and too quickly for world public opinion to realize what is happening), there is no reason for them to oppose it A terrorized Catholic population will be all the more grateful for small concessions. The position of the “moderates,” moreover, will be reinforced, because the prejudices of the Orange caste will be fully re-established as the ultimate limit of what is politically possible in Ireland.
And what is more: How will the revolutionists be able to mobilize world opinion in support of the persecuted nationalist population when the leaders of the oppressed community themselves concede apologetically that the Catholics are largely or even equally responsible for the bigotry in Northern Ireland?
The fanatical opposition to change of 1,000,000 Protestants, more than one-fifth of the total population of Ireland, is a formidable obstacle to revolution in Ireland. But the balance of forces does not come down to comparing the organization and equipment of the nationalists on the one hand and the Unionists and the British army on the other. Political factors both in Ireland and internationally come into play. As long as they are mobilized on a reactionary political basis, the Protestants remain in the last analysis under the control of the bourgeoisie. Thus, their fighting capacity is limited by the will of the bourgeoisie, that is, by the political strength of the capitalist system in Britain and internationally. If this system appears to falter and hesitate in defending the status quo in Ireland, sections of the Protestants may become neutralized or susceptible to revolutionary propaganda. That is, they may come to realize that the caste system cannot be maintained even “in the short run.”
In such a context, gestures of goodwill and reassurances from the revolutionary forces can promote a breakup of the Unionist bloc. But fundamentally only the pressure of the mass movement in Ireland and internationally can overcome the Protestant caste mentality, which is reactionary to the core.
Therefore, international support is vital to the success of the nationalist people’s struggle. Although it is essential that this movement be as broad as possible, it needs a revolutionary axis. By focusing pressure on the lines of cleavage in capitalist society – that is, by exploiting its contradictions – a militant action movement can draw in non-revolutionists and even sections of the establishment behind it. The U.S. anti-war movement is an example of this. It has pulled the whole consensus of the country far to the left and opened up the way for substantial growth of the revolutionary forces.
The antiwar movement did this, however, by mobilizing the masses independently in the streets, maintaining the campaign even in periods of steep decline in activity. It mobilized the masses on the basis of principled demands that challenged the basic contradictions of the system in a concrete way. In this case, the demand was for immediate withdrawal of American troops, which meant in practice that the people of the U.S. had no interest in suppressing the Vietnamese revolution, the U.S. had no right in Vietnam, the American government was the source of the problem, and the Vietnamese people had a right to establish a socialist regime in their own country, regardless of the objection of substantial minorities historically backed by imperialism.
On the other hand, if the focus shifts from action in the streets to the lobbying of reformists in bureaucratic and liberal organizations, political energy will be drained out of the movement and the masses will fall into indifference, waiting for salvation from their influential “friends.” Then, no matter how “broad” the support of the movement, or how many respectable personalities or “mass workers’ leaders” (that is, reformist bureaucrats who may still be capable of a few radical gestures) have given it their blessing, the stage will have been set for the establishment to smash the movement or render it harmless. The history of Social Democracy and Stalinism is full of such examples.
The explosive development of the civil rights movement has no doubt made many nostalgic for the relatively peaceful economic agitation of previous years, which was only a nuisance to the system and not a deadly threat. It is possible that activity will return to this level. But it must be understood that a general confrontation with the capitalist system has been developing for the last three years. It will lead eventually either to victory or defeat. If it is defeated, conditions will not return to where they were before the civil rights movement started. If the defeat is complete, the situation may well be thrown back further. If the capitalists regain control of the situation, it is foolish to think that they will not take every step to eliminate the threat of future revolutionary developments.
In these circumstances, shifting back to economic agitation will not represent a change in tactics but the consequence of a defeat pushing the movement back to a lower level, to its knees.
Along with the threat of a rightward evolution of centrist elements, the revolutionary youth, who have been given only very general notions of socialist struggle, are likely to move in a more and more adventurist direction. The centrists moving right and the leadership displaying political immobility would strengthen the hand of ultra-leftists who are anxious to lead the movement in that direction.
Sincerely revolutionary leaders of the republican movement sometimes complain that the speed with which the crisis has developed has prevented them from politically educating their ranks. That is a general problem in an age of crisis by no means confined to Ireland. It would be an elitist illusion to believe that great social movements can be turned on and off to suit the convenience of vanguard organizations.
Furthermore, revolutionary groups themselves are, to some extent, the product of broader movements and conditions. Deep changes have taken place in the consciousness of the Irish people as a result of the civil rights movement, and it is probable that these changes have been reflected in the internal life of the republican movement and in the leadership’s consciousness of its revolutionary perspectives.
Revolutionary education is not a smooth, automatic process comparable, say, to the programming of studies in universities or trade-union schools. By its nature, it involves conflict, argument, and learning from experience. It involves teaching a revolutionary view of the world and a precise technique for overthrowing the present system, not general philosophical concepts alone, or the views of the various socialist thinkers.
The most important element in revolutionary education is the program of the organization. It now seems clear, and the republican leaders would probably acknowledge it, that the political program of the Official republican movement has been insufficient and dangerously equivocal in some respects. Therefore, it could not serve as the basis for giving a rounded political education to the ranks. The leadership itself was learning from experience and from reality, which apparently did not develop as it expected. The republican movement’s most important educational tools are its paper, its political statements, and the political discussions.
While the republicans were clearer on some fundamental questions than the other tendencies in Ireland, such as the need for political struggle and mass action, their political tools have been shown to lack a sharp cutting edge. This can only be a problem of leadership, a political problem. It could not be expected that abstract education could make up for this deficiency, although theoretical education of the ranks is obviously an essential task in developing the movement.
In the present situation, the sincerely revolutionary core of the Official republican leadership seems to have come to a crossroads. The situation calls for a bold reorientation. The movement, however, is in a good position in some respects to carry this out. Dead traditions have been severely shaken, if not yet entirely eliminated; and this has opened up the way for casting away archaic forms that stand in the way of carrying out the real tasks of making the revolution in Ireland.
In particular, challenging the ban on political activity in the North and gaining recognition as a legal party in the South offer the possibility for effective revolutionary propaganda campaigns. By demanding the right to engage in legal political activity, the republicans can defend themselves in the most effective way against repression and at the same time consolidate solid gains. This, of course, does not mean that a “democratic phase” is opening up. All democratic freedoms are precarious in this epoch and especially so in Ireland. But the system can be forced to grant a certain room for maneuver at times, which must be used to advantage.
Through their campaign against the Common Market, the republicans appear to have gained valuable experience in conducting centralized agitations around key issues. They can move on from this to other acute issues facing the country. In the present situation, it is essential that these campaigns have a clear national focus and challenge the weak points of the system in the clearest way.
Elaborate schemes for reforming local government, education, etc., are not very useful for revolutionary agitation, especially given the resources of the republican movement. A few simple themes are needed on which all the propaganda of the movement can be focused, that is, transitional demands. Such demands should seem reasonable to the people they are intended to appeal to and at the same time should expose the contradictions of the system. In a period of general crisis, moreover, local and piecemeal economic agitation stand in secondary place for a revolutionary party. The most important thing is to give political direction and to wage a concentrated campaign against the enemy class, which itself is highly centralized and conscious of its general interests. It is not necessary, furthermore, for members of the movement to initiate and lead all local activity. Getting out the political ideas that can inspire and direct a broader vanguard is likely to generate more real activity and on a higher level.
By its devotion to the ideals of socialism and its uncompromising fight against all the conservative forces in Ireland, the Official republican movement has won the support of a large number of dedicated revolutionary youth. By waging centralized political campaigns and by giving clear political direction, it can weld these youth into the best political fighting force in Europe. The main instrument of this process, however, cannot be an “army of the people”; it must be the party of the Irish revolution.
The perspective of armed struggle must be brought into closer consonance with realities. The truth is that trying to stick to the old-fashioned structures of a “secret army” is likely in the long run to limit the armed self-defense of the Irish people rather than advance it. This policy seems to lead the IRA to think in terms of avenging the people, of small-scale commando actions, and seems to keep it from turning its mind to the tasks of organizing the mass popular militias needed to defeat imperialism.
Effective political education is possible, in the last analysis, only within the framework of a party that has a fully developed program and a consistent way of looking at things. In such a context, developments can be continually analyzed and the analyses constantly and systematically reevaluated and deepened through democratic discussion.
As a result of its unique history, the republican movement is a very broad organization which has been evolving toward more consistent political positions. It includes various branches and allows considerable room for local variations. But it is dealing now with much more fundamental questions than it has before, and it can be expected that the movement will have to make some changes in its methods of organization in order to handle these effectively. Some more systematic form of discussion seems to be needed as a basis for education and developing positions that are both consistent and flexible.
The various tendencies that exist in embryo have to have an opportunity to develop their positions fully and see them tested in debate and practice. Otherwise, the fundamental questions can only be discussed in a superficial way. The disagreements will not be resolved but will be left to fester and express themselves in unprofitable ways. And, most importantly, the political program of the organization will remain on a vague general level and be largely useless as a practical guide to action for achieving fundamental changes.
At this point in its evolution, the Official IRA has many advantages. But like every new revolutionary force that has emerged in this period (and the Official IRA is basically a young radical movement, despite its long tradition and continuity), it is faced with the challenge of developing a consistent and integrated revolutionary approach.
Gerry Foley became a supporter of the Celtic nationalist movement at the age of fourteen, learning all the Celtic languages. He joined the Young Socialist Alliance in 1961. Since 1966, he has written for Intercontinental Press, a weekly international Marxist news service.
In the summer of 1970, Foley spent a month in Ireland and interviewed a number of revolutionary nationalist leaders, including Cathal Goulding, the man known as the chief of staff of the Irish Republican Army, and Tomas MacGiolla, the president of Sinn Fein, the political arm of the republican movement. Foley returned to Ireland in the turbulent early months of 1972. He went on to tour Europe and Scandinavia with Malachy McGurran, leader of the Official republican movement in the North, to build an international defense of the liberation struggle in Ireland.
 

Foley: The Ultra-Right Pot Boils Over (September 2009)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Gerry Foley
The Ultra-Right Pot Boils Over
(September 2009)

From International Viewpoint, No. 416, September 2009.
Copied with thanks from http://www.internationalviewpoint.org.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan.


The appearance of right-wing mobs at town meetings organized by Democratic Party representatives to discuss the proposed health-care reform has set off alarm bells, in particular because of the blind fanaticism of the right-wing protesters and their threats of violence, including armed violence. These outbursts show many features of historic fascist developments – and on a scale as yet unseen in the United States.
The campaign of right-wing rallies against the town meetings organized by Democratic Party congressional representatives is a new phenomenon in American history, at least in living memory. Lynch mobs and witch hunts are, unfortunately, not unprecedented in American history. And the current right-wing rallies resemble both in the mentality they express. But never before have such mobs been mobilized by a major capitalist political party against the elected representatives of another, or associated so much with threats of armed violence against bourgeois democratic institutions.
These right-wing mobilizations against the town meetings are an extension of the so-called Tea Parties organized ostensibly against the threat that the Obama regime would increase taxes. On July 16, the Huffington Post reported:
“Catherine Crabill, the Republican Party’s nominee for Virginia’s 99th District in the House of Delegates, gave a speech at a recent Tea Party event suggesting that Second Amendment rights could be used to defend the anti-tax movement. The strange assertion was picked up by Virginia political blogger Not Larry Sabato.
“‘We have the chance to fight this battle at the ballot box before we have to resort to the bullet box,’ Crabill said. ‘That’s the beauty of our Second Amendment rights ... Our Second Amendment rights were to guard against tyranny.’”
Participants in the rightist mobs at the Democratic Party town meetings have also cited the Second Amendment as a resort if they were prevented from shouting down the speakers.
The Huffington Post reported Aug. 9:
“An official with the AFL-CIO, a federation of labor organizations, passed on what he described as a ’pretty direct threat’ to those union hands who were showing up to balance out anti-Obama demonstrations being waged at local Democratic forums.
“‘I will be going to a local town hall this weekend, all you union members BEWARE!’ an emailer wrote at 9:40 Saturday morning. We will be waiting for you. better make sure you have arrangements with your local ER. Today is the day when the goon meets the gun. see you there.’”
This threat was traced to Georgia in the deep South, where a majority of the population, according to recent polls, either denies or disbelieves that the president of the United States is an American citizen.
This threat was not an isolated one. Union officials complained of being deluged with threats. The most brutal one came from Wisconsin:
“An official with the SEIU said she had received 50 such emails, including the following one, which was edited to make suitable for publication.
“‘You socialist f---s have the nerve to say stop the violence at the town hall meetings when they weren’t violent until you p---ies showed up because your n----- leader obama said to?????? When we have ours in Racine, Wi, I want you there. I want one of your little b----- to put his hands on this Marine. I want one of you to look or talk to me wrong. I’ll be the last thing your ignorant faux bodyguards will remember for a very long time. You can f---ing guarantee that.”
 
Shock jocks and scare stories
The right-wing mobilizations have been encouraged by a plethora of scare stories about the proposed health care. This is not the first time that such tactics have been resorted to by the vested interests in the health-care business. But today, this propaganda has taken on the character of conspiracy theories, the wildest being that the proposed legislation calls for “death panels” that would decide whether old or handicapped people would live or die.
In recent times, conspiracy theories have been the staff of life of right-wing groups who claim that they are preparing to defend American sovereignty against a takeover of the country by immigrants or by the United Nations. Such conspiracy theories were a feature of Nazism, such as the claim that the Jews were plotting to take over the world. Conspiracy theories have sprung up like poisonous mushrooms in recent years. But this is the first time one of them has been endorsed by leaders of a major capitalist party, such as Sarah Palin or Republican senator from Iowa, Chuck Grassley.
The town meeting mobs have been incited by an ultra-right publicity apparatus with a huge following, the Fox TV network, TV talk-show hosts like Sean Hannity, Glen Beck, Lou Dobs, and radio “shock jocks” like Rush Limbaugh. For example, on his Aug. 3 show, Sean Hannity trumpeted the following response to the town meeting mob assaults: “This is what’s going to stop this. You are. You’re gonna make it happen.”
He went on to say:
“Now, so far at these town hall meetings, you’re doing terrific. You’re standing up to these bureaucrats. You’re standing up to their phony platitudes, talking points, and bumper stickers. The polls are now turning against Obama, [House Speaker Nancy] Pelosi, and [Senate Majority Leader Harry] Reid, so now they’re bringing out their own pollster to lie to you and find out a way how they can win the PR battle, and they’re telling them that they’ve got to attack the insurance companies.”
Other right-wing talk-show hosts, Jim Quin and Rose Tennent, cheered the mob on their broadcasts: “You still have time to scare them to death.” On Aug. 3, they repeatedly broadcast a recording of a female protester at a town hall event. Tennent cheered the woman on: “Woohoo! Go girl! Yeah! Owwooo!”
One TV right-wing rabble-rouser publicist urged his audience to “join the mob.” This constellation of right-wing broadcasters emerged in the 1990s in association with the so-called Republican Revolution, fed essentially on a backlash of older white male resentment against the reforms of the 1960s that they saw favoring women and colored minorities over them. Now this echo chamber of bigotry has turned into a machine of political agitation.
This is another feature of the rise of fascism in Europe in the 1920s and 1930s, a mass gutter press, the “boulevard papers” in France, and the “Blaetter” (rags) in Germany. The rightists claim that the great majority of the mass media have a liberal bias, and therefore this right-wing constellation is needed to restore the balance. But the fact is that the big press is all controlled by the corporations and serves their interest. The so-called liberal newspapers have to maintain some credibility for thinking people. That is not true of the right-wing media. They simply reinforce the prejudices of bigots and are now whipping them into a frenzy.
The right-wing publicists inciting the town meeting mobs have also generally supported conspiracy “Birther” theories that Obama is not really an American citizen, despite the fact that there is irrefutable proof of Obama’s birth in Hawaii. No evidence can shake the conviction of the “Birthers,” however, because it is really rooted in racism. That is why it is most widely held in the South, where only a minority accept the fact of Obama’s citizenship.
In the 2008 presidential elections, the white vote was overwhelmingly Republican – 88 percent in Alabama, for example. Overall, it seems that a majority of Republicans are not convinced that Obama is really an American, but by far the largest concentration of this is among white Southerners.
On July 28, AP reported:
“Fox News Channel commentator Glenn Beck said he believes President Barack Obama is a racist. Beck made the statement during a guest appearance Tuesday on the Fox & Friends morning show. He said Obama has exposed himself as a person with ‘a deep-seated hatred for white people or the white culture.’”
Likewise, on July 20, Beck declared:
“You should be afraid [because] the president is remaking America. He’s just not remaking it the way you thought he would. He’s just remaking it into a place that’s a whole lot crappier. Kind of a hybrid between France and Venezuela ... He’s taking the beacon of freedom and turning it into an apologetic, hey, what can you do for me, wannabe European, spread the wealth, socialist wonderland.”
Actually, the World Health Organization ranks France number one in health care and the U.S. 37th on their list.
 
Economic dislocation and the racist backlash
Prominent signs waved by participants in the town hall mobs are “Stop socialism,” and “We want our country back.” It is clear that health care is not really the basic issue for the town hall mobs. The real issue is the historic decline of white supremacy.
As Cenk Uygur wrote in the Aug. 10 Huffington Post:
“But this isn’t about health insurance. It isn’t even about health care. You think those people are really this animated about having less health care options and making sure it costs more for them and their family? No, this is visceral for them. And it has nothing to do with their perceived choices on health care. This is about the sinking feeling in their stomach that they are losing power in this country – losing control. That the reigns [sic] of power are slipping out of their hands and they don’t know what to do about it, except yell, really loud.”
The emergence of an activist ultra-right coincides with two fundamental historic changes in the United States: the decline of the American economy and the erosion of the white majority. In some key states, such as California, whites are already in a minority. In 30 years, if the current demographic trends continue, whites will be in a minority nationwide. The Republican Party, despite some token Black faces up front, is almost exclusively a white party. It is therefore led to make up for its declining numbers with increased activism. And its appeals to the frenzy of right mobs and their paranoia can promote developments outside of parliamentary politics.
In the Aug. 7 Huffington Post, James Zogby, president of the Arab American Institute, wrote:
“Behind all of this discontent, of course, are real problems. The economic crisis in America did not just begin with the collapse of the financial sector in the fall of 2008. For years now, the US economy has undergone a steady transformation. The loss of our manufacturing base has resulted in dramatic social dislocation evidenced by the collapse of many once prosperous and stable communities. As factories closed, not only were jobs lost and economic security threatened but people were forced to move, neighborhoods died and families were at risk.
“All during the 1990’s, despite gains on Wall Street, many middle-class Americans were squeezed. Real incomes declined, costs of health care, education and basic commodities rose, resulting not only in a declining standard of living for many, but, for the 1st time in American history, a significant portion of the middle class began to question whether their children would be able to achieve the same economic status as their parents.
“The trauma of 9/11 and Katrina presented a double jolt, shaking to an even greater degree American’s sense of security and their confidence in the government’s ability to perform.
“Add to this a nativist/racist current, fueled by large numbers of immigrants from the south [undeveloped countries] and fear of new foreigners (especially, after 9/11, Muslims) and the persistent presence of anti-black sentiment, and you have the ingredients of the lethal brew that is now coming to a boil.”
The right-wing mobs at the town meetings have been mostly older white people. (All the participants interviewed by the media have been classical petty bourgeois types, small businessmen, salesmen.) The unemployed youth and brutalized ex-military men that have historically represented the physical threat of far-right or fascist activism have not been much in evidence in public demonstrations. But since the victory of a Black presidential candidate, the numbers of the still small paramilitary militia organizations have begun to grow significantly.
Moreover, a private army formation that grew up in the era of right-wing political dominance, Blackwater, has been exposed as a sort of Murder Incorporated (see The Nation, Aug. 4). Gun sales have increased sharply, and there has been surge of death threats against Obama.
All these phenomena point to the stormy weather that the historic changes that are coming to pass threaten to generate. Such crises in developed countries have led to the rise of fascism in the past. The town hall rallies of the right and the role of the right-wing media, along with the gun talk of the rightists, indicates that the cultural medium for it exists likewise in the United States.
A constellation of organizations have emerged that could be the building blocks for a fascist movement. However, although a similar (though much stronger) ferment arose in France and Germany, for example, in the 1920s, it did not lead to the imminent threat of a fascist takeover until the economic and social crisis reached the point that the big capitalists became convinced that they needed drastic measures to maintain their basic interests.
That situation is far from existing in the United States at the moment. The capitalists face no serious threat to their interests. They dominate the political stage completely, and the workers’ and social organizations are very weak. Still, it is notable that the right-wing town hall rallies included anti-union threats, and the only organizations that were able to come to the defense of the right of free speech in these meetings were the unions. This was certainly not unnoticed by the right. The union leaders and trade unionists in general need to think about it also.
Of course, the historic fascist movements had collectivist programs, whereas the American rightists today preach extreme individualism. But in the past, fascists have talked out of both sides of their mouths. Hitler was a Social Darwinist more than a German nationalist. When Germany was defeated, he did nothing to try to limit the disaster, proclaiming that if the Germans had been defeated it proved that they were not the fittest and therefore they had no right to survive.
The town meeting rightists show similar contradictions. They claim to be exercising their right of free speech when they suppress free speech, to be defending the rights of the individual when they impose mob rule. Their attitude to the state can change fundamentally when they control it. They claim to be anti-tax, for example, but support the magnification of the U.S. military.
The rightist denunciations of Obama as a fascist or Nazi are nothing but empty name-calling. The purveyors of such insults obviously have no idea that these terms more closely describe themselves. They also claim that they are exercising free speech when they suppress the right of free speech of others. One protester was so ignorant as to say that Nazi Germany had cradle to the grave state health care – and look at what that led to! Actually, Germany’s state health system was instituted by Bismarck at the end of the 19th century as a measure intended to head off the rise of the socialist movement.
 
Capitalists fear backlash against ultra-right
Capitalism on occasion finds the need to back fascist-type mobilizations without being compelled to completely replace the bourgeois “democratic” framework with a fascist state. In recent times, sizable neo-fascist movements have existed in a number of European countries where there is no indication that capital is moving toward a permanent fascist option or that the ultra-right parties are ready organize fascist-type activism. The contradictory character of these developments is indicated by the fact that they have been chronically divided between an outright fascist wing and a far-right parliamentary wing. But they have been useful to capital as a means of intimidating the left.
For the time being, the rightist mobilizations at town meetings have faded from the news. One of the major reasons for this is that the Democrats have changed the organization of the sessions to make it more difficult for the rightists to overwhelm them or to use them as a platform. But the rightist constellation has made its demonstration of force.
Of course, the Obama administration may have been happy to have an excuse to retreat. Its reform proposals were never more than weak and contradictory. It, like the right, serves capitalism but merely offers to do so in a more flexible way. But some sections of capital, as indicated in the last conflict over health-care reform, are not convinced that flexibility is necessary. They have now been using the rightists to keep Obama on the “straight and narrow.”
At the same time, however, the extreme rightists are worrying some politicians in the Republican Party and threatening to cause divisions there. Most importantly, it is possible that the aggressiveness of the extreme right will provoke a backlash among working-class and democratic minded people. That is the last thing that capital wants, and if it happens the support for the ultra-right network could begin to dry up pretty quickly. Glen Beck’s denunciation of Obama as a “racist” has already cost him major sponsors.
On one level, it seems in fact that the sort of backlash the capitalists do not want has begun. The violent language and agitation of the ultra-right, supported by the Republican Party leadership and their bankrollers in the health-care corporations, have made Obama’s attempt to to justify concessions to the drug and insurance industries with the pretense of seeking bipartisan consensus appear ridiculous.
The New York Times columnist Frank Rich wrote, for example, in an op-ed piece Aug. 22:
“Should Obama fail to deliver serious reform because his administration treats the pharmaceutical and insurance industries as deferentially as it has the banks, that would be shameful. Should he fail because he in any way catered to a decimated opposition party that has sunk and shrunk to its craziest common denominator, that would be ludicrous.”
Paul Krugman pointed out in a column in The New York Times on Aug. 20 that disillusionment with Obama had been building up for a long time:
“A backlash in the progressive base – which pushed President Obama over the top in the Democratic primary and played a major role in his general election victory – has been building for months. The fight over the public option involves real policy substance, but it’s also a proxy for broader questions about the president’s priorities and overall approach.”
The last straw for progressives, Krugman wrote, was the Obama’s administration’s backing away from the “public option” in the health-care bill. In fact, polls indicated that support for the proposed health-care reform dropped precipitously without the “public option” being included. But Krugman also explained that the “public option” had deflected the thrust for a single-payer system, which is the only real alternative to the present system. The progressives had been fobbed off with a vague “public option” and were now furious that even that looked as if it was going to be dropped.
The outcry of disillusionment clearly frightened the Obama regime into claiming that it had no intention of abandoning its “public option” (though a fake, tax-the-poor version) and if necessary it would pass it without a single Republican vote.
However, the backlash against the Obama’s administration’s sounds of retreat on the “public option” highlighted the weak and contradictory character of the so-called health reform it is offering. The outcry has revived demands for a single-payer system. And it indicates that the only way a real health-care reform can be achieved is by building a mass independent movement for a single-payer system that will not be subordinated to any bourgeois politician.
The threat of the mobilization of an army of right-wing fanatics to oppose any social reform and intimidate the organizations that defend the interests of the masses can only be countered by reorganizing and reenergizing the mass social organizations. In this conflict, the AFL set a good example, the first of this type in many years, by sending out instructions about how to defend the town meetings and organizing monitors to defend them, as also did the SEIU. Even though the union mobilization was done in defense of bourgeois politicians (the stock in trade of the bureaucratic officialdoms), it was an essential response to the threat of the activist right.
In the coming period, the unions will have to relearn how to defend themselves and the rights of the people they represent. They also need to pursue the ultra-right wing into its ultimate lairs of backwardness and bigotry in the South and the West. Workers in those areas need to be organized, and there is no doubt that the unions will face physical threats if they pursue organizational drives there. It is a shame to leave the poor people who live in these areas (where the rates of the uninsured are the highest in the nation) to the local right-wing demagogues.
The rightist outbursts should have shown even the union bureaucrats the writing on the wall. It is also necessary to build protests against the incitement to hatred of the right-wing media rabble-rousers and to expose their disinformation. The coming months will show how necessary it is to begin thinking about organizing self-defense for gatherings and organizations that the rightists hate. Even the Democratic Party has had to think about it.
It is also necessary for socialist organizations to give increasing attention to educational activities on the nature of fascist movements – not just the examples of full-fledged fascism in Germany and Italy but the incipient fascist movements that arose in France, Britain, and even the United States in the 1930s. Socialist Action has already begun to do that.
 




AS WE GO to press, the threat of a US military strike against Libya continues to hold the world on edge, Washington’s European allies themselves have been showing acute signs of the jitters.
There is good reason for worry. This is probably the first time since 1914 that a situation is being created in which any terrorist incident could be used as an excuse for launching a major military action by a great power.
* * *
The Zionist state launches such strikes all the time which tend to lead them into deeper and deeper waters. The bombing of the Iraqi nuclear project is the most lurid example of this. There is now an indication that this line may be extended even further.
A major Indian news magazine, India Today, reported in its April 15 issue that Israel had approached New Delhi with a request for secret refuelling facilities in Jamnagar so that it could bomb the Kahuta nuclear installation in Pakistan and put an end to the “Islamic bomb.”
The US attacks launched from the Gulf of Sidra at the end of March against Libyan radar bases apparently had a similar objective. The only thing that the United States seemed to gain from the exercise on the military level was that it proved that the missile systems Qadhafi bought from the Soviet Union were of no use against the more advanced US electronic means of warfare and that it could put the Libyan guidance systems out of commission any time it wanted.
Politically, the threats against Qadhafi appear to have two objectives. One is to force the Soviet Union to back off from supporting Third World regimes in collision with the United States. While Washington might win certain concessions 4n that area, as it has in the past, it clearly cannot force the Soviet Union to desist from such practices in general. That would go against the USSR’s fundamental interests.
The detachment of Third World countries from direct subordination to imperialism has been one of the major factors protecting the Soviet Union from Western military threats.
The second political objective, however, gaining the backing of US public opinion for military intervention abroad, was apparently achieved, at least temporarily and on a limited basis.
The support shown for Reagan’s warlike gestures by public opinion polls in the United States seems to reflect two ideas. The first and the most important is that “international terrorism,” identified with Qadhafi as well as other Arab states and movements, is a threat to ordinary Americans. The second is that such “outlaw” regimes and movements can be punished at little or no cost to ordinary people by superior US firepower operating from a distance.
Both of these ideas are false. The world is becoming more dangerous all the time for all its people – not just Americans – because of poverty; because of the pitiless exploitation of the masses of the Third World, who are increasingly pushed to the point of desperation; and because of a massive military build-up aimed at preserving an intolerable status quo.
What Reagan calls “international terrorism” is the tiniest part of these threats.
Moreover, it is the United States itself that has built up a really massive terrorist apparatus in its attempts to suppress the struggles of Third World peoples – Green Berets, “covert warfare,” political assassination teams to “terminate with extreme prejudice” local agents and allies that become an encumbrance.
Who knows how many and what other regimes have employed such people. The United States has trained a whole layer of professional killers ready to sell themselves to the highest bidder, regardless of any ideological considerations whatsoever, to say nothing of national loyalties.
Most importantly, what is fundamentally wrong with “punishing” acts of “state terrorism” by military operations is that bombs and bullets have no political convictions. They can be used equally by rightists, leftists, criminals, uncontrolled individuals and lunatics – for all sorts of reasons. Under the best of circumstances, it can be very difficult to determine responsibilities.
When terrorist acts are used as a pretext for military action by great powers, “terror” is really out of control.
The Austro-Hungarian government, in 1914, used an act carried out by a very radical petty-bourgeois nationalist group as a pretext for war against Serbia and Russia, because it chose to view that act as part of general nationalist agitation backed by these two governments.
Reagan portrays Qadhafi as the sponsor of “Terrorism” by all sorts of groups in an evident attempt to get a blank check for repression against many struggles. In this respect, the Libyan leader’s braggadocio and wild threats, raising the specter of strikes against southern European targets, are politically useful to him. But in fact what this reflects is the narrow nationalism and military base of the regime.
Qadhafi’s Libya is not a revolutionary regime, such as Nicaragua, which uses wholly different methods and through them has won important sympathies, not only in Western Europe, but in the United States itself.
There is no way that the Qadhafi regime can build any kind of an international movement, or be a significant factor in an international movement against imperialism, exploitation, and oppression.
Just as clearly, the US imperialist government cannot be allowed to get away with any action on the pretext that it is interested in “punishing terrorism.” Over the past decades, it has used all sorts of excuses for launching wars against rebellious Third World peoples, the most infamous example being the “Tonkin Gulf” incident. If it gets away with making terrorist acts a cause for war, it has a blank check for intervening any time it chooses.
It is essential to mobilize as much opposition as possible to US military threats against Libya. Far more than the Qadhafi regime, or even the rights of Libya, is at stake. The rights of all oppressed peoples are at stake, and the survival and future of humanity.
 

Foley: Kenya Explodes! (February 2008)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Gerry Foley
Kenya Explodes!
(February 2008)

Written: Thursday, February 7, 2008.
Published: February 2008 print edition of Socialist Action newspaper.
Copyright: Copyright by Socialist Action, used here with permission.
HTML markup: David Walters in 2012 & Einde O’Callaghan in 2020.


The mass explosion and conflicts that followed the obvious falsification of the results of the Dec. 27 Kenyan presidential election have raised many questions. But one thing is absolutely clear. The imperialist governments and publicists can no longer hold up Kenya as a model of stability and prosperity for post-colonial Africa.
It is now just another story of the ruin and hopelessness that is afflicting the neocolonial states of the continent, of the effects of the continued dominance of the world capitalist economy over these countries even after their imperialist masters ceded formal governmental responsibility to local rulers.
Most fundamentally, the slaughter and destruction in Kenya are the consequence of the stagnation and inequality to which world capitalism condemns such countries. In this situation, small advantages for different groups become matters of life and death, something for which elements of the population are ready to kill and rob their neighbors.
This perverse logic is reinforced by the failure of the neocolonial governments to provide any perspective for economic improvement for all. In fact, if any government tried to offer such hope, the imperialists would use their resources to plunge that country into blood and fire. The examples of the Lumumba government and later the Kabila government in the former Belgian Congo demonstrate that.
Kabila was a follower of Lumumba, a radical anti-imperialist leader who was overthrown and murdered with United Nations complicity in 1961, shortly after Belgium had granted formal independence to the country. After the liquidation of Lumumba, Kabilia led a long-lasting guerrilla war against the Mobutu regime, another pillar of neocolonialism in Africa, until he finally defeated the dictator in 1997.
Because of his history Kabila was not trusted by the imperialists, and his nationalization of one railway apparently was enough to put them on the warpath. Only a year after Kabila’s forces marched into the Congo capital of Kinshasa, imperialist interests were able to sponsor a rebellion against his government that launched a still continuing civil war.
To date, this war of rapine and robbery has claimed the lives of more than 5 million people and thus dwarfs the conflicts in Kenya. That is the prospect facing any African government that dares try to offer its people any future other than one dictated by world capitalism.
In Kenya today, one of the centers of the worst ethnic clashes is the Rift Valley, in which the evils of the British colonial heritage have merged with the abuses of the corrupt neocolonial regime that succeeded British rule. In their attempt to crush the nationalist rebellion of the early 1950s, the British forcibly deported populations from this area, giving much of the land to white settlers.
When the British finally gave Kenya independence, being no longer able to afford the costs of holding the country by force, many of the dislocated people returned to their homes to find others in possession of what they considered theirs. Then the government of Jomo Kenyatta, Kenya’s first president and a leader of the Kikuyu (who had been the backbone of the uprising against the British), granted land in the area arbitrarily to his followers. This created seething resentments among those not so favored, some of whom are out for belated revenge now. Kenyatta’s successors continued playing the patronage game.
Kenya remained a one-party dictatorship up until 1992, and a multiparty system was not really established until 2002 when an opposition coalition ousted the old ruling group. The victors included both the incumbent president, Kibaki, now trying to maintain office by fraud, and his rival, Raila Odinga. The opposition, however, offered no social and economic alternative to the old government, and thus it rapidly became a replica of it.
Today, Odinga, a populist politician whose father was a famous liberation fighter, has become the focus of some demands and aspirations of the poor, and is therefore regarded as “a dangerous man” by the crony capitalists behind Kibaki and their allies.
But so long as Odinga offers no real alternative to the capitalist economy, he will be destined to replicate Kibaki, just as that former oppositionist came to replicate the former neo-colonialist strongmen.
The example of the Congo shows the danger of halfway alternatives. Kabila opened the way for the imperialist-sponsored civil war by failing to mobilize the masses behind a socialist program and trying to save himself by making alliances with various neocolonial states and leaderships.
A recent development in the Kenyan conflict is accusations that the inter-ethnic violence is being organized by politicians, mostly Odinga’s opposition coalition. In this situation, unscrupulous politicians will almost certainly try to exploit the ethnic antagonisms for their own benefit. It will also be hard to determine specific responsibilities. The real test of the political forces will be whether any offer a solution to the inter-ethnic conflict.
It is an oversimplification to call the Kenyan ethnic groups “tribes,” the usual term employed by the mass media in the West. Some of them number in the millions and have their own languages and distinctive economic profiles. But they are not nations either, although they represent a stage in nation formation.
The development of antagonistic nations is a result of the uneven development of the capitalist economy, which led some ethnic groups to dominate others. But this process is not far enough advanced in general in Africa, and specifically not in Kenya, to speak of oppressed and oppressor nations, even if it is necessary for principled anti-imperialist leaders to avoid appearing to favor any ethnic group over another.
Furthermore, much of the killing in Kenya cannot be attributed to ethnic clashes but are simply atrocities committed by police and paramilitary forces formed by a long history of repressive rule. Recently, Kenyans were outraged, for example, when TV showed that the police deliberately and cold-bloodedly murdered an unarmed demonstrator. The local and international press has already documented more than 60 killings by state forces, and such murders are probably a large proportion of the over 600 reported dead.
The blatant falsification of the election results in Kenya, following soon after the less blatant but obvious election fraud in Mexico, demonstrates that bourgeois-style elections tend not to produce results that can be seen as legitimate in neocolonial countries and therefore give rise to deep-going political crises.
Such elections are essentially huge expensive big-business-financed publicity campaigns designed to justify a sort of serial monarchy. When a government is elected, it has control of the patronage machine for years. It cannot be removed for a long time, even if it is quickly seen to be corrupt and to have reneged on its election promises.
Bourgeois elections are not democratic in the advanced countries either, but in such countries in normal times, the social contradictions are less explosive and they not so quickly discredited.
The more turbulent circumstances in neo-colonial countries are showing the masses there that they need another means of choosing their political representatives – that is, direct elections based on their own social organizations, like the People’s Assembly advocated by the trade-union movement in Bolivia. This was the model of political representation demonstrated by the world’s first successful socialist revolution, the Russian workers’ councils, or “soviets.”
 

S. Occupation of Iraq is Sinking in a Sea of Hatred<



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Gerry Foley
The U.S. Occupation of Iraq Is Sinking
in a Sea of Hatred
(April 2008)

Written: Thursday, April 10, 2008.
Published: May 2011 print edition of Socialist Action newspaper.
Copyright: Copyright by Socialist Action, used here with permission.
HTML markup: David Walters in 2012 & Einde O’Callaghan in 2020.


At a time when the bills for Bush’s adventure in Iraq are being totaled up, the failed offensive of the U.S. client government at the end of March and the beginning of April against the Shiite militias identified with the Islamic radical cleric Muqtada al-Sadr have introvertibly demonstrated that the U.S. taxpayers’ money has been poured down the drain. Al-Sadr, and his Iranian advisers, were crafty enough to stop the confrontation with Iraqi government and occupation military forces before major damage was done to the resistance forces.
In the aftermath of the government’s failure, the popular Islamic radical has called for mass demonstrations on April 11 to demand U.S. withdrawal. The U.S occupiers and their client government risk a devastating political defeat. Months ago, polls showed that the majority of Shiites had turned against the U.S. occupation to the point of favoring armed attacks on American soldiers. Undoubtedly, the mood of the Shiite population has continued to turn against the occupation.
The hatred of the U.S.-led occupation is so pervasive that there is no way that any of the institutions built up by the occupying powers can be insulated from it. The Washington Post reported April 4:
“A senior official in Iraq’s Defense Ministry, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not allowed to discuss military operations publicly, said Iraqi troops were overwhelmed by the second day of fighting.
“I was afraid the Iraqi forces would break,” he said. “The official said he estimated that 30 percent of the Iraqi troops abandoned the fight before a cease-fire was reached. He also said that soldiers had been hindered by ammunition and food shortages and that some Iraqi police troops, who were supposed to be backing the Iraqi army, had actually supported the militias.”
The April 4 International Herald Tribune reported massive desertions from the Iraqi government forces:
“More than 1,000 Iraqi soldiers and policemen either refused to fight or simply abandoned their posts during the inconclusive assault against Shiite militias in Basra last week, a senior Iraqi government official said Thursday. Iraqi military officials said the group included dozens of officers, including at least two senior field commanders in the battle.”
Most of the fighting took place in the southern port city of Basra and in the main Shiite neighborhood in Baghdad, Sadr City, a teeming slum of 2 million people and al-Sadr’s major stronghold.
A March 31 dispatch in the Washington Post focused on interviews with people in Sadr City after the start of al-Sadr’s ceasefire. The local people, the headline noted, expressed “despair” with the general evolution of the situation in the country since the U.S. occupation, as well as total contempt for the U.S.-sponsored Iraqi government. One resident said:
“‘They promised us a rise in salaries and pensions. It was all lies,’ he said as his friends nodded. ‘There’s hunger everywhere. No electricity, no water, no cooking gas, no kerosene. It’s only promises. No action.’”
The basic reality for the Iraqi people is that after five years of the U.S.-led occupation, the economic situation in the country remains worse than it was under Saddam Hussein, and this after the U.S. government has poured billions into the country allegedly to reconstruct it.
In an article entitled Who Won the War? the British newspaper The Independent argued that while both the Iraqi and American peoples lost, the U.S. and British capitalists made a killing:
“At one point, ArmorGroup, chaired by the former foreign secretary Sir Malcolm Rifkind, was getting half its revenues from Iraq. It carried out convoy protection at rates estimated at between $8,000 and $12,000 a day, and helped to guard polling stations during the country’s elections.
“By far the biggest winner of contracts in Iraq, though, is Halliburton, the oil and related services company run by Dick Cheney before he became US vice-president and a key architect of the war. The connections between the company and the Bush administration helped to generate $16bn in contracts in Iraq and Afghanistan in the three years from the start of 2004 – nine times as much as any other company.
“Halliburton decided last year to spin off the division operating in Iraq. That business, KBR, has generated half its revenues there each year since the invasion, providing private security to the military and infrastructure projects and advising on the rebuilding of the country’s oil industry.”
Furthermore, for the big capitalists, the gravy keeps flowing faster:
“The Washington-based Center for Public Integrity, which tracks Iraqi contracts in its investigation Windfalls of War, says the total value of contracts tendered by the US government in Iraq rose 50 per cent each year from 2004 to 2006. That had been planned to slow in 2007, but KBR said recently that the US military ‘surge’ meant more business than previously expected. After KBR, the US security contractor DynCorp secured the most work, worth $1.8bn over the three years to the end of 2006.”
The occupying powers have been anxious to extend the blessings of the “free market” to Iraq. Specifically, they want to open the flood gates of Iraqi oil for the big Western oil companies through “production agreements” that would offer a more favorable deal to the companies that they can get in any other oil-producing country.
So far the extent of the resistance has dissuaded the oil companies from investing. But they have benefited indirectly from the Iraq war, according to The Independent:
“... the war has still contributed handsomely to their record-breaking profits because of sky-high oil prices. As the US prepared to march into Iraq, crude soared to what then seemed an impossibly high $37 a barrel. Last week it reached a record $110.
“The Nobel prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz estimates that the war has added between $5 and $10 a barrel to the price of oil. The figure could be higher, if one believes that the rise also reflects a big additional premium for the threat of future supply disruptions that might be caused by geopolitical tensions or increased terrorist activity in oil-producing regions – any of which might be traced back to the passions inflamed by the war.”
So, Americans pay for the Iraq adventure not only through their taxes but every time they fill up their gas tanks. The Independent article pointed out that at the beginning of the war then Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld estimated that it would cost $50 billion, and now the recorded cost is over $500 billion while experts are estimating that the total cost will be in the trillions.
Iraq’s oil, the prize of the war for the U.S. capitalists, still largely eludes them because of the corruption of all the political forces that collaborate with the occupiers. The New York Times reported March 16:
“The sea of oil under Iraq is supposed to rebuild the nation, then make it prosper. But at least one-third, and possibly much more, of the fuel from Iraq’s largest refinery here is diverted to the black market, according to American military officials. Tankers are hijacked, drivers are bribed, papers are forged and meters are manipulated – and some of the earnings go to insurgents who are still killing more than 100 Iraqis a week.”
Moreover, it is not only Iraqi but American companies themselves that have been corrupted by the profits offered by the war and the situation it has created. This is the most privatized war the U.S. has fought since the Spanish-American war of 1898. As in the war that established the U.S. of the Robber Barons as an imperialist power, in the current attempt to return to the golden age of American capitalism, U.S. soldiers are endangered not just by enemy bullets but by war profiteers based in their own country.
Following on the heels of scandals about the corrupting of procurement officers by U.S. companies, it has now come to light that the Halliburton subsidiary working in Iraq, a hot and largely desert country, has supplied U.S. soldiers with polluted water.
A March 9 dispatch by an Associated Press reporter published in USA Today revealed:
“Dozens of U.S. troops in Iraq fell sick at bases using ‘unmonitored and potentially unsafe’ water supplied by the military and a contractor once owned by Vice President Dick Cheney’s former company, the Pentagon’s internal watchdog says.
“A report obtained by The Associated Press said soldiers experienced skin abscesses, cellulitis, skin infections, diarrhea and other illnesses after using discolored, smelly water for personal hygiene and laundry at five U.S. military sites in Iraq.
“The Defense Department’s inspector general’s report, which could be released as early as Monday, found water quality problems between March 2004 and February 2006 at three sites run by contractor KBR Inc., and between January 2004 and December 2006 at two military-operated locations.”
On top of all this, the political alliances that offered the U.S. supporters to the war some ground to argue that the occupation was achieving progress toward its goals are now faltering. The Sunni militias that have allowed the U.S. to deal setbacks to insurgents in the most turbulent provinces have been showing more and more signs of disillusion with their American sponsors, who cannot or will not offer them satisfaction of their demands.
The Kurds are increasingly embittered by the U.S. toleration of raids into the Kurdish areas of the north by the Turkish military. And now, as the latest confrontation with al-Sadr showed, the Shiite population is becoming a seething cauldron of rage against the occupiers and their client government. Thus, the Iraq War threatens to move on beyond being a disaster for the American and Iraqi peoples to become an unprecedented disaster for U.S. capitalism itself.
Big business, however, will have great difficulty in detaching itself from the Tar Baby of war profits. The American people, meanwhile, will have to force the government and capitalist class to disengage from Iraq in order to stop the drain in blood and finances that the war represents for them.
 

Foley: Rightists Build Parallel Government in Bolivia (January 2008)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Gerry Foley
Rightists Build Parallel Government in Bolivia
(January 2008)

Written: Sunday, January 6, 2008.
Published: January 2008 print edition of Socialist Action newspaper.
Copyright: Copyright by Socialist Action, used here with permission.
HTML markup: David Walters in 2012 & Einde O’Callaghan in 2020.


A latent civil war in Bolivia was defused temporarily by a holiday truce and the Morales government’s offer of “dialogue” with its right-wing opposition. But the rightists continue to consolidate a regime of reactionary and racist terror in the southeastern provinces, known as the “Media Luna” (the “Half Moon”), and in some border areas, notably Sucre, the country’s judicial capital.
The southeastern provinces, called “prefecturas,” have a majority Caucasian or mixed population, and have historically been dominated by the right. The highlands, or “Altiplano,” has a predominately indigenous population, which forms the national majority and has a radical tradition.
One of the objectives of the rightists was to transfer the political capital of the country from La Paz, which is in the highlands and subject to the pressure of the radicalized masses, to Sucre, which is in an intermediate zone. Pushing this demand, the rightists organized riots in Sucre that forced the prefect of the province, a member of the ruling party, to flee and plead for asylum in Peru.
The opposition-governed “prefecturas” have in fact seceded from the country for most practical purposes. (Formal secession would be difficult because U.S. imperialism and the neighboring bourgeois governments undoubtedly fear that the breakup of the Bolivian state could create dangerous instabilities in the region.)
It is possible that the local conflict between a reactionary racist ruling class in the Media Luna and a government that claims to represent the indigenous majority has developed a dynamic of its own. But the secessionist right is the pillar of bourgeois power in Bolivia and, however reluctantly, in the last analysis U.S. imperialism will continue to rely on it.
The most important of the southeastern provinces has long had an important fascist tradition represented by the Falange, as well as other groups. Many of the local landowners are German and south Slavic refugees from the defeat of Nazism in Europe. As it happens, the chairman of the Santa Cruz Comite Civico is a Branko Marinkovic.
The “Civic Committees” in the separatist provinces are parallel government bodies, along with the newly formed Provisional Autonomist Assemblies. The rightists have whipped a campaign of hysteria about a possible influx into the lowlands of indigenous peasants from the more densely populated Altiplano. The “autonomists” are demanding that that the royalties paid by foreign companies exploiting Bolivian natural resources go first to the prefectural governments, which can then decide how much they want to send to the national government, and that the prefectures establish their own citizenship rules.
Most of the available agricultural land and the most profitable resources (oil and natural gas, as well as iron and magnesium) are concentrated in the southeastern prefectures. The natural resources on which the Bolivian economy was based in the past – the silver, lead, and tin mines – are concentrated in the highlands, and their profitability has been declining for a long time.
Thus, Morales cannot allow the rightists to erect their own kingdom in the southeast. But he has not shown any determination to fight them effectively. From the beginning of his government he has tried to make an accommodation with them, initially even claiming to favor autonomy of the prefectures. He made no attempt to mobilize the indigenous peoples of the lowlands, who occupy many of the oil and gas-producing areas, to demand their own rights.
He says he relies on the army to defend the integrity of the country. This is the same army that protected the former neoliberal presidents, who were overthrown by mass upsurges, and the same army that was the basis of the Barrientos dictatorship, which liquidated the gains of the 1952 Bolivian revolution and was rooted above all in the southeast. And he is trying to reinforce his political authority by calling a referendum to renew his mandate.
His remedies are like trying to cure a disease with a paralytic poison. They run directly counter to the only effective means of fighting the right – that is, mobilizing the poor masses of the country to take their fate in their own hands by establishing their own organs of direct democracy and taking full control of the country’s economy.
In the last election, Morales and his party, the Movimiento al Socialismo (MAS), won 54 percent of the vote nationally but lost the government of key prefectures to the right, which are now the spearhead of the right-wing uprising against his government. The right in the southeastern provinces is not going to be impressed by an electoral majority in the indigenous highlands. And in the southeastern provinces and some other areas, like Sucre, all opposition to the rightists has been driven underground.
It is necessary for the workers movement and the poor and oppressed population to oppose the attempts of the right to overthrow the Morales government. But they cannot do this effectively if they subordinate themselves to it. They need to mobilize independently and fight for their own interests and their own demands.
 

an is Explosive in the Wake of Bhutto’s Assasination



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Gerry Foley
Pakistan is Explosive in the Wake
of Bhutto’s Assassination
(January 2008)

Written: Sunday, January 6, 2008.
Published: January 2009 print edition of Socialist Action newspaper.
Copyright: Copyright by Socialist Action, used here with permission.
HTML markup: David Walters in 2012 & Einde O’Callaghan in 2020.


The assassination of Benazir Bhutto is the subject of all sorts of speculation, even over the basic facts of her death. On the latter the explanations range from the claim that she hit her head on a knob (the story of the Musharif government) to she was zapped by a high-tech laser (the version of one doctor and some of her supporters).
Eyewitnesses say she was shot by a clean-shaven young man who stood only a few feet from her car, and that version seems to be confirmed by an amateur video of her procession at the time the assassination took place.
The government is probably anxious to debunk the latter explanation because it would confirm that the state failed to provide serious security for her. However, the Pakistani authorities’ version of the assassination is so improbable and so contradictory and so clumsily presented that it has encouraged the theories about the responsibility of the Musharaf government or at least its complicity in the murder. The Pakistani government’s apparent ineptness in handling the investigation of the assassination is undoubtedly a reflection of its underlying political contradictions.
The outburst of mass rage provoked by the killing make one thing clear: Pakistan has become explosive. The outburst of popular anger was directed not only against the Musharaf government, which has evidently lost any credibility it may once have had, but against U.S. imperialism and the rich and powerful in general. It is notable, for example, how many banks have been attacked and sacked in the rioting.
A Dec. 30 article in the Washington Post pointed up the revolutionary mood in the country:
“What is really horrifying about the past couple of days is neither the intensity of the violence nor its apparent senselessness, but the fact that there are so many people in the country who have nothing to lose and who believe, perhaps quite rightly, that the normal channels of raising their complaints – the legal and law enforcement systems – are entirely ineffective or biased,” columnist Hajrah Mumtaz wrote in the English-language Dawn newspaper. “The riots were ugly because the root issues feeding them are ugly.”
The U.S. government is being discredited even more among the Pakistani masses, along with Musharaf, despite its attempts to take its distance from him and pose as an advocate of parliamentary rule, as opposed to military dictatorship. In fact, Pakistan has been ruled by military dictatorships for most of its history and the U.S. has continued to embrace it as a close ally all that time. The U.S. rulers have obviously been looking for a more credible governmental formula in Pakistan as Musharaf’s star has disastrously waned.
The U.S. formula was a deal between the military strongman and the supposed champion of parliamentary democracy, Benazir Bhutto, whose father presided over an episode of parliamentary rule and was executed by a military dictator. Even before the assassination, it was evident that this scheme had failed because Musharaf was unwilling or unable to keep his commitments to Bhutto.
Since Bhutto’s death, documents have been released showing that she feared that he would have a hand in assassinating her and that his regime had plans for rigging the elections that were supposed to take place in January. Moreover, Musharaf had declared martial law in defiance of U.S. criticism in the name of fighting the radical Islamists but directed his repression essentially against the secular liberal opposition and in particularly against Bhutto’s Pakistan People’s Party (PPP). His campaign against the secular liberals was actually assisted by Islamic fundamentalists, who seized the PPP leader Imran Khan and turned him over to Musharaf’s police.
Military dictatorship, moreover, is usually a pretty unwieldy and inflexible form of government. As the example of Latin America since 1985 shows, U.S. imperialism prefers bourgeois parliamentary forms when it thinks they can be maintained.
The U.S. was undoubtedly anxious to force Musharaf into a tandem with Benazir Bhutto also because it did not really trust him. Like all the military dictatorships before him, he has relied on the support of Islamists. And despite his fervent denials that he any longer has anything to do with such people and the pious statements by U.S. officials about how great an ally he is in the “war against terrorism,” it would be hard to find any informed observer that thinks that he has broken all his ties with Islamists and purged them from the state organs.
The fact that some Islamists have tried to assassinate him several times does not mean that Musharaf has no deals with them. Islamist and Pakistani politics are more complicated than that. The involvement of the state intelligence agency, the ISI, with such forces is too deep-going and long-standing.
Furthermore, the existence of the state of Pakistan itself is based on Islamism. There is no other rationale for its separation from India or for uniting the various nationalities that make it up. It is the only major state based on religious identification alone. Even the increasingly theocratic Israel was founded on the idea that Jews were a nation and not a religion.
Even Benazir Bhutto’s own government relied on Islamists. It was under her government that the ISI organized the Taliban, and every Pakistani government has given covert support to Islamist groups engaged in terrorist campaigns against Indian-occupied Kashmir. Complicity with Islamist fanaticism is an integral part of the Pakistani bourgeois state.
Islamism has been a pillar of social conservatism and thus useful both to the ruling class in Pakistan and to U.S. imperialism. It was useful to British imperialism before them. Of course, there are also aspects and varieties of Islamism that appear to poor masses in Pakistan as an alternative to the rule and institutions of a ruling class subordinate to U.S. and British imperialism.
Both the imperialists and the Pakistani ruling class have found Islamists to be very tricky allies, but they have not been able to avoid entanglements with them. And these alliances have involved some very complex balancing, like the U.S. game in Afghanistan and Iraq.
What the assassination of Bhutto and the mass response to it shows is that the frustration of the masses in Pakistan has reached the point where it is very difficult for the conservative interests to find a formula for containing it. The elections have now been postponed, but it seems almost certain that they will be a disaster for Musharaf, and that no bourgeois opposition party is going to dare make any visible deals with him.
Moreover, the immediate beneficiary of the mass outrage at the assassination of Bhutto will undoubtedly be her party, which has extreme contradictions. For example, the appointment of her 19-year-old son as her successor shows that although the party has a popular base it is dominated by one rich landlord family.
It is going to be hard for the bourgeois opposition to get rid of Musharaf without weakening the repressive power of the state or without allowing the masses to express their anti-imperialist and anti-ruling-class feelings. Moreover, deals with the Islamists are becoming more difficult.
To some extent, the latter have lost credibility as an alternative to the status quo because they have ruled the frontier provinces for some time without offering any satisfaction to the needs of the masses. They have also become very hot for the decisive bourgeois forces to handle because of their attacks on the state forces and the pressure of U.S. imperialism, with its massive military presence in neighboring Afghanistan.
The most important economic interest of the Pakistani bourgeoisie is also in contradiction to dealing with the Islamists. It needs to be able to benefit from a pipeline carrying Central Asian oil and natural gas to its ports. And that requires a stable Afghanistan, which in turn requires an end to Islamist insurgency there and in the Pakistani border areas.
All of these factors point to a deepening instability of the Pakistani state and the possibility of a social explosion that could shake the entire region.
Moreover, it could be an explosion of a magnitude that could go far beyond the demagogic anti-imperialism of the Islamists and really challenge the imperialist world order.
A number of commentators in the bourgeois press have expressed a certain premonition of this by warning that the situation in Pakistan may become the biggest danger the U.S. faces in the region. The threat to the imperialist order posed by a social explosion in Pakistan and the collapse of the bourgeois state is, in fact, much more fundamental and more real than any scenario of the country’s nuclear arms falling into the hands of terrorists or nationalist adventurers. The coming period will be one of intense political debate and experimentation in Pakistan and it is possible that new leaderships may arise that can give some effective expression to the exasperation of the masses.
 

Foley Chavez’s Defeat in Referendum Opens Up Political Debate (January 2008)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Gerry Foley
Chavez’s Defeat in Referendum
Opens Up Political Debate
(January 2008)

Written: Saturday, January 12, 2008.
Published: February 2011 print edition of Socialist Action newspaper.
Copyright: Copyright by Socialist Action, used here with permission.
HTML markup: David Walters in 2012 & Einde O’Callaghan in 2020.


The unexpected defeat of the constitutional changes backed by President Hugo Chavez in the Dec. 2 national referendum has provoked deep-going discussion in the Venezuelan left. Much of it is expressed on the website Aporrea, which is operated by a Venezuelan current of Trotskyist origin linked to the Movimiento Socialista de los Trabajadores (MST) in Argentina. In general, this current identifies itself with Chavez but it does offer a broad forum for the left, including groups and individuals critical of Chavismo.
The group that started Aporrea, the Partido de la Revolucion Socialista (PRS), however, seems to have split over the question of the referendum, as well as the question of whether or not to join the state party set up by Chavez, the Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela (PSUV).
One wing is identified with Orlando Chirino, the national coordinator of the Union Nacional de Trabajadores, the new trade-union federation that emerged from the opposition to the 2002 strike-lockout aimed at ousting the Chavez government. Chirino opposed joining the PSUV and called for casting a blank ballot in the Dec. 2 referendum.
The other wing is identified with Stalin Perez Borges, another leader of the UNT, who has joined the PSUV and called for voting “yes” on Dec. 2. The Borges group argues that it is maintaining the principles of working-class independence and revolutionary socialism within the PSUV and it makes much the same criticisms as the Chirino group, except in very diplomatic language and in the context of presenting itself as a current within Chavismo.
The differences between the two currents could be seen as tactical – that is, that one wing wanted criticize the PSUV from the outside while the other wanted to raise the same differences among the workers attracted to it. But the differences have sharpened since the referendum.
The Borges group accuses Chirono and company of identifying themselves with the right-wing opposition while the Chirino group claims that the defeat of the referendum was a victory for the workers. Presumably, Chirino is trying to drive his position home by carrying it to an extreme, but in so doing he is taking a provocative stance that cannot be defended politically. He is risking discrediting whatever well-founded criticisms of Chavez’s course he might raise.
Much of the criticism on Aporrea is directed at the inefficiency of government bodies, the incompetence or disloyalty of Chavista local officials, as well as generally of the state bureaucracy. These articles undoubtedly reflect real problems, but they are superficial.
The fundamental question is that of the political leadership, specifically of the political instrument Chavez created with the declared aim of building socialism in Venezuela, the PSUV. Without a structured political leadership – a party – the basic problems of the state and its functioning, as well as the organization of society in general, cannot be solved.
The most spectacular failure of the referendum campaign was on the part of the PSUV. The party claims more than 5 million members, but only about 4 million votes were cast for the proposed reforms. Obviously, a large proportion of the PSUV’s members did not even give their proclaimed leader the vote of confidence that he demanded despite their lip service to his leadership.
Chirino and other Trotskyists who reject the PSUV have raised general criticisms of the project, such as the fact that Chavez has declared that the party will welcome “national capitalists” and that it has been used as a platform for figures that Chavez claims are workers’ leaders but who are merely his creations.
However, damning criticisms of the PSUV were also made in a Dec. 13 article by Gonzalo Gomez Freire, an Aporrea editor, who declared his loyalty to the party and his determination to build it. His basic criticisms were that the party had been formed before it had a program or a democratic structure, and so “the cart was put before the horse.” The result was an extremely distorted formation:
“The open days for signing up created the illusion that we had millions, without separating out a real devotion to political activism, sympathy, opportunism, and people who joined because they were forced to. Some functionaries forced their employees to sign up. It should not be surprising that they did not participate in the campaign groups.
“The formation of the party was not based on an initial accumulation of political cadres and activists. People were signed up on a territorial basis on open lists, instead of relying on the strength already existing in the movements, which could assure a greater political solidarity for launching the party, and a greater weight for the working class, for the popular sectors and the peasants, as against a dispersed, multi-class, unstructured mass.
“It would have been possible to create a large basic nucleus of founding activists with a real base in the social struggle and political quality, in order to go from there to sign up more members in transitional structures for political testing and political education.
“Among the battalions formed, some were artificial, created only to elect spokespersons and delegates for various factions contending within the bureaucracy. There were a lot of electoral tricks. A Discipline Commission and ’expelled members’ in a party not yet constituted is something of quite dubious legitimacy and open to arbitrary decisions.”
Apparently, there have been a lot of expulsions from the PSUV even before its founding convention and even before it has determined what it stands for. It would be interesting to know who has been expelled, for what, and by whom.
The one case that became generally known was that of the deputy Tascon, who was expelled for objecting to denunciations of General Baduel as a “traitor” when the latter came out against the proposed constitutional reforms. He was expelled immediately, without a trial or a debate.
But it is obvious that Baduel was not the only anti-socialist or right-wing element in the Chavez bloc, and there is no indication that Chavez has either a structure and criteria for building a homogenous party, or even for organizing a debate that could led to political definition.
It might be useful for revolutionists to participate in political discussion in meetings of initial PSUV groups, if they can, but it should be clear to anyone with any understanding of the nature and purpose of a revolutionary party that the PSUV cannot be transformed into one. It will never be an instrument for those who want to make a socialist revolution in Venezuela.
No matter how much you squeeze a sponge, you cannot make it into a sword. And to the extent that revolutionary groups dissolve their structures into the PSUV, or dilute their programmatic profiles for the sake of being accepted into it, they only disarm and paralyze themselves.
Chavez’s first electoral defeat, the failure of the Dec. 2 referendum, has posed dramatically the need for the creation of a real revolutionary party in Venezuela. That is essential if the radicalization is to go forward. How the debate provoked by the failure of the referendum develops will be an indication of what the possibilities are for achieving that. Venezuela remains the major laboratory for socialist revolution in the world today. All those who are interested in socialism will have to follow it closely.
 

Foley: Israel Threatens War on Gaza (March 2008)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Gerry Foley
Israel Threatens War on Gaza
(March 2008)

Written: Saturday, March 8, 2008.
Published: January 2011 print edition of Socialist Action newspaper.
Copyright: Copyright by Socialist Action, used here with permission.
HTML markup: David Walters in 2012 & Einde O’Callaghan in 2020.


“We know that the Gaza Strip is a small area. It is open for Israel – they can kill most of the Palestinian people and destroy everything. The job of the international community is to stop the Israeli crimes in the Gaza Strip.”
This was the response of Ghazi Hamad, a Hamas representative in Gaza, to questions from a reporter for al-Jazeera, the main Arab nationalist TV station and news website, to threats of a “holocaust” from the Israeli deputy secretary of defense Matan Vilnai. The Israeli minister had used the word “shoah,” which is a Hebrew term used for the Nazi genocide of Jews in the 1940s. Sami Abu Zuhri, another Hamas representative, said, “We are facing new Nazis who want to kill and burn the Palestinian people” (cf. the Al Jazeera English website for Feb. 29).
The Israeli government is threatening a military reoccupation of the Gaza Strip. Such an operation would likely mean a major war and possibly drive a large part of the Gaza population across the border into Egypt. In any case, it would certainly involve an attempt to destroy Hamas’ organization and base in Gaza, as well as those of other Palestinian resistance groups. That would mean mass repression and a slaughter of Palestinian fighters and many bystanders.
These threats come in the wake of a series of Israeli strikes and raids that cost the lives of 32 Palestinians in two days (Feb. 27 and 28), nine of whom, according to al-Jazeera, were children. In the last year, Israeli forces have killed 300 Palestinians in Gaza.
The Israeli saber rattling, which has been accompanied by diplomatic and apparently military preparations for a large-scale ground operation in Gaza, were ostensibly a response to the continuing barrage of small home-made missiles on the Israeli border town of Sderot and the beginning of firing larger and longer-range missiles at the southern Israeli port of Ashkelon.
In recent days, the Qassams have caused a few Israeli casualties. (The missiles are not aimed at any specific target and mostly explode harmlessly.) The Israeli army has been staging air-to-ground missile strikes and raids into Gaza for a long time, supposedly to stop the firing of missiles. However, although it has killed many Palestinian fighters, it has had no demonstrable success in stopping or even reducing the barrages.
For some time, key Israeli military analysts have been arguing that the only way to stop the Qassams is to reoccupy the Gaza Strip. Recently, in fact, the leading Israeli daily, Haaretz, carried an article maintaining that the U.S. was dissatisfied with Israel because it was delaying the launch of such an operation. In fact, polls show that the great majority of Israelis prefer negotiations with Hamas to an inevitably costly military assault. Even the government and the military command are divided over the advisability of such a war, according to rumors reported in Haaretz.
The Hamas political leadership has repeatedly said that it is prepared to accept an indefinite truce with Israel, even though it is not prepared to accept in principle the legitimacy of the Zionist state.
It seems that Israel has come to a crossroads. Its policy of trying to break the Hamas government by an economic siege of Gaza and killings of fighters by pinpoint strikes and raids has been failing. And the international outcry against the collective punishments inflicted on the Gaza people has been growing.
In late February, for example, the European Union adopted a resolution condemning the Israeli siege of Gaza:
“The European Parliament calls on Israel to cease military actions killing and endangering civilians, and extra-judicial targeted killings” (quoted in Haaretz of Feb. 22).
The danger now is that the Zionist rulers may try to escape their dilemma by greatly raising the stakes. It is urgent that all possible pressure be brought to bear on Israel and its allies to forestall major attacks on Gaza.
An attempt to reoccupy the territory would not in fact stop the Qassams or the firing of missiles at Askelon. Such attacks could be launched even under Israeli military occupation. But an all-out assault on Gaza could lead to a regional war, including a possible confrontation with Syria and Iran. This would cause heavy losses of life and infrastructure for the peoples of the Middle East.
 

Foley: U.S. Military Pokes a Hornet’s Nest on the Pakistan Border (October 2008)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Gerry Foley
U.S. Military Pokes a Hornet’s Nest
on the Pakistan Border
(October 2008)

From Socialist Action, October 2008.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan in 2020.


“America and Pakistan both deny it; but it appears that on Sept. 15 they fought a short war. America started it.” That was the comment of the very influential and very frank British Economist in its Sept. 18 issue. The Economist is close to ruling circles in Britain, and its patrons are evidently worried about the conflict that is developing between the NATO forces in Afghanistan and Pakistani military operating on the frontier that the government of Pakistan is unable to control.
The article in question was referring to a confrontation between the Pakistani military and a U.S. strike force trying to attack Taliban fighters inside Pakistan on Sept. 15. The strike force was reportedly being transported in two helicopters that were forced to turn back when a Pakistani unit fired toward them.
On Sept. 3, U.S. helicopter gunships landed at the Pakistani village of Musa Nika in the border area, and U.S. soldiers opened fire on a compound there, killing 20 people. That attack had been preceded by increasing missile strikes within Pakistan from U.S. drones. It also became known that U.S. President Bush signed an order in July authorizing unilateral U.S. ground and air strikes within Pakistan.
The Musa Nika attack aroused popular outrage in Pakistan, which forced the Pakistani army to issue warnings to the U.S. The Washington Post reported Sept. 16:
“Last week, Pakistan’s army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Kiyani, condemned the attacks, saying Pakistan is prepared to defend its territory ‘at all costs.’ Kiyani’s statement followed comments by Adm. Michael Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that increased U.S. incursions in Pakistan are likely.”
In Pakistan itself, the major English-language newspaper, Dawn, which has consistently defended the government’s claims that it is pursuing the war on Islamist terrorism with all its will, questioned why it was the commander of the military who responded to the U.S. actions and not the government:
“Who in Pakistan is in charge of the war against terrorism? On Wednesday, ... Gen Ashfaq Parvez Kayani issued a statement condemning recent violations of Pakistan’s territorial sovereignty by US forces and missiles and vowed to defend Pakistan ‘at all costs’. Gen Kayani was categorical: ‘There is no question of any agreement or understanding with the coalition forces whereby they are allowed to conduct operations on our side of the border.’
“On Thursday, Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani told reporters that Gen Kayani’s statement ‘reflected the government policy’. Is the country to infer then that the civilians are taking their cue from the military top brass? Why must the army chief enunciate government policy rather than the prime minister – or the president?”
After the Sept.15 confrontation, Dawn could have asked who is charge of the military, since there were contradictory statements from different spokespersons of the military about whether or not the incident happened. Despite the top-level denial, however, local witnesses confirmed that it happened – and that is why The Economist assumed that it did.
The Sept. 13 Dawn editorial also noted that when the new president of the country, Asif Zardari, was installed, the only foreign dignitary he invited was Afghan President Karzai and that during his press conference Zardari “refused to take the many opportunities offered ... to categorically condemn US attacks in Fata [Federally Administered Frontier Areas], particularly the raid by US Special Operations Forces in a village in South Waziristan on Sept. 3.”
The Pakistani establishment is clearly in a bind over the conflict between the NATO forces in Afghanistan and the Islamists in its frontier areas. Pakistan was established as an Islamic state. A succession of reactionary military rulers have used Islam as a prop of their rule.
The state’s covert operations services have traditionally used Islamic fanatics as instruments of their policy in Kashmir and Afghanistan. At the same time, the successive military regimes have been backed by the United States, and the Pakistani establishment has become dependent on U.S. money.
A very long feature article in The New York Times Magazine on Sept. 7 dealt extensively with this contradiction. It also clarified early contradictory reports about a U.S. strike on Pakistan frontier guards in June. This was actually a previous “war” between Pakistan and the U.S., one that Pakistan lost. The U.S. authorities had claimed that the killing of 11 Pakistani border guards was a “tragic mistake.”
The Times article reported that however tragic it was, it was no mistake:
“The mystery, at least part of it, was solved in July by four residents of Suran Dara, a Pakistani village a few hundred yards from the site of the fight. According to two of these villagers, whom I interviewed together with a local reporter, the Americans started calling in airstrikes on the Pakistanis after the latter started shooting at the Americans.
”’When the Americans started bombing the Taliban, the Frontier Corps started shooting at the Americans,’ we were told by one of Suran Dara’s villagers, who, like the others, spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of being persecuted or killed by the Pakistani government or the Taliban. ‘They were trying to help the Taliban. And then the American planes bombed the Pakistani post.’”
The author of the article, Dexter Filkins, argued that the incident revealed the basic contradiction of the long U.S. alliance with the Pakistan military:
“For years, the survival of Pakistan’s military and civilian leaders has depended on a double game: assuring the United States that they were vigorously repressing Islamic militants – and in some cases actually doing so – while simultaneously tolerating and assisting the same militants.
“From the anti-Soviet fighters of the 1980s and the Taliban of the 1990s to the home-grown militants of today, Pakistan’s leaders have been both public enemies and private friends.
“When the game works, it reaps great rewards: billions in aid to boost the Pakistani economy and military and Islamist proxies to extend the government’s reach into Afghanistan and India. Pakistan’s double game has rested on two premises: that the country’s leaders could keep the militants under control and that they could keep the United States sufficiently placated to keep the money and weapons flowing. But what happens when the game spins out of control? What happens when the militants you have been encouraging grow too strong and set their sights on Pakistan itself? What happens when the bluff no longer works?”
The Sept. 18 Economist article noted:
“Since soon after America invaded Afghanistan in 2001, it has paid the Pakistani army to wage a counter-insurgency campaign in the tribal areas. To sustain 120,000 Pakistani troops in the field, at the latest count, including a 60,000-strong locally-raised frontier corps, America has given some $12 billion.”
But, the British journal concluded, the U.S. has not been getting “value for its money,” and the reason was not just a double game of the Pakistani military command:
“An opinion poll last year found only 48% of Pakistanis backed military action against the Taliban. The army may be just as divided. Several hundred demoralised soldiers surrendered last year to militants in South Waziristan and Swat, a mountainous region of NWFP north of the tribal areas; some said they refused to fight their brother Muslims. Many Pakistani leaders espouse similar views.”
This is despite the fact that some analysts have claimed that the feeble Pakistan economy is supported by American money and would collapse if the aid were withdrawn. In fact, many public opinion polls show that the U.S. regime is hugely unpopular in Pakistan and that the NATO forces have become hated in Afghanistan, at least in the Pushtun areas where they mainly operate and which are the historic base of the Taliban.
A large part of the Pushtun nation lives in Pakistan, in the frontier areas, approximately 3.5 million. There has been a long-term trend for the Pushtun to develop the consciousness of being one nation. This has been a persistent threat to Pakistan. It is now a threat to the NATO-backed regime in Afghanistan. After the latest U.S. attacks cross the border, Pushtun tribal leaders in Pakistan  have threatened to mount a united war of the Pushtun nation against the NATO forces in Afghanistan.
Already the NATO commanders in Afghanistan have been expressing worries that they will not be able to contain the resurgent Taliban. Obviously, they will face a much more difficult situation if they have to confront a united Pushtun insurgency. And an open conflict with Pakistan would be a conflict of vastly greater scope. Pakistan is a country of 150 million people.
The United States is putting more and more pressure on Pakistan. That is indicated among other things by the fact that such an influential newspaper as The New York Times ran a major article documenting a two-faced policy on the part of the Pakistani establishment. And some U.S. politicians (including “the peace candidate,” Barack Obama) have been making jingoistic noises about unrestrained attacks on the Pakistani border areas.
Conversely, there are plenty of signs that the U.S. authorities are reluctant to take the chance of extending the Afghan war to Pakistan. However, after their adventure in Iraq, no one can be sure that they will not risk huge gambles, especially in a vain attempt to save their previous bets.
The accumulated heritage of corrupt Pakistani regimes backed by the United States has built up an explosive situation at the foundations of the country. The Pakistani establishment has very little credibility.
The government of Pervez Musharraf, which was basically a military dictatorship, was one of the most stable and longest lasting that the country had known. Before Musharraf was forced to step down, public opinion polls showed that 85 percent of the population opposed him.
According to the well-informed writer on Pakistan, Tariq Ali, in an interview on the public radio program Democracy Now on Sept. 16, Zardari is not starting with any better credibility than Musharraf – an approval rating of 14 percent. He was chosen president by an extremely undemocratic indirect election.
Tariq Ali described the situation of the Pakistani establishment as follows:
“This is the most callous, uncaring elite you have in Pakistan today; they don’t care about the people. Human life is cheap. A figure I quote in this book, a UN statistic, that a majority of children born in Pakistan today are being born stunted because of malnutrition. Now, this, for me, is a horrific figure.
“And no government under the sun in that country has ever cared for the needs of the people or done much for them. And that is the duel which goes on. And the surprise is that more poor people don’t turn to religious extremism. It would be comprehensible, but they don’t do it.”
Perhaps the majority don’t turn to the religious radicals, at least not in the urban areas, but many do, and that apparently includes a very large part of the population in the frontier areas. Obviously they do so out of well-deserved hatred for the United States and the Pakistani government – which is seen as a U.S. dependent.
In fact, in the last elections the religious parties that had ruled the frontier areas suffered a decline to the benefit of nationalists. But there is no indication that the hostility to the U.S. was any less; it was simply that the religious parties had no answers to the material problems of the people.
And that is an indication that as they become even more alienated from the U.S. imperialists and their Pakistani clients, the masses in Pakistan will look for deeper-going solutions to their dilemma.
Clearly, a majority of Pakistanis do not support the U.S. war on the Taliban. And an even larger majority would react to U.S. attacks on their country. Moreover, such provocations could be sufficient to ignite the social time bomb that is smoldering in Pakistan. If that happens, the U.S. will face a challenge incomparably greater than it has in Iraq and a war far greater than any that it could force the American people to accept.
 

Foley: The Test of Ireland (Part 2)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

The Test of Ireland

Gerry Foley
The Test of Ireland
(Part 2)
* * *

The IMG’s Idea of Revolutionary Morality and Ours
But doesn’t the IMG deserve some credit for being the only British organization to unconditionally defend the Irish fighters? What about the enthusiastic IMGers who bravely faced fierce hostility to sell their Red Moles with headlines that called for victory to the IRA? Haven’t they proved their revolutionary mettle? This plea by the IMG leaders and their defenders is not only an expression of petty-bourgeois moralism and an indefensible attempt to feed on the reflected glory of the sacrifices and sufferings of the fighters in Ireland (who face a more serious threat than an occasional punch in the nose); it is not even incompatible with the paternalism and sanctimoniousness of liberal imperialism in Britain. As the author of How to Lead from Behind wrote:
... and for our refusal to capitulate to the chauvinism of the British working class we have praised ourselves sufficiently in the past. But where we have had much more questionable position, and a definitely wrong practice, is on the question of how to intervene in and how to build the ‘solidarity movement.’
That is, the IMG’s virtues lie primarily in the sphere of its moral attitudes. No Marxist can accept such an apology. In fact, judged on a materialist basis, the basis of the objective effect and the underlying political implications of their actions, the virtues of the IMG are less than impressive. In trying to strike a pose of offering the most intransigent support for the Irish fighters, the IMG really developed a sectarian ultimatist position toward the Irish organisations and completely perverted the meaning of “unconditional support.”
The Irish revolutionists and their direct representatives could not have made their desires more plain. On the attitude of the Official IRA, the author of How to Lead from Behind quotes the leaders of the IMG’s Irish work to the effect that they want no part of the AIL but are backward and liberal enough to desire a “TOM.” But what about the Provisionals? Since they are dedicated to armed struggle, surely they could be counted on to reject anything so reformist as a “TOM”? But their organ, An Phoblacht, has so far obviously been more impressed with the development of groups calling for withdrawal of the troops than the increasingly sectarian actions of the AIL, even though the AIL has tended more and more openly to support the political line of the Provisionals. The Provisionals on the spot almost pulled out of the AIL after the conference where the “solidarity position” was adopted, the author of How to Lead From Behind explains.
In short, it was obvious that the IMG had not really maintained what was presented in Comrade Jordan’s September 1, 1971, article in The Red Mole as the proper attitude for British revolutionists to take toward the liberation fighters in Ireland:
Our first answer to these objections [of the sectarians] is to make it very clear that the major task of British socialists is not to tell the Irish people how to wage their struggle (methinks maybe they would be better placed to tell us how to wage ours), but, on the contrary, it is to end the position where the British working class, and especially the leadership of its organisations, are direct accomplices in the oppression of the Irish people.
As the IMG adaptation to ultra-leftism deepened, it not only did not hesitate to launch attacks on Irish militants whose forms of action did not fit into its “armed struggle” strategy but arrogantly ignored the desires of all the elements fighting in Ireland for the kind of movement that could give them effective aid.
On the other hand, the author of How to Lead From Behind does say that the local Provisionals were restrained from pulling out of the AIL by the Dublin leadership. This raises the question of why the Dublin leaders defended the AIL. Is it because of the organization’s effectiveness? But enthusiasm for the AIL seems markedly lacking in the Provisional publications.
What then could be the reason? It is true that the AIL is one of the few organizations that is continuing to do anything on the Irish question. That is to its credit. But it is still obviously declining, and even in this period of general downturn in the movement there are signs that point to its being bypassed. Let us look then at the way the Provisionals conceive of broad support activity. They have an anti-repressive front of their own, the Irish Civil Rights Association (ICRA). They have made few efforts to make this organization genuinely broad. It engages in polemics with the Official IRA, defending the Provisional line. It is small and isolated. Still it obviously has value for them, since they maintain it.
What precisely is its value? It is a “political wing,” a legal organization that politically defends the actions of the Provisionals. As such, it represents one of the historic components of the military conspiratorial movement in Ireland. The question then arises whether the Provisional leadership in fact views the AIL in the same light, as a legal front charged with the tasks of defending them politically. This could explain their support for it despite its obviously decreasing effectiveness. Such a suggestion is extremely grave. But the whole direction of the IMG’s Irish work, the essential dilemma in which all their propaganda and activity around the Irish issue is lodged, justifies raising it.
In fact, the IMG leadership finds itself in the worst possible position with regard to the nationalist movement in Ireland. On the one hand, it has proved unable to build an effective defense of the struggle arid thus win solid respect in its own right. On the other, it has progressively accommodated to the politics of petty-bourgeois nationalist terrorism and become a left cover for the conservative militarist leadership of the Provisionals. Thus at one and the same time its policy has been sectarian and opportunistic, and as a result of this it has failed in its fundamental duty of offering a perspective for carrying the struggle in Ireland forward to victory, lapsing increasingly into the role of apologist for the backward terrorist conceptions of a fossilized petty-bourgeois nationalist sect.
The courage of the IMG rank and filers who braved hostility to sell their deliberately provocative Red Moles could have been put to far better use than to support a bankrupt and fundamentally opportunist policy. If the IMG leadership did not fear to provoke the hostility of people on the streets and in other places where the Red Mole was sold, why were they unwilling to confront possible hostility of workers and soldiers in order to explain the need for British withdrawal from Ireland? Surely here a fight would not only have been much more fruitful for the Irish people but would have had a much better chance of victory in the long run. In fact, the conclusion seems inescapable that the IMG preferred a make-believe fight to the real one, and thus, however subjectively courageous individual militants may have been, the organization’s claims of revolutionary virtue are essentially hypocritical, that is, do not represent a qualitative advance over the opportunist British left organizations.
Before the irresistible pressures of reality, all the dogmatic pretexts for avoiding the duty of building a mass movement for withdrawal have slowly crumbled and become untenable. But miseducation, reinforced by frenzied factionalism, has gone deep into the leadership and the ranks of the IMG. It seems unlikely that they can reorient themselves sufficiently to build an effective troops out movement without squarely facing their errors and rejecting most of their past three years’ theory and practice on the Irish issue. The discovery of a “new conjuncture” is not enough. In fact, one of the realities they may have to confront is that because of the decline in the struggle in Ireland – owing to the political errors of the main organizations involved, errors moreover that the IMG itself approved and encouraged – it is already too late for a bring-the-troops-home movement to decisively aid the struggle of the nationalist ghetto dwellers.
The fact is that the IMG’s errors are not an accidental development, nor do their origins lie fundamentally in Britain. This entire evolution is the logical and inevitable result of the opportunistic turn taken by the majority at. the Ninth World Congress in adapting to the pressures of guerrillaism in Latin America. The development of the IMG’s sectarian and opportunist line on the Irish question in Britain has gone hand in hand with an adaptation to the terrorism of others in Ireland and the logical and inevitable corollary of this – adaptation to the political conceptions of Blanquism and populism.
 

Extension of the Latin American Guerrilla War Line to Europe
As in the development of the IMG’s sectarian and ultra-left conceptions of building a support movement for the Irish struggle in Britain, there seem to be three parallel phases in the development of its adaptation to terrorism in Ireland.
In the initial stage, the IMG’s Irish experts were attracted to the conceptions of the Official IRA, according to which the armed action of commando groups was to be subordinated to “grass-roots” struggles or assigned a role of “defending” the mass movement. Then the IMG leadership placed its hopes in a small “Marxist” commando group operating in complete isolation from all mass struggles, Saor Eire. It was hoped that by its exemplary actions, this group could spark a radical development in the larger republican organizations. Finally, the IMG leadership fell more and more into the role of apologists and advocates of the apolitical militarism of the Provisionals.
From the beginning, the IMG leadership assigned Marxists an auxiliary role to the big nationalist organizations. As an article in the April 15, 1970, Red Mole put it:
The fate of the Irish revolution in the immediate future will depend on the ability of Irish revolutionary groupings to capture the leadership of the republican movement and to indivisibly weld together that movement with the struggle in the North.
In the August 1970 issue of the Red Mole, Bob Purdie wrote:
In addition the Falls is the stronghold of the ‘Red’ Republicans, that section of the Republican Movement which has declared for a Workers’ Republic. They have won the confidence of the people by assisting them against racketeering landlords, moving them into empty houses and protecting them from eviction. In co-operation with other organizations, they run an advice center, where legal advice can be obtained in addition to help in dealing with the state bureaucracy and physical protection where necessary.
In his assessment of the Official republican convention published in the February 1, 1971, issue of the Red Mole, Comrade Purdie wrote:
The walk-out at last years Ard- Fheis by the group now known as the ‘Provisionals’, although it took out a number of genuine revolutionaries, also sloughed off a backward section of the movement which could not overcome the limitations of the pure physical force tradition of Irish Republicanism.”
In an article in the April 7, 1971 Red Mole, Comrade Purdie described the differences between the Officials and Provisionals in the following way:
Following the failure of the 1956–62 campaign the leaders of the IRA spent a long time discussing the reasons for their failure. What was important to them was not their military defeat but that they had failed to get the support of the Irish people. With such support their guerrilla war would have been invincible; without it, despite the widespread sympathy they received, they were powerless against the armed might of British imperialism.
This long discussion had profound consequences. A large section of the movement began to realise the need for a clear idea of the kind of Ireland worth fighting for, and that the only perspective was to fight for a Workers’ Republic. This coincided with a move away from such practices as refusing to recognize courts, or to answer police questions, which had led to militants needlessly going into prison, thus weakening the movement further: to the dropping of the ‘abstentionist’ policy of refusing to take seats if elected to Westminster, Stormont or the Dail.
It was the latter point which was the ostensible reason for the split last year between the ‘Officials’ and the ‘Provisionals’. Following the decisions of the Army Council in favour of ending the abstentionist policy, the 1970 Ard Fheis (Conference) of the Republican Movement’s political wing, Sinn Fein, supported the abandonment by a small majority (which was not enough to make the necessary change in the constitution). A large number of delegates walked out, setting up the ‘Provisional Army Council’, and the ‘Caretaker Executive of Sinn Fein.’
The differences were of course more profound than on the question of abstention: the Provisionals also rejected the socialist perspective of the Officials, and accused the Officials not only of having sold out by recognising the ‘Treatyite’ parliaments, but of being under communist influence.
But there was another issue, which has been the cause of the real deep bitterness between the two organisations, and that is the role of the Army Council during the August 1969 events in the North. The fact that, when the people of the Bogside and Falls were facing a pogrom by the ‘B’ Specials and RUC, the Army Council did not send the arms which were available. Cathal Goulding, the Chief of Staff, has explained the reasons for this: they carry a great deal of conviction. However, the fact of the failure of the arms to appear, at a decisive moment, combined with the turn of the Officials away from pure physical force tactics, has enabled the Provisionals to label them as ‘pacifist’ and accuse them of running down the armed section of the movement. In addition the Provisionals have undoubtedly gone out of their way to prove their own militancy against the British troops. This has tended to obscure the fact that the longest engagement between British troops and Republican forces since the Black and Tan Wars was the 16-hour gun battle carried on by the Official IRA in the Lower Falls last July.
And further on, Comrade Purdie even argued that the British troops were trying to provoke the Officials into unwise armed actions:
It seems fairly certain that the Provisionals can turn out larger numbers in conflicts with the Army, than the Officials, and that they have hegemony in more areas, certainly of Belfast. So that talk of them being a ‘breakaway’ can only be calculated to sting them into proving their military capacity, and talk of the Provisionals being more ‘militant’ must be designed to prod the Officials into proving their own ‘virility’ (to use a favourite term of the same press).
Comrade Purdie offered this concluding judgment on the Officials:
Nevertheless, regular readers of The Red Mole will no doubt be aware that we have paid a great deal of attention to the evolution of the Official Republican Movement: it is clear from what we have written that we consider them to be the most important socialist organisation in Ireland today. We think that in the long term they will play a much greater role in liberating Ireland than will the Provisionals. This is not solely because of the fact that the Officials have embraced a socialist perspective; much more important is their capability of giving a political lead to the Irish people. In a situation where the British Army is smashing up Ardoyne or Ballymurphy, the Provisionals can gain widespread support for their military effectiveness. But were British imperialism suddenly to change its tactics, and not offer the minority this provocation, even if only for a period, the Provisionals would have no role to play within these communities. Whereas the Officials have been working patiently to raise the political consciousness of the entire working class of the Six Counties, agitating on such issues as housing, jobs, etc. It is significant that the area of Belfast which was behind barricades in August ‘69, the Lower Falls, is the area where the officials are strongest; the experience of that struggle must have raised the general level of political consciousness.
The first sign of the IMG’s interest in the Official republican movement came when the May 1970 issue of the Red Mole reprinted an interview with the Official leader Malachy McGurran from Intercontinental Press. Contacts seem to have developed subsequent to that, leading to Comrade Purdie’s visit to Belfast in July 1970 and to the Official Ard Fheis in December 1970. But at the same time, the IMG came in contact with, or began to take more seriously, a group of adventurers expelled from the republican movement in the 1960s. These adventurers were associated with Gery Lawless, an “independent” Trotskyist who had broken with the republican movement in 1955, accusing it of reluctance to begin the guerrilla campaign for which it began preparing with the arms raids in the early 1950s. Many of them were ex-members of the Irish Workers Group, a heterogeneous grouping led by Comrade Lawless which disintegrated in early 1968. The IMG’s interest in this group seemed to increase at the end of 1970 when Comrade Lawless joined the IMG and became the co-leader of its Irish work.
 

An Irish ERP
In its January 1–15, 1971, issue, the Red Mole published an interview with a representative of this grouping, Saor Eire, which offered a different version of the movement toward politics in the Official IRA. This interview was announced on a cover with a picture of a guerrilla pointing a gun at the reader, In answer to a question about the split in the republican movement, this anonymous spokesman said:
Well, we have seen the inevitability of such a split occurring for the last eight years. We did not particularly favour it since, unfortunately, it happened over wrong issues. In the official section, we have an amalgam of peaceful roadmen, reformers, and left-wingers; and within the Provisionals, we have more militant elements, but right-wing politics. In practice, we have found ourselves more closely aligned to the Provisionals, it is among those elements that we draw a lot of our support.
Of course, it is important to draw a distinction between the leadership and the rank-and-file in both these organisations. Both leaderships seem equally opposed to us and equally capable of spreading slanders about us, whereas with both rank-and-files we have very much in common. We are grateful for the help that Cathal Goulding, the chief of staff of the official IRA, sent in relation to Frank Keane’s case. But we condemn unequivocally their actions in issuing disclaimers and thereby helping police to finger our organization in the Arran Quay robbery.
The representative described the origins of his organization in this way:
I’ll have to go back to the ‘60s and trace the development of the Republican movement. After the failure of the mid-’50s military campaign in the Six Counties, a certain amount of disillusionment set in within the IRA and Sinn Fein. People saw the futility of a purely military campaign not backed up by some form of political action. In the early ‘60s some people connected with the London-based Irish Democrat joined the movement. Their Stalinist politics were not accepted overnight, but on account of the lack of clear-cut politics within the Republican movement, the position was that any brand of politics was accepted. With the influx of these people, political classes were started, which were good in themselves, as they gave many members of the Republican movement their first knowledge of left-wing politics; but hand in hand with the growing political awareness, there began a running-down of the armed section, the IRA. This unfortunately led to a lot of people equating left-wing politics with reformism. Many of our members at this stage started to voice their objections to this running down of the IRA. These people were either dismissed on trumped-up charges or left of their own accord. Other members saw through the politics of Stalinism and left on a political basis.
At this time too, many English-based revolutionary groups started to spring up. People saw in these groups alternatives to the Irish Communist Party and to the current Stalinist orientation of the Republican movement, and thought that maybe, through such organisations, a new fusion could be made between left-wing politics and the traditional militancy of Republicanism. Some people who had been involved in the Trotskyist English-based Irish Workers’ Group formed an important section of Saor Eire and began to form links with these dissident elements of the Republican movement. This resulted in a loose organisation being formed in Dublin about three to four years ago, which carried out some arms raids and some bank raids in an attempt to try to get a militant politically conscious, armed group off the ground. After these initial actions there was not such a mass movement toward this grouping as was expected, since its actions were seen as more in the tradition of the international revolutionary movement, as opposed to the Irish movement. The next period was spent in discussion with various political groupings, and with various members of the Republican movement, in an attempt to win them over to this new concept of political action.
The method by which this tiny adventurist group hoped to stimulate a “mass movement” toward itself was explained as follows:
Saor Eire is a left-wing armed group which is attempting to act as a fuse or detonator to the Irish revolutionary struggle. It is attempting to step up the tempo of development of political life. It is part of the Republican tradition but also draws from the international revolutionary movement, both politically and in a military sense. As opposed to past forms the Republican struggle took, Saor Eire is centred around the cities and could be called an urban guerrilla group, inasmuch as it sees the main struggle taking place in the cities, and within the working class directly.
As for Saor Eire’s activities, although they did not exactly depend on mass support, they were designed to win mass sympathy:
Unfortunately due to publicity given to us by the bourgeois press, people seem to think that we are only involved in robbing banks and living high lives, etc. etc. This could not be further from the truth. We have robbed many banks and taken responsibility for them. But we have also been involved in armed raids, in industrial disputes, in direct confrontations with the state and its agents, also in local disputes and tenants’ disputes. The money expropriated from the banks is used to purchase arms and equipment for the forthcoming struggle in Ireland. A lot of our finances have gone to aid the Catholic population of the North who have been under attack from British imperialism. This took the form of money, ammunition, and equipment. The money is also used for the maintenance of our revolutionaries in the field, who, at the moment, number quite a few. It is also used for political education, the arrangement of classes, camps, and all of the other running expenses that any armed group is liable to. We’re also involved in military training of members of other left-wing groups in Ireland, people from the North, and the broad Republican movement, who have not been able to get this training within their own organisations. (Emphasis in original.)
Despite a certain autonomy from the masses, Saor Eire was not, it was explained, a foquista group:
We don’t believe that the foco itself can become the party or has any monopoly on the revolution. But small guerrilla groupings, to a certain extent independent of the working class, can help to raise the level of the working class and so help to create the party. (Emphasis in original)
In fact, Saor Eire was a very special kind of guerrilla group, one sympathetic to the Fourth International and especially to the International’s support for “armed struggle,” an Irish facsimile of the Argentine Ejército Revolucionario del Pueblo! An exemplification of the correctness of the line of the Ninth World Congress ...
As regards the Fourth International: we recognise the revolutionary role it has played since its inception; how it came to the aid of the Algerian revolution with arms and weapons while other so-called revolutionary organisations failed to fulfil their duty. We also admire how they came to the aid of the Cuban and Vietnamese revolutions and defended them against imperialism, in America and throughout the world. We are particularly sympathetic to the political assistance it is giving the Irish struggle at the moment. While the Stalinists have consistently dilly-dallied and vacillated on the question of Ireland and on the role of armed struggle in Ireland, the Fourth International is probably the only organization which has consistently given it support. A lot of our members have been, at some time or other, members of Trotskyist groupings.
Not only did Saor Eire have a certain appearance of Trotskyist politics, it laid claim to its own tradition in Ireland.
As regards Saor Uladh, again we have much in common with them. This was a group which broke away from the Republican movement specifically on the question of armed action, which is a revolutionary feature. We also believe in their concept that the resolving of the Irish national struggle could not take place in the Six Counties alone, but would be resolved in a Thirty-Two County context. However, unfortunately, with Saor Uladh, this military outlook was not accompanied by the relevant and necessary political framework. For this reason they failed.
The thirty-two county perspective of Saor Uladh, the group that did perhaps the most to precipitate the 1956 border campaign, consisted of two features. Its leader, Liam Kelly, sat in both the Belfast and Dublin parliaments, assisted in the second case by a liberal parliamentary breakaway from the main republican movement. It, unlike the regular movement, conducted raids in the south that were used as pretexts by the Dublin government to intern IRA men on the green side of the border. It was this second feature that Saor Eire seemed to have in common with the old Saor Uladh, as well as its desire to precipitate the main body of republicans into guerrilla warfare by its example. This historic contribution of Saor Uladh was praised by Comrade Purdie, the main spokesman of the IMG on the Irish question, in his pamphlet Ireland Unfree published in January 1972:
Behind Saor Eire’s activities is the conviction that no change can be promoted with the Republican Movement unless it is pressurised by a more militant and active military organisation. This approach contains a great deal of truth, for the launching of a struggle in 1956 by Saor Uladh catapulted the main body of the IRA into the Border Campaign, and forced the leadership of the IRA down off its conservative pedestal.
Until the writing of Comrade Purdie’s pamphlet, the opinion had been held virtually unanimously, including in Republican circles, that the abortive terrorist campaign beginning in 1956 was an unmitigated disaster that strengthened Unionism and brought the militant nationalist movement to its lowest ebb in the entire history of the country. In fact, it was this total failure of the traditional terrorist methods that forced the republican leadership to look for new methods anywhere it could find something that seemed sensible. To be consistent with his support for “armed struggle,” Comrade Purdie was apparently forced to find a positive evaluation of the border campaign:
Despite the failures of that campaign, the fact that it was fought faced a new generation of Irish men and women with the imperative challenge of the oppression of their nation; that new generation brought into the struggle the forces which today have opened up a new chapter in the political development of the Irish revolutionary Movement.
It was notable also that in this evaluation, Comrade Purdie adopted the version of the 1956 split put forward by Comrade Lawless, who was an ally at that time of Saor Uladh and one of the group trying to force the IRA leadership to begin guerrilla warfare immediately, threatening to initiate armed actions himself with his own small group. Comrade Purdie was obviously in no position to make such a judgment himself, having no personal knowledge of the unwritten history of the IRA and the attitudes of the leaders of the time.
Comrade Lawless, however, did play a direct role. This is the version given by B. Bowyer Bell in The Secret Army, the most authoritative history of the IRA. It has not been commented on in the Red Mole:
The group of radicals led by Gery Lawless, a tough, violent, undisciplined agitator, left the ultra-conservative Army they distrusted and went with Christie. Magan opposed any compromise and even refused to allow the repentant Lillis to return. The drain continued over several weeks and the bitterness grew. Even the Fianna Boy Scouts split. The ‘Christie Group’ met in a convention and decided on action with three months and expansion throughout the country. Support was solicited from units in Meath, Limerick, and elsewhere but without firm results. The pace was too slow for some. Lawless and Sean Geraghty felt Christie was hedging and ‘kidnapped’ him to urge action. Refusing to talk under duress, Christie later agreed to the three-month provision. Both groups agreed that if they began action the IRA or Kelly would have to quit stalling and begin fighting, which was just what the IRA did not want to do prematurely ...
In September to get things moving, eighteen Volunteers from the old B Company moved up to the border of Donegal and Fermanagh and sat, hoping to blackmail either Kelly or the IRA into action. Eventually this Lawless ‘column’ withdrew and Christie agreed to amalgamate with Kelly, who had little Twenty-six County support outside the border areas. A joint border operation was planned for November against customs posts. (pp. 279–280)
There was, however, a dynamic in the activity of the Lawless group that could have been understood by a Marxist without any need for inside information on the 1956 split. None of the guerrilla campaigns of the IRA have ever been initiated by a deliberate decision of the leadership, not even the war of independence in 1919. In every case, individuals attracted to the IRA by the appeal of armed action and without political training or discipline have quickly begun to press for an immediate start to the campaign and eventually initiated actions themselves that have catapulted the entire organization into guerrilla warfare. In every case the leadership has found itself incapable of controlling this process and ended up in fact riding a tiger.
In the case of the 1919–21 war, this uncontrolled activity was able to win a partial victory because there was a solid front of the nation, including most of the bourgeoisie, against the British. Once the bourgeoisie and bourgeois-oriented elements achieved their limited aims, however, they found it relatively easy to isolate the IRA and defeat it. The people were worn out by the high cost of uncontrolled guerrilla war. Furthermore, the masses were not directly involved in this struggle, and it did not seem to be directly related to their most intimate concerns. Every attempt to revive the type of guerrilla warfare that existed in 1919–21, and there has been no lack of attempts over the past fifty years, has been a complete failure. The most successful try to date has been the Provisional campaign. But this in a certain sense grew out of the mass agitation of the Civil Rights movement.
By identifying Saor Uladh and the Lawless group as the “revolutionary” detonator in 1956, the IMG leaders identified Trotskyism with the purest traditions of guerrillaist adventurism in Ireland. This fact was all the more glaring in view of the context in which The Red Mole published the Saor Eire interview. In November, the premier of the Dublin government announced that his regime was prepared to introduce mass internment of political suspects and might do so at any time. It was forced to consider such a step, he said, because the police had discovered a conspiracy by Saor Eire, a group that had been carrying out a series of expropriations since about 1966 but which almost no one knew anything about, to kidnap some cabinet ministers, kidnapping, as everyone knew, being a popular tactic of urban guerrilla groups. In particular, because of their history, the large Republican groups could be linked in the public mind to the activities of Saor Eire.
Representatives of the Official IRA protested that there was no need to open a concentration camp if the government was only worried about Saor Eire, since all its members could be interned in one cell. The IMG, however, was determined to present Saor Eire as a serious force in Ireland, since “the brunt of the witch-hunt has been borne by a group whose name up to now has been practically unknown to the British left – Saor Eire.” After all, Saor Eire was almost Trotskyist. It is clear that by offering this group two full pages of the Red Mole, in which the Saor Eire representative explained the “internationalist” character of the group as well as its military activities and aspirations, the IMG gave credence to the Dublin government’s claim that the activities of Saor Eire did represent a serious danger to “order” in Ireland and thereby reinforced its pretext for launching an all-out attack on the left and militant nationalist movement. In order to give a forum to an almost Trotskyist guerrilla group, it endangered the entire radical movement in the Twenty- Six Counties and in particular the militants who identified with Trotskyism. Was it worth it? Apparently it was to the IMG, which for a whole period put Saor Eire at the center of its strategy for Ireland.
 

The Trotskyist Guerrilla Expert
At the same time as it discovered Saor Eire, the IMG seemed to discover the guerrilla expertise of Comrade Lawless, who, although he had lived primarily in London in the 1960s in regular contact with the various Trotskyist groups, had not played a major role in the Trotskyist movement until that time. Nor had any Trotskyist group in Britain shown a great interest in his guerrilla credentials. He was, however, to emerge as the “military” expert of the IMG and, apparently, as the IEC Majority Tendency’s example of an Irish “Trotskyist” guerrilla.
In Belgium, in particular, Comrade Lawless’s past was especially appreciated in Trotskyist circles. In fact, in their zeal to defend the IRA’s right to speak in Belgium, the Belgian Trotskyists went so far as to publicize Comrade Lawless as a representative of the IRA, which, of course, he was not. In introducing an interview with Comrade Lawless, the February 18, 1972 issue of La Gauche offered this sketch of his qualifications on the Irish question:
Jerry [sic] Lawless (a fated name). Sentenced thirty-six times (this is an exact figure and not just intended to impress), imprisoned many times, notably for belonging to the IRA. Interned in a British concentration camp as a child. Described by the Unionist government of Northern Ireland as one of those responsible for the present agitation in Ulster. Sought by the British police.
In this interview, moreover, Comrade Lawless presented a different view of the split in the IRA from that offered in the Red Mole in 1970 by Comrade Purdie.
In 1969 we were in a situation where the IRA had relegated the role of armed force to a secondary position and the IRA underestimated the importance of resorting to arms. We found ourselves then facing a ‘virtual’ civil war unleashed by the Unionist party.
The IRA was badly prepared, incapable in fact of facing the needs of the moment. This coincided with the return, under the pressure of the threat of civil war, of many comrades who had left the IRA in 1962.
They had left in 1962 because they considered themselves regular soldiers. They said: ‘The fatherland has no more need of my services for the moment and I will go back and start a family.’
Jo Khal [Joe Cahill], one of the leaders of the IRA, provisional wing, is a good example of this attitude. He left the IRA in 1962 to found a belated family, and he rejoined the IRA when the threat appeared again in 1969. Men like Khal coming from Belfast noticed two things when they rejoined the IRA. The first was that it was much more left than it had been before. The second was that it had many fewer arms than before. They equated the two phenomena and made a link between them – did the IRA get soft when it moved to the left? ...
Then there was a new politicized youth that mobilized to defend its own communities. They flooded into the IRA. The fact that the IRA had neither arms nor a strategy for armed struggle brought about a split ... Many comrades joined the Provisionals in Dublin and the border areas in particular not because this wing was more right or because it was hostile to the left, but because they were intransigent, they were aware of the need for armed struggle.
The IRA split and the subsequent development of the two groups is a complex question, and as the situation developed in the North, the Provisionals did win broader support than the Officials. It is quite possible, moreover, that the Provisional republican movement will become the central element in the development of the Irish revolutionary movement in the next period, as it, like the Officials before, learns the inadequacy of Blanquist militarism and looks for more advanced revolutionary conceptions.
 

Armed Struggle, Yes; National Liberation, No
Comrades Purdie and Lawless analyzed the secret of the Provisonals’ success rather well in their article Ireland: The Eye of the Hurricane in the July 10, 1972, Red Mole.
The fact that the Provisionals have been better able to intervene in the last period will surprise only the dogmatists on the British Left who insist on misunderstanding everything which happens outside their editorial offices. During the present phase of permanent revolution in Ireland, when national struggle is in the forefront, it is only to be expected that the most consistent nationalists will play the leading role.
It is unfortunate that this lesson has not received greater emphasis in the summaries and reprints of the IMG’s positions on Ireland that have been circulated by the European sections as the Trotskyist answer to such questions. Of course, it does not fit in very well with the line on nationalism put forward in the key document of the IEC Majority Tendency, In Defence of Leninism: In Defence of the Fourth International, where Comrade Germain takes a notably dim view of the idea that “consistent nationalism” leads toward a process of permanent revolution:
This Leninist opposition to nationalism is not an abstract and formal principle, but starts, as Lenin indicates, from a ‘clear notion of the historical and economic circumstances.’ That is why there can be some exceptions to the rule based upon exceptional ‘historical and economic circumstances,’ i.e. those of oppressed nationalities which do not yet possess their own ruling class, or which have only such a miserable embryo of a bourgeois that, in the given and foreseeable situation, it is excluded that this embryo could actually become a ruling class without a complete disintegration of the imperialist structure. The best example of such exceptions are of the black and Chicano nationalities inside the United States. We shall discuss them in more detail in the final section of this text.
But it is clear that neither Quebec, Catalonia, the Basque country, India, Ceylon nor the Arab nation, can be classified as exceptional. All these nations have their own bourgeois class. Many of them even have their own semi-colonial bourgeois state. To support nationalism within these nationalities, under the pretext of supporting anti-imperialist liberation struggles, or even to defend the doctrine that ‘consistent nationalism’ would automatically lead to a struggle for the dictatorship of the proletariat is to lose the ‘clear notion of the historical and economic circumstances,’ to lose sight of the class structure, the class decisions and the irreconcilable class conflicts inside these nations, which national oppression or economic exploitation by imperialism in no way eliminates but, in a certain sense, even exacerbates when compared to what occurs in non-oppressed nations. To defend the notion of ‘unconditional support’ for Quebec nationalism, Arab nationalism, Indian nationalism, or Ceylon nationalism, is to disarm the workers and poor peasants of these countries in their class struggle against their own bourgeoisie, is to make the conquest of power by the proletariat in the course of the anti-imperialist struggle – i.e. the whole process of permanent revolution – more difficult if not impossible, and puts a big obstacle on the road of building Leninist parties among these nationalities.” (Page 34.)
Oddly, Comrade Germain omits mentioning Irish nationalism. But why is there any reason, according to this, to regard Ireland as exceptional? Isn’t there an Irish national bourgeoisie that has its own state? Haven’t elements of it even called for armed confrontations with the imperialist power? Furthermore, there is a certain logic to Comrade Germain’s positions, which has become clearer with the development of the international discussion.
For example, in its main resolution at the 1973 convention of the SWP, the Internationalist Tendency, whose positions were endorsed by one of the principal spokesmen of the IEC Majority Tendency, Livio Maitan, as well as by Peter Petersen of the IMG, was even more negative about the possibility of “consistent nationalism” playing any progressive role:
Behind the party leadership’s new vocabulary, there is an adaptation in practice to the petty bourgeois ideologies of nationalism and feminism. The SWP leadership’s adaptationism is manifested both within and outside of the borders of the United States. In fact, it is not restricted to national groups but has been extended to include women. The nub of the issue is contained in the formula that ‘consistent nationalism will lead to socialism.’ Alleged examples of this dynamic are the Cuban and Vietnamese revolutions. In fact, it was the Castroist movement’s break with nationalism, that is, with the concept of a national interest above classes, expressed in the smashing of the bourgeois state, that laid the basis for Cuba’s advance toward socialism. In the same way, it is the NLF’s ties to the workers’ state of North Vietnam, rather than its diffused nationalist ideology, that have made it able to endure as a fighting force against imperialism. Marxists have always characterized nationalism as a bourgeois ideology, i.e., a false perception of reality and an apology for particular interests, and have counterposed it to the scientific theory of international socialism.
Lenin’s distinction between the nationalism of the oppressed and that of the oppressor applies to the Communist attitude toward the two varieties of nationalism. It did not mean that we should endorse the nationalism of the oppressed, but rather, that while we intransigently fight the nationalism of the oppressor, our attitude is to patiently explain the bankruptcy of nationalism to the liberation fighters of oppressed nations. In some cases during the incipient stages of a colonial revolution, nationalism may play a progressive role in drawing the masses into action against imperialism. In such cases we give it critical support. But, we recognize that nationalism can only give the masses relief from the most superficial forms of oppression, as with the granting of formal independence. In order to advance the masses, it is necessary for revolutionaries to dispel the notion that all layers of the oppressed nation share common oppression. They must point out the bankruptcy of the petty bourgeois nationalist leadership, counterpose proletarian internationalism, and become the leaders of the struggle of the masses against imperialism. This requires a qualitative break from the ideology of nationalism and the opening of a world revolutionary perspective, which is precisely the function of a revolutionary party.
The SWP leadership’s adaptation to nationalism also takes another form: tail-ending the petty bourgeois program and leadership of national liberation struggles. The case of Palestine was the clearest example of this tendency. The SWP uncritically endorsed Al Fatah’s call for a Democratic Secular Palestine [Isn’t this what the term “republic” means to the Irish republicans, Comrades Purdie and Lawless? – G.F.], without clarifying its class content. In the case of Vietnam, Bangla Desh and Ireland, the SWP leadership has confined the party’s propaganda to the call for self-determination, without raising the need for the establishment of a workers’ state as central to the colonial revolution. (The Building of a Revolutionary Party in Capitalist America, SWP Discussion Bulletin, Vol. 31, No. 18, pp. 7–8.)
This attitude toward “consistent nationalism” has become a rather important part of the discussion going on in the International. For example, in offering its “critical support’ to the IEC Majority Tendency, the “June 10 Tendency” in the SWP cited as the first evidence of the alleged “rightward motion’’ of the American party: “The SWP leadership’s refusal to participate in the Women’s Liberation movement and in National Liberation struggles as revolutionary Marxists forwarding a socialist program ...” The first thing it cited as justification for adhering to the IEC Majority Tendency was:
To the SWP’s minimalist call for ‘Self-determination for Bangla Desh,’ the International Majority has countered, ‘For a Socialist Indian Sub-Continent.’
To the SWP’s call for a ‘Democratic Secular Palestine,’ they proclaim, ‘For a Socialist Federation in the Middle East.’ (Position Paper on the Current Dispute in the International, SWP Discussion Bulletin, Vol. 31, No. 29, pp. 18–19.)
Wouldn’t the same method in the case of Ireland lead to the slogan of a “Socialist Federation of the British Isles”? or to counterposing “For a United Socialist Europe” to the slogan of “Self-Determination for Ireland”? In any case, until further discussion clarifies the matter, we must assume that most of the members of the IEC Majority Tendency in Europe who support the IMG line on Ireland are unable to appreciate the factor of “consistent nationalism” in the success of the Provisional IRA, and regard the Provisionals’ dedication to “armed struggle” as their essential positive feature.
It is quite clear in his interview in the February 18, 1972, La Gauche that Comrade Lawless sees the revolutionary side of the Provisionals precisely in their maintaining the old “physical force” tradition of the Republican movement, which Comrade Purdie described in 1970 as “backward” and subject to manipulation by right-wing elements. Furthermore Comrade Lawless does not criticize the 1956–62 campaign for failing to involve the masses actively in a deep-going struggle, a failure recognized by Comrade Purdie in his first articles, but for its failure simply to “organize” the “popular support” that existed for the campaign.
And this line has clearly come to dominate the IMG’s analysis over the past two years. The evolution is obvious. Comrade Lawless was not integrated into the Trotskyist movement. His adventurist past and his present adventurist conceptions were and are hailed both by the IMG leadership and the leaders of the IEC Majority Tendency in Europe, especially by those comrades most directly influenced by the principal leader of this tendency, Comrade Mandel himself.
Instead of offering a political perspective, the arsenal of Marxism, and the Leninist conception of how to mobilize the masses in revolutionary struggle, the IMG and the European Trotskyist sections and groups progressively adapted to the “physical force” tradition of the republicans, to the idea that revolutionary activity consists essentially of the activity of armed commandos.
This conception, as the founder of Irish Marxism James Connolly pointed out, is an essentially petty-bourgeois notion. It grew out of the inability of the socially heterogeneous Young Ireland Movement to develop a social program for organizing the masses. As a result they fell back on a program of military conspiracy that enabled them to avoid raising social questions. This was precisely the response of the right-wing republicans to the development of a left tendency, of a social program in the organization. This was a response, moreover, that the reactionary American Irish leaders were anxious to support and which led them to provide the Provisionals with money to buy far more arms than the Officials could afford.
In his first articles, Comrade Purdie was capable of recognizing this dynamic. But progressively the spokesmen of the IMG, and their echoers in the European Trotskyist press, came to second the claims of the Provisionals that armed action as such was the decisive question. In fact, the spokesmen of European Trotskyism came increasingly to oppose the dynamic that was pushing the Provisionals to the left, their “consistent nationalism,” and to hail the tendency that was preventing them from drawing political and social conclusions from this process – their militarism.
 

The Irish Had Better Not Call Off the ‘Armed Struggle’
This tendency reached a logical conclusion in La Gauche’s response to the Official cease-fire in May 1972. As a result of a disastrous popular reaction to an act of terrorism in Derry, the execution of a British soldier from a local family who was believed to be a spy, the Official IRA announced that they were suspending offensive operations against the British army. The shooting of Best in Derry was only the latest in a series of terrorist acts that had had disastrous results for the Officials – the Aldershot bombing, the assassination of the Unionist Senator Barnhill, the attempted assassination of the Unionist Home Minister John Taylor being other examples. The Official leadership realized that it was getting caught in a dynamic that it could not control; it was getting drawn into a terrorist campaign that had no hope of success. Small groups of IRA men were carrying out politically damaging actions in the belief that they were acting as the “Army of the People” when in fact they were under the control of no mass organization.
The cease-fire decision by no means meant the end of armed actions by the Official IRA, and members of the organization continued to be gunned down in clashes with the British army and Orange terrorists. But the Official call for a return to mass struggle apparently caused consternation in some European Trotskyist circles. After all, the organ of the largest European section of the Fourth International had expressed its support specifically for the “armed struggle” of the Irish people in its manifesto on the Bloody Sunday massacre in Derry and projected this “armed struggle” as the future for capitalist Europe:
The workers of Europe must keep their eyes fixed on the armed struggle taken up on Irish soil since 1968 against British occupation. It is not only the instability or the latent crisis of British capitalism that is illustrated here, but also that of its European confederates. Ireland is only a foretaste of the crushing of the freedoms of traditional bourgeois democracy, of the trend toward the strong state which is in preparation throughout capitalist Europe. (Rouge, February 12, 1972, L’Avenir de l’Europe.)
This statement appeared to represent a very strong determination to extend the Irish example, since Irish comrades would be hard put to find a time when “a strong state” did not exist in Ireland. When the Dublin government introduced a new special powers bill in the fall of 1972, this was interpreted in a letter to the March 1973 conference of Irish Trotskyists as another move toward the “strong state,” although the Dublin regime has resorted to mass internment more than once in its recent history.
Another example of this eagerness to extend the experience of Ireland was the label “Armed Struggle in Europe” that was put on Comrade Lawless’s tours on the continent and the desire to utilize the tour of the Official IRA representative Malachy McGurran to “make propaganda for armed struggle in Europe.” Thus, it is easy to understand the disappointment of the Belgian comrades in particular when the Official IRA turned away from being drawn into a terrorist campaign.
This disappointment was expressed in an introduction to an article on the politics of the Provisionals by Comrades Lawless and Purdie that was reprinted in the December 26, 1972, La Gauche.
When at the beginning of this year the LRT [Ligue Révolutionnaire des Travailleurs – Revolutionary Workers League, the Belgian section of the Fourth International] took up a campaign of explaining the armed struggle in Ireland, we expressed our support for both wings of the IRA – the Officials and the Provisionals. We explained then the differences between these two republican organizations, but these differences could not induce us to support one over the other. The positions taken recently by the Official wing of the IRA force us to take our distance from this organization. Above all there is the cease-fire announced by the Officials, which was motivated by the argument that if the IRA did not cease its armed struggle, it would provoke a civil war. In a situation of de facto civil war, the Officials thus have deserted the task of the military defense of the Catholic neighborhoods.
The motivation for the cease-fire given in the Official statements was incorrect and politically unclear, reflecting their inability to definitively renounce terrorism, but it was rather hasty to conclude that the Officials had abandoned the military defense of the Catholic neighborhoods. In fact, it was a slander against an organization that continued to suffer grave losses at the hands of British repression precisely because it continued to defend the Catholic neighborhoods by every means, including armed force.
This denunciation of one of the main organizations leading the struggle in Northern Ireland was an exceedingly grave step, one moreover that could have serious consequences for the Irish Trotskyists, as well as the reputation of the Fourth International in general in Ireland. How could it be taken without any international discussion or consultation whatsoever?
The only possible answer is that the IEC Majority Tendency had separated out armed action from the revolutionary process, had made support of armed activity the criterion sine qua non of a revolutionary attitude, and had furthermore applied this criterion in utter disregard of the opinion of sections of the Trotskyist movement that did not share its guerrillaist orientation. Thus such a conclusion was inevitable and automatic for the writer in La Gauche.
A supporter of the IEC Majority Tendency in the U.S., Chris Marat, followed the same logic:
This confrontation with the bourgeoisie has taken on the aspects of urban guerrilla warfare during the past three years. The struggle has been led in Derry by both sections of the IRA until last year, when the ‘officials’ took their distance from the ‘provisionals’ in order to conform to the wishes of the bourgeoisie in the South. Contrary to popular opinion there remains only one IRA.” [Emphasis in the original. The Struggle for Proletarian Parties in Capitalist Europe, SWP Discussion Bulletin, Vol. 31, no. 30, p. 7.]
Comrade Marat’s conclusion, in one respect, does run counter to the line of the IMG. For example, in the March 30 Red Mole, an IMG Political Committee statement said:
The Provisional IRA is ideologically linked to the Southern bourgeoisie, and the Officials stages theory means in practice that they are incapable of linking their explicit socialism to the national struggle.
But, nonetheless, isn’t his conclusion a logical one? If a guerrilla strategy is the criterion sine qua non of a revolutionary organization, doesn’t it follow that the Official IRA – clearly less enthusiastic about the prospects of guerrilla war, as shown by the cease-fire – is more under the hegemony of the bourgeoisie than the Provisionals who held on unswervingly to the guerrilla strategy? But what about Comrade Purdie’s analysis in 1970 of the bourgeoisie’s ability to divert a purely military struggle? It seems to have gotten lost somewhere in between.
The Red Mole’s response to the Official cease-fire was as hasty and bitter as that of La Gauche. If its dedication to the principle of “self-determination” made it view with righteous horror the very idea of criticizing any armed action the IRA might resort to, the IMG apparently felt no such qualms about issuing a blanket condemnation of an Irish group that declared its intention to depart even temporarily from a concentration on guerrilla warfare.
In its June 5, 1972, issue, The Red Mole said: “Already one section of the resistance forces, the Official Republican Army, has yielded to the pressure and announced a cease-fire.” In its July 10 issue, The Red Mole said: “The Officials grabbed a few brief headlines with their cease-fire.”
These intemperate attacks completely exposed the hypocrisy of the IMG’s claim that its explicit support for “armed struggle” in Ireland was a way of “concretising” its support for self-determination. They made it absolutely clear that what the IMG was in fact doing was refusing support to any other kind of struggle in Ireland but one that suited its conception of a guerrilla strategy. Comrade Purdie himself had moved from his position of August 1970 that the British troops were deliberately trying to provoke the IRA into armed conflicts to a position that it was the armed actions of the Provisionals in particular that were the essential obstacle to imperialist policy.
In an article in the September 15, 1971, Red Mole, Comrade Purdie argued that if the British failed to win the support of Lynch in Dublin, they would be forced to try to restore the old system of all-out repression of the Northern Catholics. Only the armed struggle of the Provisionals could prevent this:
If the situation is returned to the old order and the Catholics are defeated, the whole development of a revolutionary struggle in Ireland will be set back. It was the existence of the stalemate over the Northern question which froze Irish politics for fifty years; there is a danger that they could be recast in that reactionary mold once more.
It is for this reason that we raise the slogan ‘Victory to the IRA’; the whole future of the struggle in Ireland depends on whether the volunteers of the Official and Provisional IRA can resist British imperialism, and can prevent them from imposing their strategy on the North. It is the armed resistance to the British Army which is the key to the development of the struggle. If it fails, British imperialism will smash the possibility of any independent political action by the nationalist minority. This would prevent the development of any leadership emerging which was superior to the present leadership of the IRA in ability to develop a correct revolutionary strategy.
One consequence of this theory was a clear tendency to separate out the “military” struggle from the general anti-imperialist struggle. In a reply to a letter from IS criticizing the IMG for giving uncritical support to the IRA, the IMG Political Committee replied:
”In the case of Ireland therefore’ we have to sort out several points. Firstly does either wing of the IRA have a programme capable of destroying the hold of British imperialism on Ireland. This in fact boils down to the question of whether the IRA can destroy capitalism in Ireland. The answer to that question is clearly NO. The Provisional IRA is ideologically linked to the Southern bourgeoisie, and the Officials’ stages theory means in practice that they are incapable of linking their explicit socialism to the national struggle. Therefore any slogan which states that the IRA can destroy British imperialism is completely incorrect. Any Marxist who holds to the theory of Permanent Revolution must accept this. Nevertheless this is entirely different to saying that the IRA cannot defeat the British army. Here in practice we may think it unlikely but it is not theoretically excluded in the same sense as is the IRA destroying British imperialism. There are many examples of struggles in which imperialist armies have been defeated without capitalism being destroyed and thereby destroying imperialism. We have already noted Algeria and the case of the FLN; Aden and Cyprus are other examples.” (The Red Mole, March 30, 1972.)
While the IMG Political Committee’s analysis of the impasse of the Official IRA’s stages theory was correct, it could be objected that they themselves seemed to accept a kind of stages theory – military victory first, political victory later. In this conception, what becomes of the permanent revolution in Ireland? Can the national bourgeoisie or forces “ideologically linked” to it win the political independence and unity of the country or not? If they can, wouldn’t that justify the Officials’ fear of the national bourgeoisie co-opting the struggle in the North, the fear precisely that led subjectively revolutionary leaders like Malachy McGurran, for instance, who does not hold the stages theory, to adopt a politically sectarian attitude toward the mass national struggle? Furthermore, if a purely military victory over British imperialism is possible, how could the IMG oppose the purely militarist conceptions of the Provisional leadership and the bulk of the rank and file, whose conception of the struggle is limited to the desire to defeat the repressive forces of imperialism and oust them from the country?
 

Reformism Turned Upside Down: An Ultra-Left Revision of Permanent Revolution
Moreover, the IMG not only exaggerated the power of bourgeois nationalism; it exaggerated the potency of the pro-imperialist bourgeoisie of the North. Not only could nationalists “ideologically linked” to the Southern bourgeoisie defeat British imperialism; the Orange bourgeoisie itself was powerful enough to balk the policy of the British capitalist class and prevent it from achieving a political solution in the North. It was on this premise that the IMG based its contention that the British could not isolate the guerrillas from the Catholic population. Any concessions would be opposed by the Orange bourgeoisie.
In its August 7, 1972, issue, for example The Red Mole wrote:
But protestant extremism remains a block to any progress in Ireland. In Lenadoon Avenue, the Provisionals manoeuvred the British into a choice between taking on the UDA and bursting the bubble, or capitulating to their pressure. Predictably British imperialism lined up once more with Orange reaction, despite their long term desire to ‘normalise’ sectarianism out of Six County politics.
From this capitulation the rest follows. It is not possible to give in to one side in the Six Counties without pushing hard against the other. The Provisionals having gained a new position of strength it was necessary for the British to attempt to gain the ascendancy over them in order to avoid being pushed against the UDA again. Since this could not be achieved politically the superior technical resources and fire power of the British Army had to be asserted. The invasion was not only in line with this, but it was a very substantial scrap which could be thrown to the wolves of the Protestant right.
An editorial in the same issue said:
Whitelaw failed because in the Six Counties any concessions given or promised to the catholic minority will always result in the mobilisation of the mass of the protestants determined to retain their ascendancy and sectarian institutions.
It is true that the outdated ideology and fanaticism of the Orange population makes them an unwieldy instrument of repression for British imperialism, which must, however roughly it has to handle them at times, still retain their loyalty. But this is not a new problem. It has existed for the entire history of Orangeism. In fact, for a whole period in the nineteenth century British imperialism found itself forced to outlaw the traditional Orange processions, whose purpose is to intimidate the Catholic population. The dilemma of British imperialism was stated already by the magistrate Thomas Knox in 1796:
As to the Orangemen, we have a rather difficult card to play; they must not be entirely discountenanced – on the contrary, we must in a certain degree uphold them, for with all their licentiousness, on them we must rely for the preservation of our lives and properties, should critical times occur. We do not suffer them to parade, but at the same time applaud them for loyal professions. (Hereward Senior, Orangeism in Ireland and Britain 1795–1836, p. 45)
Furthermore, the “licentiousness” of the Orangemen in the 1790s played a major role in driving the Catholics into the arms of the revolutionists and provoking the revolution of 1798.
However, by attributing to the Orangemen effective independence from British bourgeois hegemony and the control of the British ruling class, the IMG departed fundamentally from the principles of class analysis. Moreover, as a result of this eclectic schematism they underestimated the ability of the British ruling class to maneuver and exaggerated the effectiveness of a “blunt instrument,” that is, the apolitical terrorism of the Provisionals.
It is the armed struggle which has created the situation in which imperialism has been unable to impose a solution, and which has underpinned the self-confidence of the minority. (Bob Purdie, Ireland Unfree, p. 63)
The centrality of the terrorist campaign was defended, moreover, by exaggerating the ability of British imperialism to democratise Northern Ireland. It was wrong, according to Comrade Purdie, to try to mobilize the masses around the democratic demands most acutely felt by them because imperialism was ready to meet these demands. What imperialism could not accept was “armed struggle” that kept it from “stabilizing” the situation. Against the Officials’ contention that civil rights was the key issue around which to organize in the North, Comrade Purdie argued in an article in the October 16, 1972 Red Mole:
There are three dangerous elements in this argument. Firstly, it is true that the British have refused to grant the demands of the Civil Rights Association, for such simple concessions as a Bill of Rights. But this is not because they are opposed to civil rights. On the contrary, they have been anxious to ‘normalise’ the North for a long time. This is indeed essential for their long term plans to re-orient their relationships with the gombeen bourgeoisie in the South. They resist such demands because they are trying to re-establish stability, and they know that concessions to the Catholic minority on that scale would deepen the mass Orange resistance.
So they balance delicately, while trying to achieve their main priority at this time; the de-mobilization of the Catholic resistance. If they achieve this, through militarily smashing the Provos, and/or exhausting the minority, it is quite possible that they will introduce sweeping reforms in the North, as a means of sealing up the crack in the dam which nearly flooded them. Such reforms would aim at buying off the catholic resistance, and eliminating some of the structural factors which have made the catholic revolt so powerful. It is doubtful, even given the above conditions, that Britain could actually solve the Northern Ireland problem, through internal reform, but at least they could create a period of stabilisation.
In this situation the Officials’ schema would have two disastrous results.. It would mistake as a victory of the minority, what would in fact be a consolidation and strengthening of British imperialism. And, more important, they would not be prepared for the inevitable smashing of the resistance organisations which would accompany such a strategy. The Official Republicans would go down along with the Provos, PD, et al. and despite the ‘democracy’ would he unable to advocate any ‘sort of Ireland.’” (Emphasis in original.)
Fundamentally, Comrade Purdie’s theory was simply a left version of the concept held by the centrist CRA leaders that the British bourgeoisie essentially wanted to introduce normal bourgeois democracy. The conclusions that they drew were that they could use the interests of the British bourgeoisie as a lever against the Orange state and that the basic problem was to force the London government to grant these reforms in a “hot” way, that is, in response to mass pressure, rather than in a cold way, from above. According to Comrade Purdie, the problem for revolutionists was to prevent the British bourgeoisie from offering such reforms by blocking “stabilization” through the use of terrorism.
Both the approach of the centrist CRA leaders and that of Comrade Purdie deny the basic premise of the theory of permanent revolution, that is, that in the age of imperialism the imperialist bourgeoisie cannot carry out the tasks of eliminating the repressive instruments of rule characteristic of more backward social systems. The caste system in Ireland is one of the principal props of reaction not only in the smaller but in the larger of the British Isles. The notion that the British capitalist class is desirous or capable of eliminating it would mean that it still had the potential for carrying out major democratic tasks. Comrade Purdie’s concept, therefore, represents a serious revision of a fundamental element of Trotskyist theory.
But doesn’t Comrade Purdie avoid this? He says, for instance:
It is doubtful, even given the above conditions, that Britain could actually solve the Northern Ireland problem, through internal reform, but at least they could create a period of stabilization.
Doesn’t this qualification protect him against the charge of revisionism? Well, it does seem to be evidence of a general knowledge of the implications of the theory of permanent revolution. But what role does this qualification play in his overall conception? If the British ruling class cannot solve “the Northern Ireland problem, through internal reform,” why would a period of stabilization following democratic reforms be so fatal? Wouldn’t such victories encourage the Catholic minority to demand more? Wouldn’t they encourage all the workers to look toward the dismantling of the archaic repressive society of Northern Ireland? If after centuries of repression, the Catholic people won important democratic concessions, why should this be the signal for them to turn over their most dedicated defenders to the jailers of imperialism and the Orange caste system? Wouldn’t giving such democratic concessions require the imperialists and their local supporters to grant a large measure of political freedom to the revolutionists to explain to the masses the real “solution to the Northern Ireland” problem, and in conditions favorable for the assimilation of this message?
If Comrade Purdie were convinced that the British ruling class is really unable to solve the Northern Ireland problem through reforms, it would be hard to understand why he apparently thinks it is so essential to maintain the kind of instability represented by the Provisional terrorist campaign. This concept of chaos at any cost is in fact rather typical of social groups irrevocably condemned by capitalist development, such as small farmers in the United States and elsewhere. But a Marxist would have to recognize that chronic unrest of the type that has existed in Northern Ireland since the collapse of the mass civil rights movement does not necessarily favor revolution. In fact, without clear political perspectives, it can exhaust and demoralize the majority of the population and prepare them to accept any “solution.” Such a concept, then, that a decline or halt in the guerrilla struggle would mean inevitably the elimination of the revolutionists in Northern Ireland seems rather to represent the kind of desperation that comes from a feeling that capitalism has the power to solve its problems in its own way and not a conviction that imperialism is in a profound crisis. In short, Comrade Purdie’s conception is an essentially reformist one turned upside down, that is, a classically ultra-left approach that represents a revision of the theory of permanent revolution.
Comrade Purdie’s method here, moreover, is reminiscent of that illustrated by the document In Defence of Leninism: In Defence of the Fourth International, which says:
Democratic demands will normally not be granted by the decaying imperialist bourgeoisie. But nothing organically, economically, socially, (i. e., in terms of basic class relations), prevents the bourgeoisie from granting them as a ‘lesser evil’ in order to avoid a mass movement approaching a victorious socialist revolution. Organically the ‘national bourgeoisie’ of the colonial world cannot solve the agrarian question without to a large extent expropriating itself. There is no fundamental obstacle of the same kind to prevent the realisation of free abortion on demand, or freedom of the press, or even a democratic electoral law in an imperialist country. Given a powerful mass upsurge with a revolutionary potential, the imperialist bourgeoisie can grant these concessions precisely in order to avoid expropriation.
In normal circumstances, imperialism was in the past never willing to grant national independence to Quebec or Ireland. But given a pre-revolutionary situation, a powerful upsurge of the workers’ struggle, a concrete danger of a ‘workers’ republic’ being set up, there is no funda[mental] interest which would prevent imperialism from transforming any nationality into independent puppet states.
For these reasons the danger of a mass struggle in an imperialist country based solely on demands for national self-determination being absorbed by the bourgeoisie is very real. That is why revolutionary marxists must constantly combine in their propaganda and agitation, demands expressing the right of national self-determination for oppressed minorities with demands of a proletarian and socialist character in order to make this absorption much more difficult. This is what Trotsky meant when he argued that we must prevent democratic demands in imperialist countries from becoming ‘a democratic noose fastened to the neck of the proletariat.’
Trotsky’s method, however, in contrast to that of Comrades Purdie and Germain was to try to impel struggles for democratic demands out of the context of the capitalist system by stimulating the natural dynamic that they have in the age of imperialism, not to try to slip in some specially concocted anti-capitalist vaccine from the start. The latter method is a subjectivist and voluntarist one and not a scientific one. So, if Comrade Purdie’s program of chaos at any cost in order to prevent the British imperialists from co-opting the democratic demands of the Northern Irish Catholics does not seem on the surface to correspond to the “demands of a proletarian and socialist character” recommended by Comrade Germain for the same purpose, it clearly represents an outgrowth of the same logic. And this conclusion was undoubtedly made all the easier for Comrade Purdie by the increasing tendency of the Ninth World Congress majority to identify “armed struggle” in the abstract with revolutionary struggle.
Comrades Purdie and Germain’s method is a formalistic, schematic one. Under pressure of a mass upsurge, imperialism may even admit reforms that go against its fundamental class interests, such as the dual power that existed for a whole period in Austria after World War I. The importance of such reforms is their place in the process of struggle for the completion of the democratic revolution, to which capitalism as a whole is now opposed. And the fact remains that the mass struggle in the North of Ireland was touched off by mobilizations in support of demands for simple democratic rights. For four years a violent struggle has been going on, necessitating the stationing of 20,000 British troops in Ireland, marked by the most acute crises such as a general strike in the South in February 1972 and serious dangers to the stability of the Dublin regime on at least two occasions, seizure of Republic of Ireland ships on the high seas by British vessels and even the threat at times of confrontations between British and Irish armed forces. And still the North has not been “democratised.”
Furthermore, this method seems to have already led Comrade Purdie into making a serious miscalculation of the British ruling class’s objectives. In his pamphlet Ireland Unfree, he writes:
The strategy of the Irish revolution must therefore focus on sharpening the struggle in the North, to create the greatest possible crisis for British Imperialism, and the Irish bourgeoisie North and South. The main single factor which would attain this would be the smashing of Stormont [the Belfast parliament] and the complete disruption of the State, which would also involve the destruction of the Unionist Party as an instrument of British domination in Ireland. The unfolding events of the last three years have revealed that British Imperialism is willing to take any steps possible to preserve these two institutions, and that they are desperately afraid of the impetus which their eradication would give to the minority, and indeed to the whole Irish people. It is true that a small section of the British ruling class has been pressing for direct rule, but despite its ability to speak through the pages of the Sunday Times it is still a minority, even the Labour Party leaders are united with the Tories in trying to preserve Stormont and the Unionists. They would like to use the Unionist Party, as the only viable bourgeois political formation in the North, to give reforms to the minority, they are quite unwilling that the minority should take them. They hope also in a new deal with Irish capitalism, to use the Unionist Party as a lever against Fianna Fail, whose Bonapartist nature and whose loose grip on the reigns [sic] of the power makes it a not completely reliable instrument.
If Stormont were made unviable, and was swept out of the way, it would cause tremendous problems for British imperialism, it would give new confidence to the minority, and would stimulate the 26 County workers and small farmers, while also causing difficulties for Fianna Fail. We must be clear that these difficulties would not constitute an insuperable crisis for the British and Irish bourgeoisies, but they would open up new opportunities for advancing the revolution. Even if direct rule were imposed this could give imperialism at most a temporary respite, like that achieved by the Labour Government between August 1969 and July 1970. They could not fulfill the expectations of the minority, since they could not overcome the resistance to reform by the Protestant ultras, this would create the basis for a new and more effective struggle. (Pages 61–62.)
On March 25, 1972, only a month or two after the publication of this pamphlet, the British abolished Stormont and imposed direct rule. It was regarded as a victory by the minority, which, like Comrade Purdie, falsely believed that the main block to democratisation was the Orange apparatus. The change was actually rather slight; direct rule began in fact when British troops were first sent in. Comrade Purdie seems also to have forgotten that in the last analysis the state is a body of armed men, and the armed men present were under the direct command of the British government.
The immediate effect of direct rule was not to stimulate struggle but to touch off a peace movement that forced first the Official IRA and then the Provisionals to declare a cease-fire (although a brief one in the latter case). The British role of “arbiter” between Catholic and Protestant was reinforced and they were given considerably more flexibility to maneuver. Despite the spectacular resumption of the Provisonal campaign, in July 1972, hailed by the IMG as a new stage of the struggle, it is how absolutely clear that the situation has been steadily deteriorating since the introduction of direct rule, and has presently reached its lowest ebb since 1968. The new governmental formulas are, of course, not the only factor in this. But it seems clear that the demand for the abolition of Stormont as such could not effectively educate the nationalist-minded masses about the real source of oppression, was not a serious obstacle to the maneuvers of British imperialism, and the actual granting of this demand did not advance the struggle of the Catholic minority. In short it appears undeniable at this point that Comrade Purdie made a fundamental error in his assessment of this demand. In his search for the most radical proposal, the one that would cause the greatest “disruption” of the state, he settled on the one that fitted in precisely with the long-term strategy of the British ruling class. This error went deeper than a simple misjudgment of the conjunctural relationship of forces. It was the result of a revision of the theory of the permanent revolution that he picked up from the IEC Majority Tendency.
Comrade Purdie’s overestimation of the capacity of British imperialism to carry out democratic reforms led him to exaggerate the differences between the Orange bourgeoisie and the imperialists. From such a wrong judgment, it followed that calling on the central imperialist bourgeoisie to politically expropriate the Orange caste was the way to exacerbate the contradiction, to remove one of the important barriers to the national liberation struggle of the Catholic population. The imperialists’ assuming full and direct political control, according to this notion, was actually progressive. This concept led Comrade Purdie away from keeping the emphasis on the democratic demands of the oppressed people and most importantly on the demand for British withdrawal, from his revolutionary duty of constantly explaining that Britain has no right in Ireland and can perform no useful role there. Instead of constantly repeating “no trust in the imperialists, rely on your own strength,” Comrade Purdie came around by the back door to encouraging illusions in the capacity of capitalism to play a progressive role. In this process, an underestimation of the revolutionary dynamic of democratic demands went hand in hand with an underestimation of the political power of mass struggle. The result was that the need to mobilize the masses was obscured by an eclectic notion of pitting one section of the ruling class against another.
In his underestimation of the political power of mass struggle, Comrade Purdie very clearly followed the line laid out by the leaders of the Ninth World Congress majority. In an article in the September 15, 1972, Red Mole, for instance, he says:
It is the armed resistance to the British Army which is the key to the development of the struggle. If it fails, British imperialism will smash the possibility of any independent political action by the nationalist minority.
This is almost an exact parallel of the main argument used by the IEC Majority Tendency to defend the guerrilla orientation in Latin America. For example, in In Defence of Leninism; In Defence of the Fourth International, Comrade Germain says:
”Under the given circumstances, with the given social and economic instability in Latin America, the profound influence of the Cuban revolution on the vanguard of the mass movement, the decline of control of the traditional working class leaderships on that same vanguard, the explosive character of mass mobilizations which lead to rapid confrontations with the army, the emergence of the army as the mainstay of bourgeois power, not only materially but also politically, and its relative strength as opposed to the extreme fragility of all political formations of the ruling classes, a long period of gradual rise of mass struggles under conditions of relative (be it decaying) bourgeois democracy is extremely unlikely (except, as we said, in the case of Chile). The most likely variant is that a head-on collision between that mass movement and the army is unavoidable after a short period of emergence of mass explosions, a collision which could lead to a prolonged civil war, if the mass movement isn’t crushed by capitulation or disastrous defeats. Even if the enemy succeeds momentarily in establishing a military dictatorship, such a civil war could go on, temporarily take the form of guerrilla warfare, and help to overcome the lull in the mass struggles after the partial defeat. Whatever may be the various combinations of forms of struggle, it is necessary to tirelessly prepare the masses for such armed confrontations, which are unavoidable, so that the workers and poor peasants should not face the army without arms and without preparation.” (Pages 4–5)
For a very different country, quite a distance from Latin America, on the threshold of Europe in both the geographical and socio-political sense, Comrade Purdie came to the same conclusion: “... the armed resistance ... is the key. ... If it fails, British imperialism will smash the possibility of any independent political action by the nationalist minority.”
This extension of the thesis of the Ninth World Congress Resolution on Latin America to a new context shows quite clearly that what is involved in the dispute over the guerrilla line is not a concrete analysis or the specific perspectives of socialist revolution in Latin America but a certain political conception. What the line of the Ninth World Congress Majority and now the IEC Majority Tendency represents, in fact, is an underestimation of the political impact of mass struggle and a tendency to reduce the area of conflict between the masses and the state to the arena of armed action alone and finally to replace a program for arming the masses with a strategy based on small commando groups isolated from the mass struggle. This inexorable logic is well illustrated by the IMG’s reaction to the Bloody Sunday Massacre of January 31, 1972, in Derry.
 
(Part 3)
 

Foley: The Test of Ireland (Part 1)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

The Test of Ireland

Gerry Foley
The Test of Ireland
(Part 1)
* * *

The British Section Follows the Line of the Ninth Congress
The crisis of British imperialist rule in Ireland developing over the past four years has represented a decisive challenge to the British section of the Fourth International. Specifically, it has posed three urgent tasks for British revolutionists: (1) building a mass movement to defend the Irish fighters against imperialist repression; (2) politically assisting the Irish resistance organizations; (3) aiding in the development of an Irish section of the Fourth International that could apply and propagate the tenets of revolutionary Marxism in Ireland. Today it is glaringly evident that the British section of the Fourth International has failed to accomplish any of these three tasks. Moreover – what is still graver – the responsibility for this failure does not lie with the leadership of the British section alone.
The line of the IMG leadership toward the Irish crisis and the tasks flowing from it has clearly followed the logic of the adaptation to ultra-leftism by the majority at the Ninth World Congress. Furthermore, the ultra-left tendency of the IMG on this question has been fostered and hardened by the factionalism of the Ninth Congress majority in its defense of the guerrilla warfare orientation and in its method of justifying adapting to ultra-left moods in the youth radicalization.
This, process is exemplified by the fact that the IMG line on Ireland has been carried over into the press of the European sections, led by supporters of the Ninth World Congress guerrilla line, without any discussion in the official leadership bodies of the International. The experience and positions of those sections in North America and Oceania that oppose the guerrilla warfare line have been ignored by the European sections despite the impact of the revolutionary process in Ireland upon the immigrant communities across the ocean. Most of the material support for the guerrilla campaign so enthusiastically acclaimed by the supporters of the IEC majority comes from the United States and Canada. Even the attacks of the American government on alleged suppliers of the guerrilla campaign in Ireland have been passed over in silence by the press of the sections in Europe. Nothing has been printed by any organ of the European sections and groups that would indicate that the struggle in Ireland was not an exclusively “European” affair or that any section of the Fourth International other than the IMG had the opportunity of working directly with the Irish national liberation movement.
Thus, the leaderships that supported the adaptation to guerrillaism in Latin America have automatically extended the logic of this position to Ireland, developing an increasingly pro-terrorist line and apparently feeling justified in disregarding the views of the Trotskyists that opposed the Ninth World Congress turn. In short, guerrillaism became so central to their conception of revolutionary strategy, such a principled question, that in the case of Ireland conclusions were drawn automatically and no need was felt to even discuss them with those comrades who rejected the guerrilla strategy.
Very quickly the adaptation to ultra-leftism reflected in the Ninth World Congress resolution on Latin America came to permeate all the work of the majority on the Irish question, especially the section most directly involved. Before the Ninth World Congress, the IMG succeeded in organizing a demonstration of 100,000 persons against the war in Vietnam, against a war in which Britain had no direct part, by building a broad united front and developing a mass orientation in opposition to every organized tendency on the British left. The demonstration, in fact, helped to encourage the mass civil-rights demonstrations that initiated the revolutionary upsurge in Ireland.
But after adopting the “vanguardist” orientation of the Ninth World Congress majority, the IMG found itself unable to contribute to building a mass movement against the imperialist repression carried out by its own government against a people only a few miles from Britain who were officially citizens of the United Kingdom and had over a million relatives in the key centers of British industry. The IMG shifted to romantic and ultra-left sloganizing, trying to outdo all the other groups in the left in this. It found itself in splendid isolation as a result, not only in opposition to the other left groupings but also to the Irish organizations and to the dynamic of the mass anti-imperialist movement.
 

How the IMG Changed from a Mass Orientation to Vanguardism
The past five years of the IMG’s work on the Irish question in Britain has three phases. The first was a transitional one from the mass orientation of 1968 to the vanguardist notions of the Ninth World Congress majority. In the initial period, the IMG press continued to put the emphasis on the need for a “mass” solidarity movement. Thus, the April 15, 1970, issue of The Red Mole declared, under the heading Our Tasks:
The task for revolutionaries in Britain is to oppose British imperialism, to demand that the troops be withdrawn and to demand self-determination for Ireland. As revolutionaries in an imperialist oppressor country we should at all times remember that we can offer solidarity to the Irish but that we are dealing with an oppressed nation which has to find its own liberation.
Only by the most principled internationalism can we be of assistance to our Irish comrades. The record of some sections of the English left has been a poor one so far as the failure to construct a mass-based solidarity movement demonstrates.
Under the heading What Is To Be Done in Britain, the July 1970 Red Mole broadsheet No. 3 declared:
We in Britain who support this struggle against British imperialism must not fail. There must be an all-out effort to build an effective solidarity movement on an all-inclusive basis, on the principle of self-determination for Ireland. The great reserves of Irish workers in Britain are ready to be mobilised in such a campaign. And in mobilising them we will begin to mobilise their British fellow workers, not to speak of the Black Workers. In carrying out our revolutionary duty to the Irish comrades we are at the same time preparing for the war against British imperialism in Ireland to be brought home to be fought in the lair of the beast itself.
Self-determination for Ireland!
Withdraw all British Troops now!
Release Bernadette Devlin and all Irish political prisoners now!
In the August 1970 Red Mole, Bob Purdie wrote:
Last year confusion about the real role of the Troops was rife on the British left. The situation today confirms the position of those who said that they had gone in to get the barricades down and to smash dual power in Derry and Belfast and that any temporary help/protection they gave to the Catholics against an Orange pogrom was with this in mind. Today there can be no confusion about their role, but the crime of the British left is inaction. The crisis in Northern Ireland deepens every day, and every day brings closer the inevitable confrontation between British Imperialism, and the forces of National Liberation in Ireland. What is needed now is to build a mass solidarity movement to aid that struggle.
The change from this correct orientation to an overt vanguardist approach seems to have been completed over the winter of 1970–71. In an article in the April 7, 1971, issue of The Red Mole, Comrade Purdie added a third slogan for the solidarity movement: “Support the Armed Action of the Irish People.”
Why was this necessary? Why were the slogans of “Self-determination for the Irish People” and “Withdraw British Troops” no longer sufficient in Britain? Didn’t they both place the blame for the violence in Ireland squarely on the British forces and didn’t they support the right of the Irish people to employ any means to solve their own problems? Didn’t they do this in terms that were understandable to the largest possible number of people in Britain? Didn’t the adding of the demand for explicit support for “armed action” ask the British people to support a specific tactic in Ireland and, by extension, support the groups utilizing such a tactic? Didn’t it therefore demand that the British left intervene in the struggle in Ireland in support of a certain tactic and a certain group? The whole history of the IMG’s solidarity work indicates that this was exactly the effect of this policy.
This approach was sectarian within the context of Britain, and by discriminating increasingly among the forces fighting British imperialism – and discriminating not even on the basis of political criteria but on the basis of a tactic elevated to the position of a strategy, if not a principle, it tended more and more to break with the principled support of self-determination expressed in earlier statements. This development went hand in hand with a shift in the conception of the role of the solidarity movement.
For example, in an article in the September 1, 1971, Red Mole, Pat Jordan wrote:
Criticisms related to the tactics of the Irish militants must be expressed in a fraternal manner and largely confined to analytical material designed to influence their thinking. To be concrete: should a section of the IRA decide to indulge in an urban guerrilla campaign in selected parts of Britain, the thrust of the argumentation should be to explain why they have been forced along this road. We should not hesitate to express our support for their right to use these methods and we should oppose the hypocrisy of those who are ‘shocked’ by this development (explaining very clearly the implicit racialism inherent in this ‘shock’). When we express our doubts about such a tactic, it should be on the basis that we do not think it is the best method to defeat British imperialism (in general, urban guerrilla warfare should only be waged where the mass of the local population at least acquiesce in its use).
Any other course is to weaken and confuse our solidarity with the Irish people in their struggle against the British ruling class. But it is not just a question of duty – our task is to build a revolutionary cadre force in Britain. This means building a body of opinion which is prepared to use revolutionary violence in Britain to overthrow the British ruling class. It goes without saying that it is not conceivable that we can create a force which is prepared for revolutionary struggle in Britain if it is not prepared to support the armed struggle of others against that same ruling class.
Although the emphasis is still on defending the right of self-determination of the Irish, the thrust is subtly shifting toward a conception of using the example of the Irish struggle to build a “revolutionary cadre” in Britain by demanding support for the tactic of “armed struggle,” that is, urban guerrilla warfare, which is moreover separated from any political context. The example of “armed struggle” in Ireland is supposed to equip a “revolutionary cadre” in Britain to face armed action when the opportunity arises, presumably as the result of its exhilarating moral effect. Comrade Jordan does not say that by building a successful mass movement to force withdrawal of British troops, the British left can educate the workers in a revolutionary perspective, accentuate the contradictions in British society, and train revolutionists in the techniques of organizing the masses so that they can lead the class struggle to the stage of challenging the capitalist order. He says that by fully identifying with the “armed struggle” in Ireland a “revolutionary cadre” will steel its nerve sufficiently to initiate “armed struggle” in its own country.
The implications of this essentially moralistic notion of the role of armed struggle, as well as the sectarianism and ultra-leftism that flowed from separating out armed action in the abstract from the overall struggle and exalting it as a principle became all too evident in the following months.
In The Red Mole’s articles on the question of building a solidarity movement, the emphasis shifted from the need for an effective mass movement in defense of the Irish people to a certain conception of a need to sacrifice breadth for “principle.” As an editorial in the October 5, 1971, Red Mole put it:
If the Irish struggle is to succeed, the British left must fulfil its revolutionary duty. This means a struggle to construct a mass movement in Britain, essentially of British militants, in meaningful solidarity with the Irish struggle. [Emphasis in the original]
In the test of the last three years, only the International Marxist Group and The Red Mole have put forward a programme which corresponds with this. All other tendencies have, alas, been found wanting.
This tone of sectarian boasting and exclusivism is quite familiar on the. British left. In particular, it brings to mind the following statement:
Only the Socialist Labour League and the International Committee opposed direct rule from a class standpoint ...
Only the International Committee and its sections came out unequivocally against the intervention of British troops in Ireland from the very first minute. Against every other tendency we asserted that this was a basic question of principle. (Workers Press, June 28, 1972)
In the October 16, 1970, issue of The Red Mole, an article by Dave Kendall had also put “principle” in the forefront.
The task in Britain is to build an effective solidarity movement. To this end, revolutionary militants must fight for the adoption of principled positions toward the Irish struggle by the British Left which has a lamentable record on this score. The Irish Solidarity Campaign (ISC) must be an important step toward this end and every revolutionary organisation should offer its active support.
The program of the ISC printed in the same issue included three slogans, however, that overstepped the demand for self-determination:

Opposition to those fostering religious sectarianism in Ireland and preventing working class unity.
 
Support of the right of Irish workers to arm and organise in self-defence of their homes from attack by sectarian gangs, the military and police.
 
Support for popular movements, North and South, fighting political and economic domination by British imperialism.

As a whole, the program of the ISC seemed to represent a compromise between ultra-leftists of an economistic bent who demanded that the British solidarity movement support only those forces that were fighting capitalism as such and ultra-leftists of a more guerrillaist inclination who insisted that “armed struggle” was “the key.” An organization built on such a basis could not but be both sectarian and unstable. The axis of debate had been shifted from defending the right of self-determination to defending specific political tendencies in Ireland. Likewise, discussions of principle became divorced from the question of how to build the broadest and most powerful movement.
 

From the United Front to a New Brand of Sectarianism
As a result of its sectarian character, the ISC became a sectarian battleground, and when the IMG was left in possession of the name, it found that it had captured itself and isolated itself from the mainstream of the solidarity movement. From the sterile ground of the abandoned ISC, the IMG sought to oppose the mass movement that arose in spite of its policy and to a large extent in spite of the conscious policy of all the British left groups.
When the first mass demonstration developed in support of Irish self-determination, The Red Mole’s comment in its November 15, 1971, issue was as follows:
The October 31st demonstration was an important step forward in the building of a campaign in this country in support of the Irish struggle. It showed by its size (at least 20,000) that there is now a basis for a mass campaign on this issue. And more importantly, it also showed (for instance, in the slogans taken up on the demonstration) that there is wide support for a campaign with an explicit solidarity position, i.e. one which goes beyond the two demands of the Anti-Internment League (end internment, withdraw the troops) to a position of solidarity with those forces who are leading the struggle against British imperialism.
Why is this last point so important? It is important because only by taking a position of unconditional solidarity with those forces which are leading the masses in the struggle to defeat British imperialism – i.e. the IRA – can we demonstrate quite unequivocally that we ourselves are for the defeat of our own ruling class. Many genuine revolutionaries believe that the demand for the immediate withdrawal of British troops is adequate for this purpose, and indeed it is essential to include this demand in the platform of any campaign. But this demand on its own is unfortunately ambiguous: it can very easily be taken up and transformed into a ‘Bring the boys home’ campaign based on liberal issues with only a negative impact. Such a campaign avoids the issues of the class struggle, can exist completely independently of them, and in its worst form can even divert resources from that struggle. A solidarity campaign is necessary because only on this basis can a campaign on Ireland become an integral part of the class struggle in this country, and only by becoming an integral part of the class struggle in this country can it actually have any effect. Only by posing the question of solidarity with those struggling for the defeat of British Imperialism, and pointing out that such a defeat for the British ruling class would be a positive victory for the labour movement, can we hope to mobilize sections of the liberal movement on a basis which would change the relationship of class forces in this country. Only in this way can we demonstrate that working class internationalism is not a matter of sentiment but a concrete necessity in the fight against imperialism. As we call for victory to the NLF rather than for peace in Vietnam, because we are for the actual defeat|of imperialism in Vietnam, so it is necessary at the present conjuncture, when the military struggle between the IRA and the British Army is of decisive importance in the North of Ireland, that we come out openly for victory to the IRA. At the present stage of the struggle this is a logical and necessary development flowing out of the slogans, particularly that of national self-determination, on which we have consistently campaigned. We would argue, therefore, that it is necessary to transform the present campaign against internment and for the withdrawal of British troops into a campaign which is in active solidarity with those leading the fight against British imperialism. We believe not only that it is necessary to take up this position, but that the October 31st demonstration showed very clearly the possibility of building a mass campaign on this basis. The IMG and the Spartacus League will continue to work in and support the Anti-Internment League, but with the perspective of winning it to a solidarity position. And in the meantime, we shall also continue to support and build the Irish Solidarity Campaign, as part of the process of building a national campaign in solidarity with those leading the struggle against British imperialism in Ireland, the IRA.
In this statement, the vanguardist orientation of the IMG reached full flower. In the context of Britain, where it was essential to build an effective mass movement in support of the right of the Irish people to self-determination, the sectarian and ultra-left character of this position was absolutely clear. The IMG rejected the perspective of a mass campaign for withdrawal of troops. Why? Because it would necessarily be based on “liberal” issues; that is, the masses demonstrating for withdrawal of troops, for preventing the imperialist government from using its principal instrument of coercion and repression, would not necessarily start off being for revolution in Britain.
A solidarity campaign is necessary because only on this basis can a campaign on Ireland become an integral part of the class struggle in this country, and only by becoming an integral part of the class struggle in this country can it actually have effect.
The IMG’s position was ultimatistic because it denied the masses the opportunity to learn through experience and demanded that they enter into action only on the basis of explicit support for revolution. It was verbalistic because it held that by raising more “revolutionary slogans” the solidarity movement would have a more powerful effect, and it ignored the effect that a mass movement able to appeal to broad layers of the masses and exacerbate the contradictions of British society could have in staying the hand of imperialism and opening up a crisis of its mechanisms of control.
Like most ultra-left sectarian conceptions, this vanguardist approach of the IMG was essentially opportunistic and parasitic. The IMG did not seek to mobilize masses of people in its own country against its own government in support of the Irish people’s right to self-determination. It sought instead to identify itself with the fighters in Ireland more closely than any other force, to feed off their prestige in the circles of youth impatient for a revolutionary example. It said in effect:
We are the only ones who have the guts to say here in Britain everything that the fighters in Ireland are saying (and eventually do everything that they are doing); we represent the same thing here in Britain that they do in Ireland and therefore we must be taken seriously.
 

Forming a Revolutionary Pole of Attraction – Sectarianism in a New Costume
It is hardly surprising that the organizations actually fighting in Ireland found the attitude of the IMG at best a dubious compliment. The guerrillas whose positions were supported uncritically by the IMG might find such political defense useful at times, especially in their disputes with advocates of other tactics, but it was clear that the vicarious revolutionism of their imitators in Britain did not offer much help in the struggle against their principal opponent, British imperialism.
This contradiction seems to explain the following piteous lament by a member of the Manchester ISC published in the March 13, 1972, issue of the Red Mole.
I read with great interest the letter from the Lancaster comrades which appeared in The Red Mole 37, and I took particular interest in the part which I.S. played in the expulsion of the I.S.C. from the Irish ‘Solidarity Alliance’ on account of the principled stand which the I.S.C. took in regard to the slogan ‘Victory to the I.R.A.’
Up until 4 weeks ago, the Manchester branch of the I.S.C. of which I am a member consisted of the International Marxist Group, Workers Fight, I.S., Revolutionary Workers Party, Clann na hEireann [the British support group of the Official IRA], and about fifteen individual members, e.g. Irish nurses, building labourers, etc. From the formation of this branch, Clann na hEireann had been opposed to the slogan ‘Victory to the I.R.A.’ and four weeks ago they pulled out of the I.S.C. and after talks with the Provisional Sinn Fein decided to set up an Anti-Internment League.”
This blow was made even more bitter by the fact that “unity” had apparently been achieved in a nice trade-off whereby the I.S. accepted the slogan of “Victory to the IRA” in return for the IMG accepting its slogan of support for the “socialist forces” in Ireland.
Until this point, things had been going well with the branch and its members had been carrying out various activities such as pickets, leafletting and holding public meetings. A compromise had also been reached with I.S. whereby they accepted the slogan ‘Victory to the I.R.A.’ provided the other groups accepted the slogan ‘For a 32-County Workers Republic’ and this was agreed on.
In the same issue, Bob Purdie complained bitterly about the ISC in Glasgow being left in the lurch by IS and Clann na hEireann after an October 16, 1971, demonstration that had resulted in a number of arrests and fines. After leaving the ISC, Purdie explained, IS refused even to attend a unity meeting, giving this “tragic” reply to the IMG’s invitation:
”IS comrades will not be attending your meeting tomorrow night for the following reasons:

It is being convened under the auspices of an organization which does not have an existence independent of the IMG.
 
For real united front, action the forces coming together must discuss directly and honestly the platform and perspectives of such work. By deciding to issue your invitation under the auspices of the non-existent ISC you indicate that your organisation has already decided on the promotion of a particularly sectarian kind of united front in which we decline to participate.
 
We are already working closely with members of other organisations and uncommitted comrades around the slogans ‘End Internment’ and ‘Withdraw the British Troops’, and for the adoption of internees in Glasgow. We believe that your failure to indicate that the IMG now has a new attitude towards united front work means that the work we are now involved in would be jeopardized if we become involved in the kind of sectarian battles that your proposal promises ...

In defending the ISC against the IS’s attack, Comrade Purdie pointed to an IS internal document indicating that this sectarian opportunistic organization had no great interest in forming a broad support movement But at the same time, one point in the internal document tried to justify this sectarian attitude by pointing to an ever greater sectarianism on the part of the IMG.

The principal problem with a mass campaign in Britain is not the need for it, nor its potential support, but the existence of the IMG ready and willing to sacrifice it on the altar of sectarianism. Thus the only basis for a national campaign free from those dangers is a front organization of ourselves and close collaborators.

How well was Comrade Purdie able to counter this attempt to shift the blame for failure to develop a broad solidarity movement onto the IMG? The polemic that followed this article indicates that he had some difficulties. In the first place, it drew a bitter attack from Clann na hEireann in a letter published in the May 1, 1972, Red Mole:
It is Clann’s Policy not to countenance the sectarian demands of the I.M.G. but to work closely with those individuals and organisations who are genuinely interested in building a mass movement in support of the Irish struggle.
The Glasgow area leader of the IS also responded quite sharply in a letter in the same issue:
We’ve been working on our own or jointly with Clann since January partly because, as our achievements show, we are actually strong enough to do so. But more crucially, because of deep political differences we have with the IMG on the character and orientation of solidarity work in Glasgow.
Two pages before his attack on us in The Red Mole, Bob [Purdie] pledges the IMG to ‘renew our attempts to build a principled solidarity movement in Britain.’ And he then defines a ‘principled’ movement as one that ‘does not hesitate to say: Victory to the IRA.’
Now as your readers will be well aware, IS’s full programme on Ireland ‘Unconditional but critical support for the IRA’, ‘For a 32-County Socialist Workers’ Republic’, and ‘For the Building of an Irish working-class Revolutionary Party’. But in order to bring into activity on a proper united front basis as many people as possible we are willing to work around slogans that contain less than our maximum demands.
Thus, both IS and Clann in Glasgow prefer to build what Bob would probably describe as an ‘unprincipled’ movement around the minimum programme of demands to ‘End Internment’ and ‘Withdraw the Troops’.”
The IS organizer was also able to make an apparently rather telling point about the October 16 demonstration in Glasgow:
And IS feels that the wearing of berets and combat jackets, and the ‘principled’ unfurling of the Tricolour [the flag of the 26-County state] by the IMG on the October demonstration does bear out my statement in a local discussion document quoted by Bob, that the IMG are ‘ready and willing to sacrifice it (the potential of a mass campaign in Britain) on the altar of sectarianism’.
Comrade Purdie admitted that IMGers masquerading as IRA combatants was a “tactical error” at least in a city like Glasgow where there is a big Orange element:
It is true that IMG members carried a tricolour and wore berets on the October 16th demo. In the context of an Orange counter-demonstration this was a serious tactical mistake. It was not a breach of principle since we have always operated on the basis that individual organisations carry their own banners and slogans on united front demonstrations; IS, for example, carried a banner ‘For a Socialist Workers Republic’, which was not an agreed slogan. However, this cannot be a barrier to unity, since IS co-operated with us twice after this demonstration, and on neither occasion did we repeat our mistake.
In Glasgow, the symbols of Orange and Green are taken seriously. Mass mayhem, for instance, is a standard part of the program in the traditional football games between the Irish Catholic and Protestant teams. In the endemic violence of this decaying and demoralized industrial city the old rivalries between Irish nationalists and loyalists have retained their brutality while losing most of their political content. So, the IMG’s “tactical” error was obvious. Their sectarian demonstration was met by an even larger Orange one, equipped with razors, knives, and even meat cleavers. What is more, the sectarian and exotic character of the demonstration was so salient that the police felt no compulsion to prevent bloodshed and effectively forced the dispersion of the demonstration by knocking off for tea and leaving the make-believe “IRA” cheek to jowl with the real Orangemen. The result was a deep demoralization that long inhibited the left in Glasgow from organizing any open demonstrations in support of the right of the Irish people to self-determination. It does not seem, moreover, that it was very difficult for the IS to ridicule the IMG’s concept of a “principled solidarity movement.”
Comrade Purdie was left with rather weak arguments. Although participants in a mass march would certainly have had a right to wear IRA uniforms if they so desired, an organization whose members took this way of expressing their “principled demand of victory to the IRA” did not seem to have a very effective program for building a mass movement. There is, moreover, no principle that I know of that forbids revolutionists to wear IRA uniforms, and so this “error” must be described in a general way as a “tactical one.” But it did appear to arise from a profoundly erroneous approach and method – an approach that instead of trying to get masses of people to oppose British intervention in Ireland on grounds that they could understand, that is, the right of every nation to determine its own affairs, tried to get revolutionists in Britain to identify with the group and the tactic that the IMG considered most exemplary in Ireland. IMGers actually posing as members of the IRA was all too logically the inevitable outcome of this tendency.
In this context, Comrade Purdie’s argument that the line of “Victory to the IRA” was the most effective line on which to build a mass movement in defense of Irish self-determination seemed quite strained and unreal.
It is true that IMG considers that a principled programme for a solidarity movement would include ‘Victory to the IRA’ or some other formulation which unambiguously supports IRA action against British imperialism in Ireland, and which is for the defeat of the British Army. We totally reject comrade Jefferys’ conceptions about ‘Maximum’ and ‘minimum’ programmes, all of our work, and all of our demands are designed to win support for the right of the Irish people to self-determination, which we regard as being the proper principled stance for revolutionaries in Britain. Our demands are designed to concretise the question of self-determination, i.e. we demand that British troops be withdrawn, and internment be ended because we reject the right of British imperialism to intervene in Ireland, and it is this concept that we try to communicate in our political work. Both of these demands can only be temporary, and related to the immediate situation, for if internment were ended, and the troops withdrawn, the need for solidarity need not necessarily be any the less. The Irish people could be oppressed in just as cruel, if different ways. Because of the need to relate slogans to the changing situation, after internment we adopted the slogan of ‘Victory to the IRA’. This was intended to relate to the fact that a major part of the struggle in Ireland was the armed struggle against the British army carried out by the IRA. A solidarity movement which ignores such a major aspect of the struggle can hardly adequately support the Irish people. And it cannot tackle the problem which press propaganda about the IRA constitutes without an unambiguous position of explaining why armed struggle is necessary. In other words we concretise the demand for self-determination by taking a position on the armed struggle.
Why was it necessary “to take a position on the armed struggle”? Didn’t the slogan of self-determination for the Irish, including the right to determine their own tactics and means of handling foreign troops who had no right in Ireland answer all the arguments the British might raise against “the armed struggle”? Didn’t the demand that the British solidarity movement defend politically all acts of armed violence in Ireland make the task of calling for Irish self-determination much more difficult? Didn’t it in fact compromise the demand for self-determination by supporting a certain tactic in Ireland and therefore eventually the specific group or groups that advocated this tactic? Of course it did. This was the conscious intention of the IMG and was spelled out in its November 15, 1971, statement. A campaign on the demand for British withdrawal alone “avoids the issues of the class struggle, can exist completely independently of them, and in its worst form can even divert resources from that struggle.”
That is, a broad campaign was seen as in contradiction to the need of building the revolutionary organization. Mobilizing the masses to demand the withdrawal of British troops would detract from the “class struggle” in Britain. The purpose of “solidarity” was to educate a “revolutionary cadre” in the IMG’s conception of “armed struggle” which it considered exemplified by the actions of the guerrilla groups in Ireland. The conception of the British section of the Fourth International was clearly sectarian, concerned more with differentiating the “real revolutionists” through a verbally extreme position than with effective work to defend the right of self-determination. The method of the IMG was the same in essence as that of the Socialist Labour League (SLL), except that instead of “working class unity” and a “general strike,” the shibboleth was “armed struggle.”
 

The Acrobatics of Left Opportunism
Furthermore, like the Healyites, the IMG did not have the courage of its sectarian convictions. While insisting on maintaining its own sectarian front group, it pleaded that it had no intention of interfering with “unity in action.”
Comrade Purdie wrote in the May 1, 1972, Red Mole:
But IS and Clann intend to form an AIL in Glasgow. Good. We will support it; we have no intention of counterposing our Irish work to any attempt to achieve unity in action. Since Steve has issued an invitation to The Red Mole readers to work for the AIL demands I hereby apply on behalf of the Glasgow IMG. When do we start Steve? When can we affiliate?
At the same time we have no intention of withdrawing from our work to build a movement on a principled solidarity basis, and while we will not advocate that its activities cut across those of the AIL, we will continue to support and build the ISC. We will also make our opinions on the question of a programme clear within the AIL, while avoiding doing so in a way which would aggravate the present strained relations between ourselves and IS.
If the AIL was not based on a “principled solidarity basis,” how could the IMG participate in it? On the other hand, if it was possible for a revolutionary organization to participate in a principled way in this much larger organization, in fact, the real united-front organization on the Irish question, why did the IMG need the ISC? The only possible explanation was that it knew that it could not lead a broad movement on the basis of its “victory to the IRA” line but wanted to be in a position where it could parasitize off the broad movement, building a periphery through a deliberately exclusive organization, the type of organization exemplified by the “revolutionary contingents” built by the ultra-left groups in the big anti-war marches in the United States.
But then in the fall of 1972, the IMG succeeded in taking the leadership of the AIL, winning it to a “solidarity” position. It took such firm leadership in fact that Comrade Purdie himself took the job of national organizer. The former organizer, it was explained by Comrade Lawless in The Red Mole, had lost interest in the position, the organization no longer being able to pay him a salary. About the same time, the ISC voted to merge with the AIL, which had gone into a deep decline following the downturn in the struggle in Ireland that began with the introduction of direct rule in the spring of 1972. Did the assumption of the main responsibility for the antiimperialist movement mean that the IMG had decided to take the lead in building a broad movement? Did it mean that it could build such a movement on the basis of its line of “Victory to the IRA”? Alas – to use a favorite interjection of the Red Mole – neither seemed to be the case.
Instead the IMG seemed determined to assume the dubious honor of riding a dying horse to its death. Instead of taking up the responsibility for building an effective movement in defense of the Irish people, the IMG seemed rather to be taking the responsibility for giving the coup de grâce to the one reasonably effective anti-imperialist organization, which was being rapidly abandoned by the other sectarian British groups that had always been lukewarm at best about mobilizing masses in support of the Irish right of self-determination. Once again, as in the case of the original ISC, the IMG seemed only to be putting itself in a position where IS could shift the whole blame for sectarian wrecking onto it.
A document submitted to the May 1973 National Committee plenum of the IMG gave the same sort of qualifiedly optimistic assessment of the AIL that was typical of similar statements about the ISC:
Since last spring the AIL has been in a state of slow disintegration; the successes we have had, in the November 14th and Bloody Sunday mobilisations have produced slight upturns, but these have been temporary, and have slowed down the rate of decline rather than overcoming it. The cause of the downturn is clear, it is the change in the conjuncture since Direct Rule, which has turned the ‘politics of the last atrocity’ against us. Seen in this context, the maintenance of the AIL on its present level is a considerable achievement, and one which was only won through a hard political struggle. A struggle which we started before the change in the conjuncture, and which, despite tactical errors, enabled us to consolidate a united front, firm enough to stand up in this last period.
The London bombings and the Police offensive have seriously weakened the AIL. The pressure of ‘public opinion’, which reached gale force after the bombings, and the grim reality of state repression, have induced a desertion by liberal and reformist elements, and a hiatus in the activity of less politically developed sections, especially in the branches where Irish workers predominate. There is still a core of committed people, and as the situation changes the inactive elements will return; but they are at present mainly engaged outside the AIL in anti-repression work.
Against the Stream noted the strong tendency to pull away from the AIL by Republicans. This was arrested by the success of the two mobilisations, and in the case of the Provos by pressure from Dublin (in the case of Clann the pressure from Dublin was in the opposite direction). The new conjuncture has given these tendencies a strong impetus, Clann, at a recent Ard Coiste (National Cttee) meeting, disaffiliated. At present however there is no sign of IS following suit, and the AIL will continue to receive the support of Clann and SF [Provisional Sinn Fein] members who are committed to the AIL.
As dim as the prospects of the AIL seemed to the IMG leadership in May 1973, they looked brighter than in the concluding phase of the ISC. A document written in December 1972 and approved by the IMG Irish Commission described the phases of the organization’s work as follows:

The mass movement of solidarity with the Civil Rights struggle, of which we were a minor element.
 
The anti-imperialist solidarity movement, after July 1970, in which we were a leading, though not a dominant element. We were just beginning to pull other forces behind our initiatives, when internment changed the conjuncture.
 
The mass anti-internment movement, created by the hostility to the injustice of internment, and the brutality of the British Army. In this movement we began as a leading element, but due to the weakness of our day-to- day leadership in the Irish work (MacGovern being in Glasgow and Reed spending long periods in Ireland), we were not able to make a correct tactical intervention, and combine the building of the solidarity movement (ISC) with building the AIL. This led to a brief period of relative isolation.
 
The ‘new’ AIL, which after Direct Rule, adopted a solidarity programme and in which we are now the leading force.

Perhaps it was this period of “relative” isolation Comrade Purdie was speaking about when he said at the conference of the Irish Trotskyists in March that for a whole period the ISC in London consisted of five persons who drank together in the same pub. Consistently optimistic, to be sure, Comrade Purdie stressed that this was better than their drinking in five separate pubs.
 

The IMG in an Impasse
Another document submitted to the IMG leadership for discussion, How to Lead from Behind by Comrade Sykes, made it clear, moreover, that the “shift, of the AIL to a solidarity position” came none too soon for the leaders of the IMG’s Irish work.
Were we correct, after the Anti-Internment League had been set up, to maintain the Irish Solidarity Campaign in existence?
The answer to this must be NO. It is not enough to say that the IMG-ISC comrades were involved in, intervened in or even played a leading role in the AIL during this period. The point is, we did maintain the ISC as a separate organization, justified this politically, and in so doing seriously miseducated the IMG rank and file who were involved in their local areas on the question of Ireland. Why were we wrong in so doing? Firstly, the IMG allowed its own position on the question of slogans or demands to act as a barrier to achieving the broadest possible unity in opposition to the oppressive role of British imperialism in Ireland. In maintaining the ISC during this period we were being straightforwardly sectarian. In Oxford, for instance, and this was probably typical of quite a number of IMG branches at this time, the IMG was the only organized force in the ISC. Not only that but we refused to set up an AIL when other forces were attempting to do so, namely IS, encouraged by John Gray (who came to Oxford twice for this purpose). Our reason for not co-operating was the fact that the AIL would not adopt our slogan on the IRA.
In other words we refused to work in a united front with other groups who did not accept our position.
Firstly, was it a question of principle? Would it have been unprincipled to merge ISC and AIL when AIL was set up? No. The AIL was never an unprincipled alliance. If the AIL had been built around a demand for ‘Peace’ in Ireland, it would have been an entirely different matter. But quite a few IMG comrades approached this as a principled issue. This error was reinforced by the Red Mole’s statement on the merger to the effect that there was no principled political difference which justified maintaining the separate organizations, thereby implying that it was a principled question before that. The argument put forward to explain our tactic towards the AIL was more or less as follows. Here on the one hand, are we, the IMG/ISC, with the correct programme. There, on the other hand, are the masses of the AIL that we want to talk to. So what we have to do is to fight to bring the AIL to the solidarity position so that we can join it.
Now a number of things need to be said. First we were obviously correct to disband ISC and work in the AIL. But we did it too late and we gave the wrong reason for doing so. If the AIL had not adopted the solidarity position what would we have done? Eventually, I think we would have merged, because of the incorrectness of maintaining the ISC was becoming more obvious to a lot of comrades, and for the correct reason. But because the AIL did change its programme we were able to merge without having to confront the incorrectness of our past position, a position which we still, at this late stage, completely justify: ‘we were correct to have this tactical arrangement as a precaution since at any time the situation in the AIL could have changed, and made it more difficult for us to consolidate our leadership.’ (Purdie, Against the Stream, 26-12-72). At the November AIL conference there was a motion proposed to the effect that the AIL drop the solidarity slogan. If that had passed would we have walked out? Obviously it would be wrong to do so. I’m sure Cd McGovern would also oppose walking out. But the point is, the line we have taken in the past on the AIL can only miseducate and confuse members as to what would be politically correct in that sort of situation. Most likely we would come up with some kind of manoeuvre which kept us half in and half out.”
The same document disposed rather effectively, although in ponderous and obscure paragraphs, of the basic political premises underlying the IMG’s Irish work since 1971:
(3) Should the Solidarity Movement be based on Revolutionary Defeatist Programme?
Having cleared away the wrong sort of argument for engaging in ‘programmatic struggle’ it is now necessary to confront the real argument. This argument is stated quite clearly in the 1972 Conference Document and again in Against the Stream, and it is as follows:
“The principled revolutionary position of solidarity with the forces struggling against British Imperialism was not separable from the programme necessary to draw wider forces around the revolutionary vanguard and augment its efforts to engage in immediate political action on the Irish question” (AtS 4).
“The essence of our position is that in order to build a movement based on self determination we must demand that it explicitly support the armed struggle of the IRA against the British Army” (Conference Document, p. 15).
The need, for reasons already explained, is for a broadly based movement among the mass vanguard in Britain which opposes Britain’s war in Ireland. In the normal run of affairs, the initial impetus for such a movement will come from the organised vanguard, in other words, from the various political tendencies. It may or may not be the case that the common position shared by the organised vanguard is one of revolutionary defeatism. In any case the task which is then posed is to build the movement, initiated by the organised vanguard, and extend it into the working class and other social layers, to make it quantitatively and qualitatively an effective challenge to the British war effort. Now what the above argument says is that in order to extend the movement outside the ranks of the political tendencies, a programme based on revolutionary defeatism is essential. Therefore it is correct and necessary to struggle for that programme inside the UF [United Front] as a means towards building the broader movement.
Now, on the face of it, this doesn’t at all seem to be obviously correct [Amen! – GF]. It would appear to be a plausible argument to say that, although it would be correct, inside such a broad movement, for revolutionaries to put forward a revolutionary defeatist programme, nevertheless the mass vanguard is not a ‘revolutionary’ vanguard and will not be mobilised by political tendencies on a programme of ‘principled revolutionary defeatism’.
This position, on how to build a broad movement has never been seriously questioned in the IMG. The experience of the VSC [Vietnam Solidarity Campaign] has become a norm. The American experience is regarded as either an exception or as involving some sort of questionable politics. So, without prejudging what is correct, it is necessary to look at the arguments that have been offered so far to back up this position.
Arg. 1 “Without a clear position of support for those who are carrying on armed struggle against the British Army any mass movement would split in the face of disagreements about particular military tactics, especially since the entire propaganda machine of the British bourgeoisie is striving to create such disagreements.” (Conf. Doct., p. 6).
Now this argument misses a very important point about united front campaigns, namely, that they are not meant to eliminate political antagonisms. Of course there are going to be disagreements. Among the thousands that demonstrated after the massacre of Derry’s Bloody Sunday there must have been a section that demonstrated to protest this particular atrocity but without understanding the need to support the military tactics of the other side. Similarly, growing out of the experience of their own struggle against the British ruling class, an increasing section of the mass vanguard may come to understand that Britain is exploiting Irish workers also and is in fact using her troops to maintain this exploitation. This could lead to their understanding the need for a troops withdrawal from Ireland but, once again without understanding the need to support the Provos in their military campaign. Now what follows from this? Not that we ‘dilute our politics’ to accommodate to the lowest level. Posing the question in this way gets us off on the wrong foot right from the start. The task of the revolutionary group vis à vis these elements is clearly to advance and explain our own position, namely why it is necessary to support the armed struggle of the IRA. In fact, if the AIL did ever grow into a real mass united front, the political tendencies with a position of revolutionary defeatism would probably be in a minority. To say that the UF would be ‘split’ over such disagreement can only be based on the confusion that unity of programme is a prerequisite for unity of action. If this were the case then the whole question of the UF could not even be raised.
Arg. 2 “But the most important reason for having a clear position on this question iB that it is on this point that the interests of the Irish and British workers are most highly integrated, precisely because this is the sharpest point of the struggle. We must advance a position of revolutionary defeatism, a defeat for the Army in Ireland would enormously strengthen the British working class and a consciousness of this fact among the British working class would enormously advance their revolutionary potential.” (Conf. Doct., p. 6).
Of course all this is true, if we were talking about the revolutionary group. Objectively, the interests of Irish & British workers are highly integrated at this point, objectively a defeat for the army would strengthen the British working class. Subjectively, however, there is a deficiency here, namely that the British working class does not understand this. The UF tactic is precisely an important way of overcoming this to some extent, because, by creating a broadly based unity of action against the war, the conditions are created in which the methods, the propaganda and the leadership of the revolutionary group can be effective in advancing the consciousness of sections of the mass vanguard on precisely such questions as these. This however is not an argument about the programme of the UF, it is an argument about the task of a revolutionary group inside a UF, namely the politics it puts across to the mass elements that are drawn to the UF.
Arg. 3 “Up to now we have rejected the course of building a Troops Out Movement because we knew that a movement built on such a limited political basis could not be a vehicle for ongoing political action on the Irish question during such times as the struggle remains outside the understanding and concern of all but a small section of the vanguard in Britain.” (Against the Stream, p. 4).
What this argument says is that at a time when only the organized political tendencies can be brought into action on Ireland, the following is true:

A UF of those tendencies will have stability only if it takes up a position on the IRA.
 
Only if it takes a position on the IRA will it be capable of extending its activity to include more and more sections of the unorganized vanguard.

I doubt very much that either of those is true. Let’s take them in order. Firstly, whatever stability the AIL has had, it is just so much idealism to say that this was because of some section of its programme. Let’s look at what Against the Stream says about the attitudes of the various tendencies inside the AIL during this period.
Clan Some elements were hostile, but they stayed in because it provided them with a local platform and a milieu from which to recruit. Clan has since withdrawn from AIL.
SF [Provisional Sinn Fein] Almost pulled out after AIL Conference. Staying in because of pressure from Dublin and change in composition of London Comhairle Ceanntar. Has now also withdrawn.
IS Completely opportunist, they’ll work when there’s a chance of recruiting. A small section politically committed.
IMG Only IMG is completely committed to building the AIL. Despite this shaky arrangement AIL has remained stable. Why? Firstly, because of the ongoing war in Ulster which, despite some conjunctural downturn has remained at a fairly constantly high level and, over a given period of say one year, produces a fair number of ‘high points’ of mobilizers. Thus in one year we have had the Bloody Sunday Massacre, the campaign to defend the liberated areas, operation Motorman, the Hunger Strike in Belfast jail, Aldershot, the arrest of MacStiofain in the South etc. Secondly the political activity on the issue of Ireland during the past three years has politicized a small but steady section of the organized vanguard.
As for the policy of the leaders of the IMG’s Irish work, Sykes pointed out that it remained the same as in the period of the ISC – maintenance of a sectarian position while in fact tail-ending broader movements developing outside its purview.
The real problem posed for the revolutionary vanguard in this country now is how to broaden the forces in Britain resisting the British war in Ireland, how to orient to the developing crisis in British society resulting from the Irish war and to adopt the tactics appropriate to this orientation ...
How is this question posed in Against the Stream? It is posed in terms of do we or do we not have a strategy of building a TOM [Troops Out Movement]? The answer it gives is no, because this is not a stable basis for a UF and it is not a basis for extending the movement, but if such a movement got under way we would have a tactical orientation to it, while maintaining the strategy of building a solidarity movement (i.e. one based on a programme of revolutionary defeatism).” (Emphasis in the original.)
This document is rather unclear on the question of an alternative to the IMG leadership’s line in Irish work and it does not break fundamentally with the methodology of the IEC majority. However, in the context of this discussion, the IMG leadership’s discovery of a “new conjuncture” becomes more understandable. The perspective was outlined by Comrade Purdie in the January 13, 1973, conference of the AIL. This is the way the January 20 Red Mole summarized his report:
He outlined the work done over the past few years in building a solidarity movement from the Irish Civil Rights Solidarity Campaign to the present AIL. The main lesson he drew from this experience was that at certain times (e.g. after internment) it was possible and absolutely necessary to try to build a movement involving the largest possible number of people around simple demands (e.g. ‘End Internment’). Nevertheless, it was also necessary at times to fight within that movement for more developed political demands (such as explicit support for the military struggle of the IRA). Unless this was done, experience has shown that the movement will crumble with a change in the situation in Ireland (as the introduction of direct rule showed). The central basis of such demands must be the right of the Irish to self-determination.
He also pointed out the possibilities in the near future for building a movement on the basis of ‘Troops Out of Ireland’, and said that the AIL must be ready to take all opportunities for constructing such a movement.
 

How the IMG Got So Far Ahead of the Masses
That It Ended Up Behind the Social Imperialists
In the February 17, 1973, issue of the Red Mole Comrade Lawless argued that the latest British atrocity in the New Lodge Road area had increased the possibility for building a “TOM.”
But the result of their desperate rampage increased the pressure in British society for a withdrawal from Ireland – this pressure is reflected in the Labour Party’s careful airing of the demand to ‘Bring our Boys Home’. This demand is highlighted by the centrist Eric Heffer who joined Wilson’s stalking-horse on this issue, James Wellbeloved, to call for the withdrawal of ‘our boys’, while at the same time protecting himself against allegations of being an anti-imperialist by referring to the dangers our boys have to face from the ‘savages’ on both sides.
However half-hearted this demand, it contains serious dangers for Whitelaw. The shifting of the Tribunites [Labour party leftists] could easily provoke a movement by Harold Wilson to break bi-partisanship on Ireland and in turn precipitate a stampede in Britain for the withdrawal of troops, leading to the anti-war and solidarity movements of thousands gaining the strength of millions, and even reaching such proportions as to threaten to rend the fabric of British society on this issue.
Revolutionary socialists involved in rallying aid for the struggle in Ireland must, in the next crucial weeks, be sensitive to these possibilities and prepare now the initiatives to gather and organise this potential.’ (Emphasis in original.)
Comrade Lawless’s article pointed to the May 19 AIL conference on The British Labour Movement and the British Army in Ireland that was to concretize the new line. The statement adopted there called for activity along the following lines:
The British working class must support only those solutions which give the Irish people, as a whole, the right to solve Ireland’s problems, and deny any further interference by British imperialism. The central demand must be for the immediate withdrawal of British troops, the political prisoners and detainees must be released, and all repressive legislation abolished. Unless the British working class uses its strength to win these demands, the methods now being used in Ireland will be turned against them.” (Red Weekly, May 25, 1973, emphasis in original.)
In a document by one of the principal leaders of the Irish Commission, entitled The Central Orientation of Our Irish Work, the aim of the May 19 conference was explained this way:
The May 19th conference therefore should not be seen as the founding conference of a TOM. It has a limited function of intervening in this conjuncture to show how the struggle in Ireland links up immediately with the problems confronting the British working class, and to win a small number of Trade Unionists to work within the TUs [trade unions] against the repression in Ireland. This would have two effects:

It would give a more solid base to the resistance against repression in Britain, which is a barrier to the development of political work on the Irish question in Britain.
 
By developing opposition to the repressive role of the troops it would lay the basis for an effective TOM (i.e. one not susceptible to chauvinist pressure), while rendering valuable immediate aid to the struggle in Ireland. We should therefore have four main propaganda themes at the conference.


The British Army is a repressive force, not a peacekeeping force.
 
British Imperialism, and the British Army cannot solve the ‘Irish Problem’, they can only contribute to it.
 
The only realistic solutions are solutions based on self-determination, i.e., Withdrawal of Troops, release of internees and political prisoners, an end to repressive legislation, no right of a minority of the population to maintain the partition of Ireland, etc. etc.
 
The North of Ireland is a laboratory for repressive techniques which will be used in Britain. Resistance to the repression in the North of Ireland is a necessary part of tire current struggles of the working class in Britain.

We should explain why we are in solidarity with the IRA, and the other organisations resisting British Imperialism, but should make it clear that this is not a barrier to our collaboration with Others who do not take this position against the repression.
But although the issue of repression is important, we must resist any tendency to get stuck at the level of an anti-repression campaign. We did not choose to fight on this ground; without a successful challenge to repression we cannot get any further, but our aim must be to get on to the ground of opposition to the British Army. And so far as is possible we should be attempting to direct the forces involved in the anti-repression work towards our central orientation.”
Thus, despite bows in the direction of a broader movement, the method of the leaders of the IMG’s Irish work has obviously not changed. Their basic orientation remains sectarian and parasitic. Their main objective remains to mark out a “revolutionary circle” within the general movement that their political conceptions cannot promote or focus. This broad current of revulsion against the imperialist repression in Ireland has in fact tended to develop outside the purview of the IMG. While the IMG leaders have failed signally to offer this broad movement a perspective, they have been forced again and again to bow to it, have irresistibly been drawn into its wake. The IMG’s turns and the “many-sided” nature of its work are not thus an example of its “flexibility” and the “sophistication” of its tactics but simply an expression of the general law that normally the tail does not wag the dog.
The inevitable result of the IMG’s sectarian politics, its contempt for the mass movement, is that it has proved unable to play a leadership role but in fact has been forced to tail-end the masses. In fact, the turn toward a “TOM” seems to represent not simply tail-ending the masses but a deliberate attempt to tail-end the Labour party lefts, or even Wilson himself.
The author of The Central Orientation of Our Irish Work gives the following arguments against trying to form a “TOM,” such as the backward anti-Vietnam war movement in the U.S.

The difference between a professional and a conscripted Army.
 
The transformation in the US [United States] of a qualitative build up opposition to the endless slaughter of an Army which had close links with the population, into a qualitative change in the domestic political situation when the Anti-war movement focused its agitation on the issue of immediate withdrawal of troops. Even with a very much greater escalation of British imperialism’s commitment to Ireland, the point of transformation of quality into quantity is not likely to be reached before there is a switch in policy away from massive troop commitments.
 
The existence of a split in the US ruling class, which expressed itself in a fierce debate in the bourgeois political arena.

The author of this document seems to think that the anti-war movement in the United States developed almost automatically (or perhaps spontaneistically) and that its victories were handed to it at the start.
What, for example, produced the split in the ruling class? Wasn’t it the growing fear that the effects of the war on American society were too costly to justify the expenses needed to continue the war? That is, precisely the existence of forces determined to focus the anti-war sentiment into a powerful mass movement capable of inhibiting the power of American imperialism to make war?
Why did the “youth vanguard” take up the issue of Vietnam? The young radical organizations that existed at the start of U.S. involvement in Indochina showed no great desire to defend the Vietnamese people’s right of self-determination. The American Trotskyists had to wage a hard fight to make Vietnam the central issue for the left in the United States and to prevent all sorts of reformists and ultra-leftists from diverting the “youth vanguard” to other issues that they thought could be springboards to make the war “an integral part of the class struggle” in the U.S.
Furthermore, the issues at stake in Vietnam did not look at all clear to the “youth vanguard” in the early sixties. It was only a determined campaign on the central question – the right of the Vietnamese people to determine their own future – that clarified the issues in Vietnam.
Most importantly, although the U.S. Army was a conscripted one, anti-war sentiment was only openly expressed within it when a powerful anti-war movement was operating within the society at large. The demoralization and disaffection of the army was the reflection of the political forces at work in civilian society. The author of The Central Orientation seems to regard military discipline as a politically autonomous factor. In fact, it is only one element in capitalist ideological hegemony. The ability of capitalist society to convince soldiers, professional or conscript, to face death and injury in its defense depends on general confidence in the policy of the bourgeoisie. A mercenary force like the French Foreign Legion, made up of desperados, outcasts, and lumpen fascistic elements might not be so readily affected by the general political moods of the society. But this is hardly the case with a professional army of the British type, which is made up largely of young workers in need of jobs who were attracted by the advantages offered by the recruiters.
In fact, the British army in Ireland seems to be a fair mirror of British society. Despite the attempts of the officers to keep the ranks in a state of constant tension, there is a whole gamut of attitudes running through various strata from brutalized Glasgow slum toughs to very young and obviously frightened English youths. The fact that wives of soldiers started a “bring the boys home” campaign on their own indicates the possibilities for organizing in the army. The question arises, then, why the IMG leadership was so willing to believe that the youth in the British army were hardened killers and robots of repression. Similar attitudes were present among the ultra-leftists and pacifists in the American anti-war movement where they quite clearly reflected petty-bourgeois elitism and contempt for the working class. The Socialist Workers party had to wage a long hard fight against these tendencies to defend not only its perspective of mass mobilization against the war but its fundamental proletarian orientation.
If the British army has no “close links” with the population, as The Red Mole has claimed, how can writers in the same organ (now entitled Red Weekly) talk about important sentiment in the Labour party for “getting our boys out”? No matter how they interpret the political implications of such sentiment, its very existence makes nonsense of former “analyses” that presented the army as a mercenary force separated off from political influence by a Chinese wall of “military discipline” and “professionalism.” If the esprit de corps and discipline of a “professional” army precludes work among soldiers, how could the petition campaigns of their relatives calling for withdrawal begin and develop as it has? If this military discipline was so formidable, why should the relatively small number of casualties suffered by the British forces in Ireland have led to such an obvious demoralization? Isn’t it fundamentally because of the political conviction that the role of the troops was not defensible, that the cause in which they were asked to fight was not worth even a hundred lives in four years?
Why did the IMG have to wait for the development of an actual attempt to organize a withdrawal movement in army circles before it began to pay any attention to this type of activity? Why didn’t it raise this perspective from the start?
The only possible answer is that it was blinded by sectarian and elitist political conceptions. Therefore it could not offer a perspective. It could only “reorient” empirically to this vitally important activity once it actually began to develop. That is, it did not lead the mass movement but tail-ended it.
The sentiment for withdrawal is not a new “conjunctural” phenomenon in Britain. In its October 5, 1971, issue The Red Mole declared:
In Britain itself, a recent opinion poll showed that despite the mass hysteria of the British press, despite the treachery of the Social Democracy, despite the virtual desertion of the Irish struggle by a large section of the British Left, 58% of the British population support the recall of the British troops from Ireland. This percentage will grow as more and more British troops return home to the graveyards and mental homes of Britain.
Thus, despite all the IMG leaders’ claims about it being qualitatively more difficult to build a mass movement for withdrawal in Britain than it was in the U.S., two years ago the percentage of the British population favoring withdrawal was greater than the percentage of such sentiment in the United States until the final phase of the anti-war movement.
Furthermore, there is a curious contradiction between the IMG leaders’ arguments about the peculiar difficulties of building a mass withdrawal movement in Britain and their apparent expectation that the Labour party will do them the favor of creating a withdrawal movement for its own political advantage. This expectation is logical, however, in view of the conceptions expressed in the November 15, 1971, Red Mole article:
Many genuine revolutionaries believe that the demand for the immediate withdrawal of British troops is adequate for this purpose, and indeed it is essential to include this demand in the platform of any campaign. But this demand on its own is unfortunately ambiguous: it can very easily be taken up and transformed into a ‘Bring the boys home’ campaign based on liberal issues with only a negative impact.
Since a withdrawal campaign, then, would be essentially “liberal,” why not expect the Labour party to build one, which revolutionists could then support as having some “conjunctural” usefulness?
It is likely in fact that elements of the Labour party may support or even initiate protests against British involvement in Ireland if popular pressure is sufficient, possibly to gain a political lever against the Tory hawks or to co-opt anti-war sentiment. Even the American Democratic party did that. But to expect the Labour party to conduct a withdrawal campaign in any consistent way would be to believe that the social imperialists themselves are capable of fighting imperialism, of defending the right of oppressed peoples to self-determination.
This is the opportunistic implication of the IMG leaders’ sectarian and ultra-left orientation. This concept alone indicates that the Labour reformists will prove incapable of giving impetus to a mass withdrawal movement, even if they empirically readjust their course to accommodate to the mass sentiment for withdrawal. This conception also indicates the real basis of the IMG’s objections to building a “bring the boys home movement.” They flow from a rejection of the role of democratic demands in the struggle against imperialism, a rejection of the method of the Transitional Program – that is, mobilizing the masses on the basis of their present level of consciousness in a struggle that leads them objectively in battles against the decaying capitalist-imperialist system that can no longer satisfy reasonable democratic and immediate economic demands.
 
(Part 2)
 

Foley: The Test of Ireland (Part 4)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

The Test of Ireland

Gerry Foley
The Test of Ireland
(Part 4)
* * *

The Trotskyist Martyrs; or the International ‘Secret Army’
But it is not necessary to wait for the truth about Comrade Graham’s death to draw some conclusions about the way the IMG and its European cothinkers responded to this tragic incident.
After recalling Peter Graham’s life as a revolutionist, Comrade Tariq Ali issued a warning: ‘At present we do not know what criminal brute shot Peter Graham to death; but we will find out; and when we do we have ways of dealing with this type of individual.’
An investigation is now ih progress, but as Saor Eire declared (cf. Rouge, no. 126), any investigation must be directed at the offices of the Special Branch (political police) in Dublin. (Rouge, November 6, 1971)
Comrade Ali’s solemn warning could not fail to make the headlines. This was particularly true since the Dublin papers were giving sensational coverage to the Graham killing, treating it as a mysterious gang war among the republican and far-left fringe.
Comrade Ali’s threats were made even more newsworthy by an article in the independent left-liberal news weekly This Week by Sean Boyne.
The Dublin Trotskyist leader Peter Graham (26) may have been murdered in the middle of a gun-running operation. Informed sources in both Dublin and London link him with a plan to smuggle guns through the 26 Counties for the IRA war against British troops in the North.
Graham would have been in a key position for any such operation. He was the Irish representative of the Fourth International, an influential pro-IRA Trotskyist organisation with a world-wide network of branches and previous gun-running experience. He had very close contacts with Saor Eire almost since its inception. He was reported to have had access to large sums of money and he was held in very high esteem by important members of the Provisional IRA.
There is no evidence that the Fourth International has been involved in gun-running to Ireland. But through the organisation he would have been able to make valuable contacts abroad. The Fourth International in recent years has supplied arms for the rebellions in Cuba, Algeria and Hungary, and it has now decided on a policy of ‘maximum support’ for the IRA.
But even if Graham had been running arms, and there is no conclusive proof for this, who should want to kill him? His close associates in Dublin have ruled out the possibility that he was sentenced to death as an informer by Saor Eire or any Republican organisation.
’Peter Graham was no informer and he was most security conscious,’ said Tariq Ali, sentiments which were echoed by all who knew the dead man. The Young Socialists have however recalled some allegations made some weeks ago by Saor Eire that ‘murder squads’ had been formed among right-wing gardai [police] and Special Branch men. And a London-based friend of Graham’s has mentioned the possibility of a move by British Intelligence to thwart a Trotskyist intervention in the Northern Ireland situation.
But there is also a theory that the shooting may have been ordered by some rival bank-robbing group to Saor Eire which for some reason wanted to teach the ‘Trots’ a lesson. It may be significant that Saor Eire men have stated in recent weeks that they were not responsible for every bank raid carried out in the 26 Counties.
One thing is certain. Whoever was responsible for the murder is in a rather delicate position. As one London Trotskyist said ominously: ‘There is an awful lot of anger about the shooting of Peter Graham.’
Boyne’s version of Comrade Ali’s remark was: “We have our own ways of dealing with such people.”
There is unfortunately no doubt that the IMG appreciated this kind of publicity, with all its exciting suggestions that the Fourth International was engaged in international gun-running and had its “own ways of dealing” with assassins. Comrade Ali in fact protested because Intercontinental Press did not reprint this flattering article in full.
In fact, one organ of a section supporting the IEC Majority Tendency seemed really to strain itself to present the situation of the Irish Trotskyists in the most heroic light:
In difficult conditions after the cowardly assassination of Peter Graham and the mysterious death in January 1972 of Mairin Keegan, another leader of the RMG, our comrades of the Irish section are assuming an enormous task. They have to offer real support to the two branches of the republican movement (the Official and Provisional IRA), to develop Marxist analyses of the Irish question, and above all to coordinate the struggles in the North as well as the South because they alone of all the revolutionary organizations have a base both in Ulster and the Republic. (Rouge, June 3, 1972)
Tragic as Comrade Keegan’s death was, it was not unexplainable. She died of a long illness. She was, however, a member of Saor Eire, as a member of the RMG pointed out at a memorial meeting held for her in London.
She was not simply an armchair Marxist, she allied theory to action. In May 1968 in Paris she took part in the struggle of the workers and students which has opened the new era of working class revolution. And in 1969, back in Ireland, as a member of the Dublin Citizens Committee and more importantly Saor Eire, she gave aid to the national revolution that has been developing in Northern Ireland ...
I might conclude by wishing a long life to the FI [Fourth International] but this would be contrary to that body’s aims. It wants world revolution and the world includes Ireland as soon as possible. So I prophesy a short and successful life to the FI and to Saor Eire. Let our enemies which are those of the working class beware. We are only beginning. [The Red Mole, January 24, 1972]
The dangers that this kind of romantic rodomontade by the supporters of the IEC Majority Tendency represent for the entire International are only too obvious. From the standpoint of revolutionary morality, moreover, it was extremely dubious. It did not honor Graham’s sacrifice but exploited it, threatening to build a farcical tissue of romantic pretensions around this death that could only discredit the Irish Trotskyists.
At the same time, this type of boastfulness and lurid imagining had a powerful momentum. For many months after the death of Comrade Graham, adventurist fantasies tended to dominate the discussions in the RMG. This was particularly noticeable in the conference of February 1972. The representative of the IMG, Comrade Lawless, to his credit, stopped this trend at one point in the discussion as it reached a dangerous point. (As for the representative of the International leadership, he was apparently not disturbed by it and in fact was anxious to reassure me when I showed signs, no doubt, of getting rather agitated.) However, it is clear from the line of The Red Mole and the IMG speaker at Comrade Graham’s funeral that the British organization and the International leadership encouraged precisely this sort of thing. It is fortunate that Comrade Lawless decided to retreat from the logic of their adventurist line. One wonders what the IMG would have done if this kind of talk had resulted in an actual adventure and victimizations. Would they have sent a commando team to “avenge” the Irish comrades? It is much more likely that a few more martyrs would have been exploited to add to the luster of the “revolutionary pole of attraction.”
 

What Role for the Trotskyists in the ‘Armed Vanguard’?
Once the illusions about an “armed wing” of the RMG faded, however, the question arose of how the organization could be built on the basis of the political conceptions and attitudes it derived from the IMG and via it from the IEC Majority Tendency. Could the RMG capture the leadership of one or both of the republican groups, according to the schema laid out in one of The Red Mole’s strategy articles? If “armed struggle” was “the key,” as The Red Mole claimed, what role did a small political nucleus have to play? Could it offer material aid or military expertise? Obviously not. Could it interest the republican organizations in its ideas? It would have a hard time interesting the Officials in the concept that “armed struggle” was “the key,” since their leadership was moving away from the old physical force theories toward a kind of orientation to the masses, that is, moving toward the more “developed socialist groups” which, according to the Saor Eire manifesto, were further from the correct approach than the old-style republicans. In fact, this guerrillaist conception and the irresponsible sabre-rattling that followed Comrade Graham’s death were exactly the kind of thing that would convince the Official leadership that the RMG was not to be taken seriously.
Could the RMG interest the Provisionals in their ideas, since after all this group also believed that “armed struggle” was “the key”? The Provisionals clearly had a need for political theoreticians to explain their practices and to provide some sort of consistent ideology. In particular, in dealing with radical journalists and foreign radical groups well disposed to the struggle in Ireland, leftwing spokesmen could prove very useful. Even a small left group could prove useful in carrying out pilot demonstrations and certain types of legal activity. The weakness of the Provisionals’ “political wing” would make such groups all the more useful, and the absence of intellectuals in the organization has been a severe problem.
One small left group, People’s Democracy, led by Michael Farrell, had some success in working with the Provisionals. However, because of its ultra-leftist conceptions this group found itself simply rationalizing the adventurism and guerrillaism of backward republicans. Some of their members were absorbed outright by the Provisionals, their ultra-leftism fitting in quite well with the abstract moralism and “physical force” ideology of the old-style republicans. Others remained in PD but became less and less distinguishable from apolitical Provisionals.
As the Provisionals have become increasingly isolated and under fiercer and fiercer attack from the Irish and American governments, they do seem to be taking more interest in socialist and radical groups and in radical ideas. It is unlikely, however, that any small socialist nucleus can politically transform the Provisionals without combating the notion that revolutionary activity equals “physical force,” or that “armed struggle” is “the key,” which has prevented republicans for more than a century from seeing the necessity of developing a consistent social philosophy and political practice. That is, any group that wants to challenge the Provisionals would have to challenge their central conceptions, not rationalize them. Otherwise, these socialists, whatever Marxist veneer they succeeded in putting on their statements, would essentially be absorbed into republicanism rather than win the republicans to socialism.
How then has the training received by the RMG from the IMG equipped them to build a Trotskyist party in Ireland? The first and most obvious observation is that they could only be miseducated by the IMG’s adaptationism. You cannot win people to your ideas by adapting to theirs. It is important in particular for a small group that has not yet proved itself in action to strive to understand the attitudes and conceptions of the larger forces that are actually in the leadership of important struggles and to seek points of convergence that can serve to initiate a dialogue. But, at the same time, it is equally important for such a small group not to fuzz over political differences or confine itself to “critical” praise. It must make clear what it has to offer, centering its limited resources on highlighting its specific political message. It is clear, moreover, that although it has been seriously hampered in its work by the miseducation it has received from the IMG, the RMG does have vital contributions to make to the Irish revolution. In the first place, the arsenal of Trotskyism is available to it.
 

The Theoretical Gains of the Irish Trotskyists
Furthermore, despite its handicaps, the RMG already has a number of basic achievements to its credit It is the only group in Ireland that has been able to apply the theory of the permanent revolution to Irish conditions. It is the only group on the scene that has been able to advance in theoretical understanding of the socialist dynamic of the national struggle in Ireland. Consistent with this, it is the only group that has been able to understand the revolutionary dynamic of the feminist movement in Irish conditions in particular. It is the only group that has shown a potential to offer a perspective to the very young generation of Irish revolutionists in the secondary schools, the youth who have formed the backbone of the struggle in the North in particular and whose aspirations have been most brutally thwarted by the failure of the national revolution in Ireland. These youth especially have been badly let down by the big militant nationalist organizations. The Officials, on the one hand, have tried to subject them to paternalistic tutelage. The Provisionals, on the other, have used them as cannon fodder in their adventurist policies without offering them the opportunity for political development or for participating in a democratic decision-making process.
The fact that the RMG has achieved as much as it has is, in view of the difficult circumstances in which the Irish Trotskyists have found themselves, an extremely hopeful sign. In the first place, the reputation of Trotskyism among the vanguard in Ireland is a bad one. It is associated with irresponsible adventurism and abstract dogmatism, with the most vulgar forms of left opportunism, unprincipled intrigue, and sectarian cliquism. In particular, groups claiming to be Trotskyist are widely regarded as artificial extensions of English sects. Unfortunately, the history of the various groups that have claimed to be Trotskyist offers an empirical basis for such feelings. The leadership of the RMG had to begin their political lives with a bitter fight against a hardened sectarian clique that denied the revolutionary dynamic of the national struggle. They had to struggle against older and talented leaders who miseducated and failed them. They have had to build their organization in an atmosphere poisoned by the fantastic and ridiculous pretensions of a variety of “Trotskyist” sects that offer a dismal contrast to the hard struggle and sacrifices of the militant nationalist fighters in the North. Nevertheless, the RMG leaders have shown a stubborn faith in Trotskyism and have continued their activity in difficult conditions and over a long period of little gains.
But the greatest difficulty that the RMG has had to face since its inception and which it has not yet overcome has been the miseducation it received from the IMG and the IEC Majority Tendency. After their experience with the sterility of Healyite sectarianism, it was natural for the Irish Trotskyists to look with hope to the nearest sections of the Fourth International and to the prestigious theoreticians of Western Europe. In particular, the IMG seemed capable of offering effective theoretical aid because it alone of all the British groups claiming to be Trotskyist showed an ability to understand the dynamic of the national struggle.
However, at the same time as they learned some vitally important lessons from the IMG, the RMG absorbed the politics of adaptation represented by the Ninth World Congress turn. In the period leading up to the assassination of Comrade Graham and for several months thereafter adaptation to adventurism jeopardized not only the political program of the organization but the physical survival of the young and inexperienced cadres that made it up. Nor were the Irish comrades greatly helped by the International leadership bringing in a special advisor to give a first-hand account of how to apply the Ninth World Congress resolution on Latin America. Because of the strength of the terrorist tradition in Ireland, the Irish Trotskyists needed political help from the International in developing an effective Marxist critique of such methods. Instead they got encouragement to adapt to them, to rationalize them, to become the most sophisticated defenders of terrorism.
 

Irish Trotskyists Without a Political Compass
Because they were actually in the Irish situation, however, the RMG could not simply applaud the “dazzling coups” of the guerrillas. They were affected directly by the political results of terrorist errors. They experienced the political weaknesses of the “physical force” current immediately in their work. They also had to take the blame for the failure of the IMG to build an effective solidarity movement. All these things had an evident effect. Furthermore, the RMG has not yet been imbued with the dead-end factionalism that has afflicted the IMG and has shown an ability to learn from its errors. Unfortunately, however, it has not broken with the adaptationist method it learned from the IMG, and as a result its attempts to correct its course seem to have led so far deeper into political confusion rather than toward clarification. Many examples could be given of this. It is sufficient to cite the article The Actuality of Terrorism by Eanna O’Caithirneach [I assume that this is a masculine name, although Gaelic grammar was apparently ignored in its composition] in a recent issue of Marxist Review, the theoretical journal of the Irish comrades.
In the first part, Comrade O’Caithirneach says:
In fact it is easy enough to point out that terrorism of the oppressed is a concrete reply to the terror, violence institutionalized by the ruling classes, without which they could not stay in power. But it is useless to preach in the desert, we do not expect those who use or profit from this violence to denounce it.
Moreover a debate of this importance must be taken up by those who claim to be on the same side of the barricade; those who fight precisely for the abolition of class violence, the source of all violence, and who know that bourgeois violence can only be abolished by revolutionary violence, ultimately by the overthrow of one class by another. The ambiguity of what terrorism really means is a fundamental problem for the clarification of such a debate. So we see the American Marxist philosopher George Novack writing:
“Terrorism is a product of subjectivism and impatience, of frustration and desperation. Despite the loud noises made by its intermittent chemical warfare, it is an expression of political and social defeatism arising from a fundamental lack of confidence in the potential of the working people to recognize the need to get rid of the capitalist regime, engage it in struggle, and overcome it.”
The basic error of such a statement lies in the fact that it tries to define a concept in the abstract rather than as a method of struggle related to the historical phases of development of class struggle. Instead of clarifying the matter, such a generalization prevents us from analyzing concrete situations and taking a position in relation to the given moments of mass struggle.
In fact the above quotation plays on an ambiguity which feeds moralistic positions common to the bourgeoisie and to reformism. It betrays a failure to understand that two different problems must be distinguished and analyzed from a Marxist standpoint: firstly, terrorism as a political orientation, and then terrorism as a social phenomenon.
Comrade O’Caithirneach went on to say:
Indeed the history of the international working-class movement is paved with examples of groups of intellectuals or the like at the periphery of the mass struggle looking for shortcuts to the destruction of the ruling class. Suffice it to say that the ruling class can replace its leaders, of uneven value, as long as it owns the means of production; it is because there lies its strength that only a mass movement expropriating the bourgeoisie, can smashing its state, put an end to its domination.
 

Unresolved Contradictions
Comrade O’Caithirneach gives this contemporary example of the sort of terrorism that Marxists should oppose:
The ‘underestimation of the revolutionary activity of the masses’ is exactly the type of mistakes that today ‘urban guerrilla groupings’, such as the Baader-Meinhof group (RAF) in Germany, the Red Army in Japan, the ‘Weathermen’ in the States, the ‘Angry Brigade’ in Britain, have elevated to a virtue.” In a footnote this point is qualified. “There is a qualitative difference in our mind between such guerrilla ultra-left organizations (coming from Maoist or Libertarian currents) in the heart of imperialist citadels and organizations formally of the same type – such as the Free Welsh Army, the FLB (Liberation Front of Brittany), Saor Eire, the FLQ (Liberation Front of Quebec) which in content aimed at expressing by armed minority actions the revolt of oppressed nations or nationalities. Although in some cases (Brittany, Wales) such organizations won sympathy of one part of the population, they had in common with the other groupings mentioned their ultimate isolation and fate.
Clearly Comrade O’Caithirneach has received a miseducation in the use of Marxist categories. In the first place, he shows a dismaying reluctance, strikingly reminiscent of Comrade Purdie, to draw Marxist conclusions from the statement of Marxist principles. If they shared the political and physical fate of terrorist organizations in the capitalist centers, if their actions have had the same consequences, how can it be said that organizations like the FLB are “qualitatively” different from the Angry Brigade? They do not simply formally resemble terrorist groups in capitalist centers; they have shared the fate of the latter groups in reality. “Formal” thus does not seem to have the same meaning for Comrade O’Caithirneach that it does in the Marxist vocabulary; it seems to be some kind of magic word that can be used to charm away a real problem. If Comrade O’Caithirneach’s statement is not to be interpreted as pure idealism, he would have to explain what chance factors account for these “qualitatively different” groups sharing essentially the same fate. Might Saor Eire have succeeded for example if it had been more fortunate in this or that respect? Should this experiment be repeated?
It is true, of course, that in oppressed nations any blow against the oppressor tends to win very broad immediate sympathy, whereas it is much more difficult to make an impact on the masses in the imperialist centers where the forms of control are more subtle and opaque. But even in the imperialist centers adventurism does not always fail, at least not right away, to produce some positive results. Thus, obviously the chances of success are all the greater in oppressed nations. But the very fact that the contradictions are more explosive in such cases makes adventurist errors all the more serious. They tend to result not just in the victimization of a few idealistic and self-sacrificing revolutionists or a temporary witch-hunt but in beheading mass movements that could strike telling blows against the world capitalist system and in the destruction of the small number of politically trained cadres that can be produced under conditions of repression and cultural deprivation. At best, a guerrillaist orientation in such countries makes liberation struggles unnecessarily costly and exhausting and thus robs these struggles of much of their revolutionary dynamism and political power.
 

Rationalizing Subjectivism
From the subjective point of view, there is of course a difference between the sort of terrorist groups that have arisen in the capitalist centers and those arising in the colonial countries and oppressed nations. The desperate actions of militants in oppressed and brutally exploited nations commands a special sympathy. Here Comrade O’Caithirneach is right to say that the “qualitative difference” he is talking about exists “in the minds” of himself and his co-thinkers. That is precisely where it exists; not in reality. They have allowed themselves to become subjective. This is natural on the part of young revolutionists, especially those in oppressed countries who feel a strong empathy with others of their generation who are striking heroic blows against the imperialist oppressor. But a revolutionary party and a revolutionary strategy cannot be built on such subjective feelings. Marxists are not simply the fiercest militants but those who are conscious of a higher duty to the oppressed people and who have an intellectual and organizational discipline, a relentless logic and understanding of long-term processes, that enables them to lead revolutionary struggles to the final victory. The Russian Marxists, for example, had to take an extremely critical position toward a whole generation of heroic youth who eventually won mass sympathy. The party of the Narodniks, after all, was a mass party in 1917, far larger than the Bolsheviks.
The example of the Bolsheviks and their teachers is quite well known and its validity is accepted by most revolutionary groups. Comrade Caithirneach, on his own, might have been able to learn from it, especially in the light of the hard experience of the Irish fighters, as other generations of young revolutionists have. But he was apparently encouraged to “interpret” the Bolsheviks’ position in a way that fundamentally justified his subjective sympathy with the adventurists in Ireland. With this political and theoretical assistance, he discovered a previously rather neglected part of the revolutionary Marxist heritage.
After 1905, Lenin distinguished acts of terrorism, the number of which was increasing without respite, from the terrorist orientation of the anarchists and revolutionary Socialists before 1905.
In the first case, disarray and impatience led romantic intellectuals to transform their frustrations of being absent from the class struggle, into a strategy. After the revolution of 1905, they were faced with a deeper social movement which prolonged the revolutionary crisis; terrorism then was characterized by resistance demonstrations, acts of sabotage, expropriations, boldness of workers and peasants. This increased the revolutionary consciousness of the masses who drew the lessons from 1905. At this point it was necessary for the Social Democratic Party to enrich its political experience with these new methods of struggle.
A quotation follows from Lenin’s 1906 article on guerrilla warfare that has been widely cited by the IEC Majority Tendency in defense of its orientation. Comrade O’Caithirneach, then, goes on to say:
Consequently, the Bolshevik party used guerrilla actions, relating it to the question of workers’ self-defence against reaction (Black Hundred pogroms, etc.), and the crucial problem of preparation for armed insurrection, therefore having an educative role for the masses. Those who argue today that Lenin opposed the concept of the dialectical link between minority violence and mass struggle, should remember his articles on the subject in 1905, 1906, and 1907, and for instance his preparatory notes to the Stockholm Congress in 1906:

The armed actions of the combat groups belonging to the Party and fighting on their own are acceptable on the grounds of principle and opportunities in the actual period.
 
The character of the armed actions must be adapted to the task of forming leaders of the working masses in the period of insurrection and acquire the experience of offensive actions.
 
The immediate and most urgent objective of these actions must be the destruction of the apparatus of government, politically and militarily, and the actions must be particularly directed against active organizations like the ‘Black Hundred’ which use violence and terror against the population.
 
Must be considered as well, armed actions directed towards obtaining financial resources from the enemy, that is to say, from the autocratic regime, in order to use those means to the benefit of the insurrection; one must remember that the interests of the masses must be affected to the least possible extent.

Comrade O’Caithirneach concludes:
This shows precisely what differentiates our comrades of the PRT/ERP in Argentina, of the ETA (Euzkadi Ta Askatasuna – Liberation movement of the Basque country) in Spain, and the Volunteers of the IRA who carry out armed actions in the context of mass struggle, from the experience of the Baader-Meinhof or the Angry Brigade.
Unfortunately, Comrade O’Caithirneach makes the same error here that he charges against Comrade Novack; he makes an abstract generalization, failing to take proper account of the concrete circumstances. Among other things, this indicates that he uses “abstraction” like “formal” not as a Marxist description but as a magic word to conjure away difficulties.
Lenin regarded the skirmishing that followed the defeat of the 1905 revolution as representing a form of struggle appropriate to a lull in the civil war preceding a new upsurge of the revolutionary struggle that was unleashed by a general strike leading to a mass insurrection, a mass insurrection that was prepared by patient Marxist propaganda and intervention in the mass movement – not by “new methods” or “exemplary actions” or “minority violence.” The next installment of the revolution, moreover, was prepared in the same way, and acts of “minority violence” were opposed by the Bolshevik leadership in the period leading up to the general insurrection. No “new methods” of guerrilla warfare were employed.
Despite this, Comrade O’Caithirneach seems to regard these as relevant for a whole historical epoch and in a wide range of countries. These methods are supposed to be valid for Spain under Franco, for Ireland, and for Argentina (the article was apparently written before Comrade O’Caithirneach learned that the PRT/ERP had broken with the Fourth International). No mass insurrection has taken place in these countries, either on a national scale or in the key centers. The decisive masses have not risen up against the system. In the case of Ireland in particular it is quite clear now that the use of these “new methods” has narrowed the struggle and isolated the most advanced sections of the population; that is, it has had the classical result of terrorism and adventurism.
But Comrade O’Caithirneach argues:
There what Lenin condemns is a violence which is not subordinated to strategic objectives, which does not fit in an overall project of seizure of power – violence which is not understood and supported by the masses, because as Georg Lukacs pointed out:
“These isolated battles which never bring final victory even when they are successful can only become truly revolutionary when the proletariat becomes conscious of what connects these battles to each other and to the process that leads ineluctably to the demise of capitalism.”
Obviously one thing that all three situations – Ireland, Spain, and Argentina – have in common is that significant sections of the population support the actions of terrorist groups. Moreover, they “understand” them in the sense of knowing what motivates them and against whom they are aimed. That is, the argument goes, actions which are popular among a section of the people cannot be terrorist
There is no doubt that at least in Ireland such actions are in a sense “linked” to the mass struggle. Although the Provisional campaign has had the effect of crippling the mass movement, its extent and relative popularity are clearly the result of a mass upsurge. Moreover, the Provisionals’ terrorist strikes take place within the context of mass resistance to the British occupation and the Orange caste system. But at the same time instead of being “linked” to the mass struggle (any more than the Argentine guerrilla actions were “linked” to the struggle against the dictatorship), the Provisional campaign was in irreconcilable contradiction to it; it did not extend the mass struggle and carry it forward to a revolutionary mass mobilization on a scale that could lay the basis for an effective war against the imperialists and their supporters; but set back and weakened the mass movement.
According to The Red Mole, the Provisional bombing campaign was designed to impose unbearable costs on the British government and draw troops away from the Catholic ghettos. Moreover, it supposedly had the effect of preventing the British from “stabilizing” the situation. That is, it can be claimed that this campaign was “subordinated” to strategic objectives. But these generalizations were used to cover up the reality – an uncontrolled and uncontrollable campaign of random bombing that confused the political issues, demoralized and alienated the broad masses, especially in the south, and was easily manipulated by the British authorities, making repression easier instead of more difficult But still this campaign was undoubtedly popular among a fairly broad vanguard. It was “linked” to the struggle of the masses, so it couldn’t be terrorist, could it?
 

Trotsky on ‘Mass’ Terrorism
But according to Trotsky’s explanation in his 1911 article on terrorism (see The Marxist Position on Individual Terrorism,” in Intercontinental Press, August 6, 1973, p. 955), the terrorists are precisely most dangerous when they have the sympathy of the masses:
In our eyes, individual terror is inadmissible precisely because it belittles the role of the masses in their own consciousness, reconciles them to their powerlessness, and turns their eyes and hopes toward a greater avenger and liberator who some day will come and accomplish his mission.
The anarchist prophets of ‘the propaganda of the deed’ can argue all they want about the elevating and stimulating influence of terrorist acts on the masses. Theoretical considerations and political experience prove otherwise. The more ‘effective’ the terrorist acts, the greater their impact, the more the attention of the masses is focused on them – the more they reduce the interest of the masses in self-organization and self-education.
But the smoke from the explosion clears away, the panic disappears, the successor of the murdered minister makes his appearance, life again settles into the old rut, the wheel of capitalist exploitation turns as before; only police repression grows more savage and brazen. And as a result, in place of the kindled hopes and artificially aroused excitement come disillusion and apathy.
The efforts of reaction to put an end to strikes and to the mass workers movement in general have always, everywhere, ended in failure. Capitalist society needs an active, mobile, and intelligent proletariat; it cannot, therefore, bind the proletariat hand and foot for very long. On the other hand the anarachist ‘propaganda of the deed’ has shown every time that the state is much richer in the means of physical destruction and mechanical repression than are the terrorist groups.
If that is so, where does it leave the revolution? Is it negated or rendered impossible by this state of affairs? Not at all. For the revolution is not a simple aggregate of mechanical means. The revolution can arise only out of the sharpening of the class struggle, and it can find a guarantee of victory only in the social functions of the proletariat. The mass political strike, the armed insurrection, the conquest of state power – all this is determined by the degree to which production has been developed, the alignment of class forces, the proletariat’s social weight, and finally, by the social composition of the army, since the armed forces are the factor that in time of revolution determines the fate of state power.
Hasn’t the Northern minority been encouraged by the guerrilla actions of the Provisionals to look to the “secret army” of the republic for their salvation? Haven’t the masses become continually more passive as the Provisional campaign has developed? Hasn’t the number of people actively supporting the struggle consistently declined? That all these questions must be answered in the affirmative cannot be denied by any objective person, especially not by a Marxist, who must look at the situation as a whole and not be dazzled by the partial successes of those elements that strike the most spectacular blows against the repressive forces. The proof of this lies in the effectiveness of the repressive apparatuses North and South, in particular in the attitude of the Southern state that has gone further in collaborating with the British government and in suppressing the republican organizations than it has dared to go since the start of the present struggle.
In fact, the relative successes of the Provisionals, in the context of a steady decline of the struggle in the North and an increasing isolation of the oppressed Catholic communities, is a clear refutation of the IEC Majority Tendency’s vanguardist orientation. The popularity of the Provisionals with the most militant elements has increased precisely as the real power of the struggle has waned. Inevitably this will catch up with the Provisional organization itself, unless it changes its line or other factors intervene, but throughout this process the following of the Provisionals has increased by leaps and bounds.
Furthermore, Comrade O’Caithirneach not only took Lenin’s 1905 article out of its historical context but apparently did not consider the balance sheet that the Russian revolutionary Marxists made later of the experience with guerrilla warfare in these years. Of course, he could not have learned this from the IEC Majority Tendency’s writings. But in his book on Stalin, Trotsky discussed the “mass” terrorism of 1906–1909 in some detail, and offered more than one lesson that could prove useful in Ireland:
It was not, of course, a matter of abstract morality. All classes and parties approached the problem of assassination not from the point of view of the Biblical commandment but from the vantage point of the historical interests represented. When the Pope and his cardinals blessed the arms of Franco none of the conservative statesmen suggested that they be imprisoned for inciting murders. Official moralists come out against violence when the violence in question is revolutionary. On the contrary, whoever really fights against class oppression, must perforce acknowledge revolution. Whoever acknowledges revolution, acknowledges civil war. Finally, ‘guerrilla warfare is an inescapable form of struggle ... whenever more or less extensive intervals occur between major engagements in a civil war.’ [Lenin] From the point of view of the general principles of the class struggle, all of that was quite irrefutable. Disagreements came with the evaluation of concrete historical circumstances. When two major battles of the civil war are separated from each other by two or three months, that interval will inevitably be filled in with guerrilla blows against the enemy. But when the ‘intermission’ is stretched out over years, guerrilla war ceases to be a preparation for a new battle and becomes instead a convulsion after defeat. It is of course, not easy to determine the moment of the break.
Questions of Boycottism and of guerrilla activities were closely interrelated. It is permissible to boycott representative assemblies only in the event that the mass movement is sufficiently strong either to overthrow them or to ignore them. But when the masses are in retreat, the tactic of the boycott loses its revolutionary meaning. Lenin understood that and explained it better than others. As early as 1905 he repudiated the boycott of the Duma. After the coup of June third, 1907, he led a resolute fight against the Boycottists precisely because the high-tide had been succeeded by the ebb-tide. It was self-evident that guerrilla activities had become sheer anarchism when it was necessary to utilize even the arena of Tsarist ‘parliamentarism’ in order to prepare the ground for the mobilization of the masses. [Trotsky notes elsewhere that the actual scope of the guerrilla war reached its peak in 1907, that is, after Lenin rejected boycottism and by extension the use of the “new methods” mentioned in the 1906 article. Lenin obviously did not base his judgment on the “military” success of the “armed struggle.” – G.F.] At the crest of the civil war guerrilla activities augmented and stimulated the mass movement; in the period of reaction they attempted to replace it, but, as a matter of fact, merely embarrassed the Party and speeded its disintegration. Olminsky, one of the more noticeable of Lenin’s companions-in-arms, shed critical light on that period from the perspective of Soviet times. ‘Not a few of the fine youth,’ he wrote, ‘perished on the gibbet; others degenerated; still others were disappointed in the revolution. At the same time people at large began to confound revolutionists with ordinary bandits. Later, when the revival of the revolutionary labor movement began, that revival was slowest in those cities where ‘exes’ [expropriations – G.F.] had been most numerous.” [Stalin, pp. 98–99]
In the case of the 1906-09 guerrilla warfare, also, the popularity of terrorism increased as the fundamental movement that gave it its mass character declined:
On the whole, the three-year period from 1905 through 1907 is particularly notable for both terrorist acts and strikes. But what stands out is the divergence between their statistical records: while the number of strikers fell off rapidly from year to year, the number of terrorist acts mounted with equal rapidity. Clearly, individual terrorism increased as the mass movement declined. Yet terrorism could not grow stronger indefinitely. The impetus unleashed by the revolution was bound to spend itself in terrorism as it had spent itself in other spheres. Indeed, while there were 1,231 assassinations in 1907, they dropped to 400 in 1908 and to about a hundred in 1909. The growing percentage of the merely wounded indicated, moreover, that now the shooting was being done by untrained amateurs, mostly by callow youngsters. (Page 96)
Furthermore, Trotsky clearly did not draw the conclusion that the devotees of “armed struggle” were the purest revolutionary current:
In the Caucasus, with its romantic traditions of highway robbery and gory feuds still very much alive, guerrilla warfare found any number of fearless practitioners. More than a thousand terrorist acts of all kinds were perpetrated in Transcaucasia alone during 1905–1907, the years of the First Revolution. Fighting detachments found also a great spread of activity in the Urals, under the leadership of the Bolsheviks, and in Poland under the banner of the P.P.S. (Polish Socialist Party). On the second of August 1906, scores of policemen and soldiers were assassinated on the streets of Warsaw and other Polish cities. According to the explanation of the leaders, the purpose of the attacks was ‘to bolster the revolutionary mood of the proletariat.’ The leader of these leaders was Joseph Pilsudski, the future ‘liberator’ of Poland, and its oppressor. (Page 96)
Among other things, reading Trotsky on Stalin would have forewarned the Irish comrades about the prospects for Saor Eire:
A typical picture of how even the most disciplined detachments degenerated is given in his memoirs by the already-cited Samoilov, a former Duma deputy of the Ivanovo-Voznesensk textile workers. The detachment, acting originally ‘under the directives of the Party Center,’ began to ‘misbehave’ during the second half of 1906. When it offered the Party only a part of the money it had stolen at a factory (having killed the cashier during the act), the Party Committee refused it flatly and reprimanded the fighters. But it was already too late; they were disintegrating rapidly and soon descended to ‘bandit attacks of the most ordinary criminal type.’ Always having large sums of money, the fighters began to preoccupy themselves with carousing, in the course of which they often fell into the hands of the police. Thus, little by little, the entire fighting detachment came to an ignominious end. ‘We must, however, admit,’ writes Samoilov, ‘that in its ranks were not a few ... genuinely devoted comrades who were loyal to the cause of the revolution and some with hearts as pure as crystal ...’ (Page 97)
The Irish comrades have not been taught to recognize a decline in the mass struggle and draw the necessary conclusions from it. For them, guerrilla warfare seems to always move forward. After all, doesn’t it represent the “revolutionary phase” of the struggle, according to the IEC Majority Tendency? As a result of this training, they called for a boycott of the Northern elections in May and June, 1973, on the grounds, among other things, that the struggle had gone beyond parliamentarism. The Irish comrades thought the thing to do was to call for reviving the forms of dual power that existed at the height of the popular upsurge. But they failed (1) to recognize that the mass movement was in a steep decline and (2) to recognize that the embryonic dual power that existed was the result of the mass civil-rights movement and could not be revived without a revival first of the broad movement that engendered it. That is, under the influence of the miseducation they received from the IMG and the IEC Majority Tendency, they made the fundamental error of mistaking the hind part of a revolution for the fore part. Thus, they were left unarmed for grappling with the realities of the situation and assuming their real tasks.
 

The Example of Algeria
There was something obviously very wrong, fundamentally wrong, with the method these young comrades used. It lay in the subjectivism so evident in Eanna O’Caithirneach’s approach to the question of terrorism. If so many people were, doing it, there had to be something to it. Moral solidarity with the heroic young terrorists became subtly transmuted into political endorsement, tail-ending, of their actions in the way that became so typical of The Red Mole’s Irish articles. In the process Marxist categories were turned into empty generalities to rationalize impressionist judgments. At first this process led simply to a political default, a refusal to face the realities squarely and draw the necessary conclusions. But over time, it was inevitable that this kind of fuzzy thinking would lead to total confusion. And such confusion, unfortunately, is the distinguishing feature of Comrade O’Caithirneach’s article.
After quoting Lenin to try to demonstrate the value of the “new methods” of guerrilla warfare and then arguing that terrorism is not terrorism when it is supported by large layers of the population, Comrade O’Caithirneach goes on to explain that there really is a terrorist problem in the new mass vanguard.
As we pointed out above, terrorism for the past years has taken on a world dimension. It is essential to understand that such a phenomenon is objectively a product of the crisis of capitalism itself.
After the late 60s, a new revolutionary vanguard has emerged in the context of this crisis of capitalism but also of the crisis of traditional workers’ parties, particularly in rupture with Stalinism. But this revolutionary vanguard has not necessarily emerged organized in a strong credible revolutionary pole. As a matter of fact, the crux of the problem lies in the inadequacy between the maturation of the objective revolutionary situation and the weaknesses of the organized revolutionary vanguard. This gap leaves young generations of revolutionary militants oscillating between revolutionary exhalation and desperate revolt.
Isn’t this exactly the kind of mood Comrade Novack was describing in the passage that Comrade O’Caithirneach found so “abstract,” “moralistic,” and so dangerously open to “reformist” interpretation? Why is he unable to draw the obvious conclusion?
Two examples of this problem are given by Comrade O’Caithirneach – the Palestinian resistance, which receives short shrift, except for the DPFLP; and the Provisional bombing campaign, which is viewed much more sympathetically. The bombing campaign may have had its weaknesses but after all.
... the split of the Orange monolith was consummated through this campaign. Unlike the ‘Black September’ action which solidified the Zionist front, the Provisional Campaign blew up the Orange front; this campaign in spite of technical mistakes, of political weaknesses, was successful only because it was linked intimately with mass resistance struggle.”
Anyway, it was the only game in town:
Eventually it is theoretically correct to say that if a Revolutionary Socialist Party had led the armed struggle in Ireland, the liberation war would have reached a higher level; likewise it is correct to say and to propagandize for the transformation of the Army of the People (IRA) into the People’s Army [This formulation is puzzling. In view of the IMG’s dalliance with the Dail Uladh conception, the question arises whether Comrade O’Caithirneach thinks that a revolutionary armed force can be created from above first and given popular content afterward. – G.F.], through the organization of People’s militias, Vigilantes Units and the like, elected and armed by the population for the protection of the ghettos.
But the point is, that Socialists have got to take sides, whether or not such situation exists. To condemn or refuse to support the IRA at this stage by arguing ‘that it would be better if such a situation existed’ does not in actual terms provide help in the process of political maturation of this organization; moreover it condemns those who issue such statements to sheer political isolation from the class or the national struggle; likewise it prevents them to influence politically their course.
This has been clearly demonstrated during the Algerian war of liberation when the Fourth International refused either to tail-end reformists or to sacrifice content for the form when denouncing the M.N.A. which sounded more Marxists [sic] to many and ended by pledging its support to Charles de Gaulle in 1958. Instead it supported the FLN (National Liberation Front) coupling technical help (e.g. the publication of their paper El Mujahid) with political support. This laid the basis for a political radicalization, which one will easily appreciate when studying the evolution of the FLN from the 1954 bombings to the establishment of ‘Workers’ and Peasants’ Control’ in 1963 under the leadership of Ben Bella and his comrades.
Apparently Comrade O’Caithirneach has based a whole strategy for orienting toward guerrilla movements on a one-sided version of the Algerian experience. Is he aware that in Algeria itself, after years of activity, the Trotskyist movement made no lasting impact whatsoever either in terms of cadres or political influence? While it is possible for socialist intellectuals to gain considerable personal influence in broad national liberation groups by becoming technical experts of various kinds, it is not possible to educate a cadre without firmly putting forward clear Marxist principles. No one except dead-end sectarians of the SLL variety would say that revolutionists should condemn or denounce terrorists or guerrilla fighters. But Marxists cannot point the way forward without keeping their principles clear.
The guerrillas will learn by their own experience, the results of political errors, and, if they have the capacity for political development, look for the answers where they are to be found, not from their “friends” who employed their superior political education to rationalize their errors. The whole development in the Latin-American left since 1969 shows this lesson clearly. At the very time the majority of the young revolutionists were abandoning the guerrilla orientation, under the blows of reality, the followers of the Ninth World Congress Majority became its most insistent supporters. Not only did they fail to influence the broader Guevarist currents but they lost the bulk of their forces to alien ideas (this was the fate, for instance of the “comrades of the PRT/ERP’). Unfortunately, in spite of these experiences (does he know of them? has he discussed them? what are his opinions of the losses the Trotskyist movement suffered in Latin America?), Comrade O’Caithirneach seems to have elevated adaptationism into a strategy for a whole period, and on the basis of an idealized version of the Algerian experience! He could have learned this only from the IEC Majority Tendency.
 

What Road Forward?
This adaptationism ultimately makes the article almost incomprehensible. It is impossible to draw any clear political line from it. After all this “understanding” and “solidarity,” the concluding appeal to young revolutionists, tempted by the seemingly more direct road of terrorism to “seek another road,” loses all force and coherence. He writes:
As we noted earlier in this expose, it is vital to understand that new generations of revolutionaries can be misled in the deadlock of terrorist actions which they consider revolutionary in essence.
The reformists siding with the bourgeoisie condemn them. The duty of revolutionary Marxists is to face frankly the situation, remembering what Trotsky said of Herschel Grynszpan, this young Jewish terrorist who killed a member of the Nazi embassy in Paris in 1938:
“People come cheap who are only capable of fulminating against injustice and bestiality. But those who, like Grynszpan, are able to act as well as conceive, sacrificing their own lives if need be, are the precious leaven of mankind.
“In the moral sense, although not for his mode of action, Grynszpan may serve as an example for every young revolutionist. Our moral solidarity with Grynszpan gives us an added right to say to all the other would-be Grynszpans, to all those capable of self-sacrifice in the struggle against despotism and bestiality: SEEK ANOTHER ROAD!
“Not the lone avenger can free the oppressed but only a great revolutionary movement of the masses which will leave no remnant of the entire structure of class exploitation, national oppression and racial persecution.”
What is Comrade O’Caithirneach’s conclusion from this passage? He either cannot understand or cannot accept (which is more likely) Trotsky’s clear call to fighters like Grynszpan to abandon terrorism and take the road of Marxism. Instead he draws a peculiarly centrist conclusion that suggests a sort of convergence between terrorism and the Marxist movement, a “fusion” perhaps of Marxism and republicanism. Comrade O’Caithirneach writes:
The lesson is simple: the commitment and energy of such militants must be used to the best of their capability; the task of a revolutionary organization is to provide this ‘road’ linking their struggle with the masses of workers in motion. In this sense, even minority violence can be used as tactical means in the over-all strategy for the conquest of power by the masses.
Under these conditions it will be possible to use fully the experience of groups of militants who fight to a certain extent in the dark, but unsparingly.
To win these militants over to the proletarian revolution is vital, for in every generation there are few militants of this calibre; but in order to win them over, one must understand their struggle.
What road, then, is Comrade O’Caithirneach recommending? The road of Marxism – of educating, organizing, and mobilizing the masses? Then, why all the justification of terrorism? On the other hand, he obviously does think that there is something wrong with terrorism. But what it is precisely is hard to say. If the Provisionals’ brand of terrorism is more closely tied to the mass struggle than other varieties, how have they achieved this? What is the secret of their success? What political lessons can the Palestinian resistance learn from them? Obviously, none. The difference between the terrorism of the Palestinians and the Provisionals is not the result of any strategy or political conceptions but of conditions that neither movement produced or had any control over. The Orange monolith was split by the rise of the civil- rights movement; it was deepened by the mass resistance of the Catholic people. The terrorist actions of the Provisionals could not break the morale of the Loyalists or the hold of Orangeism over them. Why does Comrade O’Caithirneach think that Protestants can be expected to react differently to isolated acts of terrorism in Protestant neighborhoods than Israeli Jews to the actions of Black September? Have his advisors really answered that question?
In all, the educational and scientific value of this attempt to demonstrate a contrast between the actions of the Palestinians (except DPFLP) and that of the Provisionals is zero. Comrade O’Caithirneach calls on the heroic youth of Ireland, in the words of the founder of the Red Army, to ‘seek another road’ but without pointing to any definite road at all. If he had only begun his quote a few lines above, or continued it a few lines further, the road would have been clear. In the preceding sentence, Trotsky says:
The Stalinists shriek in the ears of the police that Grynszpan attended ‘meetings of Trotskyites.’ That, unfortunately, is not true. For had he walked into the milieu of the Fourth International he would have discovered a different and more effective outlet for his revolutionary energy.
The article ends:
The unprecedented crimes of fascism create a yearning for vengeance wholly justifiable. But so monstrous is the scope of their crimes, that this yearning cannot be satisfied by the assassination of isolated fascist bureaucrats. For that it is necessary to set in motion millions, tens and hundreds of millions of the oppressed throughout the whole world and lead them in the assault upon the strongholds of the old society. Only the overthrow of all forms of slavery, only the complete destruction of fascism, only the people sitting in merciless judgment over the contemporary bandits and gangsters can provide real satisfaction to the indignation of the people. This is precisely the task that the Fourth International has set itself. It will cleanse the labor movement of the plague of Stalinism. It will rally in its ranks the heroic generation of the youth. It will cut a path to a worthier and more humane future.” (For Grynszpan: Against the Fascist Pogrom Gangs and Stalinist Scoundrels, Intercontinental Press, October 16, 1972, pp. 1126–27.)
Trotsky was clearly not talking about artificially “linking” the struggle of terrorists to the masses but about “another road” entirely, the road of the Transitional Program for organizing mass insurrection.
Only armed workers’ detachments who feel the support of tens of millions of toilers behind them can successfully prevail against the fascist bands.
Obviously such numbers could not be achieved in Ireland, but a far broader movement than either or both of the IRAs is necessary to successfully confront imperialism and the Orange bands. Trotsky also said: “It is necessary to advance the slogan of a workers’ militia ...” He does not say that “obviously it would be better” if there were a workers militia but in the meantime the choice is do you or do you not support the terrorist groups that exist. Comrade O’Caithirneach’s counterposition of support or non-support is nothing but a false dilemma. It goes without saying that every revolutionist supports the IRA against imperialism and the Orange and capitulationist bourgeoisies. As such, for Marxists, this statement is as elementary and meaningless as an aphorism from Mao’s Little Red Book. That is about how much the method of “elliptical and synthetic phrases” illustrated by the Ninth World Congress Resolution on Latin America is worth. This soporific truism has been used to charm away the real political problem – what program must be raised. Just because we support the IRA against imperialism we do not stop putting forward our program. To do that would mean definitively abandoning the political leadership of the struggle to non-Marxist forces, tail-ending a non-Marxist program. There is no future for a Trotskyist group that does this (at least not as a Trotskyist group).
 

The Need for Leninist Clarity
What have been the practical effects of the method illustrated by Comrade O’Caithirneach’s article? While it is not possible, of course, to get a complete picture from relatively short visits, some very disturbing symptoms can be noticed very quickly. The first is the ease with which this very young, inexperienced, and highly vulnerable group was led into the wildest adventurist delusions in the period around Comrade Graham’s death by the guerrillaist orientation of the IEC Majority Tendency. The second is its consistent misjudgment of the situation in the North and the state of the mass movement, as shown in the document on the North adopted at its founding conference, which claimed that the Provisionals were developing organs of direct democracy in Belfast; and its articles on the Northern elections and their aftermath, which called for a revival of dual power in a period of decline in the mass movement.
Another disturbing symptom was a certain tendency that persisted for many months of conceiving the role of a propaganda group in such a narrow and static way that it seemed virtually to exclude any activity and deny in practice the perspective of the group ever developing into a revolutionary party or even the nucleus of a revolutionary party. This tendency was all the more disturbing in that it would be the logical outcome of a tendency to view one or the other, or both republican organizations as an “adequate instrument,” as an organization that could lead the Irish revolution without being fundamentally transformed both by the ideas and example of revolutionary Marxists. Such a conception would relegate a Trotskyist propaganda group to a passive or auxiliary role. In particular, if “armed struggle” is “the key,” it is natural for militants to conclude that small organizations have little role to play. The exciting and important thing is to become part of the “armed vanguard.”
On a recent trip to Ireland, I found that one of the key contacts of the Irish comrades had drawn just this conclusion. He was a young radical from their milieu essentially who had joined the Provisionals and was apparently doing some good work in introducing political ideas into the organization. Although he liked the comrades’ ideas about “the revolutionary role of the Provisionals,” he was convinced that the RMG as such had no role to play. Of course, this was only one individual but the Irish comrades’ political contacts in the Provisionals are not so many. And this attitude seemed to be a natural outgrowth of the IMG’s line of praising the efficacy of “armed struggle” as such, divorced from the political work of organizing and educating the masses, a line that has been reflected to a considerable degree by the RMG since its inception.
Furthermore, the IMG’s work in the solidarity movement in Britain does not seem to have won much respect for Trotskyists as such in the Provisionals. Since the British organization has not build anything in its own right but rather adapted to the Provisionals’ politics, it seems that it will be the special needs of the Provisionals that will determine whether they have any use for Trotskyists or not – as a political catspaw. And they are most likely to need such an instrument while they are on the retreat rather than while they are on the advance. Therefore, it is extremely important for the Irish Trotskyists to see their work with the Provisionals in the context of the general situation and their long-term political tasks. Otherwise, the systematic work of building a section could be disrupted and diverted.
If the concrete context and perspectives are not kept in mind, our Irish comrades, in seeking to make a breakthrough in the “armed vanguard,” can run into a deadly trap; that is, being pulled after the Provisionals into the kind of disaster that marked the end of the 1956–62 guerrilla campaign. In the best of circumstances, they would find themselves committed to defending bankrupt policies at the very time they were being abandoned by the rest of the Irish vanguard and even the decisive forces in and behind the Provisionals.
In the event of more serious setbacks for the Provisionals, it will, of course, be all the more important to defend them – both to minimize the losses of militants and to get the chance to explain the reasons for the defeats and what must be done to rebuild the mass movement and lead it to victory in the next upsurge. But in the first place, no effective defense work can be done without a realistic assessment of the period and rigorous political discipline, which are completely incompatible with any concessions to ultra-leftism. Secondly, political gains can only be made by putting forward a Marxist program.
Even in such simple matters as how a small group should function, the RMG seems to have suffered unduly from the education it has received from the IEC Majority Tendency. In one discussion I attended it was seriously argued that the reason for the group’s low level of activity was that the individual comrades had not read enough Marxist literature. This conclusion flowed from Comrade Mandel’s pamphlet on the Leninist Theory of Organization, which was quoted to support it:
The category of the Revolutionary party stems from the fact that Marxian socialism is a science which, in the final analysis, can only be assimilated in an individual and not a collective manner.
The Irish comrades attempted to base themselves on this conception of Leninism. As a result, they missed one of the basic conceptions of Leninism. That is, even theoretical Marxism can usually be assimilated only through involvement in building the revolutionary party. Comrade Mandel’s formulation opens the door to an individualist and intellectualist deviation that fits in well with relegating Trotskyists to the role of advisors to broader movements.
In the first place, sciences are not assimilated individually. Scientific learning is an eminently collective process. In this it differs notably from the literary disciplines. But what group of young Trotskyists anywhere – outside of those benefiting from the kind of advanced theory that emanates from the IEC Majority Tendency leaders in Western Europe – would get the idea that the elementary work of getting out the ideas and literature of Trotskyism depended on the individual study habits of the members? No effective revolutionary group can be built on such petty-bourgeois elitist principles, principles which at the same time as being elitist are “spontanéist” in the worst sense, in that they negate the political responsibility of leadership.
This approach is also reflected in the RMG’s debate with the Stalinoid sect that has established a reputation in student left circles as being the most “serious Marxists.” The RMG comrades correctly assessed this group as their most immediate rival. They realized that they had to establish themselves as the most respected source of Marxist ideas. But in this, they made the theoretical and political error of being drawn onto the ground of academic theorizing chosen by the Stalinoids (the BICO), into debates over the social history of the late medieval period in Scotland and Ireland and the details of Irish economic history. Aside from incidental errors, in debating the character of the Northern Protestant community and how it fitted into Irish national development, they did not keep the main political principle to the forefront. The question of whether or not the Protestants can be characterized as a nation is after all a rather academic one. The political question that must be answered is whether revolutionists should defend the right of the Protestants to self-determination. And the answer to that is absolutely clear. No. In the concrete circumstances, any distinct “Protestant” consciousness is pro-imperialist and reactionary through and through. To proclaim and defend the Leninist position on this question does not require any special theories about the nature of the Scottish reformism or a “unique Gaelic feudalism.”
Furthermore, the concept of the revolutionary party requires that those who aspire to lead the working class take clear political positions and accept responsibility for them. But in both the propaganda and analysis of the IMG and the IEC Majority Tendency, there is a general failure to keep the main principles clear and to the fore and a dismaying tendency for unexplained shifts to occur in orientation without discussion of what was wrong in the previous line or how such mistakes should be avoided in the future. The attempt to take an “understanding” attitude toward non-Marxist positions has resulted in “elliptical and synthetic” formulations and multiple “variants” that in the case of this young group have led on several occasions to the most dangerous political confusion.
 

‘Seek Another Road’
While the involved speculations and pretentious abstract formulas typical of the IEC Majority Tendency can prove attractive for a time in areas where young revolutionists live primarily on ideas and can function in a rather routine way (this, of course, can include exciting although stereotyped activities) the climate in Ireland is much severer. Ideas and theories are put to a rapid and stern test by the recurring crises and great political complexities. The method of the IEC Majority Tendency has led the IMG into abject confusion in its Irish work. The question then arises, since the RMG has received its training in Trotskyism to a large extent from the IMG and the IEC Majority Tendency, what future does it have? The answer is that if it continues to try to apply the method of the IEC Majority Tendency in Ireland, it has no future.
Not only can the empty generalities of the IEC Majority Tendency offer no guide to action in the difficult conditions the RMG faces, they will inevitably undermine and destroy such gains as the RMG has registered, primarily its understanding of the revolutionary dynamic of the struggle for democratic objectives such as national liberation and equality for women. The IEC Majority’s adaptationist method will first disorient and demoralize the few young cadres that exist and then drive them away from Trotskyism altogether. It will prevent the RMG from projecting any clear program, from learning from concrete experience, from testing its ideas and line against the reality of the revolutionary struggle. In the last analysis, the IMG and the IEC Majority Tendency have failed the Irish Trotskyists as badly as their original teachers of the Healyite League for a Workers Republic.
But members, of the RMG who have gone through an indigenous experience have some theoretical capital of their own, and that is primarily the experience of their political fight against the League for a Workers Republic. Although the League viewed itself as an irreconcilable opponent of adaptationism, it was in fact its mirror image. It had the same subjective method. In fact, I could not help being struck by the similarity of the arguments I had with the old leaders of the LWR and with some RMGers caught up in the logic of adaptationism. On the basis of a one-sided version of the past history of the Trotskyist movement in Britain and America, the LWR was determined to build a “proletarian” party. Only “working class” issues could interest them. Anyone who talked about anything other than a “proletarian orientation” was obviously revisionist. The very fact that someone would talk this way was proof enough of that. Everything you said after it was determined that you were not talking about “going to the workers” now was just additional evidence of renegacy or at best a sharp debater’s point. No matter what analysis was put forward, what facts were presented, or how many quotes from the Marxist classics could be produced to support an argument, it would have no effect. You were simply a revisionist and that was that.
The fact that the strike wave of the late sixties and the leftward movement of the Labour party dominated political life on the left in the period of their formation seemed to confirm their attitude. Their mistake was the notion that revolutionary activity had one definite style. That is, they thought in terms of shibboleths and not scientific analysis. A certain impression of the appearance of revolutionary activity blinded them to the actual process of the development of revolutionary opportunities.
The comrades adapting to ultra-leftism and guerrillaism have similar reflexes. Slogans that can appeal to the masses just don’t sound revolutionary. Participating in elections is reformist; calling for dual power is revolutionary. And what could be more revolutionary than “armed struggle”? Anyone who does not hail the Provisional guerrilla campaign is just a reformist, that’s all.
Despite the “flexibility” of the theoreticians who discover and prove in such an impressive style that the real tradition of Marxism does not conflict with, but rather justifies ultra-left moods, these attitudes are no less obscurantist and dogmatic than those that destroyed the most promising cadres of the LWR. The basic cadres of the RMG have had a chance to learn from this example. The future of Trotskyism in Ireland in the next period depends on their ability to draw the conclusions from this.
But there is a limit to the number of times a young cadre can follow a false path and survive politically. The adaptationist line has already destroyed two revolutionary organizations in Latin American that numbered many times the Irish group; hundreds of heroic cadres have been lost to Trotskyism and no one knows how many opportunities wasted because of the adaptationist politics of the IEC Majority Tendency. Now the adaptationist tendency has begun to take its toll in Europe.
In Ireland, where the revolutionary movement is one of the most promising and at the same time one of the must vulnerable, we cannot afford to lose one Irish cadre. The logic of adaptationism there will be quick and deadly. And its results will not be limited to Ireland. It is imperative for the Irish comrades to “seek another road.”
August 31, 1973
 

Foley: The Test of Ireland (Part 3)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

The Test of Ireland

Gerry Foley
The Test of Ireland
(Part 3)
* * *

The IEC Majority’s Guerrillaist Rejection of Mass Struggle Extended to Europe
The lesson of Derry, according to the IMG, was the “vulnerability” of mass struggle. In its February 7, 1972, issue The Red Mole argued:
The massacre which took place in the Bogside on Sunday 30 January claiming the lives of thirteen Irishmen will bring home to many people, inside and outside Ireland, the importance of the IRA’s role in the Six-Counties. It has been the existence of armed bodies of men engaged in the defense of the oppressed Catholic minority which has prevented the latter from being crushed by the British army. The main lessons of the massacre in the Bogside is that the Irish people have to defend themselves guns in hand against British imperialism ...
Since August 9th last year, British imperialism has been under a constant attack mounted by the oppressed Irish minority in the Six-Counties, but this attack has existed on two fronts: first the military struggle and secondly, the mass rents and rate strikes. These two fronts separated by the logistics of guerrilla warfare, were not only aimed at the same enemy, but were also linked politically through the mass popular demonstrations such as have been held over the last week, culminating in the 20,000 strong march in Derry.
The demonstrations, unarmed and presenting an easy target, were the obvious choice to attempt and break the tightening noose of resistance. The Army had failed completely to inflict a decisive blow against the IRA. The only way to defeat a rates and rents strike is by arresting thousands of householders. This was clearly impossible. The mass demonstrations provided the clearest target. Here lay the real hope of stemming the tide. Here one decisive blow could teach a terrible lesson to those who continued the resistance, because here the demonstrations were the largest and the most defiant; and because here a salient lesson could be taught to the whole Catholic population of Northern Ireland.
What is this but a war? On one side is British imperialism and the Orange Order and on the other the majority of the Irish working class, spearheaded by the minority in the Six-counties and represented militarily by the IRA.
The massacre was designed to intimidate the Catholic population. But it was by no means the first use of massive and murderous violence against the minority by the British Army, as shown by the long list of Catholic victims before then, to say nothing of the massive internment raids and continual forays into Catholic neighborhoods that followed them. The British Army did not need a peaceful march to “tempt” it into using armed force against unarmed civilians. The resumption of the mass civil-rights marches despite this intimidation represented a crucial political test of strength. It threatened a decisive political defeat for the policy of repression. To this threat, the British Army responded by a calculated escalation. It took a political gamble. Who won out? According to Comrade Purdie, it should have been the British army. The logic of his argument is that this head-on political confrontation should have been avoided because the unarmed masses could not stand up to the British military.
The murder of thirteen unarmed demonstrators dealt the British government its greatest defeat so far in the Irish crisis. It touched off the first general strike in Ireland since 1913. It forced the Dublin government to take hostile steps against London for the first time in the conflict, although before this there were hundreds of violations of Twenty-Six County sovereignty by the British army, even threatening armed clashes between Twenty-Six County security forces and British units. It evoked panic from the organs of international imperialism. The New York Times called on the British government in obvious concern to do something to stop the crisis from deteriorating. And what is more, for a period of some months the British army pulled its troops out of the Catholic ghettos, something that the long months of the Provisional “military campaign” and the “very careful sniping” of the Officials had been completely unable to make it do.
Why did the Derry massacre have this effect? It was because world public opinion and the masses of the Irish people could understand the demands of the marchers and identify with them. The demonstrators were demanding democratic rights that clearly belonged to them. They were supported by the masses of the Catholic population, as was shown by their numbers and the breadth of the united front. There was no question of their trying to force their opinions on anyone by military conspiracy or the armed violence of small groups. It was precisely by stressing the democratic and peaceful character of the march that the maximum support could be achieved for the oppressed minority from the broad masses in Ireland and throughout the world, who were far from understanding, as shown by their attitude and actions, the need for the revolutionary violence of commando groups. The fact that the peaceful, mass character of the march was evident to public opinion was what fundamentally explained the power of the protests against the obviously arbitrary and repressive terror of the British army. It was clear where the fault for the violence lay. It was clear who was using violence to suppress the democratic will of the people.
But the IMG drew a completely contrary conclusion:
The reaction Of the British press to Sunday’s killings throws into sharp relief the need to make support for the IRA a central task of the solidarity movement in Britain. Running through many of the reports is the idea that the main responsibility for the killings lies with the IRA. Imperialism’s use of internment, the presence and high concentration of British troops, the terror tactics and the murder, are all justified as being regrettable aspects of a necessary campaign against what it dubs a cancer within the Northern Catholic community – the IRA. A solidarity movement in Britain has to have as its main task the overcoming of such mystifications. This can only be achieved by showing that at this period the struggle of the IRA is the legitimate continuation of the struggle of the Irish people for self-determination. For militants who take the side of the oppressed minority of N. Ireland against the Stormont regime, the N. Irish State, and therefore British imperialism, it is vital to solidarise with the IRA, the only force capable of giving an immediate perspective of struggle against an enemy, which is determined to crush the resistance of the Irish people. A refusal to take up this position, in the present situation, means running the risk of falling into the arms of the British bourgeoisie, which is desperate only to smash the IRA before clinching a political deal with Lynch, Stormont, and the reformists in N. Ireland opposition who are prepared to sell out on the national question and accept less blatant but equally exploitative forms of imperialist domination. (Avenge Derry, Red Mole, February 7)
Thus, at a time when both the Provisional and Official IRA were trying to refute the lie that there were armed gunmen in the demonstration, that the massacre resulted from an armed clash between the IRA and the British army, the IMG saw its main task as defending the “armed action” of the IRA. This editorial started off in fact with the statement: “And after this massacre it is clearer still that the mass struggle in the North cannot be fought and defended without arms.” Protests by people who did not understand this, it argued, would be of little value: “Yet of the many protests which Monday’s Morning Star urges should ‘flood Downing Street’, few enough will help militants in Britain draw the necessary conclusions from this.”
In an impressionistic and typically petty-bourgeois leftist style, the IMG sought to turn the propaganda of the bourgeois press upside down. Its notion of developing a “mass solidarity movement” to protest an armed attack by the British army on an unarmed, united-front march, was to hail the “armed action” of the IRA, “the armed vanguard of the Irish people.”
The same notion is at work in the masquerades that have become typical not just of the IMG’s but of the IEC Majority Tendency’s way of expressing solidarity with the struggle in Ireland. In the Glasgow march, the IMG tried to live up to the romantic image of the IRA projected by the bourgeois press. The Belgian conferences where Comrade Lawless was passed off as an IRA leader tried to produce an IRA that would live up to the thrilling pictures of the bourgeois media. In short, this is a pathetic petty-bourgeois attempt to frighten the bourgeoisie by imitating the scarecrows of its propaganda. Its effect is to both endanger and mock those who are actually engaged in the struggle.
What would have been the political outcome of the Derry massacre if there had actually been armed IRA men on the march or posted nearby? This question does not have to be answered by logic alone. No “hypotheses” are necessary. The whole course of the struggle in Northern Ireland since the spring of 1972 gives a concrete and irrefutable answer. With the death of the civil-rights movement, the IMG need not fear the possibility of unarmed masses confronting the British army. Since the resumption of the Provisional campaign in July, “armed struggle” has been the focus in Northern Ireland. In fact, technically the Provisional campaign is much improved, being bolstered by rockets and mortars whose effectiveness has been hailed in The Red Mole.
But what is the state of the situation now in Northern Ireland? A year ago, the murder of thirteen peaceful marchers by the British army touched off the sharpest crisis in the history of British imperialism in Ireland since the 1919–21 war of independence. Imperialist rule was shaken. Great masses of Southern Irish people rose up to defend their compatriots in the North. The full force of world public opinion was turned against the British rulers.
In contrast to that, since the resumption of the Provisional campaign on a wider scale the Northern people find themselves almost completely isolated. Not only that but the repression has extended to the South. The masses’ fears of a seemingly uncontrolled and uncontrollable bombing campaign was so great that the explosion of a few bombs in Dublin, an obvious provocation, was enough to dissipate the opposition to draconian legislation against the militant nationalists in the South.
In the crisis that extended from the British army’s murder of Cusack and Beattie in Derry city in July 1971 to the Derry massacre and direct rule, the bourgeois nationalists were on the defensive both North and South. The battered bourgeois nationalist party in the North was on the brink of being pushed into an impossible position, into either committing itself irreparably to revolutionary opposition to the Belfast parliament or exposing itself once and for all as a traitorous body. Today the bourgeois nationalists in the North have reconsolidated themselves as the political leadership of the Catholic minority. One year ago, the death of thirteen unarmed marchers brought worldwide protests. Since the resumption of the Provisional campaign, over a hundred people have been murdered by Orange assassins and by the British army’s equivalent of the Green Berets, and there has not been a whisper of protest, not even in the South of Ireland. One year and a half ago, Britain’s claim to being the “peacemaker,” the arbiter in the North, was hopelessly compromised. After months of the Provisional military campaign, this image has been restored, to such an extent that the politicians of the Dublin government can say publicly that they are opposed to a British withdrawal and get away with it. Until the resumption of the Provisional campaign, internment was a running sore in British politics and a grave international problem for the British government. Over the last year internment has continued and dozens of Irish liberation fighters have been sentenced to horrifying sentences by drumhead courts, and this has not aroused a ripple of international protest.
What has the IMG’s policy of explaining the need for “solidarity with the armed struggle” done for this generation of Irish martyrs? All that it was capable of doing was giving the coup de grace to an already declining support movement in Britain and defending the sterile tactics that led to this disaster.
 

The IMG Tail-Ends the Centrist Official IRA
The failure of the IMG in the solidarity movement to help the fighters in Ireland, even its parasitic attitude and its mockery of them was, however, not its most serious error. In the wake of the Derry massacre, in the period of the mass protests when British imperialism was on the defensive, there was an opportunity for a qualitative leap in the revolutionary process in Ireland, there was an opportunity to build an all-Ireland mass revolutionary movement and possibly even arm the masses. The Southern government was reeling from the gigantic upsurge in the South. The entire Northern Catholic population was united in its hatred of the British and Belfast regimes. British imperialism was on the defensive. With proper direction, the mass movement could have forced the opening of the border, compelled the Dublin government to allow the passage of massive material aid to the North, and prevented the British government for a time at least from seriously interfering. But instead of pointing the way forward for the mass movement, the IMG tail-ended petty-bourgeois terrorist politics.
In accordance with its conception of itself as the “army of the people,” as the “defenders” of the mass movement, the Official IRA responded to the Derry massacre by carrying out a terrorist action in Great Britain. It tried to bomb the officers’ mess at the Aldershot paratroop base. The bankrupt centrism of the Official IRA was never more clearly revealed than by this incident. To compensate for its inability to offer a perspective to the mass movement, it resorted to a stunt designed to win the applause of the masses. Instead of understanding how to capitalize on the mass sentiment running in favor of the national liberation struggle, it squandered its advantage for the moral satisfaction of punishing the murders directly by killing a few officers in the same branch of the military. Although to give credit where credit is due, when they saw the negative effects of the operation, not having the benefit of the brilliant theory and conjunctural analysis enjoyed by the IMG as a result of its relations with the IEC Majority Tendency, the Official leadership recognized its error.
The Official leadership, however, was in a position to feel these effects directly. When the bomb attempt went wrong and killed several cleaning women and a Catholic chaplain, the tide of popular sentiment abruptly reversed itself, leaving the Officials high and dry. In the South of Ireland, where tens of thousands of organized workers had marched in protest against the murders committed by the paratroopers and had burned the British embassy to the ground, the Officials found themselves totally isolated in the wake of Aldershot. No one came to their defense. Fortunately, they were able to embarrass the government by making it clear that the arrest of their leaders was aimed at suppressing the political activity of the organization, at making it unable to campaign in the Common Market referendum. This “reformist” democratic appeal saved them; they did not take this occasion to defend the “need for armed struggle.”
This was the tack taken, however, by the IMG. An editorial in the February 28, 1972, Red Mole rushed to their “defense.”
There must be no let up in the tempo of public agitation on Ireland, though the need for all meetings to be properly stewarded is now of prime importance. In this situation many will be tempted to retreat behind the cover of arguments of the form ‘Marxism vs. Neo-anarchist Terrorism’. This must be resisted. In our society we are constantly experiencing the violence of the bourgeoisie. This occurs in covert – the violence of economic deprivation and social oppression – and overt – the open violence of the army and police forms. We deny them the right to use this violence. Every time they do as on Bloody Sunday in Derry, we will use it to show the rottenness of their system.
For us violence is a response to their violence. The use of it is not a moral question. It is merely a tactic in our struggle – is a particular act of violence conducive to carrying the struggle forward or is it counterproductive?
No matter what criticism we might make of the tactics of the carrying out of this particular action the main fact is still that we unconditionally support the right of the IRA, or any other faction of the Republican population to carry on armed action aimed at destroying British rule in Ireland.
The pacifists and liberals may weep and wring their hands with grief but even in their own moralising terms the just violence of the IRA is nothing compared to the centuries of British imperialist butchery in Ireland. In political terms as we have explained, the struggle of the IRA is in the direct interests of the British working class. The fact that a bad technical error or tactical mistake meant that unfortunately British army officers were not killed by the blast, does not in the slightest alter the political content of the struggle of the IRA.
It is in this light that we must look at the Aldershot incident.
Victory to the I.R.A.
The main point as to the historic responsibility for the use of violence was correct, of course. But in the concrete instance was this sufficient? Didn’t the statement gloss over a tragic political error? The IMG, however, was quick to clarify its position. In the March 13, 1972, issue of The Red Mole, it said:
Had Aldershot been a success (leaving aside the question of whether or not Officers were killed for the moment). [The Red Mole tended to give credence to an Official statement that the British were hiding their real casualties. – G.F.], there can be little doubt that the Northern minority, and the rest of the Irish people would have been heartened. As it is the action spells out clearly to the British Army, the consequences of a future massacre like that at Derry. Had the IRA simply ignored the massacre it would have encouraged the attempts of British imperialism to frighten the mass movement off the streets. [I was in the living room of some key organizers of the “mass movement” when the news of Aldershot came over the TV. Their reaction at least was that it meant that the political advantage won by the Bloody Sunday protests had been squandered and that now those who died in the massacre had died in vain. – G.F.], The new campaign also multiplies the contradictions for Stormont and Westminster; they had been making a lot of noise about the lower level of the Provisionals’ campaign, although they were stretched taut in dealing with it. The Officials will make their military and propaganda situation more difficult.
The IMG hoped that the Aldershot bombing, plus some other actions of a similar type meant, to quote Comrade Purdie’s pamphlet, that the Officials were being forced off their “conservative pedestal.” The March 13 article continued:
Aldershot, however, shows up some important contradictions in the Officials’ policy. Firstly their repeated condemnations of Provisional actions, while being careful in selecting those which could be interpreted as being sectarian, nevertheless have tended to make generalised criticisms of the military struggle of the Provisionals which seem to counterpose a non-violent response to the situation. An example of this is in the interview given to Seven Days by Cathal Goulding, where he criticises the Provisionals for escalating the struggle after internment: ‘But the Provisionals escalated the struggle and that gave Faulkner the excuse he needed to continue internment.’
Such statements had brought the Officials many a false friend recently, who praised their ‘responsibility’, and denounced the Provisionals as ‘terrorists.’ It is as well to lose such supporters, but by giving them a basis in the first place the Officials did not help to clarify the politics of the situation. And if they are serious about carrying through such a campaign it is as well to prepare the Irish people for it in advance; they have done the reverse. It is as well also not to have organisations which are well-known to be heavily under Official influence, such as the NICRA, denouncing the bombing (see Morning Star, 23rd February).
These contradictions, which can all be explained in terms of ‘tactics,’ in reality flow from the basic contradictions within Official policy, their attitude towards Stormont. Still insisting, after internment, after Derry, that Stormont can be reformed, they are propelled into reformist and gradualist politics. At the present conjuncture the mass demonstrations do have a revolutionary potential, since they increase the contradictions of the Unionists and British imperialism; but not being placed in the context of a policy which tries to smash Stormont, their line of development is extremely limited.
But the Officials are still Republicans, they still come from the physical force tradition [which Comrade Purdie now no longer considered ’backward” – G.F.], It is impossible for them to stand idly by while the British Army tries to crush the minority in the North; retaliatory action was necessary, and has been taken. This, however, merely opens up more contradictions, for such a campaign will have very serious consequences for Stormont. If it is carried on for an extended period it could well lead to the collapse of Stormont, and if the alternative is not to be direct rule it is necessary to prepare the ground work for a peoples’ alternative now.
It will be inevitable too that such a basic contradiction will lead to disagreements within the Officials; one section will try to resolve the contradiction by bringing the military policy into line with the reformist political policy, and another will try to change the political line. This is not the best internal situation with which to sustain a military campaign.
Nevertheless we pledge our continued solidarity with the struggle now going on, and will renew our attempts to build a principled solidarity movement in Britain, one which does not hesitate to say: VICTORY TO THE IRA!
The Official IRA did not follow the IMG’s friendly advice. When the pattern of “retaliatory” actions isolated them and brought them to the brink of destruction, they declared the cease-fire that was such a disappointment to the IMG and their continental co-thinkers.
But if the Officials let down the IMG, there were still the Provisionals, whose military prowess The Red Mole never failed to praise, although at times expressing some disquiet about their political conceptions. In the March 13 article, a hope expressed by Comrade Purdie was that the Officials might wage a more political terrorist campaign than the Provisionals:
Until the beginning of this year the main core of the military struggle had been carried on by the Provisionals, being cast in the traditional Republican mould, they have seen themselves, fighting another army. This dictated sniping at soldiers, and attacking military installations and while they did give their campaign a political edge by attempting to bomb life in Belfast to a standstill, this has not been achieved and has more and more taken the form of random actions.”
 

The IMG Tail-Ends the Provisionals’ Terrorist Course
On March 21, one of these “random actions” took place in Donegall Street, one of the main thoroughfares of Belfast. A bomb was planted in the street itself, and then the Provisionals apparently called the British army, warning them of the impending blast. Forcing the occupation forces to clear this heavily trafficked street while they searched for the bomb would have been a significant contribution to the campaign to “bomb life in Belfast to a standstill.” The British, however, did not cooperate. And it appears that they actually herded the crowd into the area where the bomb was expected to explode. When the event occurred, television sets throughout Europe and America showed British soldiers rushing to the aid of wounded and maimed civilians, including children, who were allegedly struck down by the “gunmen” of the Provisional IRA. Sanctimonious speeches by “shocked” British officers filled the airwaves.
There was something very wrong politically with this type of action. The concept of a military campaign divorced from the mass struggle, however, led inevitably to such incidents. The Provisionals’ actions were consistent with their political concepts, and they did not hesitate to take responsibility for this action and to carry out others like it later on. It was the IMG that was inconsistent.
After all, Comrade Purdie wrote in his pamphlet published just a few months before the Donegall Street bombing:
It soon became clear that the British Army faced an urban guerrilla war, a war which was probably tougher than the Black & Tan war and one of the most sophisticated guerrilla campaigns that has ever been seen. Within a few months the Army was totally incapable of making any progress, the audacity of the IRA volunteers knew no bounds, they pulled off coup after dazzling coup, while the Crown forces fumed impotently. (p. 5)
In his article in the February 28 Red Mole, entitled Ireland – Seize the Time, Comrade Purdie did criticize the militarist conceptions of the Provisionals:
The chief flaw in the thinking of the Provisionals is the old Republican one; because they place the military struggle to expell British imperialism from the North on a pedestal, they underestimate the importance of political mobilisation either of the Northern minority, or the southern masses.
But since Comrade Purdie also elevated “armed struggle” to a special position, calling it the “key” to the situation, such criticisms of the Provisional strategy became more and more overshadowed by praise for their guerrilla technique.
In an article in the July 10, 1972, Red Mole, Comrades Purdie and Lawless wrote:
The weaknesses of the Provisionals should not blind anyone to the importance of what they have been able to achieve. They have built up the most effective military resistance to British imperialism seen in Ireland since the Black and Tan war; never for more than fifty years has the British Army faced an adversary so formidable as the Provisional IRA.
We refuse to criticise them for their military strategy; we do not accept that the bombing campaign was sectarian, and we despise those on the British left who have echoed these slanders. The targets of the campaign were on the one hand the British and Six County state forces, and on the other hand the business interests, and the institutions of British imperialism in Ireland. The facts have been confused because bombs set off by the British SAS and Orange fanatics have been attributed to the Provisionals. The most common accusations is that the Provos have bombed protestant pubs and factories. First they have not bombed any pubs because they were used by protestants but for military and/or security reasons, and second they have bombed factories, which represented British investments. That they should directly affect mostly protestant workers in this way reflects the sectarian employment policy of the state, which the bombs were trying to smash.
To be sure, Comrades Purdie and Lawless pointed to the political weaknesses of the Provisionals, their lack of a program and socialist leadership. In particular they criticized the Provisionals’ concept that they had a mandate from the first revolutionary government (1919) to carry out whatever actions they deemed necessary. Comrades Purdie and Lawless stressed that the Provisionals had to develop structures of “direct democracy” that could authorise them to carry out such military and other actions. But, having put the cart before the horse, they were in a rather awkward position to make such suggestions. Since they hailed the military campaign that was being carried out by a “secret army” in isolation from mass struggles or control, calling it the “key” to the situation and the main thing responsible for the failure of the imperialists to achieve their strategic ends, weren’t their complaints about the Provisionals’ political weaknesses really rather secondary?
When the Provisionals repeated the mistake of the Done- gall Street bombing on a grand scale in the Bloody Friday bombings of July 21, 1972, the IMG’s criticism was again very ambiguous. In the July 29 Red Mole, Comrade Lawless wrote:
Taking advantage of the casualties, Whitelaw then launched his psychological warfare blitz to panic all other Republican, nationalist and socialist tendencies into condemnation of the Provisionals.
From this condemnation the British propaganda machine hopes to push them into at least neutrality, while Whitelaw ‘destroys the IRA’s capability’. From recent statements from the Official Republican movement, Whitelaw has reason to be hopeful on this score.
No one must fall for this. A defeat for the Provos would not be a defeat for the Provos alone. If Whitelaw succeeds against the Provos he will take on all other tendencies one by one. (Emphasis in original.)
Comrade Lawless’s comment was rather one-sided. The mistake of the Provisionals had its effect on the masses. The attitude of the other tendencies could not alter that. They of course had a duty to defend the Provisionals, to explain why they did what they did. But they could not help the Provisionals by endorsing their error. The best way they could help the Provisionals was by explaining very clearly why such tactics were wrong. It was all very well, moreover, to explain that many of the bombings were provocations and that the British army deliberately disregarded warnings. But the IMG did not draw the political conclusions from this. That is, that such acts could easily be distorted and manipulated by the British; they did not help to organize and educate the masses, they confused and disorganized them. They were, in short, terrorist acts, and it was the duty of Marxists to point out why they were ineffective.
The results of “Bloody Friday” were quick in coming. Confused and disoriented by the seemingly senseless and bloody bombings, the Catholic population accepted British occupation of the “no go areas.” Key neighborhoods that had been kept free of the repressive forces for months, that had served as political focuses and symbols of the resistance as well as refuges for victims of political persecution, were occupied without resistance. Once the mass mobilization and the political pressures that had kept the British army out were dissipated by the bombings, the “guerrillas” were no obstacle to the army moving in. Derry in particular, which had been the nerve center and political laboratory of the Northern resistance, the symbol of its hopes, where the Catholic population lived in freedom behind the barricades during the greater part of the crisis, fell under crushing military occupation. There was only a feeble glimmer of the spirit and unity that had defeated the British army in the aftermath of the internment raids.
But instead of explaining the gravity of this defeat and its causes, the IMG minimized it.
The invasion was hardly a famous victory, and certainly not a military defeat for the IRA. The struggle may have been pushed back by the elimination of the Free Areas, but it will continue in other forms. The Free Areas were important to the military struggle but the IRA was able to carry out quite effective military action before they were set up, and will continue to do so. (Cf. Comrade Purdie’s article in the August 7, 1972, issue of The Red Mole.)
Why was the occupation of the Free Areas not a victory for the British Army? Because the military was forced to carry out repression.
But in the long run Britain cannot win. Whitelaw’s initiative was the nearest they have got yet to imposing a solution, and having run that policy down with their own tanks the Heath government can face only a mounting crisis as the resentment of the minority is translated into a new round of the struggle against the Army of occupation.
Comrade Purdie did not seem to realize that repression does not always have the effect solely of stirring resentment The fact that the British army was able to accomplish this occupation without sparking mass resistance was a sign that they had achieved a significant victory over the mass movement. But apparently, Comrade Purdie was not very interested in that:
It is useless to make abstract condemnations of ‘terrorism’ and to declare in solemn tones that terrorism cannot achieve anything. The fact is that the Provisionals’ bombing campaign was as important as their offensive against the British Army, and the resistance of the masses in bringing down Stormont.
Nevertheless, it is clear that the bombings in Belfast were used by the British for their own ends, and to their own advantage. The advantages which they did gain are very limited, but for the purpose of the invasion important. This illustrates that while the present lines of battle remained unchanged even the most developed military technique can rebound politically on the IRA [! – G.F.] Without a solution of the problems of how to escalate the struggle in the North into an all-Ireland struggle which combines the completion of the national with the working class revolution the Provos will be balked in similar ways in the future.
That is, the Provisionals’ strategy was fine; their military technique was one of “the most developed.” But, “alas,” they lacked a strategy for extending the struggle to the South. Comrade Purdie did not seem to realize that the “bombing campaign” he praised had the effect of alienating the masses of the Southern population from the struggle in the North and was thus the exact opposite of what was needed to “extend the battle lines.” He was the one trapped in a contradiction, not the Provisionals. Despite his trying to straddle the fence, according to a method perhaps learned from the IEC Majority Tendency’s resolution on Latin America, his weight came down fundamentally on the side of terrorism.
The IMG, moreover, was apparently anxious to cash in on the popularity that the Provisionals had won in some circles of the young left by their terrorist actions. In the October 30, 1972, issue of The Red Mole, they printed an interview, without comment, with Sean Mac Stiofain and Joe Cahill, two Provisional leaders who would certainly have been characterized by The Red Mole in 1970 as “conservatives.” According to the interview, they said:
It is said that we have connections with the ruling circles in the South. I would then like to know why, if this connection still exists (certainly, who would have refused money and arms, when the battle began?), Lynch threw us into prison, and left the Official ‘Marxists’ in peace? The repression against us, coordinated between London and Belfast, gets worse every day. Heath gave Lynch a list of people who had to be put out of the way. The first victim was Francis MacGuigan, the only guerrilla fighter ever to have escaped from Long Kesh, arrested the other day with two comrades. The fact is that the Dublin government is much more afraid of us than of the Official IRA opportunists, who unfortunately have the support of a lot of marxists, even sincere marxists, abroad, while the revolutionary groups, particularly the Fourth International, are all on our side. It is we who are fighting an armed struggle against capitalism, against clerical conservatism, against the manipulation of our economy by foreign capital, against their control of the means of distribution and production, which deprives through wage slavery, the worker of the wealth which he produces.
This interview was supposed to have been given in Italy. Such sentiments have not been expressed by Sean Mac Stiofain and Joe Cahill in interviews with the Irish, British, or American press. But the interview does raise the question: Does the IMG believe that the extent of a group’s revolutionary determination and the threat it represents to the system is determined by the degree of repression to which it is subjected? It is notable that although the Provisionals continue to observe the principle of not recognizing the courts and thus put themselves in a position of suffering automatic jail sentences, a principle that Comrade Purdie noted in 1970 resulted in needless casualties, The Red Mole has not tried to persuade them to abandon this attitude.
Furthermore, the IMG has continued its “explanations” of the bombing technique:
The Provisional bombing campaign has been almost uniformly misunderstood or misrepresented. So-called ‘Marxists’ have sternly denounced ‘terrorism’ which they have defined in a quite un-Marxist way as a question of military technique, rather than as a question of the political relationship between military action and the masses. [Is this a “synthetic and elliptical phrase”? Its meaning is not exactly clear. – G.F.]
The bombing campaign had two main purposes. Firstly, it was designed to seriously disrupt commercial life in the main cities. In turn this had two subsidiary purposes: to bring pressure to bear on the British government; and simultaneously to break up the foundations of the Six County state. It was secondly an important defensive measure: the forces in the centre of the cities, forces which could have been used in the period before Operation Motorman to saturate the Catholic ghettos. The methods now being used in these areas are an indication of what this would have meant. Whole populations are constantly under surveillance by the Army, constantly threatened with arrest, and/or harassment. This seriously undermines their ability tq engage in political resistance. Fortunately the Army has not yet been able to totally crush the people but if they were able to dispose of large enough forces they would. By obliging the Army to protect the city centres the Provisional IRA contributes directly to the possibility of mass political opposition. Thus the bombing campaign is not terrorist [! – G.F.]
If we draw up a balance sheet, it shows a very heavy balance on the positive side. The campaign helped to maintain the free areas for much longer than they would otherwise have existed, by pinning down large numbers of troops. (The Red Mole, November 27, 1972.)
Thus, there is nothing basically wrong with the Provisionals’ tactics, according to the IMG, and that is essentially the message the Provisionals’ supporters have gotten. “Mr. Tariq Ali, the well-known theorist of revolution, who arrived in Dublin for a brief visit told the Commerce and Economics Society in U.C.D. [University College Dublin] that he supports the Provisional IRA’s bombing campaign in the North,” the Irish People, the New York weekly that reflects the views of the American Provisional support group, reported in its February 10, 1973 issue. What this amounts to is uncritical support for the political conceptions of the Provisionals, from which their tactics flow.
 

The IMG Covers Up the Failure of Terrorism
In order to maintain this effectively uncritical support of the Provisionals’ strategy, the IMG has been forced to completely distort the course of events in the North. This method is illustrated in the passage quoted above. If the bombings served to draw off the troops from the ghettos, how could the ghettos be occupied almost immediately after the largest Provisional bombing campaign of the crisis? If the bombing campaign “contributes directly to the possibility of mass political opposition,” why has the mass movement disappeared as the bombing campaign escalated, as was shown by the lack of massive passive resistance to the occupation in contrast to the response to the internment raids? The statement that the repression the ghetto dwellers are now suffering shows what would have happened if the bombings had not kept the troops off is completely dishonest and confusionist (and fundamentally an apology for the terrorism of the Provisionals). The fact is that the repression they are suffering comes in the wake of the most ambitious Provisional offensive in the history of the crisis. These arguments contradict even Comrade Purdie’s article in the August 7 Red Mole, which said: “... it is clear that the bombings in Belfast were used by the British for their own ends, and to their own advantage. The advantages which they did gain are very limited, but for the purpose of the invasion important.” The logic of adaptation is inexorable, and there is no end to it if you do not break fundamentally with this method.
The same method has led the IMG to deny the steady deterioration of the situation in Northern Ireland in the last year. Every new setback is regarded as the contradictory effect of a victory. An excellent example of this kind of “dialectics” is to be found in an editorial in the November 27, 1972 Red Mole.
The probability that Mac Stiofain will receive a two year sentence should not be seen as the main problem which is revealed by his arrest. Despite his enormous military ability, his arrest alone will not break the campaign in the North. The real problem is the continued weakness of the struggle in the South. The purpose of Whitelaw’s ramblings on the ‘Irish Dimension’ in his Green Paper, is now revealed. Unable to defeat the struggle in the Six Counties, British Imperialism is now going over to an all-Ireland offensive. And in return for meaningless promises of the Green Paper, Fianna Fail is acting as its main agent. Never before has the crucial importance of an all-Ireland struggle by the Irish republicans and socialists been shown so starkly.
In the first place, this argument runs somewhat counter to the previous chiding of the Officials for not realizing that the struggle in Ireland has been essentially one and that you cannot divide the North and the South. The Officials, as a result of their populist concepts, have tended to see the problem as building up the struggle to the same level in both areas. They have failed to see that the colonial and neocolonial system in Ireland form an integrated whole in which both the British government and the native bourgeois forces respond on a nationwide basis to threats arising anywhere in the country. At the same time, paradoxically they fail to grasp fully the political contradictions that arise from the different political pressures on these forces and that disrupt their cooperation. That is, their conception is incomplete and rather static. But in his attempt to present the Lynch government’s offensive as the result of a flanking maneuver by a British regime, thwarted by the invincible Provisional campaign, the author of this article reinforced this type of confusion.
Imperialism has always had an “all-Ireland” strategy, as shown by its pressures on the Lynch government from the start of the crisis. What prevented repression previously in the South was the support for the struggle in the North, and what permitted Lynch to move against the Provisionals was precisely the ebbing of that sentiment as a result of the political confusion caused to an important degree by the Provisionals’ bombing campaign. This decline in support in the South, moreover, was only a magnified reflection of a decline in support for militant struggle in the North deriving fundamentally from the same causes. As an apologist for “armed struggle,” in reality, petty-bourgeois terrorism, the writer of The Red Mole editorial cannot recognise this fact, and evidently was forced to suck a “new conjuncture” out of his thumb to explain the move toward repression in the Twenty-Six Counties.
 

Adaptation Leads to Eclecticism and Confusion
In its analysis of the Irish situation, in fact, The Red Mole goes in rather heavily for involved speculation about the strategy of the British government in this or that conjuncture. This tendency brought a complaint from the writer of the earlier mentioned document entitled How to Lead from Behind.
We have tended to concentrate unduly on the analysis of British Government and Military strategy, to the detriment of broader issues where there is a real need to [convey] correct ideas to our members-periphery-readers. Mole readers get to know about the military situation in Belfast, the morale in the Army, etc. but slightly less on the question of ‘terrorism’, the question of working class unity in Ireland, loyalist ‘socialism’, etc. There has been a definite lack of articles which set out to explain in a clear and systematic way some of the key political issues on which there tends to be confusion, even inside the Left. For instance – Terrorism, is the Provo bombing campaign terrorism? why not? what is the marxist attitude to terrorism? to guerrilla warfare?
There does seem to have been something of a lack of clear consistent analysis of the main trends in the development of the situation. Some “conjunctural” analyses such as the following from the July 29, 1972, Red Mole (Tories New Course in Ireland by Gery Lawless) indicate that the author of How to Lead from Behind had grounds for complaint:
In entering this new phase we must realise that this will in many ways be the most dangerous phase of the national liberation struggle. Before we have had to face either the carrot or the stick. In the coming period the policy will be the carrot and the stick, thus increasing the tendency to division within the anti-imperialist ranks, both in Britain and Ireland.
The Irish Times in an article by the usually well-informed London Editor, Jim Downey, made it clear that Whitelaw is anxious for a return to the cease fire, and the attitude of Republican leaders, in Dublin and elsewhere, shows that the Provos would be willing for another bilateral cease fire.
With the final vote on the Common Market Bill out of the way, Whitelaw and those elements in the cabinet which represent manufacturing capitalist interests (Europeans) are now trying to summon up the courage to take on the Orange ultras and their backers in the Tory Party, the old guard ‘Commonwealthers’. But before they do this, they must clear from their flanks the military lobby represented by General Tuzo, and behind him the Defence Minister, Peter Carrington.
Whitelaw and the ‘Europeans’ blame the ultra-Orange backlash for the break down in the truce, and recognise that implicitly or explicitly, any new bi-lateral cease fire, to be acceptable to the Provos, will have to be based on a willingness on their part to call the Orange bluff. While being frightened of this possibility, they are haunted by another spectre – the spectre of a Southern backlash. They fear that a renewal of the confrontation with the Catholic population of the North will lead to other Derry massacres, without the sacrificial lamb of a British Embassy in Dublin to appease Southern anger.
Their tactics are to work for a cease fire as early as possible, but first to appease the military lobby they want to inflict what is known in British Army circles as a ‘bloody nose’ on the IRA. What this quaint English euphemism means is, a new cease fire in which the British Army can interpret the terms, where Whitelaw, if the necessity again arise, can squeeze the Catholics to make room for the granting of concessions to the Orange ultras, without the danger of another Lenadoon.
Although Republican leaders are playing their cards close to their chests, informed sources close to the leadership make it clear that whatever the other weaknesses of the movement, in this case they have taken Whitelaw’s measure and are determined that any new bi-lateral cease fire will not be one which is imposed on them in the aftermath of a British victory.”
Comrade Lawless is, of course, rather new to the IMG but his articles are an important part of the Red Mole’s Irish coverage and similar jumbled speculations could be found in articles by other IMG writers. The basic problem is the method apparently countenanced or even encouraged by The Red Mole editors. It is an impressionist and centrist method that cannot clarify any development over the long run but ends up in complete confusion. It cannot educate anyone – not the fighters in Ireland or the militants of the IMG. In the long run all these pretentious formulations and involved speculations only come down to the notion: if the IRA keep fighting long enough and if they get the right kind of equipment, something has to give. That is, it leads to capitulation to the most backward aspects of the military conspiratorial tradition in Ireland.
It is not impossible that the Provisionals will achieve successes with their present line. Adventures are not always unsuccessful. This is one of the reasons some people always keep hoping. But a consistent revolutionary line cannot be erected on such a basis. Furthermore, the IMG leaders seem entranced by the concept of military action, armed struggle, to the extent that they do not realise that armed action like any other activity, if it is not guided by a revolutionary program, can be co-opted by the system. “Military reformism” in fact has been one of the main threads in the history of the IRA. The fact that it was organized as a “secret army” did not prevent the IRA from being drawn into supporting De Valera in the South or into a symbiotic relationship with the Nationalist party in the North. And most of the people I have talked to in Belfast and Derry did not support the Provisional campaign on the basis of any hope in revolutionary victory. One Provisional leader thought it could force the British to turn the peace-keeping over to the U.N. Others hoped it would “make the government sit up and take notice.”
 

Supporting Guerrillaism Leads to Supporting Blanquist Program
Inevitably, moreover, the IMG support for the Provisionals’ actions led to supporting their political conceptions. In an article in the January 10, 1972, Red Mole, Comrade Purdie chided the Officials in these terms:
The Provisionals also have a clear policy embodied in the work they are doing to build Dail Uladh and Dail Chonnacht, which are an attempt to create an alternative administration to, not only Stormont, but Leinster House [the Dublin parliament], since Dail Uladh involves the three counties of Ulster which are within the Free State; and the creation of Dail Chonnacht for the Province of Connaught, which includes the oppressed Irish speaking minority [Actually the Irish-speaking minority in Ulster, i.e., Donegal, is almost as numerous as the main Gaelic community in Connaught, that is, in Galway. – G.F.]. The fact that the Provisionals pose these assemblies ‘from the top’ and that they provide no clear way for linking them to the mass of the people [Comrade Purdie did recognise apparently that this represented something of a problem. – G.F.] does not detract from the fact that the building of local civil resistance committees could create the content which would bring life to the forms of Dail Uladh. The backwardness of the leadership of the Provisionals on political questions, and their lack of understanding of what socialism means could hold back developments, but this is all the more reason for those who do have a better understanding to participate in the building of the civil resistance movement.
The regional parliament idea of the Provisionals was only a reflection of their traditional Blanquist approach to government formulas. When the Fenian movement originated more than a hundred years ago, one of the first things it did was set up a government of the republic of Ireland “now virtually established.” This “government” did not arise out of a struggle or the process of the masses coming to rule themselves. It was simply an abstract formula to provide a political umbrella for the military struggle. As for the Provisionals’ assemblies, they were hardly more than publicity stunts, designed at most to show that they really did have a “political” program.
The important thing, Comrade Purdie says in another article, is where these formulas could have led the Provisionals. That is precisely the problem, they led them in the wrong direction. They did not lead them in the direction of understanding that they had to base themselves on the self-organisation of the masses. For revolutionists, the governmental formula for popular power arises out of the specific conditions of the mass mobilization and its demands, out of the revolutionary process. It is not some abstract formula decided on from above and then given “popular content.” Furthermore, the conception of Dail Uladh was fundamentally false in another regard. It was based on the premise that in Ulster as a whole, Catholics and Protestants are roughly equal in numbers and that therefore a government based on the province as a whole would be acceptable to both communities. This notion represented a complete misunderstanding of the caste mentality of the Protestants and did not contribute one iota to illuminating this key question. It was positively dangerous in the sense that it represented an accommodation to the Unionist propaganda myth of some special, separate character of the province of Ulster.
There was absolutely no basis in the ongoing struggle for such a formula. The struggle in the North had only sporadic reflections in the border counties. Such reflections moreover where not confined to the three counties of Ulster under the Dublin government but were stronger if anything in Louth, which is in Leinster. In all, the conception was a totally formal one and led away from and not toward a revolutionary political alternative for the struggle in the North.
It was particularly aberrant to present this formula to the Officials, who, whatever their other weaknesses, did understand that a revolutionary government had to be based on the mobilized people and arise out of their struggle. They attempted to develop this locally but lacked the concept of general governmental formulas. They remained populists and centrists. But after this example of abject confusion and accommodation to paleo-republicanism, it is not very likely that the Officials would have looked to the IMG for more advanced political ideas.
Thus, although it has certainly utilized to the fullest the “advanced theory” derived from the “turn” at the Ninth World Congress – Comrade Lawless in particular seems to have appreciated the “higher level” theoretical justification for an orientation he has long maintained – the IMG has failed completely to project either a clear and effective line for the support movement in Britain or for the struggle in Ireland. Its adaptations have prevented it from offering any useful Marxist education to its members or to any other forces, and have led finally to abject confusion. This failure, moreover, has been extended directly to Ireland through the IMG’s role in forming and educating the Trotskyist nucleus there.
 

The ‘Fusion Between Marxism and Republicanism’
Just as the IMG’s turning to the republican fringe represented by Saor Eire was a key bridge in its development of a guerrillaist orientation for Ireland, its involvement with this organization in Ireland was central to its concept of developing an Irish Trotskyist organization. The leader of the Irish nucleus, Peter Graham, became very deeply involved with Saor Eire when he returned to Ireland in the summer of 1971 after spending a year working with the IMG in London. Around the time Graham returned to Dublin, The Red Mole ran the manifesto of Saor Eire, which was introduced in the following terms:
Now we have received the following manifesto, in which Saor Eire explain their policies and methods of struggle. We publish it in the belief that it is an important contribution to the discussion on the way forward for the Irish revolution.
This manifesto was published nowhere else but in The Red Mole. However, it must have attracted special attention from The Red Mole’s readers. The conceptions outlined in it were remarkably similar to those of the ERP in Argentina, which by then was being presented in the British Trotskyist paper as an inspiring example. This is how Saor Eire defined its role:
Based on the premise of the necessity for armed struggle and the need to mobilize the masses of workers, small farmers and students, an overall strategy and programme must be developed. To limit the struggle to the confines of purely political parties and groupings is to relegate it to a process of endless discussions, ineffective motions, resolutions and debates and to sidetrack it into a political whirlpool. There are enough parties and groups in existence at the moment who claim for themselves the leadership of the common struggle. It will not help to create another such organization. Action will test the validity of each distinct political philosophy and it is only in action that leadership will be developed. New strategies and tactics must be developed for the Irish situation. Rural guerrilla warfare in relation to Irish topography and modern technological developments must be placed in its proper context and more emphasis placed on the urban guerrilla. Sabotage throughout the country, action by small independent groups and political work among the masses must be the order of the day. Separate revolutionary groupings must be formed to confuse the police and in the interests of security. The banks and the State have all the resources, finance and armaments, to supply these groups and at a later stage a guerrilla front can be created.
Since our inception we have strove to inject a new concept of political action into the blood stream of Irish revolutionary politics. This concept of revolutionary struggle, new in the sense that tactically and strategically it has not been tried in Ireland during the present epoch, is as old in essence as the struggle against British Imperialism itself. The idea of the National Revolution in 1916 was basically built around the belief that a small group of armed men could, by making what Pearce called a blood sacrifice, act as a detonator for the initiation of the fight for national liberation. None of the leaders of Easter Week 1916 believed that their action, taken in isolation from the rest of the country and surrounded by an apathetic populace would in itself have the immediate effect of freeing Ireland. What they achieved was a sowing of the seed which blossomed two years later into the War of Independence. Their action was a defeat militarily, but a success in that it acted as a detonator for a popular explosion. All actions in present day Irish politics should be viewed in that light.”
From the standpoint of The Red Mole editors, the Saor Eire militants were undoubtedly refreshingly free from any “spontaneist” or “massist” illusions:
What is needed is a movement that is one step ahead but still in contact with the people and not a party which ends tail-ending the mass movement at its present stage of development. The objective conditions for a revolution must not be waited upon but must be created from the material already existing. The inability or unwillingness of any party or group and their lack of success in this field has made it imperative to create small armed groupings who can take an active part in creating these necessary conditions. There are sufficient diverse political groupings in existence at the moment and the creation of one more will only lend further to the confusion already existing. Thus such a movement must draw for its support and manpower on these same bodies and carry the struggle to a higher plane. There is no contradiction between the building of armed groups and the building of the mass movement. Such actions as they will carry out whether they be armed insurrection in some labour dispute, the redressing of a social evil, or attacks on State property or its servants, will show to the people that there is in existence the means and the method to combat and defeat a bureaucratic capitalist state. Such actions will focus the attention of the people on the wrongs and the evils that exist in our society and will expose the dictatorial character of the state machine in its unwillingness to abrogate its privileges.
In theory at least Republicanism is nearer to this correct tactical approach than the more developed Socialist groupings. It is not the quantity of Marx digested that makes a revolutionary but the ability to prepare to take part in and make the revolution that matters. Some Socialist groupings, for various subjective reasons [lack of physical courage and devotion, one presumes – G.F.], hold to the belief that the mass of the people must be politically conscious and that the objective conditions must be ripe before we start to make this revolution. Such attitudes will condemn them to endless discussions, the continual analysis of actions after the event [i.e., “commentary politics” – G.F.] and eventually to political extinction.”
If the introduction to this statement was not enough to recommend this call to arms to Red Mole enthusiasts, the phoenix rising out of the flames that was superimposed over the manifesto must certainly have conveyed the message.
The Saor Eire manifesto was very much appreciated by Comrade Nathan Weinstock who quoted it favorably in his analysis of the Irish situation published in La Gauche and Rouge:
Alongside these two mass currents [the Officials and Provisionals] who are unquestionably leading the military resistance against the British presence in Ulster at this time, there are other smaller groups such as Saor Eire, a militant republican and socialist formation that has engaged in a series of armed expropriations of Irish banks to collect the funds necessary to supply the Northern militants. A passage of their manifesto very correctly points out how the movements that exist must be evaluated: ‘It is not the quantity of Marx digested that makes a revolutionary but the ability to prepare to take part in and make the revolution.’ (La Gauche, September 24, 1971; Rouge, October 2, 1971.)
The Saor Eire manifesto does seem to have had the merit of defining the attitude the IMG developed toward the Officials more clearly than any of its statements ever did: “These so called ‘left wingers’ are more reactionary than any so called ‘right wingers’ they might have deposed. For though they may indulge in ‘socialist’ phrase-mongering they have divested the Republican Movement of its revolutionary potential by dismantling and undermining its armed wing.”
The importance that the IMG gave Saor Eire is shown by Comrade Purdie’s treatment of it in his pamphlet Ireland Unfree:
But the important change since Connolly’s day is that the possibility exists for Republicanism to base itself much more firmly on the working class, and to integrate working class revolutionary ideas – Marxism – into its thinking. A fusion between revolutionary Marxism and Republicanism is the future for the Irish revolutionary movement. (Page 37, emphasis in original.)
By this concept of “fusion” between Marxism and the (no longer backward) ideology of “physical force,” Comrade Purdie was apparently extending the concept voiced in the basic programmatic document of the PRT (Combatiente) in Argentina, The Only Road to Workers Power and Socialism:
It is not by accident that the Trotskyist movement, from the viewpoint of the overall perspective for the world and continental class struggle, has arrived at important judgments and conclusions, broadening in this way the vision of revolutionaries.
Trotsky and the Trotskyist movement have also contributed – creatively – to Marxism an analysis of the Soviet bureaucracy and developed from this a very clear theory of the nature and role of bureaucratic formations.
Mao and Maoism applied Leninism to the theory and practice of the seizure of power, which is nothing other than applying revolutionary Marxism to the circumstances of a particular country with the perspective of attaining workers power. That is the ‘Concrete analysis of concrete situations’ which Lenin defined as ‘the very essence of Marxism,’ the creative application of revolutionary theory to the concrete reality of a revolution which had been thoroughly studied, understood and fought for. Mao himself said, ‘the fusion of the general truth of Marxism with the concrete practice of the Chinese Revolution.’
Mao and Maoism creatively applied and developed Marxism-Leninism in the revolutionary people’s war theory. That is, the need for a revolutionary army which can defeat the counter-revolutionary army; the need to build this army in the rural areas through a prolonged process during which the revolutionary forces grow from small to large, from weak to strong, while the reactionary forces go from large to small, from strong to weak. This produces a qualitative step forward to a general insurrection when the revolutionary forces have gained the greater strength.
Both Trotskyism and Maoism have mutually ignored each other’s contributions. What is more, some Trotskyists still believe Maoism to be a part of Stalinism and consequently a counter-revolutionary current. Maoism, for its part, continues to believe that Trotskyism is a movement of capitalist and imperialist agents provocateurs. Today the principal theoretical task of revolutionary Marxists is to fuse the main contributions of Trotskyism and Maoism into a higher unity which would prove to be a real return to Leninism. The development of the world revolution leads inevitably to this goal as is indicated by the unilateral advances of Maoism toward the assimilation of Trotskyism (the break with the Soviet bureaucracy, the cultural revolution); the moves of Trotskyism toward incorporating Maoist contributions (the theory of revolutionary war) and, above all, the efforts of the Cuban leadership to achieve this superior unity. (The Only Road to Workers Power and Socialism, International Information Bulletin, October 1972, no. 4, p. 8)
In Ireland, this “fusion” between the correct general ideas and the “concrete” strategy of struggling for power was illustrated, according to Comrade Purdie, by Saor Eire:
Alongside the Officials and Provisionals exists a much smaller group which represents just such a fusion between Marxism and Republicanism – Saor Eire (Free Ireland). SE was formed out of two distinct strands, a group of volunteers who left the IRA during the period of politicisation (they reacted against the rundown of military activity, and the influence of the Wolfe Tone Society [a Stalinist-influenced intellectual group]) and former members of the Irish Workers Group, a Trotskyist organisation which split up in the late sixties. Behind Saor Eire’s activities is the conviction that no change can be promoted within the Republican Movement unless it is pressurised by a more militant and active military [emphasis in original] organisation. This approach contains a great deal of truth, for the launching of a struggle in 1956 by Saor Uladh catapulted the main body of the IRA into the Border Campaign, and forced the leadership of the IRA down off its conservative pedestal.
But, like the ERP-PRT, the Saor Eire group, “alas,” was not exempt from militarist deviations.
But Saor Eire has been caught in the same trap as the leaders of the Officials in the mid-sixties – the contradiction between political and military activity. The need for a secret military organisation has eliminated any but the most token open political work. The sum total of Saor Eire’s political contribution has been one interview in The Red Mole, and a short manifesto, also published in the Mole. It has also meant that the group was formed on a rather vague political basis, and the pressing necessity of military action has made it even more difficult to hammer out a coherent political position.
The political restrictions on SE have in turn restricted its military activities, and so far it has been publicly known mainly for bank robberies. Without a stronger political content SE will not draw towards itself the kind of young revolutionaries who could make a military organisation a viable alternative to the two Republican Armies, and SE will remain a group respected for its courage and militancy but essentially marginal to the Irish struggle.
Comrade Purdie obviously recognised that there was a contradiction between the terrorist activity of Saor Eire and Marxist political work. That is, it was rather difficult to combine the two. But Comrade Purdie seemed strangely reluctant to draw the obvious conclusion from this. As a result, even his worst “hypothesis” fell far short of what ultimately happened to Saor Eire. The culmination of its activity was described in a statement by members of Saor Eire serving long prison terms in Portlaoise jail:
”We the undersigned Political Prisoners in Portlaoise Prison wish to publicly state that we have severed any connections which we have or ever had with the organisation calling itself Saor Eire. In this action we are following the lead of other genuine political elements who have resigned. Our reasons being the following:

That Saor Eire originally was constituted to combat Imperialism in Ireland. During the last two years, owing to political weaknesses in the structure of that organisation, undesirable elements have been able to operate around its fringe and carry out actions under the name of Saor Eire which had nothing in common with the stated objectives of that organisation. As a consequence of the activities of these pseudo-political individuals, genuine revolutionaries have been in danger of being tarred with the same brush, their political integrity, questioned and the possibility of their credibility with other organisations tarnished. As this element now seems to constitute the leadership of that organisation, we feel it our duty as revolutionaries to point out to the Republican Socialist Movement the degeneracy of that collection of individuals.
 
Furthermore these people have not alone been content to use that organisation for their own personal ends but have gone so far as to interfere with the anti-imperialist struggle in Ireland by using harassment and bullyboy tactics against life long members and supporters of the Republican Movement. As has been stated in numerous press articles, a cloud of mystery still hangs over the brutal murder of a sincere and dedicated revolutionary, Peter Graham, in October 1971. Saor Eire once operated as a sincere revolutionary organisation. For us, it does no more.” (Irish Political Prisoners Quit Saor Eire, Intercontinental Press, June 11, 1973, p. 720)

What was it that encouraged Comrade Purdie to make such a positive assessment of a grouping like Saor Eire, disregarding the long experience of the Marxist movement with isolated units devoted to expropriations? Was it because the situation was so grave in Ireland that desperate measures were needed to procure arms for the embattled ghetto dwellers? The Official republicans seem at one point to have believed this. Some of their men staged an airport robbery to acquire funds to buy weapons. They are still in jail. Such measures do not, however, seem to have helped the Officials very much.
But Saor Eire had been engaged in expropriations for “three or four years” prior to the interview published in the Red Mole. That is, they started carrying out such activities at a time when there was no possibility of their being understood, much less supported, by the masses. Furthermore, despite periods of acute crisis, there has been little ongoing active mass opposition to the Dublin government, and bourgeois legality in general prevails. As far as the. broad political movement and the masses are concerned there is probably less repression than, say, in France. Of course, it could be argued that big battles were on the agenda and that Leninists, as opposed to spontanéists, had to prepare militarily for this eventuality. If such was needed in Ireland, however, would it not also be correct in France, or even in England, where, as many European comrades have learned from visiting both places, the conditions of bourgeois legality do not differ greatly most of the time from those in the Twenty- Six Counties?
The question arises in view of the positions taken by the IEC Majority Tendency on “armed struggle” and the evolution of the IMG’s position on Ireland, whether IMG leaders did not regard Saor Eire as an experiment in developing an “armed wing” of Irish Trotskyism that could push the revolutionary struggle forward by “injecting armed struggle.” In any case, the experience of Saor Eire is highly instructive and serves as a supplementary confirmation of the correctness of the orthodox Trotskyist position on such groups.
Comrade Purdie, as I have noted, was clearly not unaware of the dilemma faced by groups like Saor Eire:
But Saor Eire has been caught in the same trap as the leaders of the Officials in the mid-sixties – the contradiction between political and military activity. The need for a secret military organization has eliminated any but the most token open political work. (Ireland Unfree, p. 38)
But Comrade Purdie chose not to draw the logical conclusion from this statement. A “secret military organization” is not an obstacle to “political work” if it emerges from a mass struggle and serves as an instrument of the mass movement. In such conditions, political and military activity interlock. But it is precisely terrorist activity that is incompatible with political work, and demanding that such an organization find a way to combine political and military work is simply nonsense. It was inevitable that the isolation of this tiny commando group from the mass struggle, isolation flowing inevitably from its terrorist orientation, would lead it into deeper and deeper isolation and into more and more exclusively “armed struggle.” Virtually all the members of this organization had to hide constantly from the police as a result of the bank expropriations. They could not hold jobs or risk contact with open political workers. They were forced to live on the proceeds of the expropriations, and this proved more and more costly as they were forced to depend on underworld figures for shelter and services. The expropriations had to increase to provide a steady income to maintain this kind of life, a need which in turn accelerated the process. Very large sums of money passed through the hands of this small group that was not subjected to the discipline of a mass movement or to any effective political discipline. Undisciplined and criminal elements penetrated the organization, probably coming first from the lumpen fringe of the republican movement. Under the pressures of a perilous and irregular existence, the group degenerated. It became a deadly trap for the political elements that remained within it, and, since a group of this type can be easily used and manipulated by the police, it became a danger to the entire republican and socialist movement.
The hopes expressed by Comrade Purdie that this organization could play an important role if it developed more political activity were completely illogical. By its nature this group could not have operated in a political way. Its fate was as inevitable as anything in politics. Saor Eire, in fact, is one more object lesson that Marxism and terrorism cannot be combined. Comrade Purdie’s formulas simply covered up an adaptation to terrorism, which had the same tragic results in Ireland as it has had elsewhere.
The statement of the Saor Eire prisoners strongly suggests that Comrade Peter Graham was a victim of this process. If this proves true, those who were his political teachers bear a grave responsibility, because no matter how the specific decisions were arrived at, it is absolutely clear that the political positions of the IMG favored and encouraged close relations with Saor Eire. It is also absolutely clear that these positions were sanctioned by the line of the majority at the Ninth World Congress and represent an extension of this line to Ireland.
 
(Part 4)
 

rge Saunders on Gerry Foley


Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

From
George Saunders

(George was fluent in Russian and used to cover the Russian dissident scene for Joe Hansen’s Intercontinental Press. Expelled along with Gerry, he went on to translate some books by Bukharin, including How it all began).
*
Sent: Saturday, April 21, 2012 8:15 PM
Subject: On Gerry Foley’s death today
What a blow! The loss of Gerry stuns me.
I’ll try to write a little about Gerry. A little now, and I hope more later.
He and I and Stephen F. Cohen were graduate students with “assistantships” (money paid in return for our work) assigned to cataloguing the Boris Nicolaevsky collection at Indiana University’s Russian and East European Institute in the school year of autumn 1960–spring 1961.
The three of us would discuss the “issues of the day” as we wrote out library catalogue cards giving author, title, etc. in the Library of Congress transliteration system for the mostly Russian-language books and pamphlets from the old Menshevik Nicolaevsky’s extensive collection of many thousand items.
I was trying to recruit people to Fair Play for Cuba, a nationwide campaign to defend revolutionary Cuba against the media campaign that was going full blast in the fall of 1960. Mistakenly I thought the liberal Steve would be more likely to respond, but in the end, Gerry surprised me.
The campus reactionaries, mainly “Young Americans for Freedom” and the “Young Republicans” headed by a sleazeball named (if I remember right) Tom Huston, who was later an adviser to President Richard Nixon and became the author of Nixon’s notorious “enemies’ list,” were trying to deny Fair Play for Cuba the right to become a recognized campus group. We started a petition for free speech rights and the right of freedom of assembly and freedom of organization on the IU campus. We had tables in the main classroom building where hundreds of students did gather around and signed the petitions for the right of FPCC to be a recognized campus group. Gerry turned up right in the thick of that work, and probably did more than anyone in our circle of supporters to get the maximum number of names on those petitions. And we won the right to be a recognized campus group!
Gerry had earlier expressed some doubts to me about Marxism, but after that successful free-speech fight into which he jumped feet first, and for which he went all-out, he was a Marxist revolutionary and remained that for the rest of his life It was right around that same time that the Cuban revolutionaries successfully defeated Kennedy-Eisenhower’s atrocious Bay of Pigs invasion, Gerry wanted to join the Young Socialist Alliance. I and my wife Ellen had brought this revolutionary seed from the Boston area, where we had been among the founding members of the Young Socialist newspaper’s support group there in late 1958 or early 1959, and then in the spring of 1960 (if I’m remembering this right) we were among the founding members nationally of the Young Socialist Alliance. The YSA cooperated closely with the Socialist Workers Party and shared the views of that party, which represented the main stream of U.S. Trotskyism and which included many veterans from the 1930s, who had worked with Trotsky to help found the Fourth International (such as Joe Hansen, who had been one of Trotsky’s secretaries in Mexico and a leading figure in the SWP since the 1930s).
When Ellen and I, in the fall of 1960, first began our efforts to form an FPCC chapter on campus, the student newspaper of Indiana University at Bloomington, regularly ran headlines denouncing us as “Mr. and Mrs. Fair Play.”
For both the YSA and the SWP, defense of the Cuban revolution and building the Fair Play for Cuba Committee nationally and internationally were the top priority in 1960 and 1961. Among the defenders and supporters of the Cuban revolution at Indiana University who decided, like Gerry, to join and build the YSA were Jim Bingham, Ralph Levitt, Jack Marsh, and Tom Morgan. (There were others as well, and I apologize to those whose names I’m not remembering and recording right at this moment.) Bingham, Levitt, and Morgan later became well known around the country as the Bloomington defendants, ca. 1963–1964. The Republican attorney general in Indiana tried to use a McCarthy-era law against the right of the YSA to exist in Indiana at all, let alone at the IU campus in Bloomington. We won that free-speech fight also, after an expensive and exhausting legal case that took on nationwide dimensions. The courts finally threw out Indiana’s “anti-Communist law,’ which prohibited the works of Marx and Lenin and “any or all teachings of the same” – including the story of Robin Hood. That was illegal. To talk about or uphold the example of Robin Hood.
Anyhow, that is my first and best memory of Gerry, and I’ll leave it at that for the time being.
George Saunders
Biography page for Gerry Foley | Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism

Last updated on 22 January 2020





It is with great sadness that the International Viewpoint team has learnt of the sudden death at his new home in Chiapas, Mexico of the first editor of International Viewpoint, Gerry Foley.
Gerry Foley was asked to be the first editor and lynchpin of International Viewpoint as the English-language voice of the Fourth International, a role that was no longer played by Intercontinental Press published in New York under the auspices of the SWP.
International Viewpoint was launched with Issue 0 at the end of 1981 and began regular production in 1982. Gerry’s knowledge of Eastern Europe society and languages was important in helping us to follow what was happening in Poland, notably in the early years of the magazine, and then later in the decade the events leading to and following the Fall of the Berlin Wall. Fluent in Spanish and Portuguese, he also followed events in Latin America, the development of the PT in Brazil, the aftermath of the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, the development of the PRT in Mexico. Gerry Foley returned to the US in the early 1990s to work on Socialist Action.
Gerry brought to the new magazine the experience of the best days of IP and the SWP. He had been, as he was proud to tell us, trained by Joseph Hansen in high standards of factual accuracy and meticulous sub-editing. This was however secondary to his broad international experience and knowledge, and impressive linguistic ability, which enabled him to feed the magazine with material from political, social and progressive movements from around the world. The continuing existence of IVP today, albeit in online format, stands as tribute to Gerry’s contribution in creating and maintaining it.
Biography page for Gerry Foley | Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism

Last updated on 22 January 2020


f Mackler on Gerry Foley


Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

From
Jeff Mackler

Few revolutionaries, past or present, have devoted their entire adult lives to the socialist cause as full-timers. Gerry Foley was one of them. He died unexpectedly on April 21 in San Cristóbal de las Casas, in the mountains of Chiapas, Mexico’s poorest state.
Gerry spent 50 years fighting – at near poverty wages – to free humanity from every form of capitalist barbarity, oppression, and exploitation. He did it with a twinkle in his eye and with an engaging passion for all things human – and thoroughly enjoyed every moment.
Gerry was 73. He died less than a week after moving from his semi-retirement residence in Mérida, Mexico, to San Cristóbal, perhaps from the exertion of moving his enormous collection of books into his newly rented home. His friend Pete, on the scene at the time, told us that Gerry had just left a social event in the large communal area of his apartment complex, where he was chatting with some young people. He returned to his apartment extremely short of breath, immediately collapsed to the ground, and died a few minutes later, likely of a heart attack.
Gerry was among Socialist Action’s most dedicated and talented comrades. Those who knew him will immediately recall his generous spirit, depth of knowledge and analysis, brilliance of exposition, love of life in all its diversity, and enduring friendship.
Gerry not only read in about 90 languages; he was fluent in more than a dozen, often serving as translator whenever his skills were required. His uncommon language facility was matched by a deep understanding of the history and culture of each nationality whose language he had mastered. Books were Gerry’s sole prized possessions. He had a collection of perhaps 10,000 scattered from California to Alabama to Mexico.
Gerry, fluent in Gaelic, was likely among the most informed revolutionaries on Irish history and politics. The Irish struggle for liberation, no matter the setbacks, was never far from his consciousness. Perhaps the socialist cause of the renowned Irish Marxist and Republican, James Connolly – among his heroes – appropriately expressed Gerry’s credo almost 100 years later. Connolly observed that “a real socialist movement can only be born of struggle, of uncompromising affirmation of the faith that is in us. Such a movement infallibly gathers to it every element of rebellion and progress, and in the midst of the storm and stress of struggle solidifies into a real revolutionary force.” In his own talks, Gerry expressed similar sentiments many times.
Gerry spent over a year in Ireland working with the Irish comrades, including Bernadette Devlin McAliskey, Northern Ireland’s fiery socialist leader and the youngest woman elected to the British parliament. As a professional journalist writing articles for the world Trotskyist press, Gerry’s insights into Irish politics served to inform the revolutionary politics of a generation of political activists. Decades later, in 1997, Gerry headed the San Francisco-based Committee to Free Roisin McAliskey, Bernadette’s daughter, who was imprisoned and tortured by British authorities as she and her supporters worldwide defeated a German government-initiated deportation effort based on trumped-up charges of involvement in terrorist activities. Then pregnant, Roisin finally won her freedom but not before being forced to have her baby, while in chains, in a filthy British prison facility. Bernadette, who had won the broad respect of U.S. Black liberation activists decades earlier when she gave to the Black Panther Party the “Keys to San Francisco” (awarded to her by San Francisco’s Board of Supervisors out of respect for her membership in the British parliament), joined Gerry at mass rallies in defense of her daughter.
During his speeches, and on virtually any subject, tears often came to Gerry’s eyes as he inserted an Irish reference into his discourse. The Irish struggle for self-determination, the longest in world history, lasting more than 700 years and still uncompleted, was ingrained in Gerry’s consciousness. And if you gave him the opportunity, Gerry would happily recount every major event of those 700 years.
No comrade could match Gerry’s deep understanding of the national question – the struggle of oppressed people and nations for self-determination, dignity, and freedom. He was a champion of all oppressed peoples and despised their oppressors with great passion.
Gerry’s articles have appeared in socialist periodicals around the world. We will soon be publishing a list of many of them. His spirit and dedication to socialist revolution and to building the Leninist party, the prerequisite instrument for bringing it into being, lives in our party and in its comrades. In his semi-retirement, Gerry remained an honorary member of Socialist Action’s Political Committee, often finding time to join its deliberations via Skype and taking an occasional assignment. He hoped to attend the Socialist Action National Convention in August.
How Gerry became a Trotskyist In autumn 1960, after graduating from American University in Washington, D.C., Gerry began graduate school at Indiana University (IU), in its Russian and East European Institute. There he met a fellow graduate student in Russian literature, George Shriver, who discussed political issues with him from a Trotskyist position. That same autumn 1960, fate had brought George and Ellen Shriver to IU from the Boston area, where they had been founding members of the Young Socialist Alliance (YSA) earlier in the year. The YSA was the fraternal youth group of the Socialist Workers Party (SWP), the main Trotskyist organization in the United States at the time. As a result of joint work with George, Ellen, and other Trotskyists in defense of the Cuban Revolution, Gerry joined the Trotskyist movement.
After George, Ellen, and Gerry had left IU, a strong YSA chapter remained behind them. When in 1963 the chapter invited YSA National Organization Secretary LeRoy McCrae to speak on the Black liberation struggle, an Indiana McCarthyite witch-hunting prosecutor, Thomas Hoadley, saw an opportunity to implement an obscure and reactionary anti-communist law. Three YSA members on campus were indicted on charges of “conspiracy to overthrow the state of Indiana by force and violence.” Gerry actively participated in this important defense effort, soon to become a national and successful campaign for “The Bloomington Three,” Ralph Levitt, Tom Morgan, and Jim Bingham.
After years of effort by the YSA and SWP the law was declared unconstitutional, an important civil liberties victory for the entire socialist movement and for all others who understood the importance of organizing broad defense campaigns for victims of capitalist persecution.
Gerry defended political prisoners in the U.S. and around the world. He was always among the first to sign up to defend capitalism’s victims everywhere and was often involved in their defense committees. In San Francisco, he was a leader in defense of Iranian political prisoners and a participant in the defense of Mumia Abu-Jamal.
In autumn 1962, Gerry moved on to further graduate study at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, where he was an activist in the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, also initiated by the SWP and YSA. Soon afterwards, the October 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis brought the threat of worldwide nuclear war, when the Kennedy administration mobilized the U.S. Navy to confront Soviet ships headed for Cuba with nuclear missiles. The Cubans, who in April 1961 had defeated a U.S.-sponsored invasion at the Bay of Pigs, sought Russian missiles to ensure against another such U.S.-backed invasion.
Gerry was active in Cuba’s defense, selling the SWP’s newspaper, The Militant, and supporting Cuba’s right to defend itself from imperialist attack. And he helped to found a YSA chapter at Madison. Soon, Gerry moved to New York City, where he joined the SWP and did a short stint as a social worker while becoming a member of the newly formed and militant social workers’ union.
“I didn’t do too well by city standards,” Gerry told me at that time, “because as I saw it, it was my job to get around all the bureaucratic restrictive provisions of the law and make sure that all my clients got on welfare and received the maximum funding possible.”
A few years later, Gerry applied for a job as translator with the United Nations. He filled out an application requiring that he list the names and number of languages that he could translate. He listed 25. Later, his disbelieving interviewer asked Gerry what he meant by 2.5 languages. Gerry replied that the figure was 25, whereupon the interviewer immediately sent for a bevy of language specialists from several UN departments to verify Gerry’s claim. Gerry passed with ease and was surprised that he was offered the job on the spot, but with one condition. The UN had a rule that each member nation had the right to challenge its own nationals before their applications could be approved.
Gerry was eventually notified that the U.S. government had vetoed his application. But the outraged staffer who so informed Gerry surreptitiously included Gerry’s uncensored FBI file with the UN’s letter of rejection. Gerry told me that it had recorded virtually every YSA and SWP meeting he ever attended, every party position he held, every public meeting he attended, and his every landlord’s name and address. Thus, in those pre-Freedom of Information Act days, still in the McCarthy era, Gerry inadvertently became perhaps the first American to see his unexpurgated FBI file. He took some pride in that.
 
Revolutionary journalist
Gerry soon became a full-time staffer for the SWP, working under the direction of Joseph Hansen in the production of what was then one of the finest weekly revolutionary news magazines in the world, Intercontinental Press (IP). It was Hansen, Leon Trotsky’s secretary during Trotsky’s exile in Mexico, who mentored Gerry in the critical necessity of accuracy in reporting, depth of research, source checking, and clear and careful formulations to explain the SWP’s then revolutionary politics. At that time, IP was the official periodical of the Fourth International (FI), the world revolutionary socialist organization with which the SWP maintained fraternal relations. Reactionary U.S. legislation prevented the party’s formal affiliation, as it does with Socialist Action today.
Gerry remained on the SWP staff for some 17 years, writing for all its publications, with his articles often reprinted by FI sections. His journalistic assignments took him to Portugal, where he covered the 1974–75 revolution, which overthrew the fascist Salazar dictatorship. He also traveled as a reporter to Iran, when in 1979 a revolutionary wave swept from power the U.S.-backed and installed Shah of Iran and opened the door wider than ever to a socialist transformation. In both cases and in all other instances where Gerry’s knowledge, reporting, and language skills took him to far-off places to cover revolutionary developments, Gerry collaborated with the FI groups in those countries, which were active in the mass mobilizations.
Gerry left the SWP in 1980 to take a staff position on the FI’s new publication, International Viewpoint (IV). He remained in Paris on this assignment for more than a decade. His departure from the SWP, which expelled Gerry retroactively, stemmed from his opposition to the bureaucratic and cult-like practices of SWP National Secretary Jack Barnes, who, along with a compliant new “leadership team,” engineered the SWP’s rejection of its Trotskyist heritage. This was accompanied by the expulsion of hundreds of its most dedicated comrades, including many of the SWP’s founding members from 1938. Many of these comrades soon after formed Socialist Action.
Relocated in Paris, Gerry was a staff writer, translator, and often a speaker for IV at conferences and conventions of FI sections. He authored hundreds of articles covering critical events in world politics and joined the French section of the FI, the Revolutionary Communist League (LCR).
Beginning in the late 1980s, Gerry’s mastery of Slavic and other Eastern European languages, and his keen interest in the mass movements in the USSR and Eastern Europe that challenged Stalinist rule, allowed him to author scores of articles that provided great insight into the revolutionary developments in these countries – especially the critical struggle of the USSR’s oppressed nationalities.
Gerry’s assessment of the importance of these developments coincided with Socialist Action’s. For the first time in decades the possibility of building Trotskyist parties in Eastern Europe and the disintegrating USSR had real and immediate potential. He supported Socialist Action’s efforts to send Trotskyist delegations to Eastern Europe and the USSR as well as our contributions to the building of a Trotskyist party in Poland, including the translation into Polish of some important works by Trotsky.
In the early 1990s, Gerry returned to the U.S. to work full time for Socialist Action as the International Editor of our newspaper. Typical of Gerry, however, before leaving IV, he insisted that we underwrite his proposal that he visit Hungary for three weeks so he could “learn the language” and more effectively follow events in that country.
Back in the U.S, Gerry was immediately co-opted to Socialist Action’s Political Committee, where his knowledge of Eastern Europe and the recent events in the USSR contributed greatly to the depth of coverage in our press. Socialist Action newspaper’s coverage of revolutionary developments in Eastern Europe, Latin America, and Ireland were remarkable in their detail and analysis, often from first-hand sources or direct participation in the unfolding events.
Gerry eagerly took on assignments around the world. Following the Zapatista rebellion in Mexico, he visited San Cristóbal, Ocosingo, and other cities that the Zapatistas had temporarily occupied, to learn first hand of their impact and to meet with their representatives.
An incident related to the Zapatista rebellion comes to mind that highlights Gerry’s desire to directly connect with the people whose struggles he embraced. I visited San Cristóbal to try to meet with the Zapatistas and to observe their negotiations with the Mexican government, which temporarily ended their first uprising in 1994. Before I left for Mexico, Gerry asked me to bring him back a dictionary of the language of the indigenous people. At the time, such an effort was the last thing on my mind. But by coincidence, during a press conference following the negotiations, a fellow walking through the aisles was hawking just such a dictionary, and I thought that I would bring it back to San Francisco to surprise Gerry with my ability to make good on his essentially eccentric request.
I gleefully handed Gerry the dictionary upon my return, and he quickly opened it. In a moment, with perhaps a tiny hint of disdain, Gerry said, “This dictionary is Tzotzil. I need to begin with the major indigenous root language, Nahuatl. It won’t do me much good.” Vintage Gerry! I am sure that comrades who knew him have thousands of similar anecdotes highlighting Gerry’s magnificent eccentricities.
Gerry Foley touched the lives of revolutionaries around the world, including comrades from other socialist currents that do not share our politics, program, and traditions. Socialist Action has received condolences from many comrades outside our movement, comrades who might have differences with us on important political questions but who respected Gerry’s diligence in presenting our ideas and who benefited from the material that only his skills and experience could provide.
Gerry was one of a kind. To know him was to be enriched in myriad ways. He lives on in our deeds and dedication to the revolutionary cause and program that he championed for a lifetime.
Biography page for Gerry Foley | Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism

Last updated on 22 January 2020








On Monday, March 15, Rosemary Nelson, a leading human rights lawyer in Northern Ireland, was killed by a car bomb.
The murder was claimed by a shadow Loyalist group calling itself “The Red Hand Defenders.”
But even real Loyalists-that is, violent pro-imperialist groups-have been known to be manipulated by the Northern Ireland police, the Royal Ulster Constabulary, and the British intelligence services. Sometimes groups are even invented as a cover for illegal actions.
Gerry Foley interviewed Bernadette Devlin McAliskey for Socialist Action about her view of the killing and what needed to be done about it.



* * *
Socialist Action: In your opinion, who killed Rosemary Nelson and why?
Bernadette Devlin McAliskey: The first suspects are the police. Rosemary, as a human rights lawyer, had been involved directly in a number of cases. The sympathy notices in the local newspapers clearly indicated the wide range of causes and cases she had taken up.
There were statements from travelers’ rights groups [travelers are an itinerant caste that originated with farmers driven from their land after the great famine], and just about everybody who had their rights trampled on.
But very specifically, Rosemary had been involved in a number of high-profile cases going back some considerable time. There was the Colm Duffy case, during which in fact she had been threatened by the police. Her case is similar to that of Pat Finucane [a human rights lawyer murdered in 1989].
People who would be arrested and taken to interrogation centers when she would be their lawyer would actually get messages from the police to her. The police would make threats in the interrogation centers to people about her.
Rosemary followed those all up very systematically. She had been instrumental in the broad issue of the threats against human rights lawyers here.
There had been a UN-led inquiry, which had said essentially these things are serious enough to be looked into. They had encouraged Rosemary to go through all the channels and exhaust them in her own right as well as in the right of her clients.
Just to focus it: Rosemary had been central

to a United Nations investigation into, at a minimum level, police failure to protect human-rights activists, particularly human-rights lawyers, and at the highest level, threats by the police against human rights lawyers.
 
She had been representing the Hamill family. This was a case where a young Catholic male, Robert Hamill, had been kicked to death, literally kicked to death by a mob of Loyalists, who had beaten him to the ground, kicked him, and stomped on his head until they killed him.

He had been in the company of his sister and friends. Members of the RUC had watched it happen, and despite the pleas of his sister to come to their aid, the police just stood by and watched it happen.

Rosemary Nelson was representing the family in that case. She had taken both criminal and private prosecution against the individual members of the RUC who were on the scene. So, she was involved at that level.
 
On the heels of the United Nations investigation, she had also made specific allegations to the Police Commission. These had been investigated by the RUC, reported back to the Police Commission, which is in fact a government-appointed body. It is a rubber stamp. It has no backbone.

But it was so bad that the Police Commission felt obliged to call in the Metropolitan Police to redo the investigation. And the findings of that investigation were due this week.

So, at these three separate levels, Rosemary Nelson had pushed the police almost to the point of exposure. Also, as a longterm practicing lawyer in the area, she was very well aware of the kind of activities that would have been reported in Sean McPhelimy’s book, The Committee. [This book presents evidence of the existence of a committee of Protestant politicians and businessmen along with police who systematically planned assassinations of nationalists.]
Therefore, at four levels, Rosemary Nelson was consistently exposing the corruption of the RUC and consistently setting out a case, not that the RUC colluded with Loyalists, but that the RUC were the main actors. They got assistance from Loyalists but they were the main operators.
Then look at who had the means. Rosemary had been in Donegal [across the border]. She only drove into her own driveway at 7:00 on Sunday night. At some time during that night, somebody attached a sophisticated car bomb to the bottom of her car.
Now when you ask again, who could have had access given the area in which she lived, there was a police roadblock, there was a security presence, which is now not so frequent. She lived in what was quite an up-market area. The police were in the vicinity of her house on the night that somebody placed the bomb there. So, you would have to say that the RUC would have to come up with some very convincing proof that it wasn’t them.
SA: So, is it generally believed in the area that the police did it?
BDM: Not just in the area, there is a general concern at higher political levels. Even the Social Democratic and Labour Party [the bourgeois Catholic party] have called for a totally independent inquiry.
The [Northern Ireland] chief constable, Ronnie Flanagan, was under sufficient pressure that he had to announce very quickly that an RUC investigation would be headed by a non-RUC police official, somebody from the English police. Some guy’s coming over to lead the RUC investigation, as is somebody from the FBI.
It is very important that people understand that this is not really an independent investigation. It’s what we would call, “Ask my brother, am I a liar?” Any American with their heads screwed on properly would know that the last person we want to send in to investigate a corrupt police force is the FBI.
I’m quite sure that Mumia, and Leonard Peltier, and thousands of other people could testify that the FBI are just more efficient and more sophisticated at the kind of work that the RUC cover up.
SA: But there is a general demand for an independent inquiry.
BDM: All of that is in the public eye at the moment, with regard to the Finucane case and now the Nelson case. The issue was increased by Rosemary Nelson taking up the Hamill case and openly calling it an example of racism, openly linking it to the Steve Lawrence case in London [a Black victimized by the English police] and directly identifying it with the Diallo case in New York.
She was making all these connections. She had a front-page article in the Irish News on the Monday that she got killed. She had two main features on the front page of the Irish News on Monday explaining that we were dealing with racism here and were confronted with institutionalized racism of the police that wasn’t any different from the institutionalized racism of the English police against Black people.
That’s in the newspaper on Monday morning and she’s dead on Monday afternoon. So, all of this is building up in the public eye, and they take her out. I think that there is a high level concern on the part of people who would rather not look at it that the police have simply taken Rosemary out of the equation, and in the knowledge that they can get away with it.
SA: That’s the next question, can they get away with it?
BDM: Well, I think in their heads initially, yes, they thought they could. The choice of Rosemary as a target was strategic, was in their own interests. And the timing was strategic. Sinn Fein have come to the last hurdle in their peace process.
But the sheer audacity of these people is really what takes me. These people, knowing that they were the subject of scrutiny, albeit by a small group of UN officials; these people, knowing that they were the subject of attention around the whole issue of threats and assassinations, simply went and organized, orchestrated, and executed the person key to shining that light on them. It remains to be seen whether they’ll get away with it or not.
SA: What can be done to make sure that they don’t get away with it?
BDM: Well, the first thing is to make sure Rosemary’s work is continued. I don’t see lawyers queuing up to do that here in Northern Ireland. We may have to appeal to lawyers, or a consortium of lawyers, from outside to make sure that it is done.
Also, I think we need to think about building an authoritative international tribunal to investigate Rosemary’s murder.
 

Foley: U.S.-led Afghanistan war loses credibility with liberal journalists (December 2010)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Gerry Foley
U.S.-led Afghanistan war loses credibility
with liberal journalists
(December 2010)

Written: Tuesday, December 7, 2010.
Published: December 2010 print edition of Socialist Action newspaper.
Copyright: Copyright by Socialist Action, used here with permission.
HTML markup: David Walters in 2012 & Einde O’Callaghan in 2020.


It was the bad luck of the war makers that at the same time as they raised the possibility of an unending military intervention in Afghanistan, their claims of negotiating with the insurgents exploded in their faces. The alleged Taliban representative they were talking to turned out to be a swindler.
The news prompted a column by Maureen Dowd, who is usually the satirical corner of The New York Times editorial page. In the Nov. 23 issue she wrote:
“And we wonder why we haven’t found Osama bin Laden. Though we’re pouring billions into intelligence in Afghanistan, we can’t even tell the difference between a no-name faker and a senior member of the Taliban. The tragedy of Afghanistan has descended into farce.”
Dowd continued:
“... it turns out that Afghan and NATO leaders have been negotiating for months with an imposter pretending to be a top Taliban commander – even as Gen. David Petraeus was assuring reporters that there were promising overtures to President Hamid Karzai from the Taliban about ending the war. Those familiar with the greatest Afghan con yet say that the British had spent a year developing the fake Taliban leader as a source and, despite a heated debate and C.I.A. skepticism, General Petraeus was buying into it. The West was putting planes and assets at the poseur’s disposal, and paying him a sum in the low six figures.”
The fake Taliban leader was undoubtedly one of the most innocent of the crooks and double dealers the U.S. chiefs have been working with in Afghanistan, as Dowd pointed out:
“Indeed, sometimes it feels as if the entire region is taking us for a ride. Everybody is lining up for Western cash, treating America, the British and NATO like suckers. President Karzai and his brother toy with us for their immense personal profit, even as they corrupt their own elections.”
Dowd would have been more objective, not to say, less nationally arrogant, if she had pointed out that the biggest robbers are the U.S. corporations that are collecting a bonanza from the U.S. war effort and are hand in glove with the local robbers. She might also have had more sympathy for Karzai’s dilemma, since in order to maintain even a minimal credibility, he has to try to demonstrate, however impotently, that he is defending his people from abuses at the hands of the occupation forces.
Juan Cole described Karzai’s problem in an article posted on the on-line journal Alternet Nov. 18:
“During the past two months, the U.S. military has fought a major campaign in the environs of the southern Pashtun city of Kandahar, launching night raids and attempting to push insurgents out of the orchards and farms to the east of the metropolis. Many local farmers were displaced, losing their crops in the midst of the violence, and forced to become day laborers in the slums of Kandahar. Presumably these Pashtun clans who found themselves in the crossfire between the Taliban and the U.S. put pressure on Karzai to call a halt to the operation.”
Jeremy Scahill offered a more complete picture in a Nation article posted on Alternet Nov. 23:
“The [night] raids undoubtedly have produced scores of successful kill or capture operations, but serious questions abound over the NATO definitions of Taliban commanders, sub-commanders and foot soldiers. Most significantly, the raids consistently result in the killing of innocent civilians, a fact that is problematic for NATO and the Karzai government.”
A number of liberal journalists pointed to the huge material cost of the U.S. war effort, which costs around $7 billion a month. In the Nov. 24 Huffington Post, Derrick Crowe wrote:
“Given the failure of the escalation strategy to produce even marginally strategically significant success, it makes no sense whatsoever for President Obama to extend this failing war through 2014. Doing so will cost the American taxpayer, on the low end, close to half-a-trillion dollars. We need that half-trillion dollars at home to put people back to work, not wasted on a war that’s not making us safer. If Congress and the president keep spending our dollars this way, no one should believe for a second that they’re serious about getting our economy back on track.”
What the liberal commentators did not consider is that the interests of the big U.S. corporations are not the same as those of the U.S. people, or even of the U.S. economy in general. Many of them are making huge profits from the U.S. wars and they do not want to invest that money in the United States. They can make bigger profits and not have to deal with American workers by investing in a war machine staffed by low-wage, unprotected third world workers and by feeding off the U.S. public for huge overseas works, such as bases and the new giant U.S. “embassy” in Kabul, planned to cost three fourths of a billion dollars (and that is before “cost overruns”).
Some commentators have argued that these huge projects mean that the U.S. intends to maintain permanent fortresses in Iraq and Afghanistan. But is also possible that the corporations, and their military-industrial partners, do not really care if these projects have to be abandoned. They will get their money regardless. A large percentage of the so-called reconstruction projects in Iraq, costing many millions of dollars, were never finished. Ironically, some of the critics of grossly wasteful industrialization and industry in the Stalinist countries argued that waste was really the goal of the ruling bureaucracies. It may be that, in its decadence, American capitalism actually approaches that.
The tone of journalists writing for publications that helped to spread illusions in Obama and his administration has become notably cynical in their comments on the war and the “flexible” date for foreign withdrawal. Thus, Tom Engelhardt wrote in an article posted on the Nov. 24 Alternet:
“Going, going, gone! You can almost hear the announcer’s voice throbbing with excitement, only we’re not talking about home runs here, but about the disappearing date on which, for the United States and its military, the Afghan War will officially end.
“Practically speaking, the answer to when it will be over is: just this side of never. If you take the word of our Afghan War commander, the secretary of defense, and top officials of the Obama administration and NATO, we’re not leaving any time soon.”
Engelhardt also made a point with far-reaching implications:
“Nor, officials rushed to say, was anyone talking about 2014 as a date for all American troops to head for the exits, just ‘combat troops’ – and maybe not even all of them. Possibly tens of thousands of trainers and other so-called non-combat forces would stay on to help with the ‘transition process.’ This follows the Iraq pattern where 50,000 American troops remain after the departure of U.S. ‘combat’ forces to great media fanfare.”
Engelhardt had good reason for his cynicism about the claims of U.S. officials But has he, or any of the liberal columnists becoming disillusioned with Obama, thought about the implications of permanent U.S. military occupation of countries like Iraq and Afghanistan? This is something that anyone interested in a decent and secure life for Americans has to think about.
The prospect of a new colonialism swallowing up the material and human resources of the country for the benefit of giant corporations and mercenary outfits and subjecting entire nations to systematic terror is a grim one. It is also a confirmation of how closely a declining U.S. capitalism is intertwined with a warfare state dominated by predatory groups.
The fight for a better future, or maybe any kind of future, requires an immediate struggle against the warfare state and its new colonialism. And that fight has to be waged independently of the politicians beholden to those who profit from war. No trust can be given to politicians who promise withdrawal but are committed to permanent war and military occupation.
 







The “peace process” strategy of the Republicans was based on an alliance of all Irish nationalist parties, including bourgeois forces such as the Social Democratic and Labor Party, and the Dublin government. It was aimed at forcing the British to make concessions in the direction of equal rights for the nationalist minority in Northern Ireland and of developing cross-border links between the two parts of Ireland.
The initiation of the IRA bombing campaign reflects the crisis that this strategy has entered.
GERRY FOLEY spoke to BERNADETTE DEVLIN McALISKEY, a leading spokesperson for the last quarter century of the mass movements that have developed against the system of British domination in Northern Ireland.



* * *
Question: Why did the cease-fire break down?
First, the cease-fire was called with the belief that within some definable period it would bring about some form of dialogue that would involve Sinn Féin in direct negotiations with the British government. And 18 months later that had not happened.
Second, there was an internal reason. If you go back to the announcement of the cease-fire, it was received with great enthusiasm by the Republican rank and file. It was presented as a victory. Basically, people went along with this out of loyalty to the leadership. This was despite the fact that at no stage had the rank and file, indeed anybody in the organisation below the leadership, had any knowledge of the long-term negotiations that led to the cease-fire. There was a belief in the initial stages that a breakthrough had been made through a secret agreement. But that was not true.
In fairness to the Republican leadership, Gerry Adams [president of Sinn Féin] and others said at the time that there was no secret deal. Yet the thing did not make sense to the people unless there had been a secret deal. And so you went from one theory and expectation to another, with people hanging in and hanging in, and then disillusion starting to set in.
So, I think finally the leadership took a calculated risk in the Canary Wharf bombing in order to reassert its own authority within its military ranks. In my opinion, they made the assessment that if they did not move at that time they were heading toward a real possibility that some element of their own organisation or people who had drifted away from it would, out of frustration, make some military move on their own.
Question: In the United States, nobody in the movement really knows what the Republicans are doing.
That’s not any different here. The Canary Wharf bombing might have resolved an immediate tension within their own military organisation. But the Republicans remain caught up in the logic of the process they started. As far as the public is concerned, they shifted the aim of the Republican movement from a 32-county Ireland (socialist or otherwise) to all-party peace talks for an agreed Ireland. And the IRA cease-fire was called on that basis.
So, people are confused about what the Republicans are doing, since they must have known that a return to military actions would not get them back to the table easily without their being confronted again with the whole issue that was brought up at the beginning, that is, non-violence and decommissioning [disarming of the IRA].
Question: An editorial in the Andersonstown News [the main community newspaper in Republican West Belfast] a few months ago said that it didn’t do any good to get people out to demonstrate for vague demands such as peace talks; that it would make a lot more sense to get them out to campaign for concrete demands.
Once the Republican movement got into secret negotiations and was putting that forward as the Sinn Féin party position, there didn’t seem to be a strategy for continuing the broad grassroots movement. Everything revolved around decommissioning or not decommissioning, a date for all-party peace talks, the shape of the table and so on. So, people started to worry that the issue of basic human rights, the issue of discrimination in employment and all sorts of broader issues, such as minimum wage legislation, the extension of the European 48-hour work week, women’s issues, all the issues that had been a vibrant part of the life of the community, were being sidelined.
Sinn Féin were taking people out onto the streets to demand all-party peace talks now, when prisoners were still being denied their basic rights, and at the same time, the grassroots, not knowing what the strategy was, were paralysed, prevented from acting independently of Sinn Féin because they didn’t want to be rocking the boat.
Question: A recent opinion poll suggests that a majority of the Catholics would accept internment of all known and suspected Republican activists “for the sake of peace”.
Sinn Féin was an integral part of creating a dynamic that they cannot control. They created the slogan “give peace a chance”. They created the initial demand for peace talks. But they had no basis for determining or even having an influence on which issues those peace talks would take place, because they were allowing the Irish government to play their hand for them. So they have actually, unintentionally, disempowered the Republican community, who are confused about what’s happening.
On the opposite side, they empowered a whole layer of people who are now very active against them. They have empowered a very broad spectrum of Irish America whose interest is in peace at any price, and they certainly have opened up the way for a lot of propaganda by the southern state.
Question: What can be done?
It’s a very difficult position. I have a hard time comprehending how the Republicans could fail to see how deep the water was that they were getting into. The first step in was failing to reject decisively the parameters of the Downing Street Declaration.
Finally, the Republicans said they were opposed to it, but by that time they had already been working within its framework for six months.
I think that the Republicans have gotten themselves in an irreversible position. I don’t believe that a return to military operations is an effective option. I think that if they go back to military operations within the climate that they themselves were a party to creating, then military defeat, for the first time in 15 years, becomes a very real possibility.
Question: But what about a return to mass campaigns?
The real question, of course, is how do you build the mass campaigns within the current context, because there is still an expectation on the part of the broad base of the nationalist community that the present negotiations, when they get started, will somehow lead to a peaceful and fair settlement. Now, that is not the case.
What is very clear from all of those talks is that we are looking at the solution which the British put forward in 1972, some kind of power sharing between the two power blocs [nationalist and Unionist], a referendum to determine the balance between the populations every 10 or 15 years and such economic and commercial cross-border trade links as are required by the end of the century economic necessities of the European Union. No more and no less.
Question: What about the discussion in the Republican movement?
Over the 18 months, the problem has been the stifling of discussion. Within the broad movement, not just Sinn Féin as a party, that has led to a lot of hostility.
When people are unable or unwilling to defend their political position politically they defend it by making attacks on the personality of the individual who is challenging their political position. There’s been a lot of that kind of thing, which we not have seen since the 1970s. The net effect has been that people simply do not discuss their differences. What is basically happening is that people who become disillusioned, or begin to see that the thing’s not working, just walk away.
In order to ensure that they can put on a good show for the British-American media, Sinn Féin has to mobilise their troops. And so, all the people who are totally loyal to the leadership, regardless of the debate, will be brought to the ard-fheis [conference]. But that in turn denies the leadership any real feedback.
Question: Is there no alternative?
I think that the way forward is first of all to make an honest assessment of where we are. I think we should hang on to the cease-fire. The special repressive legislation is still on the books, but we can initiate mass action and continue campaigning against that. If we don’t go back to war, there’s less chance of everybody being slaughtered.
I think Sinn Féin should get out of the “peace process”. Our presence in this process can do nothing to affect it. Our campaign should be based upon insuring that whatever mechanics they put on this country, we will demand equality of citizenship, as long as we are citizens here, we will demand equal opportunity, we will demand our national identity, we will demand our fundamental human rights, and begin to build a political campaign around that.
I think we can begin to build a political movement raising fundamental social, class and national issues, and one that is free to do that because it is not tied to the apron strings of the Irish government and the Hibernian [bourgeois nationalist] alliance.
 




Ernest Mandel, for decades the most widely known leader of the Fourth International (FI) – the World Party of Socialist Revolution founded by Leon Trotsky and his co-thinkers – died on July 20.
Mandel was in his early 70s, but his health had been deteriorating markedly for some years. Nonetheless, he continued to participate in the life of the Fourth International and to work on book projects and public lectures.
More than any other FI leader since Leon Trotsky, Mandel established Trotskyism (revolutionary socialism) in the world of books and ideas. His first major work, published in French in 1962 and subsequently translated into many languages, was his two-volume Marxist Economic Theory.
This book will probably be remembered as his central literary legacy. Mandel’s work was a monumental rewriting of Marx’s Capital for the 20th century, using modern evidence to reinforce the Marxist explanation of economic laws and the evolution of society.
Marxist Economic Theory and subsequent works prepared the way for Mandel’s emergence as a culture-hero of the international youth radicalization of the 1960s and early 1970s.
Mandel joined the Trotskyist movement at the age of 16. He was active in the resistance to the Nazi occupation of his native Belgium, and was captured by the Nazis and held in a concentration camp. After he was imprisoned, the German authorities discovered his Jewish origin. It was only because this occurred near the end of the war that avoided mistreatment or death.
After the war, Mandel played a leading role in rebuilding a new leadership of the Fourth International centered in Europe. The Socialist Workers Party (SWP), which was the strongest Fourth Internationalist party at the time, contributed importantly to this work.
Among the various Trotskyist parties and groups, the SWP was distinguished by its organizational professionalism and consistent work.  I remember Mandel telling me that he learned a lot about organization from the SWP in those days.
Mandel’s work as a Marxist scholar was prepared by his involvement and activity in Marxist politics, a fact overlooked by those who sought to imitate him as a scholar without going through the school of revolutionary struggle.
The immediate background to the publication of Mandel’s major work was his editorship of the revolutionary newspaper, La Gauche (The Left) during the Belgian general strike of 1961. At its height, this newspaper had a circulation of 30,000 in a country with a population less than that of New York City. It succeeded in becoming the organ of the left wing of the general strike movement.
Under Mandel’s editorship, La Gauche showed a remarkable effectiveness in translating revolutionary Marxism into slogans and symbols that could appeal to masses involved in one of the most powerful class struggles in recent times. The newspaper also dealt sensitively with the complex nationalities question that arose in Belgium out of the uneven economic development between Flanders and the French-speaking Walloon country.
For many years, Mandel wrote analyses of the evolution of the world capitalist economy for La Gauche, which remained the newspaper of the Belgian section of the Fourth International. In these articles he showed an extraordinary ability to seize the essence of complex developments and explain them in a clear and focused way. They were translated into many languages and served the press of the Fourth International as a whole.
 
The Fourth International fractures
In a disastrous split that occurred in the Fourth International in 1952–1953, Mandel lined up with the leader of the Fourth International center in Europe, Michel Pablo, against the orthodox Trotskyist forces led by the Socialist Workers Party of James P. Cannon and Joseph Hansen.
Impressed by the spread of Stalinist regimes after World War II and the revolutions led by Stalinist parties in Yugoslavia and China, Pablo developed the theory that Stalinism had a dual nature, that it could play a revolutionary as well as a reactionary role.
Pablo developed a political strategy based on the theory that World War III was imminent and that its impact would push the mass reformist Social Democratic and Stalinist parties decisively to the left. In order to participate in this process and not be marginalized, he argued that the sections of the Fourth International had to enter the mass parties without any definite project. This was unlike the entry that Trotsky called for in the 1930s in order to capture the left wings that were then developing in the Socialist parties.
The Fourth International split when Pablo tried to use the authority of the international center to impose this policy on all sections, even those sections where the majority of the membership was against it.
In Belgium, however, the entry operation had some success. The Trotskyist-led faction became a major force in the Socialist Party. But after the Social Democratic leadership expelled the Trotskyists and their supporters in December 1964, the Belgian Fourth Internationalists failed to turn the forces that followed them into a strong revolutionary party.
Instead, they formed three small centrist parties respectively in Flanders, the Walloon Country, and Brussels. These groups – which were linked in the Socialist Workers Confederation, of which Mandel was the general secretary – withered away rapidly. Later, a new, small section of the Fourth International was built, principally out of the youth radicalization of the late 1960s and early 1970s.
 
Hero of the youth radicalization
Mandel became an international political personality essentially on the impulse of the May–June 1968 upsurge in France. For rebelling students, he was the personification of the revolutionary intellectual.
Mandel had an impressive command of English and spoke German and Flemish with native fluency, as well as having a passable Spanish. But French was the main language of his political life. He was a central figure in the revolutionary ferment in the French universities during the 1968 events.
All over the world, whenever students occupied a campus or a building, their first thought was often to ring up Mandel at any time of the day or night to ask him for a message of support – a request he was always happy to meet. In many countries, crowds of revolutionary minded youth came to his lectures and responded to them with enthusiasm.
I witnessed this during the heady days of the Portuguese Revolution in 1974–1975. Although I did not agree with the line Mandel proposed for the Portuguese Revolution, there was no denying that, for better or worse, he was broadcasting in the wave length of the radicalized youth.
In my opinion, that was a source of weakness as well as strength for Mandel. The radicalization of the 1960s and early 1970s was a great outburst of moral indignation against capitalist society and imperialist brutality but it lacked practical organization and perspectives, as well as social depth. It lived too much on the level of generalities.
In this atmosphere, Mandel tended also more and more to become detached from practical reality. His authority among political cadres then waned along with the decline of the youth radicalization.
 
Defending the Fourth International
For all his political life, Mandel retained a fervent belief in the future of the Fourth International, even when his ideas for tactics or theoretical innovation led him dangerously away from programmatic clarity. His authority was important to maintain the cohesiveness of the International.
Although Mandel went along with Pablo in the 1952–53 split, he and the other younger leaders of the FI center soon came into conflict with Pablo. Mandel played a key role in bringing about the reunification of the FI in 1963 and reorienting it to the new era inaugurated by the victory of the Cuban Revolution.
At the end of the 1960s, a new division arose in the Fourth International. Mandel sided with one wing of the FI, which had been influenced by ultra-left tendencies in the youth radicalization and by the ideas of the Cubans that revolutionary processes could be set in motion everywhere in Latin America by forming small guerrilla groups. The experienced Trotskyist leadership of the SWP again resisted this lurch.
Once more the International came close to a split. But, however much Mandel may have bent to the winds of the time, he remained committed to the unity of the International. The SWP leadership was able to negotiate with him and his collaborators to avert a split and ultimately resolve the main issues of the dispute through debate and accepting the test of events.
However, just as the dispute was successfully resolved, a political struggle broke out in the SWP itself. The party’s former proletarian leadership had died or had been set aside by a new young leadership. Now, the majority of the SWP’s central leaders aimed to integrate themselves into what they termed the “World Communist Movement.” SWP national secretary Jack Barnes proclaimed that by the end of the 1980s no one but sectarians would call themselves Trotskyists.
Mandel moved to defend the Fourth International against Barnes’s new political orientation. He brought all of his influence to bear to get the Fourth International to start a new English-language international magazine in opposition to Intercontinental Press, the magazine founded on the 1963 reunification, which had been taken over by the Barnes leadership and now reflected their revisionist views.
When the leadership of the Australian Socialist Workers Party also decided to abandon Trotskyism, Mandel wrote a powerful answer to them in a special issue of the new FI magazine, International Viewpoint.
Mandel had a great belief in the power of books. I remember once in the very large Paris bookstore of the French section of the Fourth International that he pointed out to me all the books the Marxist movement has produced. “There are the great Marx and Engels – and the little Mandel,” he said.
It was almost as if he saw virtue being rewarded in the literary sphere even when it was not rewarded in practical life. There is some truth to that, but the two spheres cannot really be separated.
The books produced by the Trotskyist movement are the best and most useful guides for revolutionists to interpret and intervene in the struggles of our time. But they are rooted in the practical experience of our movement, and their range cannot extend much beyond the limitations of this experience.
The achievements of Mandel himself – the most widely known writer, after Trotsky, that the Fourth International has produced – have their roots in the struggle to build the World Party of the Socialist Revolution that Trotsky founded.
Mandel left an impressive literary heritage. But his most important heritage for the Fourth International today is his confidence in the future of the World Party of the Socialist Revolution, his devotion to its unity, and his perspective that all but fundamental differences in the revolutionary movement can be overcome by discussion and by accepting the test of events.
 

Foley: U.S. readies machinery for military intervention throughout Middle East (February 2011)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Gerry Foley
U.S. readies machinery for military intervention
throughout Middle East
(February 2011)

Written: Thursday, February 3, 2011.
Published: February 2011 print edition of Socialist Action newspaper.
Copyright: Copyright by Socialist Action, used here with permission.
HTML markup: David Walters in 2012 & Einde O’Callaghan in 2020.


A question that arises immediately in the wake of the political earthquakes shaking whole series of neocolonial regimes in the Middle East is how and how much the U.S. will escalate its military intervention in the area. The U.S. has already been heavily involved in major wars and occupations in Iraq and Afghanistan. In the latter case, the U.S. war has the potential for expanding to a regional level, if it spreads to Pakistan.
In the Middle Eastern theater, in particular, the U.S. has developed instruments for waging covert war that far exceed anything in its already dark past. It has financed mercenary forces that are veritable private armies that recruit professional killers from the entire world and are directly accountable to no elected authority. The founder of the most notorious of these mercenary armies, Erik Prince, has recently moved to Abu Dhabi, where he is under the protection of corrupt sheikhs who rule as absolute monarchs, and out of the reach of courts in countries with elected governments.
If the Egyptian upheaval leads to an anti-imperialist regime, the U.S. bosses will need to vastly escalate their military intervention to maintain their control of the region. Besides Iraq and Afghanistan, they are already covertly intervening in Somalia and Yemen. A major expansion of these operations would be a catastrophe for the peoples of the Middle East and for the American people itself.
Ironically, just at the time the Middle East began to blow up in the faces of its American overlords, it became known that a mercenary army, the Saracen International company, an outfit headed by a former officer of a white South African secret service notorious for murdering opponents of apartheid, was preparing to move into Somalia to help the U.S./UN-backed fake official government suppress an Islamist insurgency.  
The British Independent reported Jan. 22:
“The project, which emerged yesterday when an intelligence report was leaked to media in the United States, requires Mr Prince to help train a private army of 2,000 Somali troops that will be loyal to the country’s United Nations-backed government. Several neighbouring states, including the United Arab Emirates, will pay the bills.”
A spokesman for Prince denied that his boss had put money into the scheme but admitted that he offered “advice.”
As soon as this report became public, the phantom Somali government started backing out of the deal. But the “autonomous” government of Puntland, a territory claimed by Somaliland, maintained the contract that it signed with Saracen in November. A report by Idarat Maritime, a research journal devoted to maritime issues, reported that it appeared likely that the mercenaries would be used primarily to secure oil-bearing areas over which the Puntland government is anxious to assert its sovereignty.
Pointing up the murky identity of these mercenary outfits, Idarat Maritime noted that there are at least three and maybe more companies called Saracen, although reports in other papers suggest that these different companies may simply be different avatars of the same beast. One was supposedly based in Beirut but Lebanese authorities said, according to Idarat Maritime, that it is actually based in the United Arab Emirates, where Erik Prince now hangs his hat.
The allegedly Beirut-based outfit has as its chief officer Lafras Luitingh, the former white South African officer of the apartheid-era Civil Cooperation Bureau. The United Arab Emirates, notoriously subservient to imperialism, seems to have become the base of a whole network of international gangsterism.
It is understandable that the Somali government does not want to be linked to mercenaries of the Saracen or Blackwater ilk, since it depends on the support of international bodies that are anxious to maintain a certain legitimacy, such as the UN and the African Union. Obviously, it would have less control of these mercenaries than the U.S. or the Afghan government has had over similar desperados hired to do their bidding.
Idarat Maritime noted:
“In addition we will also see an influx of hundreds of new and well-trained militia into southern Somalia. Once trained these men will serve whoever can pay regularly and will look for the highest bidder; loyalty is not a feature of the Somali conflict.”
Loyalty is not a feature of mercenaries in general, as was discovered by the authorities of the Roman Empire when their mercenaries destroyed their empire and themselves.
Hamid Karzai in Afghanistan has upset his American sponsors by threatening to oust the mercenaries there that are working for the U.S. government and companies. He has well-founded fears that they work for anyone who will pay them, including the Taliban and rival warlords. The Washington Post reported Jan. 22:
“The Afghan government has accused several prominent private security companies, including some that work with the U.S. government, of committing ‘major offenses,’ a move that U.S. officials fear could hasten their departure from the country.”
The article continued:
“A list compiled by Afghan officials cites 16 companies, including several American and British firms, for unspecified serious violations and seven others for having links to high-ranking Afghan officials, according to a copy obtained by The Washington Post.”
Karzai had declared earlier that he intended to ban the mercenary groups, but the American officials seem to have been privately assured that no action was planned in the near future, so they were surprised by the Afghan government’s recent pronouncement:
“U.S. officials believed that they had reached a compromise in December that would protect key operations and give the companies more time before they would have to depart, but the list has raised new concerns that the timeline has accelerated. ‘We thought it was pretty much on ice. All of a sudden, it isn’t anymore,’ the senior U.S. official said.”
The Washington Post summarized:
“A decision to ban the major violators and those that have relationships with senior Afghan officials would affect firms that provide about 800 guards for the U.S. Agency for International Development projects and about 3,000 who work on military construction projects for the coalition, said a senior U.S. official. ‘We’re wringing our hands over this,’ the official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the issue. ‘We’re waiting to hear which companies will get disbandment notices and when they will have to disband.’”
Apparently, Karzai was unnerved by U.S. plans to expand greatly the numbers of mercenary forces already plaguing the country:
“Earlier this month, U.S. Ambassador Karl W. Eikenberry told Karzai that new NATO development projects could require an additional 25,000 guards, according to Afghan officials. This would be on top of the 27,500 private guards currently in the country, a total that alarmed the Afghan government.”
Obviously, the U.S. government under Obama, no less than under Bush, who was reportedly personally linked to Erik Prince (both of them being self-styled servants of Jesus), has no intention of reducing its use of mercenaries. It apparently considers them the elite troops of imperialism, whose role will constantly expand.
However, the expanding role of private armies financed by imperialists in dependent countries threatens to make even neocolonial pseudo-independence into an egregious farce. Moreover, there is osmosis between the neocolonial rulers and their imperialist overlords. The Washington Post reported Jan. 26:
“Afghan justice and security officials want to adopt the U.S. practice of detaining suspected insurgents indefinitely without trial, according to senior U.S. and Afghan officials involved in efforts to have the government in Kabul take control of detention operations in the country.”
The U.S. has long tried to wash its hands of torture by shunting political suspects to countries that they know practice it. Now, it seems that the Afghan officials want to institute indefinite imprisonment, citing the example of the United States.
The growth of ruthless private armies and the increasing use of torture and indefinite imprisonment without trial are the features of a descent into international barbarism that has accompanied the U.S. interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan. The crumbling of neocolonialist regimes in the Middle East is obviously a threat to the domination that the U.S. rulers have paid such a high price for. It may be a turning point.
Which way will the U.S. turn – toward a deeper descent into barbarism or toward a respect for human rights and the right of self-determination of dominated peoples? That is going to depend on whether masses of American people stand up and say clearly that the game the U.S. has been playing is now clearly a losing one, that they are not going to accept it any more, and that they will not let any politician tell them that politicians subservient to the capitalist bosses are going to solve the problem.
A danger to the peoples of the Middle East and the U.S. is that the fall of the Egyptian dictatorship, which has been the major prop to U.S. domination of the region, will lead to bigger U.S. military intervention, either directly through the official U.S. military, or indirectly through the murky mercenary forces that the U.S. bosses more and more employ to do their dirty work. It is vital that Americans mobilize to stop any such moves. Now is the time for solidarity with the peoples of the Middle East who have been the victims of our government.
 

Foley: Afghan war expands despite opposition by U.S. majority (January 2011)



Gerry Foley Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Gerry Foley
Afghan war expands despite opposition
by U.S. majority
(January 2011)

Written: Sunday, January 16, 2011.
Published: January 2011 print edition of Socialist Action newspaper.
Copyright: Copyright by Socialist Action, used here with permission.
HTML markup: David Walters in 2012 & Einde O’Callaghan in 2020.


The Obama administration’s year-end review of the state of its war effort in Afghanistan, of course, endeavored to be positive, citing some progress. However, it had to be guarded, admitting that whatever gains have been made are “fragile” and “reversible.” Just how fragile has been indicated by a number of articles in major press organs and a UN report.
The New York Times pointed out Dec. 15:
“The growing fragility of the north highlights the limitations of the American effort here, hampered by waning political support at home and a fixed number of troops. The Pentagon’s year-end review will emphasize hard-won progress in the south, the heartland of the insurgency, where the military has concentrated most troops. But those advances have come at the expense of security in the north and east, with some questioning the wisdom of the focus on the south and whether the coalition can control the entire country.”
The article described a situation of rampant gangsterism in the north by a tangle of armed groups supposedly allied with the Kabul government but not controlled by it. In this area, where the Pushtuns, the historic base of support of the Taliban, are in a minority, the dominant ethnic groups there have been hostile to the Taliban. But The Times article explained that the local populations are so tired of being plundered and intimidated by the various militias and warlords that they are beginning to see the Taliban as the lesser evil. Despite the brutality of the Taliban when they ruled Afghanistan, they gained a reputation at least for being honest and disciplined.
What the article in question did not consider, but what would be much more threatening for the U.S.-led war effort in the long run, are the indications that the resistance to the occupation is becoming more broadly nationalistic and less limited to Islamists or Taliban.
The webzine Salon reported Dec. 27:
“The big takeaway from the Obama administration’s review of the Afghan war this month was that the strategy is working. But a new independent assessment suggests just the opposite: that, in fact, the situation is deteriorating.
“It comes in the form of United Nations security maps obtained and described by The Wall Street Journal. These maps are used by UN personnel to make decisions about where they can operate within the country – so presumably the UN takes their composition seriously. According to the Journal, this is the change that occurred between the March and October editions of the maps:
“In the October map, just as in March’s, nearly all of southern Afghanistan – the focus of the coalition’s military offensives – remained painted the red of ‘very high risk,’ with no noted improvements. At the same time, the green belt of ‘low risk’ districts in northern, central and western Afghanistan shriveled. – The U.N.’s October map upgraded to ‘high risk’ 16 previously more secure districts.”
Another contradictory report from an authoritative source was cited Dec. 24 by the webzine Alternet:
“Ironically, while President Obama’s review was all about the positive, the latest National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) on Afghanistan was leaked just the day before. And boy, did they see things differently. The NIE is important – it reflects the consensus view of all 16 U.S. intelligence agencies – the CIA, the DIA, the NSA and all the rest. And what they said was profoundly different from the rosy-eyed assessment of the White House and the Pentagon.
“Officials briefed on the NIE said it acknowledged that large swaths of Afghanistan are still at risk of falling to the Taliban. And that there is no chance for anything resembling success in Afghanistan without the kind of massive shift in Pakistan that would eliminate the Afghan Taliban’s current access to safe havens across the border.
“And as of now, since the government in Pakistan we’re propping up with billions of dollars in military and economic aid has made quite clear that it – especially its powerful ISI intelligence agency – has no intention of ending support for the Afghan Taliban, the possibility of 'success' seems to be just about zero.”
However, instead of retreating, it seems that the U.S. military is edging toward expanding the war into Pakistan. The New York Times reported Dec. 16:
“The drone strikes in Pakistan have already risen significantly over the past year. The Central Intelligence Agency carried out roughly 53 Predator attacks in 2009, which was more than President George W. Bush authorized during his entire presidency. The figure has more than doubled this year, though presidential aides will not publicly discuss the program because it is technically secret.”
The same issue of The New York Times noted:
“The Obama administration plans to further step up attacks on Al Qaeda and Taliban insurgents in the tribal areas of Pakistan, to address one of the fundamental weaknesses uncovered in its year-end review of its Afghanistan war strategy.”
This report drew immediate denials from U.S. authorities because their Pakistani allies have made it clear that they will not tolerate the open incursion of U.S. forces into any territory under their formal jurisdiction, even if they do not control it. The Pakistani regime’s determination was made clear when a U.S. helicopter fired on a Pakistani border post. Pakistan closed the access roads used by U.S. supply vehicles for a period, leaving the stranded convoys vulnerable to attack by jehadis in Pakistan.
Hatred of the U.S., fueled in particular by drone attacks that have killed many ordinary Pakistanis who happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time, has put wind in the sails of Islamists in the religiously based state long fostered by the U.S. The Islamists have just demonstrated their power by shutting the country down in a protest against the government’s indication that it might repeal the theocratic blasphemy law. Thus, the Pakistani neocolonial government has to tread a very fine line in its alliance with the U.S. But the U.S. keeps pushing – at the risk of toppling it.
Already, the civil war between the Pakistani government and the Taliban has led to massive internal displacement. In its Dec. 28 issue, The New York Times published a report on the Pakistani refugee camps from an expert on refugees, who noted:
“I fear that, for those living in the region’s slum camps, things will never go back to what they were before. And it would not be the first time.
“When we walked away from Afghanistan after the fall of the Soviet Union, we left Pakistan to deal with the largest population of refugees in the world. Two decades later, these Afghan refugees and their Pakistani-born children are, despite recent repatriation schemes, largely still in Pakistan: permanent, destitute, and unwelcome, their urban camps indistinguishable from slums.
“And for those who need more than reasons of human tragedy: the Taliban was born out of Afghan refugee camps in Pakistan, and Pakistan’s displaced populations are already a source of flaring ethnic tensions there.”
Within Afghanistan itself, the direct human cost of the war is increasing. The Washington Post reported Dec. 23:
“The number of civilians killed or wounded in the Afghan war increased by 20 percent during the first 10 months of this year, compared with the same period last year, according to a UN report issued this week.
“The quarterly report said the period between July and October saw a 66 percent spike in security incidents compared with the same time frame last year. Assassinations reached an all-time high in August, it said, with most attacks targeting civilians and Afghan police. Suicide attacks occurred an average of three times a week, most of them directed at NATO troops, police and Afghan government officials.”
The war is creating running sores in Afghan and Pakistani society that will not be soon healed. At the same time, it is a huge drain on the U.S. economy that threatens to grow and even become chronic. The Washington Post reported Dec. 20:
“A year ago, Michael E. O’Hanlon, a senior fellow and military expert at the Brookings Institution, predicted, ‘We are looking at two decades of supplying a few billion a year to Afghanistan ... It’s a reasonable guess that for 20 years, we essentially will have to fund half the Afghan budget.’”
The article continued:
“Just last week, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers put out a ‘presolicitation notice’ for a contractor to build the eighth of nine planned increments for troop housing ‘to replace expeditionary housing facilities’ for 1,520 personnel. According to the notice, building the proposed facility could cost from $25 million to $100 million. The contract will not be awarded before March.
“What’s interesting is that the facility is expected to take a year to build, meaning it would not be completed before April 2012. That’s less than two years before the 2014 date when Afghans are expected to take over security, with the U.S. presence reduced to training units.
“But is that the real plan? Back in 2008, a supplemental funding bill for the Iraq and Afghanistan wars contained $62 million for an ammunition storage facility at Bagram, where 12 planned ‘igloos’ were to support Army and Air Force needs. In requesting that money from Congress, the Army wrote, ‘As a forward operating site, Bagram must be able to provide for a long-term, steady state presence which is able to surge to meet theater contingency requirements.’ A year earlier, Adm. William J. Fallon, then commander of U.S. Central Command, described Bagram to Congress as ‘the centerpiece for the CENTCOM Master Plan for future access to and operations in Central Asia.’”
So, are the U.S. authorities planning a permanent military involvement in “Central Asia?” That would be a major expansion in the U.S. military investment abroad, on top of the Middle East, with greater dangers, because it involves the risk at some point of confrontation with major powers, Russia and China.
Already, in its Dec. 29 issue, The Economist, one of the best informed press organs of the British bourgeoisie, asked if the U.S. expenditure in the Middle East was worth it for U.S. capitalism:
“Yet even if America’s influence endures, is it worth the price? Few Americans realise that the Persian Gulf nowadays supplies barely 10% of America’s oil. Its value is far less than what the Pentagon spends on American fleets and bases in the region, even excluding the costs of war in Iraq and Afghanistan.”
What value, then, could the U.S. extract from “Central Asia”? There is much speculation about this, but fairly indefinite prospects for the foreseeable future. And this area is larger and more unstable than the Middle East, a veritable bottomless pit for U.S. expenditures.
Of course, what The Economist, representing a traditional bourgeoisie, did not consider is that American big business may no longer be interested in building up the U.S. economy but rather in drawing higher profits from cheap labor abroad and in parasitically draining the U.S. Treasury for gigantic projects connected to U.S. military expansion that are essentially waste. But the British should see the pattern, because it destroyed their dominant position in the world economy. It is the self-generated poison of imperialism.
Moreover, the Obama administration, despite the fact that it was boosted into office by a reaction against the imperialist running down of the U.S. economy, has shown that it cannot stand up to the big business powerhouses that support this development. Although 80 percent of voters who identify with the Democratic Party have been shown by a recent CNN/Research Corporation poll (see July 2 Huffington Post) to be against a continuation of the Afghan War, the president who supposedly represents them shows no sign of any determination to end the U.S. military occupation of Afghanistan or the plans for permanent military bases in “Central Asia.”
The CNN poll showed, in fact, that 63 percent of people in the United States are against continuing the war in Afghanistan, and even only 52 percent of those who identify with the reactionary Tea Party movement favor it.
So why is this overwhelming opinion of the American people having no effect on the government that claims to represent them? It can only be because the anti-war majority have not yet demonstrated that they really mean it by going into the streets in massive protests, in which they take direct responsibility for the fate of their country and stop relying on politicians paid and controlled by big business. Such actions would also be the first step in moving toward rebuilding an economy that can meet the needs of the American people, in particular the rising generations who face an ever-darkening economic future.
 

